Theft, mutilation, and undermining of books
are reasons for disciplinary action and may
result in dismissal from the University
University of Illinois Library

O-1096

tv

GOIJI^TLEI^OY.

VOL. I.

NEW AND POPULAR NOVELS

AT AXL THE LIBRARIES

VICTIMS. By The Gift, author of 'Pretty Miss

Belle,' ' Visited on the Children," ' Il Lorimer,' &c. 3 vols.

PASSAGES IN THE LIFE OF A LADY, in 1814 —

1815—1810. By Uajjilton Aide, author of 'Rite,' &c 3 vols.

TILL MY Wedding-day.

2 vol.

By a French Lady.

THE GREEN HILLS BY THE SEA : A Mj^x Story.

By H 1(^11 Collegian D.vvruso:*. S vols.

THE BROKEN SEAL. By Dora Russell, author of
• Footprints In the Snow,' &c 3 vols.

HURST & BLACKETT, 13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET

Fauntleroy

^^^^<^:^
/^^

BY

ANNE BEALE

AUTHOR OF

FAY ARLINGTON," " THE PENNANT FAMILY,'
"SQUIRE LISLE'S BEQUEST,"

Give unto me, made lowly wise,
The spirit of self-sacrifice."

Wordsworth.

IN THREE VOLUMES,
VOL. L

LONDON:
HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,

13. GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1887.

Ail rights reserved.

3 5^^^
\J. 1

OOUR,TLER,OY.

^ CHAPTER I.

Concerning ADOPTING A OHLLD.

I SHOULD like to adopt a child, my dear,'
said Mrs. Prettyman to her husband, as
they sat over the fire one frosty winters
evening,

A child ! What has put that into
your head, Lou ?' returned Mr. Prettyman,
aroused from a dose.

Well, in the first place, you know we

haven't any of our own, and we're both

very fond of children ; in the second, that

stirring evangelist I heard the other day

5 VOL. I. B

said lie wished all the ladies who went
about with lap-dogs would adopt city arabs
instead of pugs ; in the third, as you know,
we have no heir to speak of, only cousin
Joseph, who don't want our money ; in the
fourth, a child would be an interest, and
give me occupation, for now we're rich I
seem to have nothing to do ; in the

fifth '

Four heads are enough for any sermon,
Lou. What if we give up this grand
house in our square and return to the
lodging at Canonbury, where you used to
cook the chop while I steamed the potatoes?
I have never since tasted such
chops and potatoes. Now-a-days meat is
tough, and potatoes ain't mealy. To be
sure, they're always mashed, and chops a returned
into "completes a la something."
'' Work is its own reward," as somebody
said, and our reward was appetites larger
than our dinners. Suppose we begin life
again ?'

^ Perhaps we should, Joe, if we adopted a
child.'

Mrs. Pretty man said this reflectively.
She had been meditating on her subject
ever since she had heard the evangelist
whose words she quoted, and fancied she
Lad thoroughly digested it. She was — or
supposed herself — a great thinker as well
as a great talker, and she had come to the
conclusion that a child in the house was
an absolute necessity.

I see but one objection to your plan,
Lou,' said Mr. Prettyman, who was somewhat
of a wag, and as great a talker as his
wife. ' Suppose he was to turn out a thief,
or a murderer, for, you know, we oughtn't
be sure of his parents, and there's a great
talk now-a-days of heredity, of crime, as
they call it ; or, if it was a she, perhaps she
would elope with the footman, as her
mother would probably have been — well,
not the best of women, a drunkard, or

worse, if worse could be '

b2

How you do run off, Joe. Of course
we must have a he, and we should be careful
to inquire particularly into bis parentage.
He must be " the orphan of respectable
parents' as the polling-papers and 
always say.'

Then you wouldn't like a gutter-child,
after all, Lou ?'

Well, not exactly ; for, since you subscribe
to so many orphanages, I should
think we had a claim on them, and I daresay
they would enter into our views on the
subject, and let us pick and choose, and
make inquiries as to the boy's antecedents
. . .'

I daresay they would ; but where did
you pick up that grand word, Lou ? Somebody
asked me the other day about my
antecedents, and I said I had none, if
thereby he meant my past. I shut my
friend up by telling him I had always
made up my accounts day by day, both
secular and religious, and I reckoned

the present moment all I knew about.'

That's quite my opinion, Joe ; and, if
we adopt a child, the sooner we do it the
better. I suppose I picked up the word
from Mills Heath, who is always talking
about hers.'

Poor soul ! I shouldn't think she had
any to boast of.'

She doesn't mean her ancestors, Joe ;
only what she has gone through all her
life up to the present moment. And now
she is as anxious as possible about Mrs.
Le Roy, who she thinks is really dying. I
looked across the square this morning,
and saw the doctor's carriage as well asher
son's at the door

She has been dying ever since we have
been in the square. But here's Sampson
at last, and our completes and pommes de terre
are cooked for us without our superintendence.'


Hush, my dear. The servants needn't
know.'

Mrs. Prettyman whispered this last sentence
as she took her husband's arm, and
they went into a comfortable dining-room,
where a substantial dinner awaited them.
But it was not, as the worthy Joe implied,
either French or Russian, but essentially
English. * Plain roast and boiled' was
still his motto, albeit he was not an old
man, and had dined at many an aldermanic
banquet.

He and his wife looked, as they sat side
by side at the large, round dining-table,
as well-to-do and happy a pair of model
London citizens as the greatest capital of
the world could produce. They always
sat side by side, except on state occasions,
and always kept up a perpetual flow of
talk. Sampson was in their confidence inmost
matters — the chops and potatoes
might have been an exception — and his
master appealed to him occasionally to
decide on some disputed point in which
arbitration seemed desirable. His mistress

was not always pleased with these measures
and was wont to say, as soon as the
butler's back was turned,

^ I declare, Joe, I will never speak again
all dinner-time. One can't say a word
without your dragging Sampson into the
conversation. It really isn't genteel.'

She said something of the kind on the
present occasion, for while Sampson was
removing the remains of some excellent
fried soles — fried whole and not filleted,
be it understood, filets being one of Mr.
Prettyman's many prejudices — her lord
and master said abruptly to his man,

Sampson, what do you think of an
adopted child?'

I often wish some one would adopt one
or two of mine, sir,' replied Sampson,
whose wife and family lived in the neighbourhood.


There, my dear, an opportunity at
once !' said Mr. Prettyman, nodding to his
wife, who looked as many daggers as her

smooth, serene face could improvise.
*What should you think of our adopting
a child, Sampson V

They make a deal of dirt, sir was the
cautious reply.

Ask what they think about it downstairs,
Sampson,' said his master, glancing
mischievously at his wife.

I pray you will do no such thing,
Sampson,' cried she, offended, and there
the conversation ended for the present, to
be resumed on occasion.

That occasion, qui fait le larroji, soon
came ; for Mrs. Prettyman was in earnest,
and, when she had ' made up her mind,
she had made up her mind,' she was wont
to say, though a more amiable and yielding
woman, when let alone, could nowhere
be found. And Mr. Prettyman was wise
enough to let her alone in a general way,
making only this proviso, that she would
let him alone also. This unusual wisdom
caused the current of their lives to flow

smoothly ; for half our miseries are caused
by small interferences on indifferent matters.
Two-thirds of the woes of childhood
spring from injudicious meddling in things
non-essential, and the major part of domestic
brawls, as Mr. Prettyman maintained,
from ^ not letting one another alone.'

Accordingly when, after dinner, his wife
returned to the subject of adopting a
child, he told her she might do it if she
liked, but he would not promise to adopt
^ the little he or she ' also, unless he took
a fancy to it.

^ That would be awkward, for I should
like to bring him up as our own child,' said
she, thoughtfully.

^ A false position, Lou. You can't make
an Ishmael into an Isaac. But suppose
we make a tour of some of the orphanages.
I have often wanted to look into them, and
you may see a child to suit you. I suspect
you don't mean it to be " first come
first served'"

*By no means, Joe. I must select. He
must be handsome, and rosy, and have
curly hair and round limbs, and I should
like him full of fun, and with a laugh that
I could hear from the nursery — dear me,
how funny it sounds I'

It certainly does !' interjected Joe.

But he must have no spiteful tricks,
such as pinching and kicking, and must
be absolutely without a friend in the
world,' she continued.

The Foundling Hospital is evidently
your place, Lou. Suppose we go there to
church tomorrow. You can then look
well at the children, and may chance to
fix your affections on the one who never
had a father or mother.'

^ How shocking! What do you mean,
Mr. Prettyman?'

Why, you and I are discontented because
we have no children, and others
get rid of theirs without compunction.
Even people who ought to know better

sometimes sont their unfortunate offspring
adrift, excusing themselves by pre-payment,
or some false balance. It is not
your East-ender alone who will have to
answer for the sins of this generation, but
your so-called noble man or woman as
well.'

Mrs. Prettyman's countenance fell, if so
plump a cheek and dimpled a chin could
be said to fall. The expression needs revision.
However, her kindly blue eyes
suddenly clouded, and the lids drooped
over them. She was engaged in knitting
she was, indeed, always knitting when
not occupied in household affairs, paying
or receiving visits, or helping to superintend
a large ragged-school at the back of
the aristocratic square. Socks, comforters,
caps, cuffs, petticoats of every colour and
dimension were framed by her deft fingers,
and speedily transported to members of
the ragged-school aforesaid, in which not
only she, but Mr. Prettyman taught. The

latter had often wondered why she had not
already adopted half the urchins who frequented
the ' yard'; but they were certainly
not gifted with the graces and virtues just
enumerated.

The Prettymans, as they were familiarly
called, lived in a large, handsome, well-furnished
corner house, and at this moment
were located in a snug room known
as the library. Bookshelves had, however,

•/ 7 7

gradually given place to pictures, for Mr.
Prettyman was not much of a reader, but
was an amateur artist and picture-fancier.
The house was, indeed, full of valuable
paintings, ancient and modern. Of course,
there were books, good and bad, but not a
superfluity. Mr. Prettyman was a merchant,
much esteemed for his probity, who
had risen from clerkdom to his present
position by his own honest labour. His
wife had neither family, fortune, nor overmuch
education to boast of, but he had
married her because she was very pretty,

and he fell in love with her. Although
they had lately celebrated their silver wedding,
she was very pretty still, and had
not walked far into the shady side of forty.
Her husband was turned fifty. Her fair hair
had no grey streaks in it, and she wore it in
curls by his wish, who had first seen her
so adorned. She had once essayed to arrange
it differently, but in this he would
not ' let her alone,' which was foolish on
his part, since half a woman's happiness
consists in varying and distorting her locks
according to current fashion. He also set
himself against caps, although he had a
weakness for the mob as seen in the paintings
of Reynolds and Gainsborough. They
both liked bright colours and handsome
ornaments, and Mr. Prettyman made his
Lou presents of dresses innumerable of
silk, satin, or other fashionable material,
the hues of which were ever of the rainbow
or the forget-me-not.

An aesthete would not have admired

Mrs. Prettymau as she sat in blue silk and
lace ruffles and collar, but her husband
did, which was more to the purpose. Indeed,
her plump, if somewhat short, figure,
her fine complexion, and beaming blue
eyes were admirable enough for anyone
who did not prefer art to nature. Mr.
Prettyman was reckoned a very good-looking
man, but descriptions of ordinary men
are usually insipid, and he was indifferent
to the judgment on his person of all save
his wife.

"We must be up in good time tomorrow,
Lou, if we are to walk to the " Foundling'"
said Mr. Prettyman.

He had an old-fashioned prejudice concerning
his horses, and would not use them
on Sunday. He was, in short, a Sabbatarian,
as it is the fashion to call those
who respect the Lord's-day, and was even
antiquated enough to declare that good
example was worth all the lectures in the
world. Accordingly, since he would not

step into his own carriage of a Sunday,
neither would he put foot in cab, omnibus,
nor train, announcing that, if he did not
employ his own servants and horses, he
saw no reason for using other people's.
His wife might have tried slightly to
modify this resolution, had she not kept
to that golden rule of letting him alone.

As everything was managed like clockwork
in the square, they had no difficulty
in reaching Guildford Street in time for
the service in the chapel connected with
the Foundling Hospital. Mrs. Prettyman
had never before attended it, and she
knew not which to admire the most, the
five hundred children, the fine organ, or
the choir, composed principally of the
foundlings themselves. But when she bethought
herself of selecting one for adoption,
she was overwhelmed by numbers.
"When the service was over, her husband
took her to the great dining-room to seethe
children at dinner, and left her a while

to wonder and admire while he went after
his hobby, Ie pictures presented to this
great institution by Reynolds, Gainsborough,
and Wilson.

He soon rejoined her, and asked her if
she had made her choice.

*How can I, amongst so many?' she
said, perplexed. ' They are all such dears,
that I could never select. "We must talk
it over, and come again.'

They talked it over on their way home,
and the upshot of the conversation was
that Mrs. Prettyman decided that she
must adopt a boy who was quite an orphan
and of respectable parentage. She was so
much in earnest, that Mr. Prettyman grew
interested, and began to think it might be
as well to humour her. All that evening
they were occupied in studying the * Handbook
of the Charities of London,' and Mrs.
Prettyman, who only knew about them
second-hand, was so much oppressed by
their multitude that she actually began to cry.

*Whj, there are at least a hundred
homes and orphanages for children,' she
exclaimed, despondently. ' What a number
the must hold !'

'Tens of thousands, Lou,' returned her
spouse, compassionately. * If charity continues
to be the fashion, I say we must
turn London into one huge orphanage.
What a field you would then have for your
choice !'

I should indeed !' she sighed. * I will
visit some of them next week ; and, when
I have found exactly the child I want, I
will take you to see him, and we will have
him here directly.'

He smiled and assented, promising to
accompany her to such as were within
reach of his oflSce in the City, if he had
time.

They had arrived at this point, when a
visitor was announced. It was the Miss
Heath of whose ' antecedents ' Mr. Pretty-man
had spoken so slightingly. She vas

VOL. I. c

a tall, thin, pale woman, with marked
features, and iron-grey eyes and hair. She
was well enveloped in furs, and entered
with a shiver and an apology.

Excuse my interrupting you at this
hour, Mr. Pretty man, but I just ran across
to speak to Louisa. I have not been out
all day ; and, as Mrs. Le Eoy has fallen
asleep, I ventured to leave her for a breath
of fresh air.'

Oh ! my dear Milly, you are the very
person,' cried Mrs. Prettyman, jumping
up, kissing Miss Heath, and seating her
in her own easy-chair. ' "We are going to
adopt a child, and I want your advice.
You have seen so much of life, and know
the ways of the world so well, and know
everybody's secrets '

but never divulges them. An excellent
but exceptional thing in woman,'
interrupted Mr. Prettyman.

In truth, Miss Heath looked as if she
might be a machine made on purpose to

keep secrets. (Will some one take out a
patent for such ?) Her mouth was firm,
her eyes unfathomable, her brow lined
with thought. She was about Mrs. Pretty-man's
age, but might have been fifteen
years her senior. They had been schoolfellows
and friends all their lives ; and
Mr. Prettyman never ceased to wonder
how such opposites could have come and
kept together. * Knit by the law of
kindness,' he supposed, since his pitiful,
warm-hearted wife was always trying to
benefit her old friend, who had been less
fortunate in life than herself.

'Adopt a child, Louisa? I daresay it
might be nice,' said Miss Heath, who took
in everything and gave out nothing. ' Butin
what way could I advise you ?'

*Well — as to the sort of child, you
know. You have had so much to do with
children.'

'True; but what does Mr. Prettyman
say?*

c2

^ He does not object. He is sure lo like

it;

'I will think it over, Louisa ^ but you
and Mr. Prettyman know year own affairs
best.'

While Miss Heath uttered this commonplace,
her mind was evidently concentrated
on the question; for her brow was knit,
and her eyes were looking, so to say,
inward. Mr. Prettyman smiled, and inquired
for Mrs. Le Eoy, whose companion
Miss Heath was. She had previously been
her daughter's governess, and was too
valuable and reticent a person to be parted
with when Miss Le Roy married.

She is much as usual,' replied Miss
Heath to Mr. Prettymaa's question. ^ As
you know, she is always an invalid.'

Her son must be as rich as Croesus to
keep up so many separate establishments.
His own in Kensington, hia place in the
country, and his mother's in our square,'
said Mr. Prettyman.

'I do not know what bis means are,'
said Miss Heath. 'I mustn't stay any
longer, Louisa, lest Mrs. Le Roy should
awake and miss me she added, rising.
We are anxious about Colonel Marmot,
who was in the last battle ; and Emily
writes from the Cape that she is not
well.'

Colonel Marmont was Mrs. Le Roy's
son-in-law.

How is the little girl with the pretty
name ?' asked Mrs. Pretty man.

Mimics seems well. Her mother calls
her Mimi,' was the reply, and Miss Heath
withdrew.

Sampson met her in the hall, and, while
opening the door, inquired for Mrs. Le
Eoy and the family. He had once been
in her service. Miss Heath replied curtly
and cautiously, and Sampson muttered to
himself that ' if all women were as cautious
as Miss Heath, there would not be half the
mischief there is in the world

CHAPTER II.

A WAIF IN THE SQUARE.

Moe than a fortnight elapsed before the
question of adopting a child was again
seriously discussed by Mr. and Mrs. Pretty-man.
The latter had, from time to time,
consulted Miss Heath during her flying
visits, but without eliciting any decided
opinion from that lady. * A great responsibility.
An amusement, perhaps. By all
means ascertain his antecedents and
similar sentences, dropped from her oracular
mouth, but Mrs. Prettyman felt that
she could not act upon them. At last she
said to her husband, one evening when she
believed Sampson to be out of earshot,

^ I have several children in my mind's
eye, Joe ; in fact, I have scores. I wish
you would choose.'

What a big eye your mind must have,
Lou ! If I could look through it, perhaps
I might choose; but I can't. There's
safety in numbers. Where do they all
come from ?' returned the considerate
spouse.

^ I will tell you as soon as I have consulted
my diary. I dotted down some of
those that took my fancy. But, between
ourselves, I am getting quite tired of the
search, and have spent a fortune in
donations.'

Just give me a few of your impressions,
Lou. Where have you been ?'

Half over London and the suburbs, and
even out of town. It is awful to think of
the myriads of children thrown upon
charity. Why don't the parents provide
for them ?

'There's the rub, Lou. 'Tis the way

of the world for young people to marry
without sufficient means, and leave their
infants for other people to support.
You, being one of the philanthropists, are
anxious to help on this improvidence.
Contrary to Scripture, you know, which
says, " The parents should lay up for the
children." '

Why, Joe, you have no idea how kindly
I was received at places where you subscribe,
particularly at the clergy and the
doctors, and the soldiers' and sailors' Homes.'

^ They are public property, Lou, because
they take care of our souls, bodies, and
native land. But where did you fix your
affections ?'

I liked the cheerful places best, where
'they were dressed in bright costumes. I
ran away from the sisterhoods because
I can't bear all those black gowns, and
veils, and strips of white across the forehead,
and big crosses. I hope I wasn't
wrong, Joe, but they frightened me ; and

SO did the rooms, like convents, with arched
windows and small panes, and gloomy
passages. I can't understand why good
people should dress themselves up and live
like that. Not but that the children looked
happy enough. However, I am tired to
death, and so I should think were the saints
and royal family, for many of the orphanages
are named after them. I often wonder
how the dear Queen and the princesses
can bear to see their names stuck about
like placards, as if to advertise the contents
of London.'

'But what of the adopted child, Lou,
and the evangelist, and our heir, &c., &c. ?'

I have about twenty children under
consideration, from as many different
Homes. You see, I insisted on their
having no friends to interfere with me,
and on their yet being respectable. Dear
me ! who can that be ringing the hall-bell
with such a peal at this time of night?
Nobody ever comes round so late except

Milly, and she rings like a mouse.'

It was, truly, a vigorous peal that
aroused the slumbrous household of the
Prettymans'. It awakened so much curiosity
in the mistress of the mansion that
she scarcely gave Sampson time to answer
it before she rang a corresponding peal on
the library-bell. There was a scuffle in
the hall, as if all the servants had come to
see what was the matter, and a simultaneous
cry from Sampson of * Master ! master !
please to come here !' as that worthy burst
open the sitting-room door.

Mr. Prettyman hastened into the hall,
followed by his wife. Sampson was looking
out of the door, and two or three of
the maids were there, wondering what it
was all about.

'What's the matter, Sampson?' asked
Mr. Prettyman.

There ! There, sir ! A woman thrust
it in and ran away before I could say Jack
Robinson. I'll go after her and the police,'

replied the butler, pointing first to a corner
of the hall, and then taking to his heels
and running up the square.

Mr. and Mrs. Prettyman and the maids
all turned their heads in the direction of
that pointed finger, expecting to see, if nota
burglar, at least his tools, or possibly a
box of dynamite ready to blow them all
up. The women shrank back, while Mr
Prettyman proceeded to investigate.

Oh ! my dear, for goodness sake take
care. There may be some explosive substance,'
cried the wife, laying hold of his
coat-tails.

It was some little time before he discovered
the cause of the commotion. In
the furthest corner of the hall he saw, behind
a chair, what appeared to be a bundle.
Moving the chair, he perceived the sole of
a small foot protruded from its folds. He
was not a nervous man ; but what if the
it ' Sampson had mentioned were a dead
child ? He shrank back a little, but, summoning

bis courage, he laid bold of the
bundle. The Toot — two feet, in fact —
began to kick vigorously.

*An explosive to all intents and purposes,
Lou,' he cried to Mrs. Pretty man,
now surrounded by the maids.

With some difficulty be dragged the
bundle from its corner, but the contents
struggled so violently that it slipped from
bis grasp, and in a minute he was confronted
by a bare-footed urchin, clad in a
suit of clothes which were too big for him,
and into which he must have rolled himself,
bundle-wise, when he attained the
corner of the ball. Two little fists were
doubled at him in pugilistic fashion, two
bright eyes looked boldly into bis, but
neither word nor cry escaped from this
juvenile prize-fighter. Mr. Prettyman
laughed, and the women, encouraged,
came forward. Mrs. Prettyman exclaimed,
the maids shrieked, and the child used
his fists defiantly at them all.

At this juncture Sampson returned with
a policeman. The attention of the young
pugilist was diverted to them, and he put
himself in an attitude of self-defence.

^ We can't find the woman, sir,' said
Sampson.

*But without doubt we shall. Come
here, you young scamp,' echoed the policeman,
seizing the child, who kicked and
cuffed, but to no purpose.

^ Don't hurt him. I am sure Providence
has sent him,' said Mrs. Prettyman.

We won't hurt the little chap, ma'am.
He can come to the police-station tonight,
and tomorrow he can go to the
union, while we make inquiries. We'll
institute a search for the woman instanter.
Here's a card round his neck.'

Mr. Prettyman examined the card, while
the policeman held the boy. He laughed
heartily as he read from the card, or rather
parchment label, ' To Joseph Prettyman,
Esq., Portman Square, London,' and from

the reverse side, ' George Hope. Irish.
Aged four years

This is an answer to your various inquiries,
Lou,' he said. * I am afraid they
have got wind where you least expected,
sand somebody has acted with more promptitude
than we have.'

The policeman began to question the
child, but not a word would he speak. He
could no longer use his fists, for his adversary
had hold of one arm, neither
would he use his tongue.

Perhaps he is deaf and dumb,' whispered
Mrs. Prettyman; 'let me try. Now,
Georgie, if you will be a good little boy,
you shall have some parties, and — ' she
continued, going towards him and affecting
an Irish accent.

Herring !' he shouted, as he liberated
himself from the policeman, and confronted
his new ally.

She took his hand, pushed off his 

cap, and looked him over. Then
she said, meditatively,

Curly hair — rosy cheeks — beaming eyes
rounded limbs — plenty of spirit — sure
to be an orphan. What do you think,
Joe?'

' Questionable antecedents'' replied Mr.
Prettyman, emphasizing the last word,
But, since he is directed to me, we can't
turn him adrift to-night. Make all inquiries,
Jones, and let me know the result,'
he added to the policeman.
'All right, sir. We'll be after the
woman, and you must identify her returned
the policeman, looking at Sampson.

I never saw her, but the child is sure
to know her. Better send him off, sir,'
said Sampson.

To-morrow, perhaps, but not to-night.
We must put the bundle away into some
cupboard or other, since it is addressed tome.
Good-night, Jones.'

The policeman departed, and the little
bare feet began to dance energetically.
Sampson looked on with becoming gravity,
the cook with displeasure, and the
other women put their aprons before their
mouths to stop an explosion of laughter.

Send him something to eat in the library,
cook,' said Mrs. Prettyman.

^ Herring !' shouted Master George Hope.

It was impossible to help laughing, and
the aprons fell when Mr. Prettyman led
off the vaccination. The child stood
amongst them with inimitable coolness,
looking from one to the other as if he
commanded the whole situation, and had
been trained for the occasion. Suddenly
he caught the general infection, and began
to laugh so merrily that even the imperturbable
Sampson was moved to join. The
juvenile treble rang through the hall till
Mrs. Prettyman could restrain herself no
longer; she ran towards him, caught him
in her arms, and exclaimed,

*0b, you darling! Let us adopt him.
There is nothing to be desired.'

'Except the respectability,' added Mr.
Pretty man. ^ But • take him into the
library.'

The child, however, objected to be carried,
and struggled so violently that Mrs.
Prettyman was obliged to put him down ;
and he was no sooner on terra firma than
the fists were at work again.

He wants the shillelagh,' said Mr.
Prettyman, taking him by the arm, and
impelling him into the library.

Shillelagh !' repeated he, digging one
little fist into Mr. Prettyman's chest.

What fools some folks are !' ejaculated
the cook, as they disappeared. ' This
comes of all the fuss about adopting a
child. Some East-ender has heard of it,
and one of them Irish-cockneys has got
rid of her child in this way. I, for one,
won't stay, if they keep him.'

Any how, you'd better get him some-vol.

I. D

thing to eat. You can send Mary Ann
up with it,' said Sampson.

Tm not a-going to wait upon a beggar
like that returned Mary Ann, the parlour-maid
— for the Prettymans eschewed footmen.


ril take it. I never see such a dear in
my life put in Ada, the housemaid, or
Acted, as she was called by her fellow-servants,
in broad London vernacular.

The women disappeared, leaving Sampson
to his solitary meditations.

Just as well one as another he thought.
They don't know what to do with their
money. He's a fine little chap, and I hope
Jones won't trace the woman. I wouldn't
swear to her, if he does ; and the child . . . .'

Sampson, come here echoed from the
library. ' See if you can get that urchin
from under the sofa.'

Sampson was a portly man, as a butler
should be, and always had a difficulty in
stooping. He did his best, however, and

saw two bright eyes peering at him from
beneath the sofa indicated, and a pair of
chubby hands, with their palms on the
floor. He was about to lay hold on the
troublesome owner of the same, when he
received a pinch in the calf of his leg,
which he felt acutely, since he wore no
padding, as more fashionable domestics
are said to do.

The young scamp !' he exclaimed, rubbing
the aggrieved member, while his
master and mistress laughed, as lookers-on
will. It was evident that they were
not used to children, or they would not
have thus encouraged the delinquent ; but
they had themselves been chasing him
from corner to corner before he took
refuge under the sofa. The scene was
exciting. The child was evidently accustomed
to go on all-fours, and the three
pairs of legs of his elders could not compete
with his staff. His eyes were as
watchful and his face as resolute as those

d2

of a dog at bay ; but he neither spoke nor
cried. Not all Mrs. Prettyman's blandishments,
her husband's amused promises of
reward for better behaviour, or Sampson's
threats could dislodge him from his place
of retreat. Four of his five senses had
been assailed in vain ; it remained for
^^da to attack the fifth. She came in
with a small tray, and took the citadel
with the sense of smell.

Herring ?' cried the hitherto impregnable
fortress.

One of my bloaters,' echoed Sampson,
resignedly.

Ye,' subjoined Ada. ^ I beg your pardon,
ma'am, for bringing it here ; but it
seemed the only thing he cared for. Now,
Georgie, come and have your dinner.*

Ada was trim and pretty, and had a
pleasant voice. She and the ' herring '
prevailed. The bundle crept from beneath
the sofa, glancing furtively from one to
the other of his entertainers, yet keeping

an eye on his place of refuge, and finally
stood before the tray, and beside Ada.

Take off the covers,' said Mrs. Pretty-man,
seating herself behind the child.
You may go now, Sampson. Pray don't
speak, Joe, or we shall frighten him again.'

Joe was quite as interested as his vvife,
and watched the proceedings with an
amused eagerness. No sooner had Ada
removed the covers from two small dishes,
which contained, the one a bloater, the
other the remains of the mashed potatoes
from the dinner table, than the child fell
to. Ada was for removing the bones, but
he managed the work without her aid by
means of his fingers and a knife. The
silver fork he did not understand.

If the bones should choke him !' whispered
Mrs. Prettyman.

But they did not. He left the ' vertebral
column' intact, and demolished all
the rest of the fish. He carefully examined
the potatoes before he began upon them,

Ada suggesting that the skins had been
pared off, and finally emptied the dish.
Ada had secreted a piece of jam tart,
which she now produced ; but this, after
due inspection, he would not eat. He
had, apparently, a cautious soul that would
undertake nothing he could not understand.
Jam tart was incomprehensible to
him, but potatoes and herrings were not.

The bumps of caution and combativeness
well developed,' said Mr. Prettyman.

Tank God for my good supper !' said
the child, to the general surprise and delight.
Then he made a sidelong move
towards the sofa, as if about to return to
that harbour.

But Ada took his hand, and asked him
coaxingly to come with her, whispering
aside to her mistress that she would take
care of him.

Where T asked the child, with a strong
Irish burr, looking inquiringly at Ada, as

if he meant, literally, to discover her
intentions through her eyes.

To bed,' she replied ; and he was so
well satisfied, either with her looks, or
words, or with both combined, that he
nodded an assent, glancing suspiciously at
Mr. Prettyman the while.

'All right nodded that gentleman in
return. ^ But I hope your feet are clean.'

Biddy washed 'em,' replied the urchin,
taken by surprise, and protruding, first
one, then the other, to the admiring gaze
of the trio assembled, and showing that
they were as white as need be.

Ada drew him from the room with some
difficulty, he positively declining to approach
Mrs. Prettyman, or wish her goodnight.
When he was gone, a discussion
arose concerning him. Mr. Prettyman's
natural jocularity was laid aside for serious
consultation, and his wife's simplicity
for common-sense. He usually found his

pleasure in innocent jests on her credulity,
and she hers in wondering whether he were
in jest or earnest ; but now, as there was
something tangible to consider, they both
tried to meet it. He said, decidedly, that
every inquiry must be made concerning
the child, and he restored to his friends, if
he had any, and if they could be found.
It was evident that some one to whom he
belonged had heard of her inquiries at the
various orphanages, and had thrust the
boy into the house in the hope that he
would meet with a good home.

And why not ?' she asked, timidly.
He is a lovely child.'

Inheriting all the instincts of his race.
A born fighter — a veritable son of Erin,'
he replied.

The discussion waxed hot, and had not
Mrs. Prettyman been incapable of quarrelling,
this ' let-one-another-alone ' couple
Avould undoubtedly have quarrelled over
the innocent George Hope. The fact was

that Mrc Prettyman had humoured his
wife in her fancy for adopting a child, because
he felt sure that it would die out in
the difficulty of choice ; which it probably
would but for this unforseen complication.

The timepiece struck ten while they
were yet talking fast, and coming to no
agreement. This was the hour for family
prayers, and Sampson appeared with the
last stroke, took the Bible and Prayer-book
from their seat on their own particular
shelf, and put them in their accustomed
place. A goodly show of maids and a boy
came in, but Ada was not amongst them.
It must be confessed that Mr. Prettyman's
temper was ruffled when he began the
chapter, but it calmed as he proceeded ;
for was it not about ' The little ones,' and
*The millstone,' and ' Their angels'? Moreover,
in the prayers, there occurred a special
intercession for the orphan.

When they all rose from their knees,
and while Mr. Prettyman was saying good-chapter

III.

A Been Soldier

Important business letters and still more
public important political news in the
Times occupied Mr. Prettjman so engrossingly
the following morning that he appeared
to forget the intruder altogether.
Mrs. Prettyman did not remind him of
him, knowing that ' time and the hour *
operated wonders with her husband. Still
he was so unusually silent that she almost
feared she had offended him by the
unexpected result of her quixotic inquiries.
Soon after he had left home for the
City, Jones, the policeman, arrived, with a
woman whom he had arrested on suspicion.

Sampson told Mrs. Prettyman that the
policeman wished to confront the woman
with the boy before proceeding further.
Mrs. Prettyman was in a terrible fuss, as
may be imagined. She ordered Ada to
bring down the child, which she did with
much difficulty. The policeman and his
charge stood inside the hall door, and they
opposite. No sign of recognition passed
between the woman and the child.

'Do you know her?' whispered Ada,
and Master George shook his head.

She had made some slight inroad into
his confidence. Not so Jones ; for when
he stepped cautiously forward towards.
him, he bolted through the nearest open
door.

May I be struck dead, my lady, if ever
I see that child before said the woman.
Tma poor hard-working' striven soul, as
have lost half-a-day's work all along of
being took up by this gentleman. And
here lost half-a-day's work, and the public

have to pay all the same, for meddling wi'
what don't concern him. That's what the
police is for. I wish they'd mind their
own business, I does, and so do a-many
others.'

Mrs. Prettyman thought she was a 
female, with blear eyes
that winked at her queerly ; still she had
sympathy with all who were wrongfully
suspected, and having asked the policeman
if he were satisfied, and received a somewhat
dissatisfied assurance that he was,
she slipped five shillings into the woman's
hand.

The Lord bless yer, my lady. I'll be
happy to be took up on suspicion everyday
this year, if I can oblige yer, Mr.
Bobby, and sure, if I can help to find the
friends o' the child, I'm at your service.
I'll keep an eye on the square, my lady,
and on this house particular . . .'

Oh ! pray don't trouble,' began perplexed
Mrs. Prettyman ; but the policeman

cut the obliging offers short by taking off
the woman. ' They won't lock her up,
Sampson ?' she added.

Certainly not, ma'am. She's as innocent
as I am. Lucky that master isn't in.'

It may be as well to say here that the
indefatigable Jones brought two other
women during the course of the day, still
^ on suspicion or approval,' but both were
evidently ' as innocent as Sampson ;' and,
when Mrs. Prettyman made up her accounts,
she was puzzled to know whether
the fifteen shillings she had disbursed out
of sympathy could be justly inserted as
^ charity ' or not. But she entreated the
policeman to take up no more of such very
expensive suspects.

When female No. 1 had departed, Mrs.
Prettyman and Ada had a hunt for George.
They feared he had escaped, for they
could find him neither upstairs nor down.
At last, like Achilles, he was again taken
by the heel. He had curled himself up

far back beneath the big library sofa, and
the discreet Sampson, remembering the
episode of the previous evening, descended
to all fours to look for him. The little
pink heel betrayed him, and thereby he
was ignominiously dragged forth by the
butler, struggling manfully, but still resolutely
quiet.

A queer fish,' ejaculated Sampson,
holding him with difficulty as he rose from
his quadrupedal to his bipeds state.

Herring !' once more said the child ;
then added, in a whisper, ' Let me go,
Pat.'

There was a ring at the hall bell, and
Sampson was in what is vulgarly called a
fix; but Mrs. Prettyman appeared, and
released him. She put her arm round the
boy's waist, and held him tight. At first
he struggled to free himself, but was
arrested by a kiss. Whether this was an
unusual sensation or not did not transpire
; but suddenly the little double fist

unrolled, and tiny fingers stroked the
lady's cheek. Further demonstrations
were checked by the entrance of Miss
Heath.

Ha, Louisa ! The adopted ?' she said,
inquiringly.

The foundling, rather, Milly. Now,
Georgie, you are not going off,' returned
Mrs. Pretty man.

But off he would have been, had not
Miss Heath seized him and held him at
arm's length. He kicked and cuffed in
vain. She had experience of naughty
children, and knew how to manage them
or so she thought. She looked well at
him, and he returned her gaze ; not impudently
or defiantly, but with a sort of
grave consideration, as much as to say,
he had met his match.

Stand still,' she said. *Be good, and
you shall be rewarded ; be naughty, and
you shall be punished.'

Milly Heath never wasted words :

VOL. I. E

neither, as far as had yet transpired, did
George Hope ; but he understood hers.
He turned a face full of pathos towards
Mrs. Prettyman, and uttered the little
word, ' Lou !' by which he must have
heard Mr. Prettyman address her the previous
evening. She opened her arms, and
he rushed into them. The rounded cheek
and curly head nestled on her shoulder ;
the loving arms enfolded him ; the kind
lips kissed his forehead. And what of
Milly Heath? A slow tear rolled down
her cheek, proving that sympathy may be
silent. So may grief and gratitude ; for
Mrs. Prettyman's neck was wet with the
tears of the child, who had shed none
before. And these were not apparent
when she rose hastily and led him, obedient
now, out of the room.

Miss Heath wiped off that slow tear,
and sat immovable till Mrs. Prettyman
returned. Her hands were tightly clasped,
an intimation on her part of inward feeling.

Colonel Marmont was killed in the last
battle with the Caffirs,' she said. ' Mr.
Le Roy is with his mother, and I ran over
to tell you. We have not yet heard from
Emily.'

Mrs. Prettyman made amends for her
friend's frigidity. She understood her,
and poured forth a stream of sympathy
with her, the Le Eoys, the widow and
orphan, which soothed a soul whose self-restraint
was almost a mania, and a source
of anxiety to the few who cared for her.
Then she gave the history of the child who
had just left the room, and asked the
advice of Miss Heath.

What does Mr. Prettyman say ?' asked
that discreet woman.

That he must go to the workhouse if
we cannot find his friends. But he shall
never, never go there. Why, Milly, he is
just what I wanted, and you made him
good directly. How clever you are !'

'If you want to keep him, let Mr.

e2

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

Prettyman alone. Agree with him, and he
will come round

We always have agreed till last night,
and then he was quite cross, though he
encouraged me at first; and, now Providence
has sent me just what I wanted, he
has taken quite a turn the other way.'

He will come back if you have patience
said Milly, hurrying off, relieved in spirit
by this slight interchange of sympathy.

Mrs. Prettyman went in search of her
protege. She found him in the servants'
hall, quiet as a lamb. Tom, the page-boy,
had given him an old box of soldiers, which
he had arranged in military fashion on the
floor. He was wholly abstracted from the
scene around him, his attention being as
keenly fixed on his mimic artillery, as
would be that of a general on his troops.
He did not even notice Tom and two of
the maids, who were looking on with much
amusement and interest. Neither did Mrs.
Prettyman's arrival disturb him. He must

have been amongst soldiers, for he manoeuvred
his red-coats as if he understood
what he was about, putting them through
their facings, and giving the word of command
with strange precision.

I wanted his measure for a suit of
clothes, and some shoes and stockings, but
perhaps we had better not disturb him,'
whispered Mrs. Pretty man, to the still
implacable Mary Ann.

What he's got on is good enough for
the like of him, ma'am ; I hope you
won't be taking up with such a beggar's
brat. No good ever comes from that
sort of thing,' replied the outraged housemaid.


He's wonderful 'cute, ma'am,' remarked
the cook. ' He says " Fire !" as if he was
the Took o' Cambridge.'

And he certainly had stentorian lungs
to judge from his commands to his soldiery.
Mrs. Prettyman longed to embrace him,
but resisted, fearing to arouse the sleeping

lion, so she went in search of Ada for a
consultation.

Shortly afterwards Mrs. Prettyman went
out. She walked round the square in order
to look at Mrs. Le Roy's house, which was
on the side opposite hers. She had the
satisfaction of seeing that the blinds were
down, albeit Colonel Marmont must then
have filled a soldier's grave, and that
several carriages were at the door.

*Mr. Le Roy's — the doctor's — Sir John
Marmont's, I think — the rest for inquiries
she mused. ' Milly will have enough todo.
The old lady's as proud as Lucifer,
and as to her son, nobody knows what he
is. Some say he was crossed in love, and
that's what makes him so queer.'

As she walked quietly past the house, a
tall, pale, distinguished-looking man came
out, and got into one of the carriages. It
was Mr. Le Roy. He looked about forty.

Why doesn't ho stay and comfort his
poor mother ?' muttered Mrs. Prettyman,

who, like the rest of the world, had a taste
for ~ managing her neighbours' affairs.
However, she soon forgot theirs in her
own. She walked quietly down Orchard
Street into Oxford Street, and, after
a long inquisition of different shop-windows,
paused long before a wax
figure of a boy in fashionable costume.
She went in, and asked for a similar suit
for ^ a fine child of four.' She would fain
have purchased a uniform for her miniature
general officer, but it had not yet
become the fashion to dress children upas
soldiers, though juvenile sailors were
as common as the way on which they
walked.

*This suit is altogether loose, madam,
and will fit any young gentleman,' said
the polite showman, displaying a suitable
costume, which Mrs. Prettyman purchased,
and ordered to be sent home. Returned
to her own house, she bade Ada attire
Master George in it as soon as it arrived.

lion, so she went in search of Ada for a
consultation.

Shortly afterwards Mrs. Prettyman went
out. She walked round the square in order
to look at Mrs. Le Roy's house, which was
on the side opposite hers. She had the
satisfaction of seeing that the blinds were
down, albeit Colonel Marmont must then
have filled a soldier's grave, and that
several carriages were at the door.

'Mr. Le Roy's — the doctor's — Sir John
Marmont's, I think — the rest for inquiries,'
she mused. ' Milly will have enough todo.
The old lady's as proud as Lucifer,
and as to her son, nobody knows what ho
is. Some say he was crossed in love, and
that's what makes him so queer.'

As she walked quietly past the house, a
tall, pale, distinguished-looking man came
out, and got into one of the carriages. It
was Mr. Le Roy. He looked about forty.

Why doesn't ho stay and comfort his
poor mother ?' muttered Mrs. Prettyman,

who, like the rest of the world, had a taste
for - managing her neighbours' affairs.
However, she soon forgot theirs in her
own. She walked quietly down Orchard
Street into Oxford Street, and, after
a long inquisition of different shop-windows,
paused long before a wax
figure of a boy in fashionable costume.
She went in, and asked for a similar suit
for ^ a fine child of four.' She would fain
have purchased a uniform for her miniature
general officer, but it had not yet
become the fashion to dress children upas
soldiers, though juvenile sailors were
as common as the way on which they
walked.

*This suit is altogether loose, madam,
and will fit any young gentleman,' said
the polite showman, displaying a suitable
costume, which Mrs. Prettyman purchased,
and ordered to be sent home. Returned
to her own house, she bade Ada attire
Master George in it as soon as it arrived.

But he bad grown fractious again, and
was in hiding under the bed in Ada's
room. It was decided to let him remain
there for the present; and Mrs. Pretty-man
went off again, to a toy-shop, where
she purchased a sword. The house was
quite at sixes and sevens, owing to this
youthful interloper.

Mr. Prettyman came home early, and
his wife trembled, as she answered his
inquiries about the child. But she gave
him the history of the day, and was reassured
when he laughed his genial laugh
over her adventures. She did not venture
to mention the new suit.

There is nothing for it but to send him
to the workhouse, or board him out, or
put him into a home for forsaken children,'
he said.

Would you like to see him first, Joe ?'
she asked.

He assented, and she ran upstairs. Ada
had caught him, and was vainly trying to

dress him in the new suit. He was simply
restive, and would not have it on. Mrs.
Prettyman had the sword in her. hand,
and, with a cunning which she afterwards
declared was * inspired drew it out of the
scabbard, and said,

^ Georgie shall have this, as soon as he
is dressed.'

The sword was a magic wand. With
eyes fixed upon it, and chubby hands outstretched
towards it, he submitted to be
sumptuously attired. Shoes and stockings,
however, he would not, kicking lustily
while Ada tried to put them on.

We will do without them for the present,'
said Mrs. Prettyman. 'Come with
me, Georgie, and you shall have the sword.
Irish children go without shoes and
stockings.'

She led him downstairs, holding his left
hand so tightly that he could not escape ;
and, when they reached the library-door,
she put the sword into his right hand.

No sooner did he see Mr. Prettyman, than
he set himself in an attitude of defence.

Ouj* prize-fighter turned into a swordsman
!' exclaimed that gentleman, surveying
the child with involuntary admiration.

He certainly was a fine specimen of
Hibernian beauty, if Irish he really was.
He had the dark violet eyes and fair skin
of the race, and his well-developed frame
might have been that of a juvenile Hercules.
In struggling to brush his hair,
Ada had massed up the curls on the top
of his head, and the process of washing
had flushed his cheeks. The bare legs
and feet showed sturdily beneath the new
knickerbockers, and altogether he was a
magnificent specimen of childhood.

Let me see your sword said Mr.
Prettyman.

The boy looked gravely for a minute
into the kind face, then marched up to
him as if at the word of command, and
laid the sword at his feet.

It was a Divine impulse Mrs. Pretty-man
would say, in after-years. ' I, too,
was praying.'

Strange !' ejaculated her husband, laying
his hand on the child's head. * Who
and what can he be ? We cannot send
him away, Lou.'

*I was sure you would say so,' cried
Lou, suddenly putting her arm round the
neck of her spouse and giving him a hearty
kiss.

George burst out into a peal of childish
mirth, which made the worthy couple
almost ashamed of themselves. But Mr.
Pretty man drew him towards him, and
placed him, unresisting, on his knee.
From that moment George Hope's fate
was sealed.

CHAPTER IV.

AN UNCERTAIN WELCOME.

A SQUARE is an epitome of a city, as a
school is of the world. Grief and joy,
life and death, alternate in the smaller as
in the larger area. A wedding on one
side, a funeral on the other, mirth here,
depression there.

We pass quickly from winter to summer,
and glancing at the Le Eoys' mansion, as
Mrs. Prettyman and her maids were doing
from the upstairs windows, see a funeral
procession extending from the door through
two-thirds of the square. An open hearse
containing a cofiBn enveloped in wreaths
and crosses • mourning-coaches and private

carriages, and all the paraphernalia of woe.
The long-time invalid, Mrs. Le Eoy, has
gone to her rest at last, and her mortal
part is about to be taken to Highgate
Cemetery, where she has willed it should
be till aroused by * the last trump.' She
is said to have been a good and charitable
lady, and had much sorrow during her
sojourn here below. Her end, even, was
apparently hastened by the death, first of
her son-in-law, Colonel Marmont, who was
killed in battle, and subsequently of her
daughter, Mrs. Marmont, who only survived
him a few months, and who died in
South Africa, having been too weak at the
time of her husband's death to bear the
voyage home.

Her only son is the chief mourner, and
he enters the first coach alone. He is
pale, but is calm and erect, and looks as if
either callous or resigned to this great
sorrow. Friends, acquaintances, medical
men, domestics, fill the remaining carriages,

and follow the flower-laden and
cheerful catafalque through the square.
But no woman accompanies the departed
to her final resting-place. As the procession
moves slowly on, however, female
heads may be seen through apertures in
curtain or blind, proving, if proof be
wanted, that womanly curiosity survives
the tomb.

Miss Heath's is not one of them. She
sits in her room alone, pondering sadly
over her past, and more sadly still over
her future. One or two slow tears
creep down her cheeks as she looks
back through the vista of bygone years,
and forward into the unsearchable. Her
hands are tightly clasped, and lie listlessly
in her lap ; her eyes are partially closed,
and there, in the black dress, she would
seem almost as inanimate as the friend she
has lost and will never see again in this
world. No exclamations move her closed
lips, none of those self-apostrophisings, so

telling to the inquisitive, open the shuttered
windows of her mind ; she is secret
almost to herself.

Yet her apartment is pretty and cheerful.
Partly sitting-room, partly bed-room,
it is adorned with the art collections of a
life. The walls are covered with all describable
and indescribable pictures, photographs,
brackets, china, screens ; while the
tables are equally laden with mementoes
of childhood, girlhood, womanhood. 
and boxes of Indian and Japanese
workmanship lie on her dressing-table,
and embroidered cushions and ottomans
abound. These are her treasures ; but
they do not serve to console her to-day.
If only one of the many donors of the contents
of her museum were near, she might
feel less utterly sad and lonely. Not that
she would herself invite such companionship.


It comes, nevertheless. The door suddenly
opens, and Mrs. Prettyman appears.

C - ^ ^

T '

she is sure to have provided for you,' said
Mrs. Prettyman.

She could not, for everything goes to
Mr. Le Roy. Besides, I want no provision
so long as I can work. But — I grieve for
her — for she was — very — kind to me.'

Something almost resembling a sob
broke the sad monotony of Milly Heath's
voice and attitude. Mrs. Prettyman took
her hand, saying,

You know. Milly dear, that we are
your friends, and you shall come and stay
with us as long as you like. Perhaps you
could master our young tyrant.'

A shade of interest passed over Miss
Heath's countenance, as she said,

What of him ?'

Oh ! he is a dear ; but so unmanageable
that we scarcely know what to do with
him. He is not naughty, you understand,
but so masterful. Although he has been
now six months with us, nothing can
induce him to keep on his shoes and

VOL. I. F

stockings, or to learn his letters, or to sit
quietly at table, or to call us mother and
father, as we wish. Ifc is always " Joe "
and " Lou." '

Miss Heath actually smiled, and said,
How very amusing. What else ?'
He runs after Ada all over the house,
annoys the cook and Mary Ann, and won't
do what I tell him. Mr. Prettyman says
I spoil him, but no sooner does he show
bis pretty face, and look up at Joe,
than he spoils him too The house isn't
the same, I assure you, for he's here, there,
and everywhere ; and so are his soldiers.
He seems very fond of Joe, and hugs him
like a young bear.'

What of his antecedents ?' asked Miss
Heath, interested.

He talks of Biddy, and Pat, and the
"pigment," and the great sea that Biddy
and he and the ship were upon just before
he saw us ; but when we ask him if he

will go back to them, he shakes his head,
looks at us with his beautiful eyes, and
runs into the first hiding-place that offers.
He was a long time before he got used to
Sampson, and scrambled under the sofa
when he appeared ; but he is now accustomed
to him, and rules him like the rest
of us. After all, there's nothing like a
child in a house, Milly.'

I have had enough of them, and they
are sure to die,' sighed Miss Heath.

Dear Milly, do tell me something about
Colonel and Mrs. Marmont and the little
girl.'

There is not much to tell, Lou. He
was killed in battle, as you know. She
must have died of grief at the shock ; and
we have heard nothing of the child, as yet.
Mrs. Le Eoy's end was undoubtedly hastened
by the news of her daughter's
death.'

It is very sad for you, dear Milly, and,

f2

I suppose, for Mr. Le Roy ?' suggested
Mrs. Pretty man, interrogatively.

Yes — sad for me, of course, and
doubtless for him. But I have not seen
him;

*Not seen him !'

No. He was not here when his mother
died, and he has only been once since —
until to-day. Perhaps you had better go
now, Louisa, as he may wish to see me
when he returns.'

Let us arrange something first, Milly.
Wo are going off to the moors almost
immediately, that Joe may have some shooting.
That is why we are so late in town.
Don't you think Georgie will be quite at
home on the moors, with his little bare
feet ? You must come to us there. You
want a real change. I suppose Mr. Le
Eoy will like you to remain here until he
breaks up the establishment, after which,
you must have a holiday; and I am sure

Mr. Pretty man will be very glad to see
you, and Georgie will not run away from
you, when he knows you better. He
is shy at first, but he really is such a
dear.'

I must wait God's time, and take what
offers,' returned Miss Heath, despondently.
Yet I thank you sincerely, Louisa.'

This response damped the warmth of
kind, voluble Mrs. Pretty man, who suddenly
felt that she had been talking solely
of worldly matters in the presence of that
mysterious Death still hovering over the
house. She had come to cheer her friend,
and had forgotten that the departed lady
had been her benefactress, and that, whatever
her exacting demands on the patience
of her dependent, the fact that they were
now separated was a solemn reality. Again
she took Miss Heath's hand, and said,
affectionately,

'Forgive me, Milly, if I have not sympathised

as I ought. But you used to
call me thoughtless, and carried away, aud
I daresay I am. Still I feel for you from
my heart, and for poor Mrs. Le Roy, and
her son too; though, I must say, they
were odd in many ways, and I never knew
them personally — which makes all the difference.
But death is always awful ; and
I only hope your poor friend was prepared.
I pray to be ready when my time comes,
though I suppose it is impossible to realize
it all till it does actually arrive.'

She said it was only '^ crossing the
bridge"' replied Miss Heath, with another
stifled sob. ' But I think you had better
go now, Louisa. Perhaps Mr. Le Roy
may wish to see me when he returns.
If you go out very quietly, no one will see
you.'

Mrs. Prettyman rose, kissed her friend,
repeated her invitation, and finally left
her, muttering, as she went down the
carpeted stairs,

^ Poor dear ! Always the same. Uncommunicative
and reserved to a fault.
Keeping her own and everybody's secrets.
This is a larger house than ours, and
better appointed. But they have always
been grand people, and would look on us
as parvenus. No difference now, however,
between poor Mrs. Le Eoy and our Georgie,
except, to be sure, that he is young and
alive, and she '

Her soliloquy was cut short just as she
had her fingers on the bolt of the hall
door, by the housemaid, who had been on
the watch for her. She and her female
compeers had been sitting in the diningroom,
awaiting the return of their male
fellow-helpers, and discussing what was
likely to happen. Amongst other things
they had remarked freely on the fact that
'Mrs. Prettyman, who had never crossed
the threshold before, should venture to do
so now.'

While the door was being opened, a cab

drove up, and Mrs. Prettyman retreated,
for a gentleman within beckoned the housemaid
to him. She overheard the conversation
that followed. The girl detailed the
melancholy circumstances of the household,
which the veiled windows must have
previously indicated, and the gentleman
replied,

This is indeed sad. I am Captain
Percy, who wrote to your late mistress the
account of Mrs. Marmont's death, and
subsequently to your master. Mrs. Percy
and I were coming to England from South
Africa, and have brought Colonel and Mrs.
Marmont's daughter with us. Were we
not expected ?'

Wot that I know of, sir,' answered the
servant.

But we telegraphed. Did the message
not reach Mr. Le E,oy ?'

I do not know, sir.'

Perhaps you will kindly show us into
some private room, until Mr. Le Roy

returns. "We have no time to lose, still I
must see him. The cabman will stow away
the luggage, if you will tell him where to
put it. I assure you Mr. Le Roy must be
aware of our arrival about this time.'

The bewildered housemaid had not a
word to say, for while she stood by the
cab, irresolute, Captain Percy acted on his
own words, and Mrs. Prettyman saw a
lady, and a little girl in deep mourning,
enter the hall. She did not stay to watch
further proceedings, but instantly hastened
upstairs to Miss Heath's room, unperceived,
she thought, by the new arrivals. She
found her friend as she had left her, only
with a prayer-book in her hand, open at
the burial service.

Milly, you must go downstairs at once,'
she began, breathlessly. ' A Captain and
Mrs. Percy have brought Colonel and Mrs.
Marmont's little girl from South Africa,
and they are in the hall at this moment.
Captain Percy says he wrote and telegraphed,

and thinks they were expected. Did
you know of it?'

I read his letter announcing poor
Emily's death, since which I have heard
nothing,' replied Miss Heath, clasping her
hands and trembling with nervous agitation.


Mrs. Prettyman hurried her downstairs
before she had time for consideration, and
they met the cabman in the hall with a
large box on his shoulder.

'What am I to do, Miss?' asked the
maid, relieved by the appearance of Miss
Heath, who was still the last person to
whom she would naturally have appealed
in an emergency. ' They are in the ,
and I told the man to put the
luggage in the passage, where Mr. Le
Eoy is sure not to see it. You must tell
him, if you please. Miss. I was obliged
to let them in.'

Screw up your courage, Milly. Think
ol the poor orphan. Hush ! Look ! Here

is a mourning coach said Mrs. Prettyman,
while that melancholy vehicle drew up at
the door.

She flew upstairs, and ensconced herself
in Miss Heath's room, palpitating with
terror of the formidable Mr. Le Roy. But
there was no escape for Milly. She stood
planted in the centre of the hall, while one
solitary mourner descended from the coach,
and faced her. She perceived that he
would have passed her by unnoticed, but
she made a slight movement, and said, with
dignity,

May I speak to you, Mr. Le Roy ?'

Certainly. I hope you are well, Miss
Heath.'

He held out a black-gloved hand, which
she barely touched, and led the way into
the dining-room, pausing at the door with
studied politeness to allow her to pass in
first. His face was stern, and wore an
expression of disgust which Miss Heath
knew well.

Will you not be seated ?' he said.

'No, thank you, I will stand. I shall
not detain you. Captain and Mrs. Percy
have brought Emily's little girl from
Africa. They are in the drawing-room.'

A slight elevation of the high, white
forehead, and a strange twitching of the
firm mouth and nostrils were the only
symptoms of surprise evinced by Mr. Le
Eoy at this intelligence.

You must see them ; I cannot,' he said.

They have written, and telegraphed,
and believe themselves expected,' she rejoined.
' They are waiting for you. They
were Emily's friends.'

Her voice quivered slightly.

Friends !' he repeated, with another
elevation of the brow. ' They cannot
expect to see me at such a time. The
house is at their service. Send up luncheon
anything you like.'

And the child?' suggested Miss Heath.

You know I hate children,' he replied.

There was a quick, firm step in the hall,
followed by an opened door and a ring at
the bell. In another moment a footman
in black came in, and said that Captain
Percy wished to see Mr. Le Eoy at once,
as he had an engagement elsewhere in
half-an-hour.

Say I will come immediately,' returned
Mr. Le Roy, while Miss Heath escaped to
her room.

He went to the drawing-room, and
apologized to Captain Percy for keeping
him waiting.

I am grieved to intrude at such a
moment, and sympathize heartily with you,'
said Captain Percy. ' But my wife's mother
is expecting us to luncheon. "We only
arrived last evening, and slept at the hotel
We leave town immediately. I telegraphed
at once.'

*I never read telegrams or post-cards,
but my man does, and I wonder he did not
tell me,' said Mr. Le Eoy.

This is your niece put in Mrs. Percy.
I fear you did not expect her so soon.'

'Scarcely. How do you do? — hem — I
forget her name.'

Mimica/ said a low, soft voice, as Mrs.
Percy impelled the child towards him.

She was certainly like her uncle, but tall,
slim, and delicate-looking. Their gloved
hands touched, and she retreated to Mrs.
Percy's side.

I will see you again soon, dear, if your
uncle will allow me,' said Mrs. Percy.

Whenever you like,' replied Mr. Le
Eoy.

As the lady stooped to say some confidential
words to Mimics, the child clasped
her arms round her neck, and whispered,

^ Take me back to the Cape. . My uncle
does not want me here.'

He is sad — he has just lost his mother,'
said Mrs. Percy.

Like me,' returned Mimics, glancing at
her uncle, who was hearing from Captain

Percy the account of his only sister's dyin^^
request.

This had been that Mimics should betaken
to her mother, Mrs. Le Eoy. The
letter announcing that Captain and Mrs.
Percy would bring her immediately had
not been opened, for it had reached London
the day of Mrs. Le Roy's death, and
had been given with other papers to her
son, who had set it aside, and either
ignored or forgotten it. He now made
polite apologies, hoped he should have the
pleasure of seeing Captain and Mrs. Percy
at Kensington, would do himself the honour
of calling on them as soon as possible.
in short, said all that a gentleman
should, but did not mention his niece.
There was no time for further conversation,
only for a hasty farewell to Mimics ;
and Captain and Mrs. Percy left the house.

CHAPTER V.

AN EVENTFUL DAY

Mr. Le Roy and his, niece were together
for a few minutes. They contemplated
one another in silence. Tears filled the
eyes of the little girl, but she wiped them
away. In person she was not unlike her
uncle. Both were pale, and had deep grey
eyes, but the somewhat marked features of
his unsearchable countenance were softened
in hers. She looked sadly delicate,
and, had she remained much longer in
Africa, would probably not have survived
to be a burden to one not given to be
burdened.

I daresay you are tired,' he said, and

bis voice sounded harsh, in spite of an
effort to command it.

Yes, and my head aches. I have had
fever,' she replied, languidly.

He rang the bell and left the room
hastily. He had a dread of infection. He
waited in the hall till the bell was answered.

Tell Mrs. Le Eoy's maid to take Miss
Marmot to Miss Heath, and to ask Miss
Heath to be good enough to see that she
is properly attended to. Let Dr. Bouverio
be summoned, if necessary. Make my
apologies to Miss Heath for giving her
this trouble, but I must return to Kensington
immediately. Will you order my
carriage ?'

Having said this, Mr. Le Koy went into
the dining-room.

Miss Heath and Mrs. Pretty man were
still in the former's room, awaiting the
departure of the cab, in order that the
latter lady might leave without encountering
Mr. Le Eoy. Miss Heath was as

VOL. 1. G

much excited by the course of events asher
nature would allow her to be, and was
even guilty of looking out of the window
to watch for some indication of movement.
She was thus occupied when the door
opened, and Miss Marmont was announced.
She was accompanied by a respectable
upper servant, who gave Mr. Le Roy's
message verbatim, and then left the room.
Miss Heath advanced to meet Mimics,
and Mrs. Prettyman rose. The little girl
looked from one to the other, and then
hastened to Mrs. Prettyman, sa3dng, ' Are
you Miss Heath ? are you mamma's old
governess ?' and therewith offered her hand
and held up her face as if for a kiss. Kind
Mrs. Prettyman took the hand, and kissed
the pale cheek, then led her to Miss Heath,
explaining her mistake. Poor Miss Heath,
who was ever fated to be second in everyone's
affections, though first when aid was
required, put her arms round the child
quietly, almost negatively, and felt herself

embraced in return. Mrs. Prettyman,
hearing wheels, glanced out of the window,
and saw Mr. Le Roy's carriage drive
up, and that gentleman enter it.

Now I had better go,' she said. ' Bring
her over to see Georgie. He will make
her laugh. It is evident that you cannot
leave for the present, Milly. When your
affairs are settled, you must come to the
moors.'

I should like to go to the moors. Papa
used to tell me of them. But they are
cold,' said Mimics, shivering.

The poor child is cold, though it is a
warm day,' said Mrs. Prettyman. ' You
had better give her something hot.'

It is the fever — I take quinine,' replied
Mimics.

She was evidently more self-possessed
than Miss Heath, though she suddenly
began to sob when Mrs. Prettyman went
away. There was more of spontaneous
tenderness in her than in Miss Heath, and

g2

the child felfc it. Still Miss Heath succeeded
in soothing her, taking off her
travelling things, arranging her masses of
dark hair, and finally conducting her to
a pretty morning-room on the first-floor,
which had been her grandmother's sitting-room.
Here refreshments were brought,
and the young stranger gradually became
communicative as Miss Heath's manner
insensibly relaxed towards this child of a
friend whom she had loved. It soon became
evident that Mimics had been accustomed
to be waited upon, though, at
the same time, she had been her mother's
nurse. An allusion to that mother brought
the tears to her eyes, and she said, sobbing,

Mamma told me that I should be with
grand mamma, when she was gone to
Heaven, and now she is with mamma, I
suppose. Are you sure they are in
Heaven, Miss Heath ?'

This question, put with much solemnity
and a searching glance of two earnest

grey eyes, took Miss Heath aback, who
could only reply that she hoped so.

The converted negroes are always sure
that they will go to Heaven when they
die,' pursued Mimics. ' Why are not you ?'
Miss Heath had known many children,
but she had never before been so questioned
by one whom she saw for the first
time.

The subject is too grave for you at
present,' she returned, evasively.

That is what they all say,' concluded
Mimics, drumming slightly on the table.

You must not do that, dear, when your
uncle is present ; he is most particular
ventured Miss Heath.

I don't like him. He did not even kiss
me,' was the reply. * Perhaps 1 had better
take my quinine.'

There was such a strange mixture of
the woman and the child in this little girl
that Miss Heath failed to understand her.
She discovered soon, however, that she had

been in the habit of readings religious
works to her mother, and that her mind
was full of crude notions too advanced for
her years. She was, besides, hiorhlv nervous
and sensitive. Her travelling-bag:
and the smallest of her many boxes were
brought to Miss Heath's room, while the
next apartment was rapidly preparing for
her use.

The quinine was found, and taken without
a murmur.

Poor mamma was always taking it she
said.

A more responsive mind than Miss
Heath's might have drawn much from the
child, who questioned her incessantly, and
seemed disappointed at her curt replies.
But there was no apparent sympathy
between them.

'I think I had better lie down now.
Will you cover me up?' put an end to
the conversation, and Milly Heath gladly
allowed her to recline on her own particular

sofa, and routed out a couvre-pied in
which to envelope her.

She asked for a book, and, when Miss
Heath found a story-book on some remote
shelf, she declined it, saying she preferred
something more serious. She was finally
satisfied with a religious periodical, and
fell asleep over it.

What will Mr. Le Roy do with her ?
Send her to school, doubtless, which will,
perhaps, be best for so precocious a girl,'
murmured Miss Heath, as she contemplated
her slumbering charge.

She had no further trouble herself, for,
when Mimics awoke from her siesta, it
was tea-time, and, when that meal was
over, she was attracted to the window,
and sat watching the carriages and people
in the square. She inquired where the
lady lived whom she had seen when first
she came, and, when the corner house was
pointed out to her, she kept her eyes
upon" it.

When may I see Georgie ?' she asked.

Perhaps your uncle may not wish you
to see him at all,' was the reply.

How old is he ?'

'Between four and five.'

Too young for me she added, thoughtfully.


Precocious in every way,' mused Miss
Heath.

The day drew to a close more rapidly
than usual for Miss Heath, who was sensible
of the relief of the change from the
monotony of the sick-room to the semi-life
of her new charge. Still it was always
sickness or death for her.

Perhaps I had better go to bed now,'
said Mimics, looking at a small watch
which she drew from its pocket. 'The
doctors said I needed much rest, and it
is past nine.'

'Were you ill when — when your mother
was ill ?' asked Miss Heath, and it was the

first direct question she bad put concerning
that mother.

*I made believe not to be ill, but the
doctor used to tell me, when we were away
from mamma, that I must take care of
myself for her sake, and so I did ; and now
I must keep well because there is no one
who would like to nurse me.'

Would you mind telling me something
of your poor mamma?'

Mimics took a seat at the table near
which Miss Heath was sitting, and went
circumstantially through the events of her
father's death in battle, and her mother's
subsequent long illness. It was strange
to see so young a child so collected, and
gifted with a memory for the minutest
trifles. She told how her mother had
swooned when the news of her husband's
death was brought her, and how she alone
had been the means of bringing her back
to life — how she had read nothing but

good books from that time to lier
death, and how that her chief relaxation
had been listening to hymns sung by
Mimics herself. Then, suddenly interrupting
herself, the child-woman again
said that she ought to go to bed.

Miss Heath accompanied her to her
room, and asked if she ' had been accustomed
to a maid. She replied in the affirmative,
but with an imperative gesture
begged Miss Heath to assist her, as she
disliked strangers. She could do little or
nothing for herself, and Miss Heath made
a mental note that she would need a strict
bringing-up, for she was sure she had been
spoilt, in spite of her apparent unselfishness,
since that little pronoun ' I ' was
largely interspersed in her various narratives.


'I should not mind if grandmamma
were alive,' she said ; ' but my uncle does
not want me. What do you think he will
do with me ?'

Impossible for me to saj/ curtly replied
Miss Heath.

Perhaps you will go now and come back
again,' said Mimics, who was standing
irresolute opposite the cheval-glass, attired
in a flowery dressing-gown half-covered
by her long hair.

Miss Heath obeyed, again making mental
notes. When she returned, Mimics was
singing Keble's evening hymn. She had
a sweet voice, and the tones touched Miss
Heath.

I used always to sing it to mamma the
last thing,' she said, when she concluded,
fixing her eyes on her new friend.

Unfortunately there was so little answering
light in Miss Heath's that she looked
disappointed, and said good-night almost
coldly. But Milly kissed her, tucked her
in, and sat by her side until she fell
asleep.

The last post brought Miss Heath an
astonishing and perplexing letter from Mr.

Le Roy. He bad never-written to her
before, and it was some time before she
mastered the contents, clear as they certainly
were. She sat with it on her lap
for nearly a quarter-of-an-hour before she
could rouse herself to action or even
motion. It ran as follows :

Dear Miss Heath,

Will you be so good as to
undertake the charge and education of my
niece, Miss Marmont ? You can state your
own terms. I intend her to be brought
up at Courtleroy. If you accede to my
request, will you kindly make preparations
to leave town at once, as I am about to
break up the establishment in the square.
I will write to the bailiff and housekeeper
at Courtleroy, and order them to be ready
to receive you. I will defray any expense
you may incur in transporting your personal
effects. Miss Marmont's are, I understand,
ready, and need not be disarranged.

You will, perhaps, try to start
this week, either Friday or Saturday, as
may be most convenient to you. The
servants will assist you, and be at your
orders entirely. I will inform them of
my intentions. IE you and the housekeeper
at Courtleroy will together manage the
monetary department, the bills shall be
paid through the bailiff. I have written
*' Miss Marmont," because I cannot ascertain
the young lady's Christian name. It
sounded preposterous. She might be
more becomingly dressed.
Believe me,

Yours truly,

Reginald Le Roy.'

At last Miss Heath was roused. When
she had mastered the letter, she sat down
to answer it, and this was what she wrote.
She knew Mr. Le Roy well — had known
him, in fact, nearly all his life, and she
never wasted words upon him.

Dear Mr. Le Roy,

'I shall be happy to accept
your offer. The sum your mother paid
me will still satisfy me. We can leave
town on Friday by the express. Miss Mar-mont's
Christian name is Mimics, I
understand it is Greek, and means, I
fancy, " my friend." I will attend to her
dress.

'Believe me,

Yours truly,

MiLLiCENT Heath.'

It would have been difficult to ascertain
whether Miss Heath were pleased or not
with the proposal made by Mr. Le Roy ;
indeed, she probably did not know herself.
She might have liked a change, but here
she was in the same family still. She had
been with them since her present patron
was, to her as to others, Peggy, a troublesome
and somewhat disagreeable boy ; and
she was to return to Courtleroy, where

she had first seen him, now that he had
become an unapproachable, and, to her,
disagreeable man. It was strange ; but
Miss Heath was not an analyst : she was
simply a chest into which the various drugs
of which life is composed were secretly
placed ; and they might have been labelled
poison so resolutely did she abstain from
reproducing them. To be an enigma to
oneself is a riddle hard to read.

However, she was stirred to immediate
action. She no longer sat with her hands
on her lap, thinking of Mrs. Le Eoy, and
wondering what would be the next move
in her apparently uneventful, yet really
eventful life, but she began to gather
together her ' personal effects,' as Mr. Le
Eoy had called her treasures. She was
occupied in packing them into their respective
cases until a neighbouring clock
struck one, when she went to bed. She
had forgotten the prime mover in this
change — Mimics — in the healthy movement

itself ; but she remembered ber before
sbe fell asleep, and with a helpless * Ah
me !' got out of bed, resumed her dressing-gown,
and went into her room. She found
the child awake, and startled her by the
light she carried.

Oh, Miss Heath, is that you ? I am so
glad,' said Mimics. * I cannot get to sleep.
I have repeated many hymns, and gone
almost through the Sermon on the Mount,
and said a thousand backwards, and done
all poor mamma used to tell me ; but I
have heard that dreadful clock strike all
the quarters, and have counted ten, eleven,
twelve, and one. I wish I were back at
the Cape. London and this big house
frighten me.'

"We are going to Courtleroy. You will
sleep well there, it is so quiet,' replied Miss
Heath, gazing at the excited face oF the
child, and the shower of tangled hair that
fell about the bed.

Mimics started up.

Courtleroy ! Where mamma was born.
That will be delightful. When shall we
go?'

Miss Heath told her, briefly, what had
occurred and was to happen. Mimics's
imagination was stirred, and she put innumerable
questions, answered also, briefly.

If you would come into this bed, I
should sleep now, for T am so glad,' she
said, when Miss Heath prepared to leave
her.

Miss Heath was about to reply that she
must conquer her fears and fancies, but a
something in Mimics's face reminded her
of her mother, and, with an unusual
impulse, she put aside her dressing-gown,
extinguished the candle, and lay down by
her side. Soon two thin little arms were
thrown round her, and a chilly form nestled
close to hers.

Kiss me good-night, dear, and I will
say my last little prayer, and go to sleep,'
breathed Mimics, and the tired, over-vol.

I. H

burdened woman clasped the little girl in
her arms, kissed her fervently, and soon
they fell asleep.

CHAPTER VI.

A MIMIC BATTLE.

Where death had so lately reigned, all was
excitement. The late Mrs. Le Roy's household
was aroused from slumber at the
news that her son was about to break up
her establishment, and that the first move
was going to be made by Miss Heath and
her granddaughter. As to Mimics, she
was excited out of her real or imaginary
fever, for it seemed that Courtleroy had
been the dream of her young life, and to
return there had been her mother's paramount
desire. She assisted Miss Heath in
her packing, or impeded her according to

circumstances, and forgot her griefs in

h2

anticipations, and counted the quarters as
they sounded from the * dreadful clock '
aforesaid, as * One less before we leave on
Friday There were only "Wednesday and
Thursday to be got through.

It was no easy matter to dispose of Miss
Heath's various ' effects but she was
methodical, and they were packed up, in
less time than might have been supposed,
on the Wednesday.

How shall we ore throuorli tomorrow ?*
asked Mimics, when the day was done, and
they were enjoying a well-earned tea. ' I
suppose my uncle will come and wish us
good-bye ?'

As she spoke, the eight-o'clock post
brought Miss Heath another missive from
Mr. Le Rov. When she had read it herself,
she said to Mimics,

Here is an answer to your questions.
I will read you what your uncle says, as it
concerns you. " Dear Miss Heath, — I
should be much obliged if you would dispose

of my mother's wardrobe. Take what
you like yourself, give Mimics what she
would wish, and distribute the rest among
the female servants or in charity. "Will
you also see that her jewellery and such
ornaments as she valued, or her granddaughter
might value, are packed and sent
with your boxes to Courtleroy? The
packages can follow you. Of course, you
will stay till Saturday, if you cannot get
this done in time for Friday. Yours
truly"'

I never saw grand mamma. I would
not wear her clothes — take them and give
them to the maids,' cried Mimics. ' Let
us begin to pack again. Are all these
pretty ornaments to go to Courtleroy?' she
added, glancing round the well-appointed
boudoir.

I suppose so,' sighed Miss Heath.
• They are mostly presents from friends —
many from your mother.'

'Then we will take all— all. I have

finished my tea ; do let us set to work at
once

Although Miss Heath was less rapid
than Mimics, she lost no time. In the
course of her melancholy life, she had
several times had to distribute the personal
property of relatives and friends, so,
calling the late Mrs. Le Eoy's maid, and
informing her of what was expected of
them, they at once set to work. Mimics
forgot quinine, bed-time, and fever in the
excitement of watching or aiding, and frequently
gave her opinion as to what was
only fit to be given to the poor,' or what
she considered might be useful to Miss
Heath. Now, as Mrs. Le Eoy had conscientiously
dressed as an old lady, and
Miss Heath, if not exactly as a young one,
at any rate, in the becoming costume of
middle age, her remarks were not flattering
to the latter. The maid understood
things better, and merely said that such

and such clothes might be altered to suit
the late companion. She did not employ
that expression, though she had often declared
that she preferred her own position
to Miss Heath's.

Poor Milly put even a stronger restraint
than usual on herself as she saw her old
friend's wardrobe turned out and assorted
in different heaps. It was not large, for
sickness and sorrow had made Mrs. Le
Roy indifferent to dress, and it had gradually
dwindled down to comparatively
small proportions for a lady of her position.

^ I should send all the rest to the poor,'
said Mimics, reflectively, when the body-linen
was inspected. * This would do for
the negroes. Mamma was on the committee
of the negro aid society, and she
was always glad when linen clothes came
from England. People would send woollen
things, and they were obliged to be sold.'

*I will consult Mrs. Prettyman. She

knows all the charities.' replied Miss Heath,
as a cupboard full of cast-off garments was
disclosed.

My mistress always intended to send
them away, but she was never equal to the
task,' put in the maid ; ' and now it seems
a great hurry — quite indecent,' she added,
under her breath ; but Miss Heath heard
and agreed, so did Mimics.

Is not my uncle a very queer man r'
she asked, but neither of her hearers
replied.

Miss Heath set aside a small portion of
the wardrobe, either for herself or Mimics,
and a large proportion for charity, and
then told the maid that she and her fellow-servants
had better share the remainder.
She did not wait to listen to the maid's
arguments as to the probability of their
quarrelling over it, but went, accompanied
by Mimics, to inspect books and ornaments
elsewhere, knowing full well that squabbles
must follow.

*Will my uncle be angry if you do not
do as he likes ?' asked Mimics.

He will make no inquiries.'

'But supposing you were not quite
honest ?'

^ I should bear the burden. He would
not care.'

How funny ! What can you do withall
these things ?'

Send them to Courtleroy, as he and his
mother wished. Mrs. Le Roy intended
everything for your mother.'

'Mamma would have sold them and
given them to the blacks — so would I.
You know, we ought to convert them. I
left everything I could behind me with the
committee, but Mrs. Percy would make me
bring lots of things.'

Quite right. We will finish tomorrow,'
said Miss Heath.

The morrow was Thursday, and menservants
and carpenters were at work all
day packing, under the superintendence of

Miss Heath and Mimics; the latter the
more decided of the two. But all was not
finished, and not even the partial and petulant
requests of the young lady — the
heiress, as they called her — could prevail
on the London artisans to remain after
six o'clock.

We shall not get off till Saturday said
Miss Heath.

^ The negroes would have finished it all
exclaimed Mimics. ^ They are much more
obedient.'

Now I shall be able to take leave of
Mrs. Prettyman/ rejoined Miss Heath.

Accordingly, when the house was quite
dismantled of books and ornaments, and
the offices filled with packages of various
dimensions, when, in short, on Friday
afternoon, Miss Heath believed she had
fulfilled the wishes of the Le E-oys, mere et
Fils, and completed her onerous duties, she
prepared to seek her haven of refuge in
the opposite corner of the square.

*I will take you with me, Mimics, as
you are not likely to see any of them
again, and your uncle could not object,'
she said.

Mrs. Prettyman was at home, and received
them with open arms. She had not
heard of them since she left them together
the previous Tuesday. Miss Heath related
briefly what had taken place.

Then you are provided for, dear Milly,'
cried Mrs. Prettyman, again kissing Miss
Heath, impulsively. *1 told you God
would surely point your way. You will
have to educate this dear child, and what
an interest you will be to one another !
The same family and everything, Milly;
the same old place where you spent so
many years ; I daresay the very same servants
and poor people, the '

Excuse my interrupting you, Louisa ;
but what am I to do with poor Mrs. Le
Eoy's cast-off clothes?' broke in Miss

Heath, and, ' May I see Georgie ?' asked
Mimics.

Send them over to me, and I will soon
find wearers,' returned Mrs. Prettyman,
ringing the bell. 'Tell Ada to bring
Georgie down,' she said to Sampson, when
he answered the summons.

In a few minutes Ada appeared with the
redoubtable George Hope. She had regularly
undertaken the office of nursemaid,
or, more properly, nursery-governess, since
she was to teach the young hero of the
hour the rudiments.

Go in like a gentleman — or, a soldier,'
whispered Ada at the door — words overheard
by Mimics.

'We got him to wear shoes and stockings
at last by buying him red ones in the
winter, and now he is getting accustomed
to them,' said Mrs. Prettyman. 'We
manage him by force of arms, my husband
says, for we say, '' like a soldier,"
and he obeys

Master George stood at the door considering
the trio, and was meditating an
escape, when Mimics ran towards him,
caught him, and dragged him into the
room.

You are a little soldier, and I am a
soldier's daughter. I know about parade,
and drill, and everything,' she said. ^ Now,
attention !'

In a moment the child stood erect, his
arms glued to his side, his chubby hands
on his knickerbockers. He wore his sword
fastened to his belt, resisting all efforts at
its removal, except when he went out with
Mrs. Pretty man. He fixed his eyes on
Mimics — large, solemn, blue eyes they
were — and she drilled him as she had so
often heard her father drill his troop. At
the words, ' Right-about — face — March !'
he turned, and marched round the room.
Mrs. Prettyman and Miss Heath laughed.
Not so Mimics — she only said, ' Halt,' ashe
returned to her, and in another moment

he was on her lap, overpowered by kisses.
Then she laughed merrily, and he let his
musical treble ring through the room ; and
the serious cherub turned into a mirthful,
dimpled one. The elders looked on, the
one amused, the other thoughtful ; but the
latter. Miss Heath, as if she had had enough
of it, interrupted their contemplation with
the words,

You will write to me, Louisa ?' and she
and Mrs. Prettyman were soon engaged in
conversation.

Meanwhile, Mimics was absorbed with
Georgie. He had called her ' Captain,*
which had greatly delighted her ; and when
she told him her name was Mimics, he had
shouted * Mimi * quite loud, which had been
her mother's pet name for her.

What a pity she should be going away,'
said Mrs. Prettyman, interrupting herself
in a string of kindly rules that she was
threading for Milly's benefit. * She would
soon be as fond of Geordie as we are.

I hope we shan't be foolish about him.'
You cannot well be too kind to him ;
but don't spoil him,' returned Miss Heath.
Joe says that would be impossible, he
has such a fine temper; and he obeys us
now. when we are not cross with him.
Isn't he a dear. Milly r'

He certainly was a 'dear if hv that
comprehensive word was meant beauty of
form and feature, for George Hope was a
lovely child. But it was the clear, unflinching
truthfulness and innocence of his
eyes that impressed every beholder. His
pugilistic tendencies had nearly departed,
though Sampson roused them occasionally,
not without malice prepense. A sort of
military alphabet-book had been procured
for him, which gave an impulse to his
intellectual capacity ; and Ada declared,
That he could learn everything, he was
so quick.' He had become, 'Monarch of
all he surveyed,' for it was impossible to
refuse him anything; he had conquered

even the cook. He had no aristocratic
tendencies, but trotted about at will from
drawing-room to butler's pantry, from
dining-room to kitchen.

Before Miss Heath and Mimics left, Mr.
Prettyman came iu.

*Joe!' exclaimed Georgie, at sound of
the latch-key, jumped off Mimics's lap, ran
to the hall, and finally returned on Mr.
Prettyman's shoulder. That gentleman
put him down on perceiving visitors, and
shook hands with Miss Heath.

*Mimi — Mimi!' shouted the child, and
dragged him towards a corner where
Mimics had taken refuge at sight of a
stranger.

Miss Heath introduced her, and Mrs.
Prettyman detailed volubly the circumstances
connected with the anticipated
flight to Courtleroy.

'Would you like to go with Georgie,
and see his army, my dear?' asked Mr.
Prettyman, to whom all young people

seemed about the same age. ' Georgie,
take her up to the nursery, and show her
your army.'

And certainly an army Mimics found, for
every imaginary warlike auxiliary had been
lavished on the boy. They were soon engrossed
in military manoeuvres, and difference
of age was forgotten in similarity of
tastes. They went away hand in hand, and
the trio they left canvassed the future of
this orphan pair. Mr. Prettyman told
Miss Heath his intentions concerning
George Hope, which he was already maturing
; and she grew almost communicative
over Mimics.

He shall not change his name he said,
because his friends may claim him some
day, and I hate mysteries

We think he must be the child of an
earl at least ; changed at nurse, or stolen
by gipsies, or forsaken by some unnatural
mother,' put in Mrs. Prettyman. ^ I want
him to be taught to call us father and mo-vol.

I. I

ther, for he cannot always say *' Joe " and
*' Lou "; but you object, my dear,' to ber
husband.

Straightforward dealing is best, both
in trade and sentiment,' rejoined that goodman.
' I hate complications. His name
is not Prettyman ; he is not our own

child . . ;

^ But I love him already just as if he
was,' again interrupted the wife.

My dear Lou, he may turn out a monster,
and you may change : all women are
weather-cocks, moved at the will o' the
wind; except, perhaps, Miss Heath,' said
the husband, bowing to that lady.

I — I — you do not know what I am,' she
stammered in return, a vivid flush overspreading
her face, and making the marked
features handsome. ' Fortune, circumstances,
connections, make or mar us.'

'Under divine guidance,' rejoined Mr.
Prettyman. 'But to return to Georgie.
He must be a soldier. I shall give him

the best of educations, send him to a
military-school — Aldershot, I suppose —
adopt him as a son in all but name, and
teach him his duty to God and his neighbour.
What can I do more ?'

Nothing,' replied Miss Heath, averting
her eyes.

^ And what do you think Mr. Le Roy will
do with his charge?' he inquired.

Nothing,' she again answered.

She will probably do something for herself
— marry, or be his heiress,' said Mrs.
Pretty man. ' She will be a handsome girl
when she fills out and gets some colour in
her cheeks. You will both be the better
for the country, Milly. So nice to return
to your old haunts. It will be like beginning
life again.'

Miss Heath sighed, and rose to depart.
There was a sudden drumming at the
door, and in bounced Georgie.

Tome and see the battle ' he cried,

i2

seizing Mr. Prettyman's hand, and tugging
him upstairs.

The ladies followed, and they found
Mimics seated on the floor, surrounded by
cavalry, infantry, artillery, volunteers,
cannon, ambulances, and all the mimic
paraphernalia of war. She had. arranged
it, and excited Georgie cried 'Fire* as
soon as he drew near. ' Puff' went some
invisible engine, and Georgie shrieked with
delight. The spectators laughed and clapped
their hands, and so ended the afternoon
of the first acquaintance of George
Hope and Mimics Marmont.

CHAPTER VII.

Fauntleroy.

An old pony, an antiquated pony-carriage,
and an elderly coachman stood at a small
wayside station awaiting the train. An
empty cart and horse were nigh at hand,
and the station-master walked to and fro
from wee platform to coachman and carter,
to enjoy the pleasure of a gossip. Porters
or other officials there were none, for it
was a rare event when the train stopped at
this rural station, passengers being few
and far between. It had been, indeed, setup
for a neighbouring landed proprietor,
who was then abroad.

When the train was heard in the distance,

the triad of gossips were almost as
brisk as if they were daily expecting
arrivals ; and station-master and coachman
hurried to the platform, leaving vehicles
and steeds in care of the carter. Wreaths
of curling smoke were seen surmounting
the woods through which the line had been
cut, long before the engine appeared, and,
when it finally stopped, the lonely spot
was, for the moment, alive. Out stepped
Miss Heath and Mimics, out jumped the
guard, and, in a minute, the platform was
half covered with luggage. Miss Heath
counted the packages, Mimics superintended
the parcels, and very soon the little
station was quiet as ever.

How do you do, Grant ? This is Miss
Marmont,' said Miss Heath to the coachman,
holding out her hand.

Bless my heart ! Can it be Miss
Emily's daughter ?' returned Grant, as
Mimics also shook hands. * Many changes
since you were here last, ma'am,' he added

to Miss Heath. ' There was no time to
get a fly, so I brought the pony-carriage.'

Poor old Shock ! I am glad he is
alive,' said Miss Heath.

^ Is that Shock ? Mamma's own old
pony ?' exclaimed Mimics, running off the
platform, casting her arms round Shock's
neck, and kissing his forehead.

The pony whinnied, and held out his
mouth, as if expecting something ; at
which Mimics took a bun from her ,
and fed him. She had already
made a friend.

The luggage was carried to the cart,
the wraps to the carriage. Miss Heath
seated herself in front by the coachman,
Mimics in the small back-seat: and the
cortege drove off. The coachman explained
to Miss Heath that he was afraid she
would not find all she could wish at Courtleroy,
for his master's notice had been so
short that the housekeeper had not had
time for preparations. Then he inquired

about Mrs. Le Roy's illness and death, with
the respectful interest of an old and valued
servant, and Miss Heath was, perhaps,
more communicative to him than she
usually was to most people.

Meanwhile, Mimics found enough to interest
her in a four-miles drive through
shady country roads and lanes, past a picturesque
village and many way-side cottages,
and by occasional brooklets that
sounded like music to her after the drought
of South Africa. ' They are almost as
respectful as the negroes,' she thought, as
the country-folk touched their hats and
curtseyed as they passed ; and she imitated
Miss Heath, in bowing in return, feeling
almost royal as she made her best salute.
Democracy and equality had not made
their inroads, as yet, into that neighbourhood,
which was essentially conservative;
and the peasantry were still not above
making the old-fashioned reverence to their
betters. The evening was deliciously cool.

and the sud, which was setting somewhere
behind the woods, glinted through the
over-shadowing hedges and trees upon
Shock's shaggy mane and Mimics's dark
hair.

'Is that Courtleroy spire — and is that
the parsonage amongst the trees — and is
this the village?' asked she, breathlessly,
touching Miss Heath's shoulder, who answered
in the affirmative.

They had reached the scene where she
was to live henceforth, she supposed ; and
she rejoiced that it was so pretty.
All the inhabitants, young and old, were
at the doors of the half-dozen cottages
that were known as Courtleroy village ; all
were bowing and curtseying, just as if it
was a carriage and four instead of old
Shock and the pony-carriage, and all were
intent on catching sight of Miss Emily's
daughter.

There's no one at the lodge just now,
miss,' said Grant, in a whisper, as they

drove through an open gate and past a
neglected-looking lodge, about which jessamine
and roses hung in masses, unpruned
and broken loose from the walls.

How pretty ! Is that where mamma's
nurse used to live ?' said Mimics.

Yes, miss,' replied Grant, ' but she
died a year or two back, and no one has
been put in her place

Mimics's attention was soon turned to
the oaks and elms that embellished the
drive, which wound through rich and
varied pasture-land, also dotted with
groups of fine trees. The fields were
undulating, if not exactly hilly, and the
scenery was pleasantly domestic, if in nowise
grand. It was essentially an English
place, and when, after a drive of about
half a mile, Courtleroy appeared, it looked
as English as its surroundings — a country
house, and nothing more. No Italian
towers, or Grecian colonnades, or Babylonian
terraces, or Elizabethan gables, or

Queen Anne's windows, but a fair-fronted,
two-storeyed, porticoed house of large
proportions, surrounded by gardens and
backed by shrubberies and trees. Mimics
thought it charming, as they passed
through a second iron gate, and saw a
respectable-looking woman standing where
Shock stopped of his own accord.

How do you do, Mrs. Stone ?' said Miss
Heath, just in the same tone and manner
she had used to Grant.

But Mrs. Stone was all fuss and flutter
and apologies, declaring that she could get
nothing ready at such short notice ; hoped
the ladies would not take cold, for she had
aired the beds ; trusted they would excuse
everything that was wrong, and finally led
them into a room vv^here tea awaited them.
Mimics shivered involuntarily, and Miss
Heath perceived it, who suspected — knew,
indeed — that the room had not been tenanted
for years. It smelt damp and
mouldy ; the paper was peeling off the

walls, the books were mildewed, the carpet
moth-eaten.

This is better than the large rooms,'
said Mrs. Stone, aside. ' They must be
done up before sou can use them.'

May we have tea removed to the hall ?\
asked Miss Heath.

'Certainly, ma'am,' replied the housekeeper,
not pleased with so sudden a
disarrangement.

Mimics felt as if she had left sunshine
without and found darkness within. The
went upstairs, and it was not much better.
The house was thoroughly neglected and
out of repair, and the furniture was old
and waxing shabby. They were evidently
interlopers, and nobody knew what to do
with them ; Miss Heath was well aware of
this fact, but Mimics only felt it dimly.
Two of the principal bed-rooms had been
hastily prepared. They were side by side,
opened into one another, and looked out
upon the park-land and trees in front of

the house. The view was bright and delightful,
the apartments were dull and
heavy.

I wish I was back at the Cape,' shivered
Mimics.

'We will improve it all to-morrow
responded Miss Heath, making an unusual
effort at cheerfulness.

To-morrow is Sunday !' moaned the
girl.

Then we will go to church and see the
neighbours.'

Neighbours ! There is no gentleman's
house except this anywhere, and this is
only fit for the Caffirs.'

'My dear Mimics! what would your
poor mamma say ? This was her home.
But come down to tea.'

In a minute, Miss Heath. I must be
alone — quite alone — like the queen when
she first became queen.'

Mimics spoke resolutely, and went into
her own room, shutting the intermediate

door. She kneeled down, and burst into
a passion of tears. This had been her
method of self-control when with her mother
during her long illness, and she had
certainly discovered the most effectual.
Still it was sometimes almost beyond her
strength, for she was born with a wild,
passionate nature, had been much indulged,
and was over-excited by constant religious
reading and teaching. She wanted perpetual
sympathy, and had been hitherto
over-sympathized with, considered almost
oracular, and half-worshipped by her surroundings
— now she had certainly fallen
on different ground.

*I won't give way!' she cried, when she
rose from her knees, wiped her eyes, and
went downstairs.

Miss Heath was awaiting her in the hall,
or, more properly, saloon, for it was a
large room, furnished with fire-place,
settees, arm-chairs, screens, and other

comforts, and, being essentially cheerful,
had always been much used. The front
Twas almost entirely of glass, through
which the sun always seemed to be looking
when not veiled in clouds or mists,
and he, with beneficent purpose, kept it
dry and warm — one must confess, occasionally,
somewhat too hot. On this
particular occasion he was casting side
glances through the large panes of glass,
for he was soon to remove entirely from
this scene of his daily labours.

Boiling tea, cold chicken, hot eggs,
strawberries and cream, and attentive Mrs.
Stone tended to reconcile Mimics to her
meal, which, in spite of an inward resolve
to depreciate, she partook of with fine
appetite. So did Miss Heath.

The gardener says the strawberry-plants
are quite worn out, and want renewing,'
apologized Mrs. Stone, as ]\[imica heaped
the delicious fruit on hei plate.

We will get fresh ones said the child
with her queer little air of command, which
made Mrs. Stone smile.

This is where your mother used to
play battledore and shuttlecock when it
was wetjMimica,' said Miss Heath. ' You
remember, Mrs. Stone ?'

I should think I did, ma am. Miss
Marmont is not so much like her as she is
like Mr. Le Roy.'

I am sure I am not like my uncle,' returned
Mimics, offended.

He was reckoned a very handsome
gentleman, Miss, and I daresay he is
still ; but he has never been here since . . .'

A cough and warning glance not unperceived
by Mimics, informed the housekeeper
that this was a forbidden theme.

I wish Georgie were here, that I might
give him strawberries and cream. I
mean to write to him on Monday,* said
Mimics.

Write to Georgie ! He cannot tell his

letters,' exclaimed Miss Heath, with the
shadow of a smile.

Mrs. Prettyman will read my letter to
him. I think I may do him good said
Mimics, with an air of assumption that
rather became her.

The remainder of that day and the night
following passed peaceably enough. So
did the breakfast in the hall on Sunday
morning. Preparations for church were
hurried, owing to the unpacking of boxes ;
but Miss Heath insisted on a suitable costume
both for Mimics and herself.

First impressions,' she said.

We ought not to think of impressions
when we are going to church,' rejoined
Mimics, who had an idea that it was high-minded
to abjure dress.

However, Miss Heath had her way, and
both were dressed in scrupulously-appropriate
mourning, as were the few domestics,
when they appeared at Courtleroy
church. Such had been the rapid successor.

I. K

sion of events, that they had almost forgotten
that this was the ' first appearance '
in church since Mrs. Le Roy's death. It
was an ordinary country church, and had
been repaired and re-seated since Miss
Heath last saw it. The old-fashioned,
square pews were replaced by low sittings,
and, beyond the fact that the Courtleroy
pews were still in the chancel, behind the
choir, rich and poor were, at least, on an
equality in the matter of church accommodation.


Mimics, who had been taught to analyze
her feelings and conduct, was scandalized
at herself that first Courtleroy Sunday.
In spite of her best efforts at attention,
she looked about her. Opposite her sat a
magnificently-dressed lady, with the carriage
of an empress — if, after all, empresses
do always carry themselves, as it is fabulously
reported they do — a good-humoured
looking gentleman, a young man, and a
little boy. In the body of the church she

noted a lady in a long pew with, what
seemed to her, a dozen plainly-dressed
girls and boys of all ages. She supposed
it was a school. There were, besides, many
smartly-attired people, the school-children,
the poor, the servants ; but the grand lady
opposite, and the long pew with the young
people, attracted her most. She liked the
quiet church with its marble tablets, its
one painted east window, its open doors
through which penetrated the songs of
birds, and, above all, its pastor. He, she
thought, was a man whom she could love,
and she hoped he was as good as he seemed
from his manner, and, above all, his plain,
earnest sermon. She was a reflective
child, and she certainly had much matter
for reflection ia Courtleroy and its surroundings.


When the service was over, much to
Mimics's disappointment. Miss Heath remained
in her seat until the congregation
had dispersed. This, she afterwards found,

k2

was out of respect to the deceased Mrs,
Le Roj. When they left it an open carriage
was driving off, and Mi mica's 'empress*
waved her baud to Miss Heath, who
returned the salute.

Who is that?' asked Mimics.

'Lady Helena Carew,' replied Miss
Heath.

And the others who are with her ?'

'Sir Joshua Carew, and, I suppose, her
sons — but I have not seen the eldest for
six or seven years, and the youngest never

'Did they know mamma? She never
named them.'

Yes;

Further conversation was interrupted by
the approach of the clergyman. He came
forward and introduced himself as Mr. Leste,
offering his hand in a kindly, clerical way.
He was onlycurate-in-charge, the incumbent
being abroad for his health. Miss Heath
had known the former, but had never
before seen Mr. Leste.

We are all glad to see tenants at Fauntleroy,'
he said. ' Vacant great houses are
sad eye-sores in a parish, and we have
hitherto had two. Neither Courtleroy nor
Summerlands has been regularly inhabited
during the five years I have been curate.
I hope you will make what use you like of
the vicarage, and my wife and children.
We are a round dozen altogether, and Miss
Marmont will find two or three of us companionable,
if not all.'

Mimics looked at Mr. Leste amazed.
He appeared to her quite a young man,
and yet must be father of * the school '
she had observed in church. He smiled
at her kindly, and so winning was the
smile, so pleasant the voice, that she would
fain have accompanied him at once to the
vicarage, the roof of which she saw among
the trees near the church.

I am not quite my own mistress,' said
Miss Heath.

I understand. Still I hope we may

^1-^

Ibis

Mr

l/r:

■jizz-aiiig.j^ v:

., J'-.-i Q 3- . £.

CHAPTER Vii

THE curate's family.

Why does not my uncle live at Courtleroy ?'
asked Mimics of the housekeeper.

This was a question which she had
frequently put to Miss Heath without
eliciting the desired information.

She was still invalided, and Mrs. Stone
was waiting upon her. The aguish African
fever had hold of her, and no one
knew when it would let her go. The
country doctor was in attendance, but he
did not understand the intermittent malady,
neither did Miss Heath. She and the
housekeeper were untiring in their care
of her, and rarely left her alone. Indeed,

she tired more of them than they did of
her. Partly from curiosity, partly from
the excitement of fever, she was, however,
never tired of asking questions, which were
more readily answered by Mrs. Stone than
by Miss Heath. She naturally desired to
know why the place to which she was
banished was deserted by its master ; and
on this occasion she repeated her inquiry
until it was answered.

Mr. Le Eoy has never been here since
Lady Margaret jilted him,' said that worthy
woman.

Who was Lady Margaret ?' asked
Mimics.

Lady Helena Carew's younger sister, a
sweet young lady, and your dear mamma's
friend. Miss Heath was her governess
before she came here. I always says she
was forced into the engagement by Lady
Helena, with whom she lived ; for Mr. Le
Roy wasn't the sort of gentleman she was
likely to care for. Anyhow, she ran away

from home ; and to this day nobody knows
what became of her, leastways the public
don't.'

How very sad for my uncle ! I am
sorry for him now. This makes the house
more melancholy than ever. Why did not
grand mamma live here ?'

She had her jointure-house in town
and liked to be independent. She and
'Mr. Le Eoy never agreed very well. He
had such odd, new-fangled notions.'

I like that. I don't care for people
who are common-place.'

Then, my dear, you will like the curate's
family. Poor things ! they call themselves
the '• Help-myself Society." They can t
afford to keep a governess or a servant,
and do everything for themselves.'

How fanny ! But will Lady Helena
come and see me?'

Bless your dear heart, no. The families
have never been friends since it all

happened. But sou must keep quiet and
not excite yourself.'

I will be as good and quiet as a lamb,
if you will only tell me about it returned
!Mimic, who had started up in her excitement.
*I shall dream and think of nothing
else till I know for certain. My
head is all in a whirl.'

lie down, and I will tell you. There
is no reason that you should not know.
Mr. Le Eoy was desperately in love with
Lady Margaret, and proposed for her, they
say, many times. He was rich and she
was poor, so she accepted him at last.
There's a many do that. I hope you
never will."

Never !' cried Mimics, excited again.

There, now ! keep you quiet. The poor
young lady had to live with her brother-in-law,
and that's never agreeable. Anyways,
she and your uncle were engaged.
Never was such a commotion at Courtesy

before or since. The house was to be
clone up from top to bottom, and the
rooms which look so shabby now were
beautiful. It is more neglect than years
which have spoiled them, for the master
allows no money for repairs or firing, only
just enouofli to pay our wages, and, if
extras were wanted, I had to write to
your grand mamma. She insisted on keeping
the old servants, such as me, and the
gardener, and Mr. Grant : but Mr. Searle,
the bailiff, transacts all the business. Of
course the estate must be cared for. The
marriage day was fixed, and the whole
county was in expectation. They were to
be married from Monkton, Sir Joshua
Carew's, and then to go abroad for a bit,
while the alterations here were completed.
Some of the rooms and the garden were
never finished, as you will see when you
get about. There were to be fine goings
on here and at Monkton, and you should
have seen how pretty the church looked.

all decorated with flowers, and arches
from the gate all the way to Monkton.'

'Were they to have been married at
Courtleroy ?' asked Mimics.

Of course. Monkton is about two
miles the other side of the village. A fine
old place, and Sir Joshua is one of the
old-fashioned sort of squires. But, to
make a long story short, our party went
to church, and waited, and waited — but
there vas no bride. I shall never forget
it to my dying day. The church was
crowded, and we were all looking to the
door in expectation, when Sir Joshua
Carew came in and went straight to the
altar where Mr. Le Roy was standing,
very angry, to judge from his nostrils, and
beckoned him out.'

*Why to judge from his nostrils?' asked
Mimics.

They always worked when he was ina
passion, just as yours do, Miss Mar-mont.
The two gentlemen drove off to

Monkton, and left us all in consternation.
Fortunately your grand mamma was too ill
to come from London, so our party was
only gentlemen. They and the rector
consulted till long after twelve, and then
we left the church. Outside it was said
that Lady Margaret was dead, and some
hours passed before the news spread that
no one knew if she was dead or alive, but
she was nowhere to be found. And from
that hour to this, as far as I know, she
has never been heard of, and, from that
hour to this, I have never seen Mr. Le
Eoy.'

What became of him ?' asked excited
Mimics.

No one knew at the time, but afterwards
he wrote to his valet to pack up his
clothes and come to him somewhere abroad.
I believe he wrote to your grandmamma,
but all I can say for certain is, that I have
lived on here with Mary, who was then
kitchen-maid, as I was cook, ever since, at

Mrs. Le Eoy's particular request. I felfc
that I was getting old, and, being used to
the place, I did not care to leave it. My
rooms is very comfortable — Mr. Searle
sees to that — but he says the rest of the
place may go to rack and ruin for anything
Mr. Le Roy cares. But Miss Heath knows
a deal more than I do, if she chose to tell.
She was at Monkton at the time, and Lady
Margaret was very fond of her. Then she
went as companion to Mrs. Le Eoy. But
she is close, she is.'

'What did the people say about it?'
asked bewildered Mimics.

Some said she had drowned herself, and
the ponds were dragged ; some said she
had run off with another gentleman, but
nobody knew who, and there was no station
at Summerlands in those days from which
she could be traced ; many people thought
she might have disguised herself and got
away with the foreign hop-pickers, who
were about at the time . . .'

Who are they ?' asked Mimics.

A ragamuffin lot who come to help in
the hop-yards. Mr. Leste is trying hard
to improve them.'

I will help him when I get well. I
want to work amongst the very poor,' said
Mimics.

Plenty to do here, Miss Marmont ; for
wee have nobody now, except the curate,
his wife, and children. They work hard
enough both at home and abroad ; but they
have nothing to give. Summerlands is
empty again, and everybody misses the
family.'

Where is Summerlands ? Who lives
there, Mrs. Stone ?'

Lord and Lady Manville, it is true,
lived there, but 'tis the way of the world,
I'm told, not to be able to live where God
has placed you ; they go to Algiers or
some outlandish place, in search of health.
His lordship has three big houses, and
can't live in either of 'em. No wonder

some of the poor people are turning
radical, and wanting his land for themselves.
Searle and I often talks it over,
and agrees that we, who have lived in the
same place ever since we were born, and
can't get change of climate, are just as
well as those who wanders all over the
world.'

I think this is a bad house for fever,'
shivered Mimics, * but when 1 am better 1
shall tell the poor people here how enlightened
they are compared with the negroes.
And 1 will write to my uncle, and advise
him to come back, for he has three houses
like Lord Manville, only he lives in one of
them.'

He won't take any notice, Miss Mar-mont.
I've wrote to him two or three
times, but he haven't answered.'

*I am his niece, Mrs. Stone; and he
must reply to me.'

Mrs. Stone laughed. She had heard
from Searle, the bailiff, how that Mr. L©

VOL. I. L

Roy had written to him instead of to Miss
Heath, in answer to that lady's account of
Mimics's illness, and had ordered him to
see that a doctor was sent for. Also he
had commanded that, since it was evidently
a case of fever, she should be isolated
for some time, for fear of spreading the
infection.

Thus it came to pass that, when Mimics
recovered, she was kept a prisoner in
Courtleroy. This gave her an opportunity
to explore the house and its surroundings,
and to make acquaintance with the few
people who worked within its boundary.
Bailiff, gardener, coachman, and labourers
became as much her slaves as had been
the blacks, and she alternately preached
to them or ordered them about, much to
their wonder and amusement. Miss Heath
set her to work at regular lessons, but they
wearied her. Habit had sent Miss Heath
to her mother's old school-room, which was
tolerably dry and cheerful, and here sententious

and somewhat heavy instruction
prevailed. The old grand piano was tuned,
the pictures were re-hung, and the books
re-arranged. In this Mimics took part,
and was especially interested in her mother's
books and sketches. Reading, writing,
and drawing were passions with her,
and conscientious Miss Heath sought to
restrict her in these avocations. In vain.
Neither could she prevent her writing
letters to her uncle, which, as Mrs. Stone
had predicted, were never answered. Those
to George Hope had a happier fate, since
Mrs. Prettyman returned wonderful messages
and hieroglyphics, that took much
time to decipher, and served to amuse
Mimics.

But quarantine must have an end, and
at last Miss Heath yielded to the repeated
invitations of Mr. and Mrs. Leste, and
took Mimics to call at the vicarage. This
was an old-fashioned, comfortable, homelike
house, encircled by a garden and

l2

shrubbery, and protected at the back and
sides by trees.

How cheerful !' was her exclamation,
as they passed through a wooden gate
between hedges of laurustinus, walked round
the circular carriage drive, and stood in
front of a trellised porch and innumerable
windows, upon all of which the sun was
shining.

The sound of children's voices echoed
from behind, and all, from the clematis
on the porch, the ivy on the gable end,
the reddening virginian creeper on the
facade, the fuchsia in the border, and
the chrysanthemums everywhere, repeated
Mimics's words, * How cheerful !'

A bright girl about her own age answered
Miss Heath's modest ring. She
shook hands with them, and showed them
into a pleasant room on the right, where
Mimics was pleased to see, seated in state,
Lady Helena Carew. With her were her

eldest son, Mr. and Mrs. Leste, and their
eldest daughter.

*You are Miss Marmont — I am Leila
whispered the juvenile parlour-maid, as
Miss Heath was welcomed by Mrs. Leste.

Call me Mimics, if you are one of the
Lestes,' replied Mimics, doubtfully ; for in
South Africa the young ladies never answered
doors.

My dear Milly, I am glad to see you
iigain,' were the words she heard, as she
stood a moment at Leila's side.

Lady Helena kissed Miss Heath, and
the face of each lady was troubled. They
had not met since that inauspicious month
when Mr. Le Eoy was jilted.

^ This is, I suppose, Miss Marmot said
Lady Helena, recovering a certain majestic
manner for which she was celebrated, and
looking at the girl, who shrank back, repelled
at something in the countenance.
And this is our son Montague, whom you

have not seen since he was a boy ; now he
thinks himself a man,' continued Lady
Helena, while Mr. Carew shook hands with
Miss Heath.

I am so glad to see you, dear. I hope
you are quite well again said Mrs. Leste
to Mimics meanwhile, and voice and manner
attracted even more than Lady Helena's
had repelled. ^ I think you are about
Leila's age. This is Barbara, the eldest
girl ; you shall see them all in time.'

Mimics shook hands all round, and,
when the party had settled down, made, as
she usually did, her observations upon
them. Her first impressions were favourable
to all, except Lady Helena. Her son
looked handsome and pleasant ; Mr. and
Mrs. Leste were delightful, and their
daughters she thought she should like.
Barbara's handsome, expressive face pleased
her most, and, when Mrs. Leste suggested
that perhaps Miss Marmont would like to
go and see the children, she gladly followed

her and Leila upstairs to a room that
served for school-room, work-room, nursery
and all. It was, like the rest of the house,
essentially cheerful, and lonely Mimics
was dazed at the scattered books, work,
and toys, which surrounded what seemed
to her a dozen children of various ages.

'This is Miss Marmont — Mimics Mar-mont,'
shouted Leila, whose involuntary
restraint was gone. 'Now come and be
introduced. We have all been wanting to
see you for ever so long, Mimics.'

Do behave yourself, Leila. We are all
like wild animals let loose when anything
new happens,' said Barbara.

Mimics, on the contrary, thought them
wonderfully well behaved, as they all
gathered round her, shook hands with her,
and even kissed her.

You are not to interfere with me. I
saw her first, and she is my property,'
said Leila, authoritatively. * This is my
eldest sister, Bold Barbra: you can imagine

lier character from her title; she is just
sixteen. His Reverence — that is papa —
called her 'bold" because . . .'

'Don't be so silly, Leila,' interrupted
Barbara, colouring.

Because,' resumed Leila, ' she taught
our brother Horace, aged fifteen, and got
Dick, aged eleven, into the clergy school.
She is afraid of nothing. This is Laura,
next to Horace, aged fourteen, and she is
so clever that she teaches us all. Here is
Totty, and Helena, who has the honour of
having a lady in her own rank as godmother,
and Octavius, so called because
he is the eighth of our olive branches. I
am Leila, and shall be thirteen at Christmas,
when I invite you to my birthday feast.'

There was a tap at the door, and a
May I come in ?' followed by Mr. Carew.
Mimics's swarm forsook her, and buzzed
round him. All but Barbara, who was too
old, and who remained at Mimics's side.
We have been introducing ourselves,'

said Leila. ' I have had all the work, as
usual. Parlourmaids always say the names,
don't they, Monty, when there is no footman
?'

Of course they do. Now introduce me,
Leila. The proprieties downstairs omitted
to do so, I suppose, on account of the escapade
of our respected uncle and aunt,
which we certainly couldn't help.'

Miss Marmont — Mr. Montague Carew.
Is that right ? He will soon be twenty,
Mimics, and he and Master Herbert are
our only playfellows.'

Mr. Carew broke through his ring of
girls, and shook hands with Mimics, who
suddenly felt herself converted from woman
to child. Then, drawing a roll of
music-paper from his pocket, he gave it to
her companion, with the words,

I have copied the carols, Barbra, six
times over. My ardour has been wonderful.
I wouldn't have done it for anyone
but you.'

]\Iimica at once wove a little romance, as
she saw the young man spread out six
sheets of neatly copied manuscript music,
and the young woman smile and blush as
she received it. Are not such romances
woven and rudely broken every day, just
like Mimics's?

Lady Helena is going !' were the words
that shattered hers, spoken by Mrs. Leste
from the doorway.

Come down, Barbra,' whispered Monty ;
and Mimics remarked that everybody called
her ' Barbra ' sharp, as if the three
syllables were too long in these fast days ;
albeit, it was still tolerably slow at Courtier
oy.

The three elders disappeared, and Mimics
was again surrounded. She was soon made
acquainted with the history of the Leste
family, since each child had something to
tell. They also heard hers, which was infinitely
more stirring than theirs. Laura,
a pale, delicate-looking girl, possessed herself

of her hand ; Totty and Helena seated
themselves at her feet while Octavius
climbed into her lap.

*I must go and help W.h the tea. You
will be sure to stay said Leila, suddenly
abstracting Mimics's hat. ' We shall have
it at five.'

And, to Mimics's extreme happiness she
did stay, Mrs. Leste havig- prevailed upon
Miss Heath to remain, 'mica had never
before sat at such a tenable, never encountered
so joyous a family. They were
a round dozen, includingsrself and Miss
Heath ; for the two yoi;est were there
each seated between two ei sisters who
attended to them. Mr. and's. Leste sat
at the top and bottom oie table he
energetically cutting breathe pouring*
out the tea.

Mrs. Leste was know the outside
world as ' a sweet person, home as the
most perfect of mothers, was in every
respect a lady, as her hud was a gentleman

; and the most arrant gossip could
find nothing to say against them, save that
they had married as soon as he was
ordained, on a curacy of a hundred a year.
Now they had a bouse, and nearly a couple
of hundred. Busybody said, 'How do
they live ?' and Irs. Grundy would add,
'Tis the way olthe world for curates
to marry on noting, and have larger
families than the bishop,' which it certainly
is.

Mimics made a utter tea than she ever
remembered to te made before, and,
reflecting over h day afterwards, supposed
that it y the force of example,
and that the bathing to do was to marry
a clergyman, knave ten children.

CHAPTER IX.

CORRESPONDENCE

Here is a letter from Milly Heath !' exclaimed
Mrs. Prettyman. * She says there
is a nice place to let not far from Courtesy,
called Summerlands, and that you
can have all the shooting and fishing.
Lord and Lady Manville, the owners, spend
part of every year abroad, and are not
coming home at all this year ; so you can
rent it for as many months as you like.'

Then we should see Mimi !' exclaimed
a voice clear as the eyes of the speaker.

'And Master George would have his
way, as usual responded Mr. Prettyman ;

and there was a laugh as telling and clear
as the eyes and voice.

We left George Hope a child of five or
thereabouts ; we find him a lad verging on
twelve. He is receiving the best of educations
at a first-class school, preparatory to
one of the public schools, and is at home
for the holidays. He is the son of the
house in all but name. His face is as
handsome, his manner as frank, his mind
as resolute in boyhood as it was in comparative
infancy. His tastes are still military,
and, although he does not either
double up his fists or wear a sword, he has
resolved to be a soldier; and what he
resolves is law. Mr. Prettyman says still,
that it would be impossible to spoil him,
and both he and his wife do their utmost
to prove his words. The trio are at breakfast,
and they are in the habit of discussing
all sorts of topics at that meal.

You may as well go to Courtleroy — I
mean Summerlands — as abroad, or to the

moors, Joe,' pursued Mrs. Prettyman. * I
should have Milly Heath and those nice
people, the Lestes, for neighbours, and
you could shoot and fish, and wear yourself
out '

'As well as his boots, madre,' interrupted
George ; for there was a perpetual
joke about Mr. Prettyman's apparel when
in the country.

It may be well to state here that, soon
after his adoption, George had taken a
fancy to a certain Italian organ-grinder
and his wife, not only because of their
music, but their dress, and a certain military
monkey that accompanied them. Once
or twice a week, at least, they had appeared
beneath his nursery window, and each
time he had carried them out a penny,
and a cake for the monkey. They had
been in the habit of returning profuse
thanks to the 'padre and madre who never
tired of watching the scene from the window
; and, insensibly, those soft-sounding

words had taken the place of the Joe and
Lou which had been his first familiar
appellatives of his benefactors.

It is not exactly father and mother
pleaded Mrs. Prettyman, when her matter-of-fact
husband declared that everything
connected with the boy should be aboveboard,
^ and Mr. and Mrs., and sir and
mara, are so uncommonly stiff.'

That is true, Lou. Perhaps we may
jump over our difficulty in this way,'
laughed Mr. Prettyman ; and many other
people laughed subsequently at what they
considered the affectation of the worthy
citizens of London town and their Irish
adopted son.

And what does Miss Marmont say in
her letter, George ?' asked Mrs. Prettyman.

You may read it, madre. It is full of
good advice. She says I had better let
Carew and all the rest of the bullies alone
but what does she know about it ?'

George's eyes flashed as he handed a

letter to Mrs. Prettjman, and her husband
inquired what it all meant.

A lot of fellows have taken to twit me
because they have found out my history
said George. ' I long to fight them all,
and I know I could lick every one of
them ; but I promised you never to fight
anyone but the enemies of my country. If
I am Irish, I suppose I shall have to fight
the English.'

A merry laugh accompanied this sally.
*You know what I meant, you young
rascal replied Mr. Prettyman. ' But do
you tell Miss Marmont everything ?'

Almost. You see, she is my sister in
the same way as you are my foster-parents.
She has adopted me ever since she saw me
first, and she knows me, not only because I
write to her, but from all my photographs.'

How many have you had taken ?'

One a year, is it not, madre ?' said
George, with a mirthful glance at Mrs.
Prettyman.

VOL. I. M

I think so, dear. He changes so that
I like to have him taken frequently, Joe,
and I am sure you don't mind. Miss
Marmont doesn't appear to know of Milly's
wish that we should take Summerlands ;
but then Milly is so close.'

Yes. Mimi says she lives a life apart.
She is not even allowed to go often to the
vicarage. But, now she is grown up, she
means to assert herself,' said George.

She seems to tell you everything also
remarked Mr! Prettyman, amused.

She says she wishes to do me good,'
replied George, with a merry twinkle in
the bright eyes. ' If the boys knew, how
they would laugh and tease me ! You
will take Summerlands, padre ? But then
I should be near Carew — at least, Mimics
thinks I should. She wishes me to see
her uncle, Mr. Le Roy.'

Mr. Prettyman made inquiries, which
resulted in some curious revelations concerning
Mimics's correspondence with

George. She had confided to him, as her
only friend in London, that she wished to
know something of her uncle, from whom
she had never heard, and who yet appeared
to have absolute power over her.
She had written to him frequently with no
result, and she thought if George could
only see him, and tell her something about
him, it might be a satisfaction to her.

Le Eoy's niece should have money independently
of him,' said Mr. Prettyman.
Colonel Marmont must have left something,
even if his wife did not. I fancy Le'
E/Oy is a selfish, one-idea d man, who passes
his time in ways peculiar to himself. But I
have never come across him since he left
the square. We will puzzle him out together,
George, and a deep problem he
will be.'

He sold everything when he gave

up the house,' put in Mrs. Prettyman.

But I got my share. Milly sent all Mrs.

Le Hoy's old clothes to me, and I district



bute there. At any rate, the neighbouring
poor were the better for her death, if
no one else was.'

Did Tou give any to the ragged-school,
madre ?' asked George.

• They had their share ; but it is so long
ago that I almost forget. Before you
heard the fife and drum band, and ran
away after it.'

The trio laughed, for this incident was
not without results, and was often discussed
in the back slums of the square : for
that neighbourhood, like most of our
fashionable localities, had its dens well
within reach. It was doubtless to one of
these that the woman escaped who brought
George Hope to his present benefactors.
The ragged-church and school near the
square had inaugurated the military band
to which Mrs. Prettyman alluded, and
which had attracted George's attention
some years before, when tooting and drumming
passed the house. He had escaped

after the juvenile redcoats, and was recaptured
with difficulty. But his memory
was retentive, and Mrs. Pretty man had no
rest until, on a certain festive occasion, she
took him to the place where the band
mustered and practised. As time went
on, he accompanied her occasionally to the
ragged-school at which she taught, and soit
came about gradually that he also became
a teacher. He needed no better incentive
to learn such lessons as were
distasteful to him than the promise of a
sight of the fife and drum band, or of
books or sweets to be distributed amongst
the poor children. Mrs. Pretty man would
wonder whether his love for the redcoats and
his natural inclination for the ragged proceeded
from early associations, and her husband
would assure her that this was doubtless
the case, and that they could not do
better for his welfare, temporal and spiritual,
than foster it. Accordingly he was
allowed to frequent ' rehearsals ' of the

musical performances of the fifers and
drummers, and to become quite an habitue
of the yard. Neither Sampson nor Ada
altogether approved of it, though they,
like their employers, were slaves of Master
George.

He always gets his own way, do what
one will,' they would say ; but not unkindly,
for everybody loved the child. As to
his pensioners, they were legion, and all
his money, toys, and various presents were
lavished on the children so much poorer
than himself. As he grew to boyhood he
would reflect that, probably, such as they
were he would have been, but for a merciful
Providence ; and it would seem that
his mind's eye saw every privation of the
poor as if by instinct. He remembered
little of his early life, though he was constantly
striving to recall it. A wild country,
soldiers, and the woman Biddy were
the only prominent features of it, and
these naturally faded as he grew older.

At school the boys who bullied him occasionally,
or twitted him with his uncertain
birth, yet respected him, for he was bold
and brave. Many of them loved him, the
weak especially, whom he ever supported.
One of these chanced to be the son of the
Captain — now Major — and Mrs. Percy who
brought Mimics to England. He was a
shy, delicate boy, and George protected
him. A son of Sir Joshua Carew happened
to be at their school, who took delight
in tormenting Percy. In defending the
one, George offended the other, and Bully
Carew, as he was called, revenged himself
by insulting George concerning his birth.
Mimics, in her superior wisdom, was wont
to give George good advice, and was
especially interested in Carew and Percy,
of whom she knew something ; and thus
the correspondence between her and George
assumed a personal character.

Consequent on all this, a friendship had
sprung up between the Prettymans and

Percyss. The latter had been to India and
back since they brought Mimics to the
square, and, during the Indian period, had
left their only boy at school. He had
spent most of his holidays with George,
and thus the acquaintance between the
families had begun. Major and Mrs. Percy
were still much interested in Mimics, but
only heard of her second-hand, through
Mrs. Prettvman and George. The had
exchanged formal visits with Mr. Le Boy,
who seemed to know little or nothing of
his niece, and his manners repelled inquiry.

I will ask Major Percy to take me to
see Mr. Le Eoy, and then I can tell Mimi
all about him,' exclaimed George, suddenly,
after an interval of silence, during which
he had been self-absorbed.

Happy thought ! I fancied the brown
study was to evolve something originals
laughed Mr. Pretty man.

They are coming to luncheon to-day
with Bobby,' said Mrs. Prettvman. ' Dear

Mrs. Percy is always asking about Mimics.
If only you would take Summerlands, Joe,
she and the Major and Bobby could come
and pay us a visit. Isn't it a pretty name ?
So sunshiny

Like you, dear madre,' put in George,
his arm round the good lady's neck.

Soft sadder, Georgie !' cried the
husband.

I wish they hadn't settled at Sydenham,'
mused Mrs. Prettyman. ^ It is a long way
to come, and they aren't rich. "We can
drive them back, though. You will be home
to luncheon, Joe ?

'I wintry.'

The kiss of peace,' said George, as the
trio rose from the breakfast-table, and his
arm was transferred from benefactress to
benefactor.

This • kiss of peace ' had been an institution
as long as the boy could remember,
and passed from husband and wife to him
quite naturally.

The Percyss duly came to luncheon, and
Mr. Prettyman returned homo to meet
them. They were cheerful, pleasant people,
and talk flowed easily.

I never come to the square without
thinking of Mimics Marmont,' said Mrs.
Percy. ' That was a strange home-coming
for her.'

'And I behind the door all the time
returned Mrs. Prettyman. ' I shall never
forget the poor child.'

*Nor 1 her uncle. He is the most incomprehensible
man I ever knew,' remarked
Major Percy. ' He thinks it a duty to
invite me to dinner, when I am in town,
and makes a point of accepting our mild
invitation to luncheon. I wonder he does ;
for our moderate meal is a sop to Cerberus
compared with his elaborate ceremonial.
And as to his house !'

Will you take me to see him, Major
Percy?' broke in George. ' I want to tell
Mimics all about him, and to find out why

he will not write to her, or give her any
money, or let her come and see him.'

You will have to be cautious in your
inquiries, for my lord will not brook curiosity
laughed the major. * Still, if you
wish it, I can bring you together. May
he come and spend next Monday with
Bobby, Mrs. Pretty man — for on that day
we rather expect to see Mr. Le Roy, who
has intimated his intention of honouring
us, on his way to the Crystal Palace. He
goes to all the oratorios there, is very
musical, and affects the ancient music.
His own music-room is a curiosity in itself.
May George come, Mrs. Pretty man ? Will
you bring him, and see the lion for yourself?'


It was finally arranged thafc Mrs. Pretty-man
and George should spend the day
with the Percyss, and so take the chance
of meeting Mr. Le Eoy.

'He will not thank you for the introduction,'
said Mr. Prettyman. ' He looks

down upon us merchants, who have made
our own fortunes, as parvenus ; and on one
or two occasions, when chance brought us
together, gave me to understand that we
were quite of different races. But that is
only the way of the world, unless one forces
oneself into it by Babylonian feasts and all
sorts of heathenish entertainments.'

You are a philosopher, Mr. Prettyman.
It is not everyone who knows how to
spend his money, when he has made it,
and to entertain hospitably without show,'
said the major.

Padre entertains strangers such as meas
the Bible says,' exclaimed George, who
was in the habit of joining in all the
conversations.

I suppose you mean to add that I have
thereby entertained " an angel unawares,"
you young rogue,' returned Mr. Prettyman.

I think you have, sir,' meekly put in
Bobby ; * for he always helps us when weare
in trouble.'

I should like to be one,' said George,
looking affectionately at his friend ; * but
padre is only joking

Mrs. Prettyman began to talk of the
subject uppermost in her mind, which was,
at the moment, Summerlands. It would
bo so delightful to take the place for the
autumn, and see Milly and Mimics. Then
it might enable Major and Mrs. Percy to
see them also, as they must come to Summerlands
; in short, there never had been,
or could be, so charming a place. As washer
wont, she painted the unseen with such
bright hues that her guests imagined she
knew the place well, and were much amused
when their host assured them that she had
never seen it. George was quite as imaginative
as herself on the subject, and, before
the party separated, they laughingly declared
that Summerlands must be an El
Dorado, and that it would be simply wasting
an opportunity not to go in search of it.

CHAPTER X.

THE HANDEL FESTIVAL.

Me. Le Roy kept his appointment, and
accordingly Mrs. Pretty man and George
Hope Lad their desire. They met at
luncheon at Major Percy's. Mr. Le Roy
was too courteous to show surprise, but
his formal bow and distant manner displayed
some of the pride with which Mr.
Prettyman accredited him, when he was
introduced to that gentleman's wife. It
was, perhaps, scarcely pride, but a dislike
to make new acquaintances — a dislike of
his kind, in fact. A general desire to
shun people is often set down to pride.

But Mr. Le Roy was an enigma to the
world about him, if not to himself.

Major Percy's abode was a small, snug,
detached villa, and his dining-room was
also small, but pleasant. Generally luncheon
there was a gay, sociable meal, and Mrs.
Prettyman and George especially enjoyed
sharing it ; but Mr. Le Roy made it formal.
It must be confessed that the scrutiny he
underwent from his new acquaintances
was enough to render him stiff, if he was
conscious of it. George, particularly, scarcely
took his eyes off him, being resolved to
gratify Mimics's curiosity about her uncle.
He was, even at that early age, a shrewd
observer, but Mr. Le Roy baffled him. He
had a handsome, pale, marked face, but it
was characterised by a strange irritability
and moroseness of expression, rarely relieved
by a smile. His bearing was haughty,
and at times speech seemed an effort to
him. He was well known as a virtuoso, a
man of taste, if not of feeling, an amateur

of the arts, if not a patron, a thing of
humanity utterly self-absorbed. Mrs. Percy
had found one vulnerable part in him, and
that was his sister. It was for her sake
he maintained a sort of intimacy with the
Percyss, although he chose to ignore her
child. He had disliked Colonel Marmont,
and would never speak of him or his affairs
indeed, he rarely conversed on any subjects
save such as were artistic, and in nowise
personal.

Nothing could exceed the formality of
that luncheon. Even Mrs. Prettyman,
generally so innocently loquacious, had
not a word to say ; and such talk as there
was was carried on between the two gentlemen.


George, you are eating no luncheon,'
said Mrs. Percy, abruptly. ' What is the
matter?'

I — I — am not hungry,* ho replied.

He has been feeding on my countenance.
Pray what have you discovered T

said Mr. Le Roy, suddenly turning his grey
eyes full upon George, who sat opposite
him.

Nothing,' replied the boy, returning
the gaze frankly, and producing the ghost
of a smile on the Le Eoy mouth.

Then may I ask what you wished to
discover ?'

^ I wanted to tell Mimics all about you,
sir. I did not mean to be rude.'

Mimics ! What do you know of her ?*

We write to one another ; she is my
adopted sister.'

Indeed ! And what is your name ?'

George Hope.'

Here Mr. Le Eoy suddenly turned towards
Mrs. Percy, away, it would seem,
from those large, clear, truthful, inquisitive
eyes that were so honestly fixed on his,
and asked if she were going to the palace,
adding that he had a spare ticket at her
disposal. She was, however, engaged with
Mrs. Pretty man, and declined it with

VOL. I. N

many polite acknowledgments ; so did the
major.

Are you fond of music, George Hope ?'
asked Mr. Le Roy, again returning the
now furtive gaze of the boy.

I love military music best, sir, and
next to that sacred,' replied George.

'Then the "Israel in Egypt" should
please you. Will you come with me ?' returned
Mr. Le Eoy.

May I, madre ?' asked George, glancing
from him to Mrs. Prettyman, sunshiny
radiance in his blue eyes.

Certainly, if you can be back in time
to get home for dinner. I am sure weare
much obliged to Mr. Le Roy. George
has been ignoring: to hear an oratorio ever
since . . . well, ever since he was old
enough to know what it meant.'

And what does it mean ?' asked Le Roy.

A religious drama set to music,' replied
George, reflectively. ' Is it right to

set the Bible to music ?' he added, as if
the idea struck him for the first time.

Now, George, no metaphysics or theology
to-day,' laughed Major Percy, and
Mr. Le Eoy attempted no reply to the
oft-disputed question.

Moreover, ifc was time to proceed to the
festival ; for, although luncheon had been
early on Mr. Le Roy's account, the moments
sped. He promised to bring George
back, and the pair departed in his carriage,
in waiting for him at the door of
the modest villa. George thought he
might have been a duke at least, to judge
from his powdered footmen and other
appointments.

It was soon apparent why Mr. Le Roy
invited George to accompany him, for he
began at once to question him concerning
his acquaintance with Mimics. George
told him everything, even to that first
interview when she made him march round

n2

the room, and finally helped lira to fight
his mimic battle.

And you have never seen her since ?^
asked Mr. Le Roy.

No, sir ; but I know her quite well,
because she has written to me so regularly.
If padre will only take Summer-lands,
I shall see her.'

Whom do you mean by padre ?'

The answer to this question was cut
short by the arrival at the Crystal Palace,
They were late, much to Mr. Le Roy's
annoyance, whose frowning face betrayed
the temper that lay beneath the polished
exterior. George treasured it up for
Mimics, as well as several muttered sentences
to the effect that he had been a
fool to accept Percy's invitation — he, who
hated luncheon-parties and dull festivities.
He had reserved seats in front of the
orchestra ; so, once in their places, they
had only to listen to the magnificent oratorio
they had come to hear. The ' Israel

in Egypt' certainly was to George's taste,
and there was no more excited and breathless
auditor than he in that vast concourse
of some eighty thousand people. Indeed,
he grew giddy as he looked at the great
orchestra, with its band of nearly five
hundred instruments, and its chorus of
hard upon three thousand singers. Truly
sights and sounds to be remembered so
long as memory lasts. Often had he followed
on the map the wanderings of the
children of Israel ; often had he imagined
their condition in Egypt, the plagues sent
by God on that country, and, above all,
the power of His servant Moses, but never
had he before realised what the hailstones,
and the darkness, and the other plagues
meant.

The choruses electrified him, the solos
stirred his young soul to its depths ; and
such was his enthusiasm that he attracted
the attention of those immediately surrounding
him. But, fortunately, not of

-V

tSi^krl?

*!X*

tti'-

Isti

do

iris.;

plantations during; the interval between the
parts he said, averting his face till the
flush disappeared from that of the boy.

She would like to know why you do
not answer her letters,' was the frank
reply.

1 should have thought Miss Heath
would have told her that I hate both receiving
and answering letters, and would
have recommended her not to write tome.'


She says Miss Heath is so reserved
that she never tells her anything,' said
George, confidentially.

Milly Heath ! yes ; she is a wise woman ;
she knows all and tells nothing,' returned
Le E/Oy, the dark frown on his brow. ' I
suppose Miss Marmont is fond of scribbling,
since she writes so voluminously.'

Scribbling !' echoed George. ^ Her letters
are beautiful. She gives such good advice,
and describes the parish, and the vicar,
and the Lestes, and the hop-pickers, and

the books she reads, and the neighbours,
and . . .'

What neighbours ?' interrupted Le Roy.
There are none but the inmates of the
vicarage.'

^ Sir Joshua and Lady Helena Carew,
and Mr. Carew. She need not describe
Bully, because I know him better than she
does.'

And has Miss Heath allowed this acquaintanceship
?'

There was that in the voice which
enunciated this last question that frightened
George. He saw the pale face of
the questioner grow livid, and the tell-tale
nostrils work, and the mouth set itself as
if in a vice. He knew that in his desire
to interest the uncle in his niece, he must
have said more than he ought. He made
an awkward attempt to explain that he
believed Mimics and the Carews only met
at the vicarage ; but there was no change
in the iron countenance.

Are you in the habit of giving my niece
good advice in return for hers ?' at last
whispered or hissed the stately man. • If
so, advise her to keep at Courtleroy. But
I will see to that ; you are too young for a
father confessor.'

She is tired of Courtleroy,' replied
George, boldly. ' She is grown up, and
wants to come to London to see you. She
means to be of use in the world, and would
take care of you, sir, and be a Sister, or goto
her father's friends, or '

Enough ! You are a bold advocate for
your age, and not, like Miss Heath, reticent.
You must study diplomacy before
you take another brief. Stay where you
are till I return. I see some friends
yonder.'

With these words, Mr. Le Roy rose, and
left George to his meditations. He watched
the tall, stately figure make its way to a
group of men standing not far off, and
then began to wonder at what could have

annoyed him. He was not, certainly, born
a diplomatist, but, from what was known
of him, a combative infant, developing
into a lad, far too open-hearted and open-mouthed
for the world that is. He and
his adopted parents were of one mind, and
he had not yet learnt secretiveness.

I don't like him, and I wish I hadn't
come was the uppermost thought in his
mind, when the orchestra began to fill
again, and Mr. Le Roy returned.

He soon forgot him, Mimics, and the
troubles of life, in Handel ; not so Mr. Le
Loy, who watched him narrowly, and whose
face wore the same set, contracted expression.
It relaxed a little, however, at the
delight and enthusiasm of the boy ; and
when the exultant duet, ' The Lord is a
man of war resounded through the place,
he almost smiled, as George rose in his
excitement, and gazed on the singers.

" A man of war' that is what I mean
to be,' he said, turning suddenly on

Mr. Le Roy, when the applause began.

Then you have no pity for Pharaoh
and his host T returned Le Roy, cynically.

I never thought of that, sir he replied,
as the chorus, * The depths have covered
them, they sank into the bottom as a stone,'
proceeded.

The magnificent oratorio, with its grand
caste of the finest singers and musicians in
the world, was performed torts finale without
flaw or blemish. George's vivid imagination
followed the Israelitish host; and still
he wished to be a leader such as Moses,
entrusted with the work of the Lord. His
thoughts were visible on his intelligent
face, and Mr. Le Roy sighed as he watched
him. What would he not have given to
be a boy again, and such a boy as George
Hope!

*Is it Moses or Handel?' ho asked, as
the final chords of the last chorus sounded.

^ '' The servant of the Lord ; for He shall
reign for ever and ever'" returned the

lad, again impulsively putting his hand on
that of his companion, and using the words
he had just heard.

They made their way through the crowds
as best they could to the carriage that
awaited them. During the short drive,
George thanked Mr. Le Eoy, with the
words,

'I never enjoyed anything in my life,
sir— except, perhaps, the fife and drum
band.'

Truth at last !' exclaimed that gentleman.
* If you go to Summerlands, perhaps
you will write to me ?'

But you hate letters, sir.'

From girls and women — not from boys.'
What shall I write about ?'

All you see — things — and people. My
niece, Miss Heath, Courtleroy, the — the
neighbours.'

Perhaps it would not be right. Padre
says I am too communicative. But I will
write, if he will let me. May I give a

message for you to Mimics? Will you
send her your love ?*

Love ! I have none to give. I never
send my love.'

The carriage drew up at Major Percy's
gate, George got out, and Mr. Le Roy
proceeded on his lonely way.

CHAPTER XI.

Cumberland.

Master George had his way, as usual, and
Mr. Prettyman took Summerlands for the
autumn months, "with power to continue to
rent it during the winter. They took it
with its carriages, horses, servants, and all
appertaining thereto which it pleased Lord
and Lady Manville to leave behind them
when they went abroad. Still the rent
required was not exorbitant ; for the
owners were so thankful to get it well off
their hands for a time that there was no
difficulty in coming to terms with their
solicitors.

The reception of the new tenants of

couKri-i

Summerlands at ibe li::': : .'-^vsT-statkm

:- :". 7 -^ ^ fife: froze

:": :-£e:.:L and il: frzie six

f . The were sie: by

risen bj a well-here

received, as

1 and Ladj Mans
L George

Tl.

c:52t:;:i . ~ as not there to

~ r:zi' J.Trtvman that

1 Z-:£n they

- "^ - -T It 5. lanes, and

-e drive to the
; far from io
1 ? principal lodge

-riiZe, but the

ciire . loDsr, and

G^ led his c: 7

ins of del

5, the shade the

- - ~ and, above all,

the d-

As tbej approached the mansion, they
were somewhat awestruck by its imposing
appearance, and Mr. Prettyman pronounced
an opinion ud favourable to his future
prospects.

I hate such a big, square, turreted
place. Oh ! Georgie, we shall never be so
happy here as we were in the lodge on the
moors.'

Look at the woods, padre ! Think of
the game I Then, what space for fortifications,
and bridges, and mining operations
— above all, think of Mimics !'

I must only think of madre,' laughed
Mr. Prettyman, as they neared the house.

There, at the top of a broad flight of
steps, stood Mimics, in propria persona
backed by Miss Heath.

There they are ! that is Milly Heath ;
but that cannot be Mimics,' exclaimed
Mrs. Prettyman, surveying the figures
from the carriage window.

It was no wonder that she failed to

VOL. I. o

recognise the pale, angular child of twelve
in the tall, graceful girl who stood with
hand shading her eyes from the westering
sun, and gazing towards the carriage. As
to George, he was mute for the first time
in his life. As the carriage pulled up,
however, Mimics ran lightly down the
long, broad flight of steps, and welcomed
George, as he leaped out.

At last ! at last !' she cried, with tears
iu her eyes.

But George had not a word to say.
His face flushed all over, his heart beat
with the excitement of this longed-for
meeting, but he could not realise that the
grown woman who kissed him so naturally
was the friend whom he loved so dearly.

Are you really my Georgie ?' she asked,
looking into the face she had only seen in
photograph.

Yes ; but you are not my Mimi,' he
found words to say.

Greetings between Mrs. Prettyman and

Miss Heath interrupted them, and then
Mimics had to be re-introduced, and the
many accessories of an arrival at a new-place
seen after. Sampson and Ada, now
Mrs. Pretty man's maid, had preceded their
master and mistress with luggage enough,
so said Mr. Prettyman, to stock a shop,
and they were in attendance in .


But while this was proceeding, Mimics
took George's hand, and said imperatively
that he must come into the hall with her.
He obeyed, and they mounted the steps
together, hand in hand. In the great, pillared,
frescoed entrance hall, they stood a
moment gazing at one another with curious
earnestness. George saw before him a
slight, elegant figure in some sort of light,
simple costume, with a broad hat half concealing
the pale face. She threw ofi* the
hat.

Am T like what you fancied ?' she
asked.

o2

No ; but you are like Mr. Le Roy he
replied.

Her countenance fell.

That is what Stokes says she added,
almost irritably.

But you have a sweet smile, Mimi, and
he looks grave and sour,' pleaded the boy.

Truly the smile that moved the lips,
shone in the deep-grey eyes, and cast sunshine
over the white face was sweet. The
lad was right. And the heavy mass of
dark hair, coiled at the back of the head,
seemed to turn face and form into a
picture, as the girl stood facing the boy,
and leaning against one of the marble
pillars.

We are friends for life she said.

Yes he replied.

Well, you are together at last,* interrupted
Mrs. Prettyman. *I hope you will
like one another as well personally as by
letter. One is always so raucli better and
pleasant in writing than reality. That

is why I never want to know the authors I
like best, for I am sure if I didn't care for
them I should not be interested in their
books.'

Oh ! Mrs. Pretty man, I long to know
all the authors,' exclaimed Mimics, enthusiastically.
' They must be nice, and their
society so delightful

I know one : our head master ; but we
don't like him particularly said George.

This is the drawing-room,' put in Miss
Heath, who had known Summerlands
many years.

They all went into an immense saloon,
the walls covered with valuable paintings,
the room handsomely furnished. Mr.
Prettyman shuddered, and said, smiling at
Mimics,

This is all your doing, Miss Marmont.
That young rogue of a Georgie would
come to see you, and I am to be the
victim. I really cannot breathe in such a
grand place.'

You shall go to the slums, padre, where
the atmosphere is very refreshing said
George, recovering his natural manner.

Miss Heath, who was not changed either
in appearance or nature since we first made
her acquaintance, looked at Mimics, and
said it was time for them to be at home.
They had walked from Courtleroy, a distance
of a mile or more, and were to walk
back. Besides, as she remarked, the
travellers would have enough to do on
that first evening, without interlopers.
Mimics longed to volunteer to help them,
but dared not venture. Both she and Miss
Heath had been surprised that no interdiction
had come from Mr. Le Roy concerning
their intercourse with Summer-lands,
since he had written a few short
lines, after the Handel Festival, positively
forbidding intimacy with the Carews.
This was a sore trial to ]\Iimica, for Lady
Helena was moving heaven and earth
to bring her and Mr. Carew together,

and Mimics found him a very pleasant
companion when they met occasionally at
the vicarage, at church, or by chance in
village or high-road.

Miss Heath and Mimics took their leave,
the latter having obtained a promise from
George to visit her on the morrow, while
the former trembled lest they should thereby
offend Mr. Le Eoy. George watched
them till they were out of sight, then said,
sadly, ' She is so big !'

So is this house !' sighed Mr. Pretty-man.
' I wish we were in "a lodge in
some vast wilderness," or back in our
square.'

But that panacea for all true-born
Britons, a good dinner, tended to reconcile
him to his fate, and subsequently an inspection
of the fine paintings that half
filled the house inspirited him. Sampson's
assurance that there was more game at
Summerlands than in all Scotland made
him laugh, and by degrees his kindly

genial nature was reconciled to the inevitable.


But neither he nor his wife could imagine
the speculations of the countryside.
While they were at dinner, Sir Joshua,
Lady Helena Carew, and their sons, also at
dinner, were discussing the propriety or
non-propriety of making their acquaintance;
the vicar and his family were rejoicing
in the hope of alms for the poor and festivities
for themselves ; the villagers were
speculating as to whether they would be
more or less charitable than their absentee
benefactors ; and Mimics and Miss Heath,
over their tea, were talking of them, and
all concerning them.

He has the face of an angel. He is
like one of the cherubs in that picture of
Sir Joshua Reynolds,' said Mimic, pointing
to an engraving of the celebrated
painting of an angelic host which hung
over the mantel-piece of the school-room
in which they sat.

You think so was the reply, and Miss
Heath looked from the engraving into her
tea-cup.

Mimics shrugged her shoulders, and
swallowed some uncomplimentary adjective
which rose to the tip of her tongue.

The school-room had become their ordinary
sitting-room, and Mimics had
furbished it up and adorned it wonderfully.
In addition to her mother's sketches
her own were now stuck about here and
there, some in frames manufactured by
the village carpenter, others in a rough,
unfinished state pinned to the wall, or
surmounting the piano. Miss Heath's
treasures of cushions and modern ornaments
were scattered about, and such
articles of virtu as Mimics thought proper
to appropriate from the stores saved from
her grandmother's rooms added to them.
But she was very proud, and was often
roused to declare that she would accept

no more from ber uncle's bounty than
necessity obliged.

Morning, noon, and night she fretted
against this ' dole ' of his, as she called it
and frequently came into collision with
Searle, the bailiff, whom she named his
medium.' Indeed, Miss Heath was once
heard to say that between master and man
they were between two rickety stools, and
likely to fall to the ground. But nobody
liked Searle, and everyone wished that Mr.
Le Roy would look into his own affairs,
for, the tenants said, * He was a gentleman,
if a queer one. But then, to be sure, all
the Le Boys were queer.' Even Mimics
was looked upon as a strange girl by her
few acquaintances.

Her strangeness, up to the present time,
had developed into a devotion to literature,
painting, writing, and sedentary pursuits,
happily counteracted by a strong-minded
desire to be of use in the world. "When
she was not reading, writing, or painting,

she v>'as helping in the school, or visiting
the poor people ; but she had it in her soul
to become an author, a Sister of Mercy, a
medical woman, a female missionary — anything,
in short, which could emancipate her
from the thraldom of dependence. This
was the more galling, because she had no
pocket-money. Miss Heath would have
given her all her regularly-paid salary, but
she was far too proud to accept it ; and, as
searle paid all the bills, she had, literally,
no money of her own. She intended to
battle it out with him, since she began to
understand that her uncle could not even
have read any of the letters she wrote to
him.

Soon after her arrival at Courtleroy, she
had prevailed on Miss Heath to appropriate
to their joint use the wing of the
house in which the school-room was ; so
that the principal rooms — the entrance-hall
excepted — were still untenanted. They
lived, slept, and otherwise spent their time

in - ^ T : L ^ seen her

i-:.::-v. f S f-;-: s^if ^i: :rt of

:,-: :: : f t : ' :z :::ag a

i-^ - ling-rooms, the remainder of

7 L : 7 - ; ~ Ad to them. Mimics had

- T : .- 7 1 7 during the first

n : : 5 : : L 7 ind Lad found

m :- :: z reverie 7 7 : and curiosity,

be:. : ; ::i:t-^1: : 1 ^ f . . 7~ : ; : ; ^::med
tc-zJ 5.: ; :. ':3gs, and ^'.'^r Herself up

2':: : : .:' ::7 ^:;.: .; '7, -' :.i£S :: the
^.\' . . :: ./". :: ~ : more in trie right

\j<

ckev Leste is a handsome, nice boy,
but 1 : : :o be compared with George,' res

: ii: ^ r:n'^^ ?after she had got over that
li : - : ^ =0/ ' I do not wonder that
tir 1 ': 'le Handel Festival.

Lz.:. : : / - .- :: . :.:> "him.'

'TLi: - i~ -7-:.:£::7 about us

returned Miss Heath. ' We must be careful
lest George should tell either too much
or too little

I am quite indifferent, Miss Heath, I
shall ask him to give a full account of all
he sees — our seclusion and penury ; for it
is penury not to be allowed a sou to spend
as one likes, and to be obliged to send the
bill for a shilling picture-frame and penny
reel of cotton equally to that horrid Searle.
I wish I was Leila, going out as a Lady-help,
or even Laura, tormenting her own
brain and Horace's over Greek and Latin,
and sums. She is afraid she cannot matriculate,
as she calls it, and is going in
for the Post Office, or a situation as
governess. S f ^ used the Oxford examination,
thanks to Mr. Lesse. What an
ignoramus I should have been, author you,
dear Miss Heath.'

This Httle compliment called a flush of
pleasure into Miry's thin cheeks. Mimics
in pondering over her own lot, too often

forgot bow intimately it was shared by
Miss Heath ; and how little reward she had
for her indefatigable labours in teaching
her all she knew herself. And this was
infinitely more than the outer world imagined,
for she was a thoroughly well-educated
gentlewoman, and conscientious
teacher. Mimics noticed the unusual
flush, and, as she rose to ring the bell, laid
her hand on Miss Heath's shoulder, and
touched her forehead with her lips.

If 1 am miserable, what must you be,
who have had so many years of it?' she
sighed.

Neither of us is miserable, dear. We
have all we actually want. Having food
and raiment, let us be therewith content. I
have known some well-born and educated
who '

Here Miss Heath paused.

'Yes, dear. Tell me about it. One of
your old pupils?' put in Mimics, excitedly;
for Miss Heath often began a story and

stopped short just when the girl was
panting to know the conclusion.

I cannot, I must not she replied.

I wish I knew George's history. That
would be romantic,' said Mimics.

'Better unknown probably,' replied Miss
Heath.

Further conversation was interrupted by
a ring at the hall-bell.

'An event!' cried Mimics, starting up,
and running downstairs.

How wild she is !' sighed Miss Heath,
following slowly.

She found Mimics in the hall, shaking
hands with a young man. It was Horace
Leste, the vicar's eldest son, who apologised
for calling so late.

I am off tomorrow morning for my
ship, and I could not go without wishing
you good-bye,' he said, with all a sailor's
easy zeal.

And you won't see Georgie,' returned
Mimics.

What do I care for George ? It is
you I want to see, Mimics — you, and Miss
Heath. *' When shall we three meet again ?" *

But this is sudden, Mr. Horace,' said
Miss Heath, seeing that Mimics's face
changed, and the tell-tale nostrils quivered.

I got the telegram this morning, and
this is my first leisure moment. We are
ordered to the African coast, and I hope I
shan't die of yellow fever before I meet
you again. Give me something to do for
you, Mimica/

If you go to the Cape, will you try to
find out my old friends the Beverley, and
tell them about me. He is an ostrich-farmer.'


Horace laughed, and said he would do
his best.

I suppose you will not slip a line into
my sister's letter sometimes, Mimics ; just
for auld lang syne ?' he added.

She had better not, Mr. Horace,' said
Miss Heath, decidedly.

But I can send you messages, Horace ;
and I shall be sure to read all your letters.
So we shall know about one another said
Mimics, sadly, for she felt as an old friend
towards the Lestes, parents and children.

^ I hate everything second-hand ; but I
know We shall not forget one another.
Good-bye, Miss Heath ; good-bye, Mimics.'

A sailor's grasp of the small hand, and
he was gone.

VOL. I.

CHAPTER XII.

Introductions.

^ We will have a whole holiday. You shall
go your ways for once, and I will go mine
said Mimics to Miss Heath, when George
appeared at Courtleroy early the following
morning.

Madre hopes you will go and see her,
while Mimi and I make personal acquaintances
added George, with a frank look
into Miss Heath's illegible face.

For once, Miss Heath returned the glance,
and, meeting George's eyes, seemed irresistibly
fascinated into a prolonged investigation
of them. Most people who
saw them were thus fascinated. But a

trouble stole over her face, and she quickly
looked away. Mimics perceived this, and
asked if she had discovered a likeness.

Yes — no — perhaps — the brother I lost
when a child,' stammered Miss Heath.

George at once took her hand with that
grace which sympathy imparts to the
young for the sorrows of their elders.

Will you let Mimi and me be your
sister and brother?' he asked, simply.
We have only each other.'

All the years that Mimics had known
Miss Heath, she had never said to her
such caressing words as those, and she
looked at George astonished.

He takes in the sorrows of the world,'
she thought, while Miss Heath bent over
him and kissed his forehead.

^I will go to Summerlands and you can
do as you will, Mimics,' she said, hastily,
and left the room.

Alone for once ! Unobserved by those
cold eyes ! this was happiness to Mimics,

p2

And to be with George, untrammelled by
observation, and freed from a presence
which irritated her, she knew not why, was
unspeakable bliss.

'Let us make the most of it,' she exclaimed.
* Where shall we go first?'

I should like to see the house, if I
may ; then the grounds and all the people,'
replied George.

Mimics laughed as she said the house
was poor compared with Summerlands, and
the people few — still she wished to show
him everything, on the chance of his
arousing some interest in her uncle ; for
she knew that, if he wrote to him, his
natural, truthful and often remarkable
words mio:ht awaken dormant feeling.
Accordingly she led him first through
the wing she and Miss Heath tenanted,
telling him how she had found
everywhere traces of her mother. She
showed him one particular cupboard in
which she had even found her dolls and

playthings, treasured there still with final
affection. She occupied her mother's bedroom,
and Miss Heath the apartment that
had been appropriated to her when that
mother's governess ; in short, the girl was
wholly surrounded with memories of the
past.

sit was melancholy at first,' she said,
poking out all these dead relics ; but it is
tolerably cheerful now. This corridor
was left to the last when my uncle was
preparing for his bride, and was to have
been re-furnished during their wedding-tour,
but fortunately for us it was not
begun when the marriage was so strangely
interrupted. The housekeeper was very
fond of dear mamma, and kept it tidy,
while the rest of the house was neglected :
so that even her nursery remains. Here
it is. I come and sit here sometimes, and
used to call it my drawing-room. I fancy
my uncle must have had a sort of tenderness
for this wing, which makes me try to

think better of bim. Poor grandmamma,
too, must have left it untouched. I often
think how bright and cheerful it must
have been when poor mamma was a child
with nurses, and playthings, and all she
wished for, round about her.'

Dear Mimi,' said George, pressing
Mimics's hand between both his, and surveying
the faded carpet and chintz, and
the old-fashioned child-pictures that covered
the walls, with sympathetic eyes.

We can scarcely screw money enough
out of Searle to keep these rooms properly
warmed,' said Mimics, indignantly. ' It
seems incredible that one disappointment
should make a man neglect his property
like this. I should be too proud.'

^ It seems like fighting against God,'
said George.

You are too wise for your years,
Georgie. Come along,' cried Mimics,
hurrying down the passage which led
from their wing into the principal landing.

She marshalled him through chambers
innumerable, all of which were cold, damp,
and cheerless. The furniture of each was
handsome, but faded.

I have been reading about old china
lately she said, holding up a large jug,
and here is a set that would yield a fabulous
price. The house is full of it. If I
had not a conscience, I should try to sell
it for pocket-money.'

They went downstairs, and through the
principal rooms. They were only in worse
condition than when Mimics first saw
them. The dining-room looked especially
dreary, but Mimics pointed out likenesses
of her mother and uncle which interested
George. He said Mr. Le Eoy's portrait
was excellent, and again remarked on its
likeness to Mimics.

Never say that again, if you love me,
George,' she said.

But there was no gainsaying it.

In the cheerful hall at last, where

Mimics and Miss Heath received the few
visitors who came to see them. The
Lestes usually mounted to the schoolroom,
but they were so much occupied
that they had never much time to spare.
Then out into the shrubberies and gardens.

This was mamma's garden, and I keep
it in order said Mimics, pausing before a
bright spot full of autumn flowers, and
surrounded by shrubs and trees. ' It is
the only bit of real flower-garden we have.
I shall miss Horace Leste again ; for, when
he is at home, he brings me cuttings, and
helps me to dig and delve. Sir Joshua
Carew got him his naval appointment.'

A shade passed over the young face.

You like him best ?' asked George,
perceiving it.

Next to you, I think. Bat I love all
the Lestes. Come and see them.'

They were away from the garden in a
moment, through a high shrubbery of

laurustinus and arbutus, into a clump of
firs, then out upon the drive. Mimics
walked as if she had not a moment to lose,
saying they had so much to do and see
that they should not go through it if they
did not make haste. The lodge was now
the prettiest house on the property, for
the gardener had removed to it from his
dwelling, fast falling to decay, and kept it
in order.

Mimics nodded to his wife as she passed
through the gates, and they were soon at
the vicarage. It was no longer Leila who
came to the door, but Helena, who had
taken her place as parlour-maid. Her
arms were round Mimics's neck in a
moment, and it was some time before she
realised that her other visitor was the redoubtable
George Hope. She was about his
age, and felt quite flustered at the introduction.
She was the beauty of the
family, and had bright black eyes and long

black hair, which George thought resembled
a picture of a gipsy that he had seen
iu the Academy.

mimic has brought George Hope to
see us,' was, however, soon shouted through
the house, and all its then inmates were
shortly assembled to see the hero of whom
they had heard so much.

George was overwhelmed ; he was not
shy, but when he suddenly found himself
face to face with so many strangers, who
still were not strangers, for he knew them
all from Mimics's descriptions, he felt
somewhat disturbed. Mrs. Leste's loving,
motherly welcome soon reassured him, and
he became, as usual, equal to the occasion.

You have come to console us for
Horace's loss,' she said, looking from
Mimics to George, with tearful eyes. ' I
am so glad he saw you, dear Mimics.'

Yes — we shall miss him sadly replied
the girl, with a quiver of the tell-tale
nostril.

Are you the little boy that was found
in — in — a big hall ?' lisped the youngest
Leste, named Baby when Mimics first saw
her, and now rejoicing in her Christian
name of Bertha.

Yes, I was shoved into Mr. Pretty
hall . . .' began George, with the
customary resolve and heightened colour.

But Bold Barbra came down upon the
inquirer with a ' For shame, Bertha ; you
are old enough to know better ad caused
the abashed child to withdraw in confusion.

*I don't mind said George, following
the little girl, who was some three or four
years younger than himself, and laying his
hand protecting on her shoulder.

They were in the vicarage dining-room,
or, more properly, common sitting-room ;
the school-room was still upstairs. The
house wore the same cheerful aspect as
when Mimics was first welcomed by its
numerous inmates ] but they were changed.
Mrs. Leste looked older and more careworn,

though sweet and gentle as ever ;
Barbara had grown from the girl into the
woman, and was, perhaps, handsomer than
in her girlhood ; Laura had studied and
taught until she was beginning to show
lines between her eyebrows, which nearsight
probably helped to form ; and the
younger were growing up quickly into
the places their elders had filled, it seemed
to the parents, but the other day. Preferment
was slow to come, but always hoped
for, and meanwhile Mr. Leste went happily
on his way, a blessing to his parish, and
himself blest in a cheerful, healthy family,
who were striving, one by one, to aid their
parents as best they might. But for their
example and companionship, Mimics would
have been morbid and desolate indeed. Still
her first friend, George, was best beloved.
But she saw little of the elder boys.
Horace, as we have seen, was a sailor, and
owed his appointment in the navy to Sir
Joshua Carew ; Dick, the second, was

clever, and bad won a scholarship which,
with other means, supported him at Oxford
; while Octavius was fortunate enough
to have succeeded Horace at the Charter
House ; again thanks to the indefatigable
Barbara, aided by their kind-hearted neighbour.
Sir Joshua Carew.

All who were at home were introduced
to George, whose first impressions were
highly favourable ; and he could no more
help judging by impressions and the
countenances of the people he saw, than
he could help his gifts of clear-sighted
perception, and natural truthfulness. He
was soon engaged in initiating the younger
branches into some of the military arts
ever in his mind, and had speedily settled
what to do with certain models of forts and
toy-machines which were unnecessary to
him. Moreover, he had promised to show
them how to dig a trench and throw up
earthworks, and perform other warlike
feats astounding to them. Martin, the

youngest boy, had also soldierly proclivities,
and felt that he had, at last, found a hero.

Is Leila happy, Barbra?' Mi mica inquired,
when she saw that George was thus
occupied.

She would make herself happy anywhere,
and she has twenty pounds a year :
the first money any of us girls have earned,'
replied Barbara. * But it would have
been better had she gone amongst strangers.
Lady Helena is kind but exacting ; and it
is hard to eat humble-pie amongst those
whom you have known all your life.'

I am sure the lieutenant will be kind
to her,' suggested Mimics. ' He is at
home now, on leave.'

*Yes, of course,' replied Barbara, a
flush rising through her clear cheeks upto
the broad, sensible brow.

Mimics always wondered why Barbara
would never speak openly of Mr. Carew
to her. On other subjects she was wont
to talk freely, though Mimics seemed to

lier still but a cotemporary of her younger
sisters, and scarcely a personal friend.
Barbara was older than her years, and in
common sense and capabilities of work
and organization, might have been her
mother's senior. As it was, she was her
father's right hand in the parish and the
house, and his Bold Barbra was truly
like himself, a blessing wherever she
appeared.

I wish I could be spared to go forth asa
money-maker,' she said to Mimics. * But
father and mother won't let me.'

What could they do without you ?' was
the rejoinder.

Much was said during the brief visit
concerning an interchange of courtesies
between the vicarage and Summerlands ;
and, after due consultations with Mimics,
it was settled that Mr. and Mrs. Leste, and,
perhaps, Barbara, should call the following
day.

We have so much to do ; we have nota

moment to lose,' said Mimics, at which
all her friends laughed, and declared they
had never seen her so excited before. ' It
is all George she added, laughing herself.
J feel quite maternal, only he is really
older than I am

When they left the vicarage, Mimics
took George to see the poor people. She
hurried him from house to house, through
the picturesque village, and it was soon
apparent that she was a favourite, in spite
of her slender purse. George was much
admired, and looked upon as the son of
the rich tenants of Summerlands. He
forced all the money he had in his pockets
into Mimics's hand, to give to a sick boy,
and thus made her his almoner.

Id the village they met Mr. Leste, and
subsequently Mr. Carew and his brother,
Bully Carew, as George called him.
Mr. Leste welcomed George heartily to
Courtleroy, but not so the junior Carew.
He scowled ominously when he saw his

school-fellow, and doubtless thought of
various passages-alarms, in which George
had always been victorious. But victors
can afford to be generous, and George
said, magnanimously,

It seems odd to meet here, Carew ; but
I daresay you know that my foster-parents
have taken Summerlands, and I daresay I
shall see you during the holidays

'No; we don't know anything about
Summerlands, now that Lord and Lady
Manville are not there returned the
other, haughtily.

Meanwhile, Mr. Carew was talking to
Mimics and Mr. Leste. He, like his father,
Sir Joshua, was a general favourite, while
his younger brother, who resembled Lady
Helena, was equally disliked. His manners
towards Mimics were restrained, she
thought; and she knew that her uncle's
late prohibition of all intercourse between
them made her feel uncomfortable. More
than this, it caused her to hurry away

VOL. I. Q

instead of lingering. as usual, to speak to
one whom she liked but seldom met.

Miss Marmont is quite changed of late,'
said Mr. Carew to Mr. Leste, when Mimics
disappeared. 'She is a strain ore girl.' He
spoke with some irritation ; then added,
hastily, ' Who is that handsome bov she
has with her ? I never saw such a face.'

*It is George Hope — the Foundling!'
cried his brother Herbert. "He is the
greatest bully in our school.'

• I hear he is brave as a lion, and chivalrous
as all Christians should be,' said Mr.
Leste. looking hard at the real bully, who
slunk behind his brother.

Mr. Carew was on his way to the vicarage,
whither the trio proceeded together.
He had entered the army soon after our
introduction to him, but when at home,
was as intimate as ever with the Lestes,
and more attentive to Barbara than Lady
Helena liked.

CHAPTER Xii

SEAPwLE THE BAILIFF.

Me. Searle, the bailiff, or, as he wished to
be called, steward of Courtleroy, was an
important personage in that locality. He
was what is termed a rising man. He had,
in fact, risen from the house in the park
formerly occupied by men filling his situation
to one outside the village of some
pretension and magnitude. He was originally
lawyer's clerk in the firm of
Messrs. Unit and Co., solicitors employed
by Mr. Le Roy, and having, on more occasions
than one, made himself useful to
that gentleman, was offered the post of
bailiff on the Courtleroy property. The

q2

emolument being superior to what be
received as clerk, be accepted the offer.

This was some little time before Mr. Le
Roy's engagement to the Lady Margaret,
Lady Helena Carew's sister, and when Mr.
Le Roy overlooked bis own property.
As related in a previous chapter, when
Mr. Le Roy was so cruelly treated by
Lady margaret on the very day fixed for
the wedding, be turned bis back on Courtleroy,
and bad never been near it since.
Hence it was that all bis business, private
and public, was transacted through Searle,
in whom be bad perfect confidence — or,
to speak more accurately, through Searle
and bis former employers, Messrs. Unit
and Co., solicitors, resident at the count'
town of Prestbury, distant from Courtesy
about ten miles. Searle was a far-off
relative of the Units, and Mr. Lo Roy
trusted them all implicitly. Large as was
the estate, both landed and funded, they
bad to manage, they were known to complain

occasionally of the demands made
upon it, both in town and country ; but, so
long as Mr. Le Roy received the money
he required, he made no inquiries.

Mr. Searle had built his own house on
a piece of land belonging to Courtleroy,
for which he paid ground-rent. It was
not generally known how he had prevailed
on Mr. Le Eoy to grant it to him for an
indefinite term of years, but it was patent
to rich and poor that it belonged to him,
and that he had named it Court House.
It will be easily understood that, being a
sort of middleman between landlord and
tenant, master and servant, he was not
popular ; an angel would scarcely have
been popular under similar circumstances.
Nevertheless, he commanded an immense
amount of outward respect; and, to see
Mr. Searle and his family on Sundays and
all village festivities, you would have
thought him squire, his wife squires, and
daughters squire's.

It was to Court House that Mimics led
George when they left the village. Although
it was outside the actual park, it
was still in the confines of the estate
which joined Sir Joshua Carew's property
further on. The house was built in the
modern Elizabethan style, of red brick
and stuccoed decorations, and looked out
of place in the parish of Courtleroy, where
farm-houses and cottages were of the
old-fashioned plaister and wood-work, so
picturesque and homelike to sketcher or
inhabitant

Mt is like a villa near London,' said
George, as he and Mimics stopped before
a green gate leading into a flower-garden
laid out in modern fashion.

It is fifty times as comfortable as
Courtleroy/ returned Mimics, irritably.

They walked up a broad, gravelled path,
and Mimics knocked at the door, declaring
that she felt more afraid of that knocker
than she would have been had it belonged

to a palace. The door was answered by a
serving-maid with smart ribbons in her
cap, and, Mr. Searle happening to be
within, they were shown into what was
called the drawing-room by his wife and
daughters. Here was a piano, books, a
table covered with innumerable photographic
albums, and poked into a corner
according to modern device ; other tables
laden with ornaments; chairs, easy and
uneasy, hidden by antimacassars of every
variety of shade and pattern ; walls covered
with pictures that would not have
charmed Mr. Prettyman, and whole sets of
china suspended or on brackets — in short,
most of the appliances of the modern
show-room.

*The Miss Searle have been at a
boarding-school. They are much more
accomplished than the Lestes,' said Mimics.
I have met them at penny-readings, but
Miss Heath won't let me go to the vicarage
when they are there to tea, so weare

not acquainted, I am thankful to say.'
Perhaps you would like them if you
knew them rejoined George, looking about
him.

When Mr. Searle came in, Mimics rose
and bowed stiffly with a ' Good-morning, Mr.
Searle.' He bowed also, and stood before
her. George thought it funny that she should
bid him be seated in his own house, and wondered
what could have changed his friend
so suddenly from a natural girl into a proud
woman. He was, however, not so much
surprised when he examined Mr. Searle,
and heard the conversation between him
and Mimics. He took him in at a glance,
as far as the outward man went, but could
not read his nature either from eyes or
expression. He was a fine, portly-looking
man, with a large head and broad, short
face. He had a slightly turned-up nose
and immense ears, but his mouth and eyes
were expressive, albeit he never looked
anyone in the face. His voice and manner

were singularly supercilious, but his bearing
was that of a gentleman, and his language
free from provincialisms or bad
grammar. He had been, indeed, tolerably
well-educated, and, but for lack of means,
would have been a lawyer.

I came to inquire if you have heard
from my uncle, Mr. Searle,' began Mimics.
I am particularly anxious to get the
address of some member of my father's
family.'

^ Mr. Le Roy does not know their
address, Miss Marmont.'

Then I shall advertise. And about
that bill, Mr. Searle. Mrs. Stone says she
cannot possibly use less coal or provisions
than she does ; indeed, the house is tumbling
to pieces, and for myself, I will never
ask for a penny again, if I go in rags.'

Searle's low forehead was contracted
almost into the nose, but his manner did
not change.

'I will speak to Mrs. Stone on her

business, Miss Marmont, and to Mr. Le
Eoy on yours. Everything passes through
his hands, and I am only his agent.'

'Miss Heath has not yet received her
salary, and the gardener and coachman
have made complaints about their wages
lately. I promised to speak to you, Mr.
Searle, since my uncle takes no notice of
my letters

*Mr. Le Roy has required more money
than usual of. late, madam, and this has
delayed home payments. Besides, the
times are hard, and the tenants are almost
all in arrears. I have a difficult task to
keep up two establishments without displeasing
their master.'

Searle laid a slight stress on the word
master which annoyed Mimics.

What do you mean by establishments,
Mr. Searle i Courtleroy can scarcely be
called one. But would you mind telling
my uncle that, now I am grown up, I mean
to inquire at the War-office about the

pension I am told I ought to receive up to
a certain age, as the orphan of an officer
killed in battle.'

Mimics's voice trembled, and Searle's
grew sharp.

Would you allow me to make the application
for you, Miss Marmont ?' he asked,
as if off his guard.

^ I should be much obliged to you, Mr.
Searle, since you would do it better than I
should. But I have no money to pay, if
any is required.'

'None would be needed, Miss Mar-mont.'


George felt a strange wish that Mimics
had chosen to write herself.

*A11 the tenants and the poor people
ask me to write to my uncle,' she continued.
* But you know that would be useless.
They say they cannot pay such high rent,
and that repairs are needed everywhere.
It is not that they complain of you, but of
the absenteeism of my uncle. I wish he

would come down and speak to them
himself.'

*I wish he would, Miss Marmot. It is
hard upon me who have to bear the blame
as well as to do the work and raise the
money. Is this young gentleman trustworthy
?'

Searle said the concluding sentence
aside, while George, seated at a distance,
was looking out of the window, feeling
conscious that he was an interloper.

Perfectly. He is my particular friend,'
replied Mimics.

There is padre !' exclaimed George.
May I run out and stop him ?'

Searle, glad to put an end to the interview,
rose and let George out of the front
door, who ran quickly to the gate by which
Mr. Prettyman was passing, and arrested
him. They remained there while Mimics
concluded her complaints. She found that
she could not pour them out as readily
when alone with Searle as when George

was present. Still, she would not lose her
opportunity, or let her courage flag. She
had a strong will, and had been so cowed
by circumstances that strength and weakness
were continually opposing each other.
Miss Heath would never speak to Searle.
Had her salary ceased altogether, she
would not have applied to him for it; and,
as to Mrs. Stone, she had, as she expressed
it, ' browbeat him till she was tired, and
got only insolence for her pains.' 'Not
that Searle was ever really insolent, only
overbearing to those in his power. To
Mimics he was ever perfectly behaved, and
she had no fault to find with him, personally,
only on her uncle's account. Whether
he attended to her petitions to that relative
or not, she could never discover, though
she occasionally fancied that matters were
seen to of which she had spoken to him.
She had long ceased to write to Mr. Le
Roy, so no concessions could be made
through her letters.

Certainly her penetrating glance should
have sufficed to influence any man, to say
nothing of her occasionally scornful, and
always distant manner. She fixed her deep
grey eyes upon Searle's broad face all the
time she was speaking to him ; an inquisition
he felt but never reciprocated. She
wound up something in the following
strain :

*You see, Mr. Searle, although I am
much obliged to my uncle for what he has
done for • me, I wish to be independent.
You may tell him so, and that I mean to
support myself. I can no longer endure
the life I have been leading.'

I will write exactly what you say, Miss
Marmont.'

Searle had been standing near the door
since he returned to the room, and as she
rose he held it open for her, and then followed
her to the entrance gate, with a
view to opening that also. Here were
Mr. Prettyman and George. The two men

lifted their hats, and Mr. Prettyman addressed
the bailiff.

You have a nice place here — the first
habitable box I have seen. Summerlands
looks neglected, and as to Courtleroy, it
must be a warren, overrun with rabbits
and rats. 1 suppose Mr. Le Roy won't
have me up as a poacher if I make a mistake
and shoot a bird on his property.
Lord Manville's keeper says the estates
join. Although I am a cockney, I am a
fair shot. He tells me that Mr. Le Roy
sells his game.'

Yes, sir, but I am sure he would not
mind your bagging a partridge or so replied
Searle, with a smile.

Mr. Prettyman was on an exploring
expedition. When unoccupied, he was
never happy without George, and had followed
in his wake, making many acquaintances
on the way. He said that Miss
Heath had consented to stay at Summer-lands
to dinner, and that Mimics was :



- i ti. Miss

ii : — iz 7 I I lam

several heads at; the school-room window,
Barbara's amongst them. She kissed her
band. Her companion glanced up also
and Barbara disappeared. Fe :'-led
again. He was a gallant o£ic t :^i

to have all the jonng ladies a:

'Which of us frightened 3:1 3^ ::a
away ^ asked Mimic 3. .

Eu: :Lr lieutenant-:i},' i 1: rep-j. Het

: i^rl, L:- : : , jl bj Mimics's

side as far £.5 :-r :t L: ige, Mr. Leste

nving Mr. Fr^tjman, and George

L .: Z : r : : walking side by side.

I ^ irw/ b^^n George, *let us
fire 15 Iil^ is such a happy place
in: I want to be friends with all the
world.'

Tien —hj do you take Perq^'s part
^^y.iiz me? asked Herbert Carew. *!
1 r 22, and I daresay you'd do it against

I am sure I should, because he is weak
and you are strong. He is coming to
Summerlands soon.'

TOL.1. It

Summerlands ! What business have
any of you there ? Mr. Prettyman isn't a
gentleman.'

^ You had better not say that again.'

The eyes flashed, the fists doubled, and
Georgie was the Irish arab once more.
But he governed himself, turned from the
boy contemptuously, went to Mr. Pretty-man's
side, and took his arm. Doing so,
he looked back at Mimics.

^ She is red instead of pale. What has
Carew's brother been saying to her?' he
thought.

What indeed ? Mimics did not understand,
although her face flushed ; but she
made out so far as to perceive that he was
anxious to reconcile the houses of Le Roy
and Carew. He did not see why they
should be at variance, since his parents
had not participated in the rupture at the
proposed wedding.

Surely your uncle and my aunt, the

one dead and the other as good as dead,
need not come between you and me, Miss
Marmont,' he said. * "We have not seen
much of one another, but I think our
respective reputations are patent to each
of us. Yours, at least is first-rate.'

I am glad to hear it, but it does not yet
reach that of Barbara Leste,' replied
Mimics, either innocently or designedly,
she knew not which herself.

Their eyes met, and his fell, while the
colour seen by George flushed her pale
cheek. They reached the lodge. Mr.
Prettyman turned to ask Herbert to come
and see George, adding that he hoped, also,
to make Mr. Carew's acquaintance; who
replied that he should do himself the
pleasure of calling at Summerlands. Mr.
Prettyman's hospitable nature always expanded
in the country, and what with the
fine air of that autumnal day, the cheery
presence of Mr. Leste, and the conscious



ness of a big, half-inhabited house, he
honored to invite the whole neighbourhood,
both rich and poor.

'I am so glad you asked that bully,
padre said George, when they had passed
through the lodge gates, and left their
companions on the other side. ^ I am
longing to fight him.'

^TThy, my born pugilist?'

'Because he said you were not a gentleman.'


But his opinion does not hinder my
being one, or make me a scoundrel. You
don't think him a gentleman.'

Mimics interrupted this discourse by
referring to her late interview with Searle,
and George, with his customary truthfulness,
said he was sorry to have been there.
She inquired why.

'Because you were not my Mimi, but a
grand young lady. You were as erect
as Miss Heath, and so like Mr. Le Roy.
You are quite different now, so let us go

and see the coachman and the pony.'

*You are turning the tables, Master
George. It is you who are mentor, not
Miss Harmonic,' said Mr. Prettyman.

^I hope he will say exactly what he
thinks,' rejoined Mimics, with stately air.

It was now the lad's turn to grow red ;
but the little cloud soon passed off, and
Mimics hurried them over the grass-grown,
acorn-strewn drive towards the back entrance
of Courtleroy. A bell rang out,
and she laughed.

That is mv clock,' she said. ' It rinses
at seven to summon the workmen and
arouse the establishment ; at eight for the
servants' breakfast -, at nine for family
prayers, and the Le Eoj meal ; twelve for
the workmen's dinner ; at two luncheon ;
five, servants' something; half-past six,
dressing ; seven, dinner. You look surprised,
but this goes on just as if there
were a house full of people, and Mrs. Stone
declares solemnly it is in memory of grand-mamma.

She was very nervous, and when
she lived here alone she used to have a
pistol fired off from one of the windows
every night at nine o'clock to frighten off
the robbers.'

Mr. Prettyman's hearty laugh resounded
as they entered the deserted stable-yard,
and saw old Grant grooming the old
pony.

He is always rubbing him down,' said
Mimics, as the pony trotted up to her for
the bread or apple she invariably carried in
her pocket for him.

It was pretty to see the mutual caresses
that followed, and to hear her say,

I could not have lived but for poor old
Shock and Grant and to watch the old
coachman hobble towards her.

I be very rheumatic, sir,' he apologised
to Mr. Prettyman. *But Miss Marmont
always cheers us up. She is the very
double of her mamma, who had Shock

SEARLE THE BAILIFF. 247

when he was but a colt. I've been coachman
here going for forty year

And he can drive just as well as ever ;
only I drive him now,' cried Mimics.
Put on his harness, and I will drive you
all to Summerlands.'

No sooner said than done. In a short
space Mr. Prettyman was seated in front
of the antiquated pony-carriage, the coachman
and George behind, and Mimics, reins
in hand, and minus a whip, was en route
for the great house.

CHAPTER XIV.

HEB PENSION.

All the neighbours called at Summerlands
in due course of time, Sir Joshua and Lady
Helena Carew and their sons inclusive.
Lady Helena's present object in life being
to bring her eldest son and ^limica together,
she set aside her dislike to tenants
at will, parvenus, and people of doubtful
antecedents, in order to effect this purpose
on what she imagined neutral ground.
That Mimics would be Mr. Le Roy's
heiress nobody doubted, and had he nota
magnificent property adjoining the
Carew estates, and otherwise most advantageous
to an aspirant for monetary.

county, and political fame, such as she
hoped her son was ?

Providence favours me she thought to
herself when, on entering the Summerlands
craving-room, she found Miss Heath and
Mimics there. Sir Joshua and Mr. Carew
were with her, therefore all was as it
should be.

Sir Joshua was the most genial of men ;
very fussy, very argumentative, somewhat
stout and short of breath, very rubicund
and jocose, reckoned a hon vivant, and
exceedingly popular. He and Mr. Pretty-man
were drawn together, though he was
a staunch Conservative, and Mr. Pretty-man
a Liberal ; not so their wives. Lady
Helena was much too grand and aristocratic
for Mrs. Prettyman, while that lady
was far too simple and loquacious for her
ladyship. However, they could not clash-much
at a morning call, particularly as
Miss Heath was present to help her friend
in case of emergency.

Mrs. Prettjman had previously said to
her,

My dear Milly, what is one to say when
a real lady of title addresses one ? Suppose
Lady Helena should call — I am sure
I hope she won't — am I to say '' your ladyship
'' every time I speak to her ? If so, I
shall be sure to forget. I have been in
company with ladies of title, but never
come in contact with them, as I must if
she should come to Summerlands.'

Oh ! speak to her as you would to me,
Louisa, and don't say " your ladyship " at
all, then you will be natural,' Miss Heath
bad replied, with more openness than
usual.

Still she looked with some anxiety on
the greeting, as Mrs. Prettyman, meeting
the dignified Lady Helena, made a sort of
hesitating curtsey. The contrast was perfect
between the comely, plump, fair,
uncapped, ringleted, and gaily-dressed
merchant's wife, and the tall, thin, stately,

dark-clothed daughter of an Irish earl,
and wife of an English baronet. But
Lady Helena was indifferent so long as
she saw her son making himself unusually
agreeable to Mimics. She was, however,
annoyed, as was often the case, with Sir
Joshua ; for he interrupted the teie-d-teie of
the young people.

Glad to see you within the walls of a
private house, Miss Marmont,' he said,
fussing up to Mimics. ' Met you often at
church, and hope you haven't been too
much flattered by my gaze ; but you're so
like your uncle. How is your uncle ?
Never been into the country since that —
Oh ! I forgot : her ladyship is looking
at me. " Oh ! no, we never mention her."
But how is your uncle?'

I believe he is very well. Georgie saw
him not long before he left London,' replied
Mimics, looking inquisitively at the
questioner. He was a new study to her,
who bad seen so few people.

And who is Georgie ?' he asked. ' I
should like to see anybody who has seen
Le Roy within the last dozen years

I have, sir here put in George, who
was listening and watching. ' I went to
the Handel Festival with him.'

Sir Joshua looked at George rather
contemptuously for so kindly a man ; but,
meeting his honest eyes, said he had heard
of him from his son Herbert, who was, he
believed, his schoolfellow. He had, indeed,
heard a very disadvantageous report of
him. Lady Helena also cast a side glance
at him, not unperceived by Mrs. Pretty-man,
who was shrewd enough to imagine
that her ladyship would take the maternal
side.

K protege of yours, I understand ?' said
Lady Helena.

An adopted son : the dearest, and cleverest,
and most tractable boy in the world,'
cried Mrs. Pretty man, enthusiastically.

'Indeed !' interjected Lady Helena.

Sir Joshua looks well,' volunteered Miss
Heath, conscious of the dangerous ground
near at hand.

He is always well, Mills. Just what
he was years ago. Your Mimics is singularly
handsome, with that clear profile, pale
face, and dark hair. The Le Eoy eyes and
nostrils. Is she amiable ? He was not, but
her mother was.'

Miss Heath was too wise to speak to
Mimics s amiability; indeed, she could not
make up her mind on that head, so she
replied that she was clever, but lacked the
advantages of masters.

*what a blessing,' interrupted Sir
Joshua, who had a way of interrupting
everybody, and mixing in all that was
going on. ' No masters ! No pianos, violins,
violoncellos, flutes, sackbut, psal-series,
dulcimers, and no kinds of music !
No vocal screaming to bring the house
about your ears ! Miss Marmont, let us
shake hands.'

To Mimics's amusement he held out his
hand and shook hers heartily. She fell in
love with him then and there. So did
George, who was standing close by.

Will you shake hands with me too, sir,
and tell Herbert we are all friends?' he
said.

To be sure I will, my boy returned
Sir Joshua, looking at the frank, beautiful
face upturned to his.

'Are you taking leave. Sir Joshua?'
asked Lady Helena, half-rising.

Only making believe, my lady,' he answered
; and Mrs. Prettyman began to
think that, in spite of Milly Heath, it tuas
proper to say my lady,' and ' your ladyship.'


Meanwhile Mr. Carew kept near Mimics.
He entertained her with descriptions of
life, military and fashionable, and made
himself vastly agreeable. He was good-looking,
had charming manners, and was
as yet the only young man of position — so

to call it — Mimics lead met. They had
seen one another at church whenever he
was in the country, had been occasionally
thrown together at the vicarage, and
had even walked together for a few minutes,
during some chance encounter. Mi-mica
was singularly unconscious, straightforward,
and natural in manner, and,
strange to say, not shy. Her intercourse
with the Lestes had cured her of some of
her natural imperiousness, and she was
learning gradually that she could not
rule the world. Still, her manner was
sometimes authoritative and occasionally
brusque. ' She could not have learnt it
from me,' poor Miss Heath would mutter,
when Mimics volunteered an opinion
which she considered too decided for her
age.

Can you never pay us a visit ? I often
see you driving past Monkton ?' said Mr.
Carew.

'Never, until I have emancipated myself,'

replied Mimics. ' But then, I must
go elsewhere. How is Leila ? What has
she to do ? How does she get on ?'

Too independent, I fear,' half whispered
Mr. Carew, glancing at his mother.
^ I am very sorry for her.'

*It is excellent to earn one's own living.
I envy her,' returned Mimics. ^ Laura
has just made up her mind to become a
schoolmistress, because she hears female
clerkships are so hard to get. There are
hundreds of candidates at all the examinations,
and Mr. Leste says he would rather
she were in the board school than in
London.

Board school !' echoed Mr. Carew, in a
horrified voice. * What next ? A clergyman
of good family, clever, with a well-connected
wife and superior children, to
make his daughters schoolmistress, and
lady-helps, and '

But they can't starve, Mr. Carew. I
wish I were a bishop or an archbishop

and Mr. Leste should have the best livings
England. What is the use of a bishop,
if the very best clergyman in the diocese
is left with a curacy and less than two
hundred a year, house included ? I say it
is a shame

*What is a shame, Miss Marmont?'
asked Sir Joshua, who overheard Mimics's
hot words, and spoke so loud himself that
everybody else was startled by the question.
Mimics coloured, and Mr. Carew answered
for her with a good-natured laugh.

*We were discussing church dignities,
and disestablishment, and patronage in
all the professions, and other problems.'

But what was the shame ?' persisted
Sir Joshua.

That Mr. Leste has not a good living,'
Mimics took courage to say.

^ The way of the world put in Mr.
Prettyman, on whose lips this, his favourite,
aphorism always hovered.

When Lady Helena rose to go, many
VOL. I. s

civilities passed on all sides, and thus the
acquaintance was beorun. Mr. Carew
signified his intention of walking home, so
Sir Joshua and Lady Helena departed
without him. Miss Heath and Mimics
also moved to go when their carriage
drove off, which gave Mr. Carew an opportunity
of accompanying them. George
was of the party, and Mr and Mrs. Pret-
lyman stood on the broad steps to see
them off. It was a cheery autumn day,
and the extensive view from the house of
park, woodland, lake, and distant rising
ground covered with fir-trees was extremely
beautiful. The lake faced the house at
no great distance, and gleamed like silver
beneath the afternoon sun. A pair of
swans sailed on its glowing breast, and
other waterfowl made it their peaceful
abiding-place. Shrubs and trees diversified
its margin, and a boat was moored beneath
one of the latter.

May we have a row, Mr. Prettyman ?'

suddenly exclaimed young Carew. * Shall
we all go iu for it ? I will be oarsman.'

I can row, too. Oh, padre, let us go
cried George.

In spite of Miss Heath's feeble remonstrances,
they were shortly at the water's
edge. Mrs. Prettyman was the only one
of the party who positively declined to get
into the boat ; the rest consented. Mr.
Carew helped Mimics, and watchful, and
may-be jealous, George saw her pale face
flush crimson beneath the sheltering hat.
He noticed, also, that her manner grew
shy and distant, and that a little time
elapsed before it resumed its natural frankness.
He sat beside her, his aid not being
needed as oarsman, and said, softly,

You are hurt, Mimi. Who has offended
you?'

^ No one ; not you at least, Georgie,' she
replied.

But the delicious motion of the boat, the
plash of the oars, the beauty of the day

c 9

and scene soon effaced any annoyance she
might be feeling, and she toyed in that
her first venture on the lake. She and
George had many a vow subsequently, and
she soon learnt to handle an oar as lyell
as he.

The party remained some time on the
lake. Mr. Prettyman was in his happiest
mood, Mr. Carew as agreeable as possible,
and Mimics full of girlish delight. Miss
Heath alone was uncomfortable. She satin
silent watchfulness, wondering what
Mr. Le Roy would think of this intimacy
with the heir of all the Carews. So did
George. In his youthful devotion to Mi-mica,
he felt aggrieved that anyone should
share her attention, and he could but feel
that he was set aside for the moment.

The waning afternoon warned them, at
last, that even the innocent enjoyment of
moving over a placid lake was in the
power of the sun ; and they disembarked,
and separated. George returned with his

padre to the house, with a regretful lookin
his clear eyes, while Mr. Carew accompanied
the ladies to the end of the
park.

*Is that antiquated, half-animated statue
always with you?' he said to Mimics, while
Miss Heath was for the moment at a little
distance.

Not always,' she replied. ' I am occasionally
alone. When I work in my garden,
Miss Heath — if you mean Miss Heath — is
seldom with me, because she takes cold.'

Of course I mean your duenna. How
glad you must be when she takes cold !'

As Miss Heath came up almost before
he had finished the sentence, Mimics could
neither resent his words nor confess that
she was occasionally glad when a catarrh
to which her friend was subject kept hera
prisoner for a day or so. They reached
the lodge, where their routes lay in different
directions, and separated. Again the
tell-tale blush observed by George rushed

to Mimics cheeks when she shook bands
with Mr. Carew. She hastily withdrew
hers, and turned away.

When she and Miss Heath reached
Courtleroj, they found Searle awaiting
them. As he said he came on particular
business, they asked him up to the schoolroom,
and Mimics begged him to be seated.
She insensibly took the initiative with
Searle, because Miss Heath would scarcely
speak to him; indeed, that lady was only
too glad to let Mimics he foremost on all
occasions.

^ 1 have done as you requested me, Miss
Marmont,' he began, looking apparently at
a sketch on the wall behind Mimics. ^ I
have rfiade inquiries about the pension.'

She started, and eagerly asked the
result.

I have succeeded in obtaining fifty
pounds a year for you, until you are supposed
to have finished your education at
twenty one. There are some difficulties.

and I am afraid if Mr. Le Roy beard of
them he would be annoyed at my having
applied. He is peculiar, as you know, Miss
Heath;

Fifty pounds a year !' exclaimed Mimics,
as soon as she could realize the position.
It is a fortune. I am most grateful to
you, Mr. Searle.'

She rose as she spoke, and felt inclined
to throw her arms about him, but refrained.

I am sure I am truly glad to have been
of service,' he continued, gazing now on
his knees. 'But it may be injurious tome,
and I should be much obliged if you
would not mention the transaction to anyone
for the present ; at any rate, until I
have sounded Mr. Le E-oy, and told him
how the matter actually stands.'

If I were to write to him about it, he
would not read my letters, so you need
have no fear,' said Mimics, who was beside
herself at the prospect of possessing money
of her own at last.

It might be wise to abstain from mentioning
it to — to — other friends, for fear of
its getting to Mr. Le Eoy's ears until I
have made the matter clear to him continued
the bailiff. * So many inquiries were
made, which I was able to answer, but
which would have made him furious, that
I must be cautious

'But the money is mine, Mr. Searle ?'

Just so, as sure as your father was a
colonel in the army, and you are his
daughter. I have brought you the first
half-year's pension. May I understand,
before I give it to you, that the affair is
private — for the present — for the present ?*

*Until you wish it made public,' replied
excited, over-toyed Mimics.

Searle took from his pocket-book two
ten and one five-pound Bank of England
notes, and laid them on the table before
the girl. She had not seen so much money
since her childhood abroad, and she almost

kissed the hand that passed the notes on
the table.

You will also be silent, madam, for the
present — just for the present he added,
turning towards Miss Heath, but not looking
her in the face. ^ To be sure, you
always are silent and prudent. You never
made mischief anywhere.'

Their eyes met for an instant, and both
pairs fell, but Miss Heath, in an undertone,
said something to the effect that she should
not mention the subject. He drew a
receipt from the pocket-book which he
asked Mimics to sign and Miss Heath to
witness. Both read it first, and it was
simply an acknowledgment that the half-year's
pension was duly received. It
looked to them like a government document.


I may depend on silence and secrecy,
ladies — for the present,' he repeated, as he
walked towards the door.

Yes, oil ! yes. I am for ever obliged
to you. Forgive me if I was rude the
other day responded Mimics, following
him, and half-extending her hand.

not at all, Miss Marmont,' was the
ambiguous response ; but the hand was not
taken, and apparently not noticed.

'Hurrah! hurrah!' shouted Mimics,
when they heard his footsteps far down
the passage. ^ Money of my very own to
give to the poor, to make presents with,
to pay small bills, to buy colours and
drawing-paper, to travel by train — Oh !
let us go to Prestbury tomorrow with ?ny
money, and not yours Miss Heath — to have
in my purse, and I must get a new one ;
to pay all my debts to you, you dear,
patient, prudent Milly. Forgive me, the
Christian name slipped out . . .'

Mimics !' ejaculated Milly, while the
insane girl caught her in her arms, dragged
her from her chair, and began to dance
with her round the room.

I suppose I must not tell even George,'
she said, when she paused, breathless, and
released her partner.

Not for the present,' gasped Miss
Heath, sinking into a chair, and indulging
in the unusual outlet of a laugh.

CHAPTER XV.

mimics's first proposal.

Mimics's garden was one of her most
substantial pleasures. In it she forgot
her grievances, and would linger the day
through amid her flowers, digging and
delving, pruning and potting, if Miss
Heath would let her. The old gardener
was her staunch ally, and [msLUj were their
joint manoeuvres to supply lack of funds
by cunning and cheap inventions. But,
when Mimics entered her cherished retirement
the morning after her accession of
fortune, her schemes for improving it
were vast and multiplied. Never had
bank-notes produced a greater revulsion

than those left by Searle, the bailiff, in the
school-room of Courtleroj.

Miss Heath listened with mute surprise
to the plans laid out for its disposition ;
and when old Gandy heard of how they
were to purchase some desirable plants,
and to mend the old glass over a certain
forcing-bed, he opened his small eyes with
astonishment, and exclaimed, ' Who's to
pay, miss ?' for everybody knew the emptiness
of their young lady's purse. Mimics
longed to reply, ^ Gandy, I have a pension,'
but respect for Searle, whom she had
never respected before, restrained her.
Such is the power of money.

Its accession, however, did not make her
forget Horace Leste, whose handiwork was
visible everywhere, not only among those
old-fashioned beds and borders, but in the
rustic seats beneath and amidst the grove
of trees that surrounded them. Had he
not hammered together the falling back
and arms of her mother's favourite seat,

and had he not created new ones out of
all sorts of grotesque branches ? Had he
not spent more money than he could spare
in the rearing of her plants, and afterwards
helped to arrange them ? And how
poor the Lestes all were ! and how, for
their sakes as well as her own, she longed
to be rich I And now, how rich she was !
Twenty-five pounds !

She and Gandy had been at work together
some time, when he remembered
that the vegetables had not been taken to
the house, and he went oS to the kitchen
garden. She remained, cutting off dead
roses, and tying up weakly shoots, until
she was suddenly startled by a rustling in
the woods, as of a footstep. There were
already some fallen leaves beneath the
aged oaks, and she and George had rustled
them when they were exploring.

It is probably George,' she thought,
pausing, scissors in hand, and glancing

through the wicket that led from her
bright parterre into the grove.

It was not George, but Mr. Carew.

*I have been watching for that old
fellow's departure,' were the words which
greeted Mimics as that agreeable young
officer pushed through the gate and stood
at her side.

She was somewhat taken aback, but,
not being: either self-conscious or sentimental,
she received him naturally, though
aware that his visit was contrary to rule.

How did you manage to get into that
wood? Have you lost your way?' she
asked, quite unaffectedly.

*Yes, and I have come to you to help
me to find it,' he replied.

'It is straight enough. Yonder path
leads into the drive,' she said. ' How is
Leila?'

What an interest you take in Leila ! I
wish you took as much in me.'

That would be impossible. I know her
intimately, and I — well, we can scarcely
be said to be intimate, Mr. Carew.'

But we ought to be, Miss Marmont ;
we should be, were it not for that old
feud ; and you cannot be influenced by
what happened to our relatives years ago.*

*I am dependent on one of them, so I
must be influenced. He would even be
displeased at our meeting on his property.
It is certainly very absurd.'

Mimics laughed merrily, as the idea
presented itself to her mind of a by-gone
rupture making her almost afraid to speak
to a neighbour in that pretty, shady spot,
because its owner objected.

What if you and I were to try to mend
the breach between our families ?' he asked,
with a meaning glance, which, however, she
did not understand.

^I am sure I wish we could,' she replied,
simply. ^ It would be very pleasant. Do
you remember your aunt ?'

This question disconcerted him. He
had been on what he considered the right
tack before ; for he had come for a settled
purpose. He had taken a fancy to Mimics.
Whether it was love or not he had not
cared to inquire; and, urged on by his
mother, had begun to think she would bea
prize worth the winning. He was an
attractive man — musical, good-looking, and
possessing such allurements as women delight
in ; and he was not vain, which is
contrary to the usual idiosyncrasy of similar
characters. Neither was he remarkably
intellectual, though not deficient ina
certain cleverness and readiness, which
often stand in good stead for intellect.
Mimics was far his superior in intelligence,
and this attracted him, as well as her uncommon
expression of face and singularly
unconscious manner. He was five-and-twenty,
she between seventeen and eighteen
: what could be more auspicious, when
the respective properties of Courtleroy and

VOL. I. T

Monklands were considered, than a union
between them ?

After a slight pause, he replied to her
sudden question.

'Yes. I remember mv aunt. She was
very lovely. I was to have been at the
wedding, and shall never forget the confusion
when she disappeared. But I must
not lose time and this opportunity by talking
of her. Cannot you and I induce your
uncle to forget the past, by — you must
understand me, Mimics — by a marriage —
which nothing shall interrupt ?'

She did understand him at last. He
had taken her hand, and was orazinor into
her liquid, lustrous eyes. Her pale face
flushed; the eyes flashed; the hand was
withdrawn, and she stood before him with
pulses beating and breath quivering, as
she poured forth a stream of what she
believed righteous wrath.

How dare you say such words to me ?
How dare you waylay me to insult me?

Am I not Barbara Leste's friend, and have
you not loved one another long before you
knew me ? Is she not worth a hundred
of me, though they are all obliged to
stoop . no, not to stoop, but to rise
to their poor circumstances? Is it because
Leila is your mother's dependent,
and the others are seeking situations, that
your manner has changed of late towards
Bold Barbra? And she has been — no; I
will not own that she has been heartbroken,
because you do not deserve it:
but she has been very unhappy. Is it
usual for men to change their loves like a
ferment ? If so, I would rather know
nothing of them, and live secluded in this
old place for ever.'

'But, Miss Marmont, you are mistaken
put in Mr. Carew, with some hesitation of
manner.

His face was crimson, and his eyes no
longer gazed into hers.

*Xo, I cannot be mistaken. Leila and

I have known it always, and thought how
happy you and Barbra would be together.
And now you ask me — their friend, their
sister — to come between you — you two,
who have sung together, talked, read,
walked, taught, visited the poor together
never been apart, except when Lady
Helena chanced to be present, who is ambitious
and proud. Yours is the one
romance I have watched all my life, the only
one ; and you ask me— me ! to try to blot
it out. Cannot you see the stain that
would be left behind? The indelible
shadow that nothing could erase? But
perhaps you are amusing yourself with
my inexperience. Only tell me you are,
and go back to Bold Barbra. I will
never, never let her know of this forgetfulness
of her.'

Mimics's manner changed from anger to
entreaty. The colour faded from her pale
cheeks, and tears welled in her eyes. It
was the first shock to the affections that had

come home to her, and her mind was highly
strung for the lovely chords that vibrate
to youthful touches of love and constancy.

^ You are really mistaken, Miss Mar-mont.
There is nothing between Barbara
and me,' said Mr. Carew, with averted face
and injured manner.

Nothing ! Then what is something ?
Is it nothing to have tried to make her
love you ? nothing to have been welcomed
by a whole family as one of themselves ?
nothing to have raised their hopes for the
future of this, their first, best, sweetest,
loveliest daughter ? Oh ! Mr. Carew, don't
say so, but return to her, even though you
do not deserve her.'

Mimics pointed towards the spire of the
church, visible between distant trees, near
which nestled the vicarage. The path to
the drive led in that direction. She did
not understand him to whom she spoke so
bitterly any better than he understood
himself ; for her words had roused certain

feelings of love, shame, and anger in his
breast, equally unpropitious to his present
suit and past affections. Anger prevailed.

If you knew more of the world, Miss
Marmont,' he said, 'you would understand
that a boy and girl friendship between
neighbours does not mean an engagement
for life. Perhaps, when you have more
experience, we shall have an opportunity
of renewing this subject.'

Never ! I will not speak to you again
until you have made your peace with Barbra.
Boy and girl ! She is nearly three-and-twenty,
and you are older. You have
always loved one another for twenty
years ; and now you dare to pretend to
care for me ! Is it you or Lady Helena
who does me this honour ? Good-morning,
Mr. Carew.'

'Good-morning, Miss Marmont.'
He turned, and was on the verge of the
v70od-path, when she hastened after him.
'For pity's sake, for love's,* she cried

staying his steps, and fixing lier lustrous
eyes upon him, ' go back to Barbra. She
will die if you forsake her ; and then what
would your sufferings be ? I am but a
girl, but I know her constant nature, and
that she would never alter as you have
done. Oh ! there is no one in the world
like Barbra.'

A change came over his face. The Lady-helena
pride forsook it, and the Sir Joshua
kindliness overspread it — for so Mimics
afterwards phrased it. He held out his
hand.

' You are right, and a true friend, Miss
Marmont,' he said. ' There is no one in
the world like Barbra. But, I fear, she is
not for me.'

So saying, and grasping her hand, he
hurried through the wood. Turning back,
she saw George disappearing on the opposite
side of the garden. She called to
him. George, if anyone, could calm her
excitement.

'What is it, Mimics ?' be asked, seeing
her flushed face, tearful eyes, and agitated
manner. * I heard your voices, and
thought — you would not want me.'

^ I always want you, Georgie,' she replied,
sitting down on the rustic seat, and
beginning to cry.

*What is it, my Mimi ?' he said, the
beautiful eyes full of loving anxiety.

It is not myself, but Bold Barbra,' she
sobbed. ' She will surely die.'

'No one but God knows who will die or
live. " Our times are in His hand." I read
that verse this morning,' he replied.

'You do not know — you cannot tell
what Barbra is?'

But God knows. If she is good, He
will care for her.'

These simple words stayed Mimics's
agitation. She took George's hands and
recounted what had passed. She always
told him everything. His face grew inexpressibly
bright as she proceeded, and,

when lie concluded, be said, looking at
her,

'You are still my Mimi. I feared he
might take you from me. Yesterday, on
the water, you liked him best.'

She smiled a perplexed smile, for yesterday
she had liked him, to-day she
despised him.

'Are we responsible for our likes and
dislikes?' she asked, while George stroked
her hand.

He had come to fetch her to go with
him to a neighbouring hop-yard, and they
went first together to the house. Miss
Heath, nothing loth, consented, promising
to pay Mrs. Prettyman a visit meanwhile.
George picked up a heavy basket that he
had deposited at Courtleroy on his way to
the garden, and Mimics helped him to
carry it. The contents were edibles.

Padre has gone with Mr. Leste to hear
him speak to the hop-pickers, and madre
has got the cook to make these cakes he

said, * by telling her what we do in London
slums. They are anxious to give
them a tea when the picking is done.
"What a picturesque scene it is !'

Mimics had sketched it until she forgot
whether it was picturesque or not ; still,
when they reached the hop-garden, with
its trailing wreaths of varied green, and
saw the many-costumed hop-pickers, she
realised what George meant. The Courtleroy
servants' dinner-bell warned that it
was one o'clock just as they entered, and
almost simultaneously Mr. Leste and Mr.
Prettymau appeared also.

Although this West-country hop-yard
was not, like those of Kent, replenished
from the very poor of the London streets,
still it contained many Irish adventurers
and other wayfarers, in addition to the
native population, who had come in the
hope of a day's wage. George's memories
revived at sight of a Connemara cloak
here and there, and he started more than

once at the sound of a brogue familiar to
him in babyhood. Mimics watched him
anxiously as they threaded the green
alleys, and finally anchored beside their
friends in a sort of central plot, where lay
poles, baskets, and many juvenile * hoppers.'
It was the dinner-hour, and most of the
natives went home ; while such of the
visitors as had any dinner gathered about
this spot to consume it. The latter were
chiefly vagabonds, and to these Mr. Leste
addressed himself. By * vagabonds ' we
do not mean that they were worse than
their more settled companions, only they
were mostly homeless wanderers. For
many years Mr. Leste had been in the
habit of meeting these poor people, and
giving them a few words of kindly welcome,
religious instruction, and invitation
to church, or to a service which he held
in a large barn, lent by a parishioner.
This he did on the present occasion, and
told his motley congregation that he would

hold a service that evening in the barn,
and that he should hope to see them at
church the following Sunday. His manner
was serious, yet genial, and the
Thank 'ee, sir,' which followed his kind
words went to George's heart, who was
wondering whether he might not have a
friend or even a parent amongst the
ragged throng. A baby lying under a
small tent particularly attracted him, as
did the hungry cur, watching it and the
eaters with grave earnestness, and seeming
to be taking in Mr. Leste's words. These
were concluded by the reading of a few
verses from Holy Writ, and a short prayer,
to which all responded by a hearty 'Amen.'

Now, Georgie, open your basket,' said
Mr. Prettyman, when the address was
concluded.

He and Mimics were soon engaged in
distributing the cakes, and promised bread
to all who came to the barn that night.
Mr. Leste smiled, and did not say, as some

do, that this temporal allurement interfered
with the spiritual, but rather listened
approvingly to Mr. Prettyman's, ' This is
how we manage in our ragged church.'

The blessings showered on Mimics and
George were many and unaffected, and the
mind of the former was much exercised as
to how she could best share a portion of
her enormous wealth with these poor
people; while the latter Twas every now
and again consulting with his padre as to
the tea in the barn.

The next ringing of the Courtleroy bell
was a warning that the dinner-hour was
over, and that the daily labour was to be
recommenced. Mimics and George were
standing in the centre of the open space,
watching the people, who gradually made
a little crowd around them, while Mr.
Prettyman and the clergyman went to
greet those returning to the field, when a
dispute arose between a couple of Irish.
Neither George nor Mimics saw the disputants,

but the concluding words reached
them distinctly.

*I tell ye, as sure as I'm alive, it's
Georgie Hope

CHAPTER XVI.

IN FARMER Wesley's BARN.

In Farmer Bezley's crowded barn that
night there was no one so excited as
George. He and Mr. Prettjman came to
the service with a view to discovering who
had spoken those strange words. In vain
had they wandered through the hop-garden
after they were so distinctly enunciated ;
they failed to find the speaker. They did
not wish to make them public, still they
desired to know who and what was the
man or woman who spoke them, whence
he came, and what he knew of George
Hope's parentage.

As to Mr. Prettyman, he was in agony

lest they should lead to some discovery
that might take quixotic George back to
his original friends ; and, as regarded
George himself, he knew not what he
wished, beyond the desire to help and
know his parents, if he had any. His
eyes wandered restlessly through Mr.
Leste's congregation, and he could neither
listen to him nor to Barbara, who sat at
a small harmonium, leading the hymns.

The service was short and impressive.
A few extempore prayers, interspersed
with cheerful psalms and hymns, an extempore
address, and it was over. The
congregation, consisting of many villagers
as well as the hop-pickers, responded
heartily, and joined in the singing, led
by Barbara's clear and really beautiful
voice. George could not help thinking of
Mr. Carew in connection with her, and
wondering that he could transfer his affections
from such a charming girl to another,
even though that other was his

Mimics ; but the boy had yet much to
learn !

Mr. Prettyman had bought up all the
bread in the village, and the juvenile
Lestes were to distribute it with Gorse —
for Mr. Leste liked to afford his children
the high privilege of giving when in his
power — who was, however, thinking more
of the faces of the recipients than of the
dole ; and, as the Irish contingent passed
out, he was striving to reawaken the
memory of long ago, while Mr. Prettyman,
meanwhile, was bidding them to a great
hop-pickers' tea in the same barn, which
he hoped to have shortly. He had never
been so much in his element before during
any of his holidays, as he was in this his
visit to Summerlands, and his consequent
introduction to Mr. Leste.

If George watched the Irish narrowly,
they also watched him. He was perplexed.
Could they all be acquainted with his
name and history? Could all the half-vol.

I. U

clad, wild-lookioor crew beloDor to him?
Did the ' God bless yer honours,' the ' May
the Lord recompense ye's,' and the other
hearty recommendations to heavenly returns
come from his own kith and kin ?

He rustled the still green leaves of his
memory in vain, in the hope of recognising
a face, until a sheepish-looking fellow was
passing him by with a glance from the
corner of his eyes. Instinctively he cried
out,

Patrick ! Stop, Patrick.'

The man was arrested. Their eyes met.

An' sure, it's Patrick !' said the former,
holding out both hands.

George seized them, and, forgetting all
else in his excitement, cried aloud,

Padre. Here he is — Patrick. Padre,
come here.'

Mr. Prettyman hastened towards him
through the decreasing throne and found
him still hand in hand with the rough

Irishman. All eyes were upon them, and
Mr. Prettyman could only whisper to the
man to stop behind, and to George not to
attract further attention. The bewildered
boy let go the hands ; the man shrank
back : the one stood as in a dream while
the barn emptied, the other looked terrified,
as if he had committed an offence.
At last everyone had departed, save those
three and Mr. Leste.

Better let me speak, Georgie,' whispered
Mr. Prettyman, who was almost as
much excited as the boy. * Come forward,
my man,' he added, addressing Patrick,
• and tell us what you know of this young
gentleman.'

An sure, I think, from his eyes, he's
nobody else than our Georgie. But I'm
not within' to interfere with his good
prospects,' replied Patrick.

'What do you mean by "our George"'

George Hope, and bless his sweet face,

u2

and jours too, my lord, who gives us the
bread, wit a promise o' the tae ; an' his
reverence's too, for the sarmou.'

'Is your name really Patrick?' interrupted
the perplexed George.

An' sure it is ; but how would ye know
it, after given or eight year?'

How, indeed? George could not answer
that question. He could only rapidly
pour out others, taking the initiative himself,
and ignoring the presence of his
elders, who could only stand aside and
listen.

Patrick recounted how that he had
known George from his infancy, ever since
he was a year old ; and told, with much
circumlocution, how that one Biddy Malone
had nursed him from that age until
he was five or six, and then carried him
off nobody knew where.

'Was she his mother?' interrupted Mr.
Prettyman.

His foster-mother. Nobody ever heard

of his mother in our parts. He come to
Kirkpatrick wit his father, who was there
wit his regiment ; and he put Georgie —
I ask yer pardon — Masther George, out
to nurse wit Biddy Malone an' her
mother.'

My father ! What became of my father ?
What was his name ?'

His name was George Hope, just like
yer own, sir. He went to foreign parts
wit his regiment, and never come back.
He was just made corporaL I seen him
when he come to Biddy's cabin, to say
good-bye ; and I'll never forget it to my
dying' day.'

How old was I then ?'

'Something short o' three. He doated
on ye ; and no wonder, seen' what a Beauty
you was. He give Biddy money, and promised
to send regular.'

Was he Irish ?'

To the backbone, and as fine a man as
ever ye see wit your eyes. They duty

savages never see the likes, 1*11 be bound. "^

What savages ?'

'The Caffirs. I'd a-been at 'em too, but
I'd just had my discharge. I lived at
Braghh, where Biddy lived, a mile out o'
the town ; but there was nothing' but steering
going on from morning' to night.'

And you taught me, Patrick ?'

'By my soul, I did: and you were the
wonder o' the pigment.'

There could be no doubt that this man.
Patrick Malone, was what he represented
himself to be : but further questioning
elicited little more of George's history.
His father had probably been killed in
Africa, and had thus left him to the care
of Biddy Malone, who must have brought
him to London, and left him with Mr.
Prettyman. But how could she have
heard of that gentleman, and of his wife's
wish to adopt a child? She had not returned
to her native place ; so Patrick
had nothing: to tell on this head, and

George was obliged to content himself
with the knowledge that his father had
been a soldier, and must have been of
good repute, or he would not have been
raised to the rank of corporal. It evolved
that he was not a native of Brag:h, but
had merely come there with his regiment.


Mr. Prettyman inquired how Biddy managed
to maintain the child, and Patrick
replied that nobody knew ; but that she
received letters and remittances occasionally,
though not from abroad.

Mr. Prettyman gave Patrick some money,
and bade him say nothing of his recognition
of the boy, which he readily promised,
declaring: that he would on no account
ruin the young gentleman's prospects.

If my father should ever come back
and inquire for me, you will tell him where
I am?' said George.

He'll never come back, small blame to
him ; for he's dead and buried in the diserfc

long ago, or, may be, eaten up by the
cannibals ; the Lord save bis soul.'

These suggestions as to bis father's
latter end were not pleasant to George,
and Mr. Prettyman, seeing that be turned
pale, hurried bim off, promising that be
should see Patrick on the morrow. As
Courtleroy lay midway between the barn
and Summerlands, be proposed calling
there, in order to distract the boy, and
orders were accordingly given to the
coachman, wbo bad come with one of the
numerous carriages tofetcb them. Already
the Summerlands establishment were surprised
at the irregularities of their temporary
master, wbo, when ^ out for a
holiday,' ignored conventionalities, and
disturbed the dull routine of an abode
made duller by absenteeism.

We'll bave a first-rate spread,' said Mr.
Prettyman to Mr. Leste, as they shook
bands. 'You prepare the discourse, your
wife the ornamentation, and I'll see about

the food. Best say nothing of the Irishman'


Depend on me. All my parish, including
the hoppers, say you are the
nicest gentleman that ever came into it,'
laughed Mr. Leste. * But you mustn't
spoil us, or what shall we do without you
when you leave us ?'

Sufficient for the day, etc,' replied Mr.
Pretty man, as they drove off.

Mrs. Pretty man was awaiting them.
She, Miss Heath, and Mimics were in the
hall. There was a cheerful fire, and the
lamp burnt brightly, and the room looked
singularly habitable — for Courtleroy. The
evenings were growing chilly, and Mr.
Prettyman rubbed his hands energetically
over the fire.

'Something has happened!' exclaimed
Mimics, grasping George's hand, and
looking into his downcast face.

'My father!' returned the boy, and
burst into tears.

This was such an unusual event that
even Miss Heath was affected by it.
While the others gathered round their
darling, offering comfort and asking explanation,
she stood supporting herself on
an old carved screen, looking on with
clasped hands and evident participation
in the general excitement. But George
had recovered himself before Mr. Pretty-man
had briefly recounted the event of
the evening. .

Thank God he is dead, and you are
our child still,' ejaculated Mrs. Pretty-man,
innocently, and with no malicious
intent.

• Louisa !' exclaimed Miss Heath, as if
awestruck by so un-Christian a sentiment,
and making a move from the screen to
the group in the centre of the hall.

madre did not mean to be unkind,
Miss Heath said George, turning his eyes,
now more lustrous than ever with the
tears, full upon her.

'I know — but — I feel so sorry for you,'
replied Miss Heath, with a sob in her
voice which brought sympathetic George
to her side as she sat down on the nearest
settee.

Nobody knows how tender-hearted
Milly is. She never could bear to see
anyone cry, and I really believe she is
quite fond of Georgie,' said Mrs. Pretty-man,
aside, to Mimics.

She used to bear my grief with great
equanimity,' laughed Mimics. ' But there
is something about Georgie that makes
everyone sympathise with him.'

This was probably because he sympathised
with everybody. Accordingly, they
all calmed down together, and began to
discuss what had taken place. Mimics
and George sat hand in hand, she strengthening
bim by saying she was glad that
each of their fathers was a soldier, and
died on the same alien soil ; he suggesting
that perhaps his was not dead.

Oh, Georgie, you needn't say that, since
one father is enough for anyone,' put in
Mrs. Prettyman, aggrieved.

Miss Heath suggested, reprovingly, that
he would naturally like to know his real
from his adopted father ; upon which
George started up and went to Mr. Pretty-man,
who was standing with his back to
the fire.

Padre, I should not love you less if I
could find him. May I go to Braghh some
day and make inquiries ? The post-master
might know where the letters sent to
Biddy came from, and that might lead to
the discovery of my mother.'

Time enough for that, Georgie. We'll
see about it,' replied Mr. Prettyman, as
tears started to the eyes of his wife.

I think we'd better go. I'm sure I
wish we had never seen Patrick,' sniffed
that lady, rising.

It will all come right, and I daresay
George's father was a prince in disguise,'

laughed Mimics, as her friends took their
leave.

But she was very thoughtful when they
had finally departed, and tried in vain to
interest Miss Heath in her imaginations
concerning George's history. Miss Heath
was more reticent than ever. They had
passed an unusually exciting day, for they
had been by rail to Prestbury, to expend a
portion of Mimics's income on some really
necessary purchases. In spite of her
visionary ideas, Mimics had calmed down
at Milly's representations, and had greatly
reduced her list. Still, drawing materials
and presents, to say nothing of a new
evening dress, had somewhat lessened lier
Bank of England notes.

George's history is very strange,' said
Mimics, as they lingered over the fire.
'We can now guess at his father. I
wonder who his mother could have
been?'

It is useless to wonder. The best thing

that could happen to him would be never
to hear of them again.'

soh! bliss Heath, how do you know
that?'

I n^uess it from the circumstances.'

Perhaps his father may have been '

Nonsense, Mimics ! Of what use

speculating ? He is now the son of rich
people — virtually the son.'

Yes, but subject to all sorts of aspersions.
The Carews alone — at least, the
youngest — have spread the story of his
birth, and all the villagers are talking of
it. I would rather be the real son of a
respectable common soldier and a camp
washerwoman than the adopted one of a
prince ; and so would he. My dependence
is bad, but his independence is worse, in
spite of his devoted friends.'

CHAPTER XVII.

MISUNDERSTANDINGS.

George understood for the first time in
his life what it was not to be able to sleep.
His young mind was excited bj visions of
that soldier-father of whom Patrick had
spoken, and by strivings to recall a past
"which had nearly faded from his memory.
He rose with the dawn, and was downstairs
as soon as Sampson, who asked him
if he was after some new fortification, or
if he was about to blow up Summerlands.

I must find Patrick,' was all he replied,
as he hurried off to the hop-yard, distant
over a mile.

The pickers were assembling, and he

stationed himself at the gate to watch.
Patrick appeared, and seemed as glad to
see George as be was to meet bim. He
took the Irishman's hand, and led bim, unresisting,
to a part of the garden that had
been cleared, where they seated themselves
upon a heap of poles denuded of their
graceful garments, and laid-bj for service
in another autumn. The sun shone out
from his curtain of mist, and began to
drink up the morning dew which lay
around them, while the neighbouring trees
awoke from their night sleep, and tried
to smarten up their dresses of yellow,
red, and brown. The voices of the hoppers
and the chirping of the birds made
the day-dawn cheerful ; and the curling
smoke from the distant chimneys of the
farm seemed to warm the damp atmosphere.


Patrick feared his young master, as lie
called George, might be cold ; but George
was indifferent to atmospheric dangers, he

only wanted to hear more of his father
and mother. Patrick had not so much to
tell as to ask, and George soon found that
Biddy was as prominent in the man's mind
as his father was in his. Patrick could
only enlarge upon what he had related
the previous day. He told how that his
father, Corporal Hope, was 'quite the
gentleman,' and came to see his boy whenever
he was able ; and how that he gave
all his money to Biddy Malone for nursing
him. Biddy had known him, or his
family before, but she could never be
brought to speak of them. He, Patrick,
believed he knew as much of her mind
as anyone under the sun; but never a
word of Corporal Hope, or his friends,
would she speak to him. Indeed, he offended
her by his questions concerning
them, and, when she suddenly disappeared
from Port Patrick, he was sure it was to
avoid his inquiries.

Ye see, Masther Hope, I loved her as
VOL. I. X

my soul,' he said, with tears in his eyes,
which affected sympathetic George, and
produced similar emotion. ewe was to
have been married, when your father was
ready to resave you, which Biddy always
said was to be next month ; and then,
when he went to Africa, 'twas to be as
soon as yer friends was prepared — and
they was always preparing, and never
ready, like the corporal. So Biddy put
me off, and off, till I should a-murthered
ye, I behave, but for your eyes.'

Like the young princes in the Tower,'
put in breathless George.

As like as two peas !' returned Patrick,
who had never heard of them. ' But, me
darling, I was jealous of ye, and that's the
holy truth. We quarrelled over ye many's
the time ; but that last evening was the
worst. *' You'll be sorry for this, patrick,"
says she. " Deed a bit," says I.
"Marry me out and out, and I'll take the
boy wit ye." " An' murther him," says

she. " That's the opinion ye have of me,"
says I ; and I turns, and goes off, whistling
like a mermaid. An' I never see her
again from that day to this.'

'And this was on my account?' cried
George, laying his small hand on the rough
knuckles of Patrick.

'An' by my soul it was, Masther George.'

But that would not have made her
bring me to London, and leave me at Mr.
Prettyman's !'

To London ! Was it to that big place
she tuk ye, and not here wit the hop-pickets
? ril be after her. I've a fraud
in London, who'll help me find her. If
she's alive, as sure as I'm Patrick Malone,
111 have her.'

And then you will bring her to me,
and I shall know about my father and
mother.'

An' sure I will. But where will I
find yer honour ?'

Call me George, and not "your honour.'

x2

I will give YOU my address, Patrick, and
mj padre and madre will help us to discover
my real father and mother. I: is
Tery perplexing, is it not ?'

An* shire i: is. George, my boy.
Murther ye I Who but that spalpeen of
a Biddy 'ud a told me that ? But Vm
after her to-morrow

•Yoa must stay for the treat, Patrick.
When we are both in London, we will find
Biddy. I am almost sure she will be in
our slums.'

• Slums, is it ! Do they call the strand
houses up in London slums ?'

•Xo; but the poor districts at the back
of them.'

Poor districts ! I thought them was
only in ould Ireland, and London was as
rich as the Lord-lieutenant.'

George took an antiquated membrane
from his pocket, and took out
a leaf. The book was filled with strange
hieroglyphics in the shape of military

sketches, mathematical computations, and
various problems explicable only to himself,
but showing the bent of his mind.
He wrote Mr. Prettyman's address dearly,
and gave it to Patrick, who exclaimed
at the ^ fine writing,' and asked if
he had also written the contents of the
memorandum-book. In another moment
George was explaining certain strategic
plans, and forgot all else in his military
ideas ; forgot even his breakfast, thongs
the Courtleroy bell was audible. Patrick
also, once a soldier, forgot that he-^tp^
hungry, although he had a p:e:e : :
bread in his tattered coat.

They were both recalled to the world as
it is by the approach of Farmer Bes ej,
Patrick uttered a 'Here's the mas
what will I dor' But George reassured
him by rising to meet the farmer, who
had been watching: them from a distance.
He had heard the village gossip concerning
them, and was not less inquisitive than

his neighbours : moreover, work was pressing',
and labourers few.

I am afraid I must disturb you, young
gentleman,' he began. 'Your breakfast
and my hops are waiting.'

He is an old friend, sir. He knew my
father, and, if he is not at work, it is my
fault,' said George.

An' sure, sor, I'll do the work of two
this blessed day,' broke in Patrick, hurrying
off to his companions.

'And if you please, Mr. Bezley, I will
pay him for the time he has lost,' added
innocent George.

Mr. Bezley smiled, and said it was not
so much the money as the labour, and
asked George to look in his pocket and
assure himself that his purse was safe;
for, he added, ' Those vagabonds aren't to
be trusted ; and, for my part, I like 'em
best at a distance. You'd better take off
your clothes and shake 'em when you get
home, Master Hope.'

rm not afraid,' returned George, indignantly
for him. ' I love the poor, and
I go to see them when they are crowded
into houses, and not under the blue sky,
like this.'

Bless your sweet eyes, my lad, and
may you always help the poor, both in
town and country,' exclaimed the good
farmer, laying his hand on the boy's
shoulder. * We have settled the day after
tomorrow for the treat, when the hops
will be saved, please God. Mr. Prettyman
is quite willing.'

Thank you ; good-bye. I will tell
padre,' replied George, hesitating, as he
held out his hand. *I did not mean to
be rude j only, you know, the poorer
people are, the more we should feel for
them.'

Farmer Bezley stood a moment to look
after him, thinking that he had taught him
a good lesson ; then turned to superintend
the hop-pickers. He was always good to

the • vagabonds,' in spite of his fear of
their proximity ; and, not only did he let
them fix their tents in the stubble-fields,
but gave them up his empty barns and
lofts during their temporary service. He
was not slow to perceive that Patrick was
working with a will, and the little conversation
with George encouraged him to
be soft rather than hard to the somewhat
wild-looking people that were gathering
in his treasure. He was somewhat of a
sceptic in the matter of what is called
indiscriminate charity,' though his bark
was worse than his bite. He and Mr.
Leste had many a dispute, when he said,
Charity's the fashion now-a-days, and I'm
not for the fashions ;' still he could never
refuse that good clergyman anything he
asked.

Farm and vicarage were very busy on
the day of the treat. No sooner had the
hop-pickers cleared out of the big barn in
the morning than it was well swept, and

the usual preparations went on. Mimics
and George joined the young Lestes in the
Stork, and would Lave been quite happy,
but for one little circumstance. They were
conscious of a restraint in the manners of
Barbara. Mimics personally and painfully
so, and George by sympathy with her. Mr.
Prettyman, with his customary bonhomie
had invited all the neighbours ; and they
were both instinctively fearing Mr. Carew's
presence, and the complications that might
arise therefrom. But how Barbara could
have heard of his proposal, if she had
heard, was a mystery. It was cleared as
the day went on.

It happened that Barbara and Mimics
were left alone in the barn, while the
other young people had gone to the schoolhouse,
to assist in bringing down the
forms from thence for the benefit of the
party. All the school children were helping,
and the work went merrily on. Barbara
and Mimics were engaged in arranging

the long tables, when they suddenly
and unexpectedly found themselves thus
together. Both were silent, and Mimics
was framing an indignant protest in her
mind, and wondering how she could speak
it without compromising Mr. Carew with
Barbara, when Leila came in. She was
always in a hurry, for Lady Helena was
exacting, even while professing much latitude.
Mimics felt that her greeting was
also cold, and her hurried explanation of
her presence was unusually constrained.

I am to tell Mr. Prettyman that Lady
Helena is not well, and cannot have the
pleasure of taking tea with his hop-pickets
she began, sarcastically. ' I shall probably
be wanted to attend upon her ladyship.
Sir Joshua may look in, if he has
time between shooting and dinner ; and
Monty — I beg his pardon, Mr. Carew — is
in too bad a temper to make up his mind
to anything. Herbert is on his way, and
I don't envy anybody who has anything todo

with him. Ho are you, Barbra ?
You don't look a bit better.'

Barbara turned coldly round, and assured
her sister that she was well. Her looks
belied her words.

What is it all ?' suddenly broke in
Mimics. ' You used to tell me everything,
and now you are both like stones.
I cannot bear your unkindness, and — and
T will not.'

Unkindness ! Secrecy !' cried Leila.
*Wbo is unkind, I wonder? Have you
not taken Monty Carew away from Barbra,
and are you not both breaking her
heart?'

'Leila, for pity's sake . . . .' put in
Barbara, dropping a cup she was holding
from her trembling fingers, and trying to
lay her hand on Leila's lips.

I will speak, Barbra : Mimics shall
hear it all. I never thought she would
have been so deceitful. Lady Helena says
Mr. Carew is all but engaged to her, and

Tvbat I told you the other day is quite
true.'

Barbara turned a stony face upon
Mimics, while Leila put her arm round
her waist. The trio were standing in the
centre of the barn, in the midst of the
manifold confusion of the preparations for
the feast.

Then Lady Helena told a falsehood !'
cried Mimics, quivering with indignation.

The faces of both sisters flushed, and
they made a little movement towards her,
but she withdrew.

You ought to know, Leila,' she continued,
passionately, ' that I would rather
break my own heart than Barbra's. Not
that it is breakable. If I were as much
in love as Juliet, or Hero, or any imaginary
love-sick shepherdess, I would scorn to let
my heart betray it. I have never read a
love-tale, real or fictitious, that I did not
long to tell the heroine what an idiot she
was ; and now you accuse me of being in

love with Mr. Carew ! Monty Carew ! I
should just as much fall in love with —
with Georgie. What right has Lady
Helena to use my name in connection with
her son's ? I know next to nothing of
either of them, and should probably offend
my uncle past redemption if I knew
more.*

Do you mean to call Barbra an idiot ?^
asked Leila, indignantly. ' I always
thought you loved her.'

So I do. You must both know that I
think Barbra the dearest and best girl in
the world, far before you or me, Leila,
and ten thousand times too good for ^Mr.
Carew. But I hear the noblest women
love the meanest men.'

Hush, Mimics !' began Barbara, fixing
her eyes on the agitated girl. 'You have
no right to say I love him, neither to call
him mean. I have known him longer
than you, and declare him honourable,
generous, and a true friend. If — if— he

BarijoraTs 1^ quiwiaed and lier face
fluafaed. She Idd outlier land to

'I tl- - --tier good

work, cr :1t - 'zt, he reads she

7 ^iwd, and jam.

—I

a t-ez:.
in a m
twain.
Dei

children are nothing back — I hear papa's
voice. Ah ! what shall I do ?' She broke
away from them, and went to the far end
of the barn.

Nothing shall induce rae to stay with
Lady Helena ; she is a snake in the grass,
and Monty is a coward,' exclaimed Leila.

Mr. Danvers has promised to come and
address the hop-pickers. He has just had
the living,' said Mimics.

It was now Leila's turn to flush, for Mr.
Danvers was very fond of her.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

LONDON ; PKiNIED BY DUNCAN MACDONALD, BLENiUlIil J^OU^E.

m



VOL. II.

^

^-^^^

Courtiers

BY

ANNE BEALE

AUTHOR OF

*fay ARLINGTON," *the PENNANT FAMILY,"
'' SQUIRE LISLE'S BEQUEST,"

ETC., ETC.

Give unto me, made lowly wise,
The spirit of self-sacrifice."

Wordsworth.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. IL

LONDON :
HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,

13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1887.

All rights reserved.

OOUI^TLET^OY.

CHAPTER I.

UNITED AND PARTED.

That is Patrick, Miss Heath, you wanted
to speak to him,' whispered George, when
Mr. Prettyman's numerous guests were
assembled.

Mr. Leste had said grace, hop-pickers
both native and foreign were seated, and
the feast had begun. All Courtleroy,
gentle and simple, was there — so was
Summerlands, so were the junior Carews,
and so were several neighbouring clergymen.
Shops far and near had been

VOL. II. B

ransacked for provisions, Summerlands
emptied, and altogether it was a good
time for the poor. Sampson and Ada
were all importance ; and as to George, he
and not his padre was master of the occasion.
But it was not all eating and
drinking. There was a strong undercurrent
running, particularly amongst the
gentlemen and lady-helps.

Leila, a lady-help by profession, was
quite carried away by it, for a certain
Reverend Charles Danvers kept close to
her side, and insisted on waiting upon her.
Another reverend, Sellon by name, also
attended sedulously upon Laura, and,
since both were bachelors, it is no wonder
that Mimics and George put their heads
together, and made notes.

'If only they would propose, what a
blessing it would be !' said Mimics. 'Two
disposed of ! Then, perhaps, Lady Helena
would not object to Barbra.'

She looks very pale and haughty,'

returned George. ' Do people always look
so when they are in love ?'

No time for further conversation. Teacups
to be filled, plates replenished, and
all the waiters required. Except, perhaps,
Miss Heath, who hovered about Patrick.
Indeed, he was an object of general attention,
and looked abashed as one and
another pointed him out as ' the man who
knew all about George Hope.' Herbert
Carew was especially attentive to him,
and overpowered him with good cheer and
inquiries.

'You really knew George Hope's father?'
ventured Miss Heath, when Herbert went
elsewhere.

I'll never be latin' at all at all,' muttered
Patrick, arrested just as he was putting a
large piece of bread and meat into his
mouth. 'An' sure I snowed him, tna'am,'
he added, turning his head politely towards
his interlocutor.

She slipped something into his hand,

band

hurried off to help Mrs. Prettyman,
who was carving vigorously.

Och, an' I'll be a rich man if this
goes on !' thought Patrick, as he transferred
Miss Heath's gift to his pocket.
I'll be after Biddy at cockcrow to-morrow
Masther George, my boy !' he whispered,
as George came up.

Mr. Carew was near, and George perceived
that he looked much disgusted. He
was not surprised, for he knew the old saw
about the two stools, and falling between
them. But he was always bent on doing
people good turns, so, in his capacity of
major-domo, he asked that fickle swain to
cut up a pie at one of the tables near
which Barbara was standing. He piloted
him thither unperceived by her, and left
them side by side. He thought he had
made a wonderful hit, but was mistaken.

*May I help you, Barbra?' asked Mr.
Carew.

Thank you,' she replied, cold and stately;

took up an empty plate, allowed him
to fill it, and went to the other end of the
barn.

Mimics was near, and saw this by-play.
She, in turn, presented a plate to be filled.
He replenished it mechanically, watching
Barbara's tall figure the while.

'It is all a mistake. Tell her so, and
she will forgive you,' she said, as their eyes
met.

I do not quite understand,' he replied,
affecting unconsciousness. ' Having done
nothing amiss, I need no one's forgiveness.
You might, perhaps, ask mine, remembering
how you treated me the other
day.'

There was no time for more, but indignant
Mimics flashed a glance at him, and
also went to a distance. Soon after, she
watched him saunter down between the
ranks of tables and benches, and take up
his stand near the great barn-door.

When the meal was ended, the tables

were rapidly cleared, and a few addresses
and speeches followed. Mr. Leste and his
brethren of the cloth, spoke shortly and to
the point, and Mr. Prettyman said a few
kindly, genial words, which were received
and answered by vociferous cheers. His
wife's face was pleasant to look upon while
he was thus honoured, and she found herself
saying to Mrs. Leste, confidentially,
that there was no one in the whole world
like him.

So thought his motley crew of hoppers ;
and, indeed, the villagers also, for, where
absenteeism is in force, a present benefactor
soon replaces the absent in public
esteem. And so thought Mr. Leste and
his family, except, perhaps, his three eldest
daughters, who were absorbed in far other
speculations. As to Barbara, everyone
noticed her restrained and haughty manner,
and when, at Mr. Prettyman's particular
request, she stood to lead the * Evening
Hymn,' she looked like a statue rather thana

living, breathing, and pre-eminently handsome
woman. As Mimics had said, Montague
Carew was not worthy of her love.
But who stops to ask concerning merits,
after a score of years of constancy, on one
side at least. He, meanwhile, stood, with
folded arms and affectedly unconscious
air, leaning against the barn-door watching
her and listening to the full tones of
her rich contralto voice, as it began each
verse of the well-known hymn. When it
was ended, and Mr. Leste had pronounced
the benediction, the party began to disperse.
Mr. Prettyman and George detained
Patrick for a few final words, while Mrs.
Prettyman stood near the door to wish
their guests good-bye. The sun was setting,
and a full tide of liquid gold flooded
the barn and the people. Farmer Bezley
and the bailiff were looking on.

If Mr. Le Eoy were like Mr. Pretty-man,
there would be some hope for us,'
said the former.

^ Then the countryside would be pau-prized,'
replied the latter.

We shall all be pauperism, if matters
don't mend,' remarked Bezlej.

I do the best I can,' said the bailiff.

Tea was prepared at the vicarage, which
was not far from the farm ; and, when the
poor people had dispersed, their richer
brethren walked across a couple of fields
to the parson's abode.

Keep by me,' whispered Mimics to
George, as she perceived that Mr. Carew
moved as if to accompany her.

He did so, and they hastened on together,
while the rest of the company
walked in pairs, more leisurely, from farm
to vicarage. Barbara remained behind,
professedly to superintend, really to avoid
Carew ; while he, conscious of this, and
with true masculine contradiction, waited
for her outside. The amiable Herbert was
watching, and gathering up news for his
mother.

Let me help you, Barbra,' greeted her
as she was about to mount the stile that
separated the hedgerows, overshadowed
by monster elms, in which the rooks were
cawing.

No, thank you,' she replied, climbing
over hurriedly.

I am off tomorrow,' he said, nonchalantly.
'You used to be sorry when I
went, and glad when I came.'

Possibly, when we were children,' she
replied, hastening on.

It is not like you, Barbra, to cast off
your friends because they are grown up.
I could point out a dozen to whom you
are constant as the pole-star.'

I have scarcely so many friends, Mr.
Carew.'

'You are unusually cynical, Barbra.
We have been almost more than friends
all our lives, and, now that circumstances
are against me, you turn from me.'

'What circumstances? Yours seem

unusually prosperous by comparison with
mine

*Well, yes — in a worldly point of view.
But your parents don't care for money, and
mine do. I am not my own master. You
know how well I love you. If you would
engage yourself to me, I should be yours
for ever — I could never change.'

The old story — secrecy. Never.'

They had reached a small wicket-gate at
the back of the vicarage, whence a gravel
path led, beneath trees, to a small shrubbery.
He paused as he opened it to let
her through. How pale and grand and
stately she looked I Few women were so
good and so beautiful as Barbara Leste —
the Bold Barbra of his boyhood, the truelove
of his manhood.

What has come between us ?' he
asked, forgetting all else but her.

'Mimics,' she answered, slowly, somewhat
disdainfully, yet with melancholy
intonation.

Before he could either protest or explain,
she had turned and hastened towards the
house. Did she expect him to follow her ?
Possibly. But what could he say ? How
face her in the presence of her sisters,
whom, he believed, in the zenith of a new
happiness ? He also turned, but not after
her. Hastily he skirted the vicarage
garden, and went into the high-road.

She soon found herself surrounded by
her younger brothers and sisters, and
dragged into the dining-room. A bright
and happy party were there assembled.
Never had charitable feast resulted so
delightfully as Mr. Prettyman's ; for it
was impossible not to perceive that some
wondrous event had happened to Laura
and to Leila.

^ They are engaged. I am sure they
are engaged,' whispered Mimics, as Barbara
passed her by.

She turned involuntarily towards the
door, but no lover had followed her to her

home. She was obliged to join in the
cheerful talk that went on around her,
and to wonder if the short transit from
farm to vicarage that had sufficed to
estrange her aud Montague Carew had
also sufficed to unite her more fortunate
sisters to two good men who had admired
them for some time, but whose * 
been against them,' as Montague
had phrased it.

Here is my Bold Barbra at last exclaimed
her father, always unconscious of
such love passages as might be acting
around him. everything went off beautifully,
and Mr. Prettyman has been
singing the praises of your voice.'

^As fine a contralto as our American
prima donna cried Mr. Prettyman. ' Let
her come up to us, and have some lessons.'

But Barbara hastened across the room
to where Leila was handing about the tea,
attended by Mr. Danvers.

'Is it ?' she whispered ; which enigmatical

monosyllables were answered by
an ^ All right,' from Leila.

And, as far as she and Laura were concerned,
it turned out to be * all right ' ;
but what of Barbara ? No Montague
Carew again appeared ; and they had
parted without even shaking hands, after
a life-long friendship.

CHAPTER II.

THE LE EOY TOWN HOUSE.

major and Mrs. Percy were unable to pay
their promised visit to Summerlands that
autumn, and were accordingly at home
when George returned, alone, to London.
Hops and holidays ceased together, but
not partridges and pheasants ; so the
Prettymans continued in the country, and
George joined his friend Percy at Sydenham,
in order to return with him to school.
It was his last term at Dr. Brace's. After
Christmas, he was to go to Woolwich.

A few hours previous to his arrival at
Sydenham, the Percyss were surprised by a
visit from Mr. Le Roy. They had not

seen him since the eventful day of the
Handel Festival. He had gathered from
George's letters that he was to be there,
and had come especially to invite him
to spend a portion of the following day
with him. The succeeding day the lad was
to return to school. The reason he gave
for the invitation was that George, having
been at Courtleroy, might be able to give
him certain information that he was anxious
to obtain. Mrs. Percy trembled for
Mimics; but the major promised that
George should at least call upon Mr. Le
Eoy. When Mimics's name was mentioned,
that gentleman made no comment, but
seemed rather to avoid all allusion to her.
His desire to see George was inexplicable
to the Percyss, since they scarcely believed
that his merely having been at Summer-lands
could account for it.

However, when George arrived, he appeared
quite as desirous of accepting the
invitation as Mr. Le Rov had been of giving

it, and, ranch to Ins friend Herbert's
disgust, it was decided that be should goto
Kensington to luncheon. They made
the most of their one evening, however ;
and he never wearied of talking of Mimics.
From Sydenham to Victoria, from Victoria
to South Kensington ; and George
soon found himself at Mr. Le Roy's splendid
mansion at the Gate. He was not
shy, he thought too little of self to be
shy. His manners were as unabashed as
his soul ; for he had never done anything
to be ashamed of, and could look everybody
in the face through those truthful
eyes of his. He was expected, and the
belated and powdered footmen showed
him through passages and ante-rooms of
bewildering magnificence into an apartment
full of musical instruments. He
heard sounds of music as the door opened;
and, when he was announced, Mr. Le E-oy
rose from a grand piano, at which he had
been playing, and received him with what,

for him, seemed warmth. George glanced
round the room in amazement. Was this
what they called aesthetic ? Ceiling and
walls were painted by first-class artists,
and Apollos, Euterpes, Satyrs, Fauns, and
every possible and impossible musician,
rustic and polished, was reproduced. His
mind reverted involuntarily to Sir Joshua
Carew and his remarks on the ' sackbut,
batteries, and all kinds of music of modern
days,' and he felt abashed — in spite of what
has just been said of his Unabashed soul —
before some of the partially-veiled figures
that surrounded him. The apartment was
large and lofty, and contained an organ as
well as piano, innumerable cases of stringed
and wind instruments, encased violins
and horns, and piles of music. The fire
was on the hearth, and the blue tiles that
surrounded it were designed with musical
subjects.

Mr. Le Eoy regarded George's amazed
glances with a slight show of satisfaction.

VOL. II. c

you are musical, I know,' he said.
what instrument do you play?'

I am learning the violin,' replied
George, modestly.

Let me hear you.'

And a violin was at once placed in the
boy's hands.

He played a bit of Mozart from memory,
delicately and with feeling; and in an
instant Mr. Le Roy was accompanying
him on the piano, with a touch and taste
which, to look at him, would have seemed
alien to his nature.

Not bad. Is my niece musical ?' he
asked.

She is not so musical as Barbara
Leste,' replied George, evasively. 'But I
think she could play if she had a better
piano, and it were kept in tune.'

really! What can she do? What
occupation follow, if quite unprovided for,
as she must be when the pension ceases ?'

I do not think she has a pension — at

least, she has no money. But she says
she will go out as lady-help, like Leila
Leste, or as nurse. She wants to do
good. She is very clever, and writes
poetry, and tales, and studies languages.'

I hate women writers. Has Miss
Heath taught her do thing ?'

Everything, sir. She paints splendidly.
Padre says she has a genius for art, and
he is a great connoisseur.'

Indeed ! He must be very different
from madre, as you call la sposa Pretty-man.'


They are very much alike, sir. They
are kind to everyone, and the people at
Summerlands and Courtleroy wish they
would never leave them.'

A slight frown wrinkled Mr. Le Roy's
forehead, and the nostril worked.

Did you see the Carews ? You have
not mentioned them in your letters ?'

*Yes ; they called on us, and we have
seen them two or three times.'

c2

I suppose my niece does not know
them ?'

She has met them sometimes by chance

Truthful George hesitated for the first
time, and his questioner perceived it. The
nostril worked more vigorously, and the
lips grew compressed.

'When did you last see them together?
What members of the family does she
know?'

Padre gave a supper to the hop-pickers
and villagers in Farmer Bezley's barn, and
Mimics and Miss Heath came, and Mr.
Carew and Herbert, and all the Lestes.'

That seems a strange proceeding. The
barn is mine, the howard is mine, the
village, with slight exception, is mine ; yet
a promiscuous gathering of strangers
usurps my domain. Where was Searle ?'

He was there, sir, and very cross he
looked. He hasn't a nice expression, and
Mimics doesn't like him. But I don't
think he had anything to do with the

party, and I am sure padre did not mean
to intrude. He thought Farmer Bezley
rented the barn with the farm, and that
he might entertain the poor hop-pickers
just as we help to entertain the poor of
London. The feast only came off just
before I left, or I would have written to
you about it. I hope you liked my letters.'

^ Yes ; they were nice, truthful letters
enough. But you did not mention the
Carews. Wherefore ?'

Because I heard, sir, that you were
offended with them.'

'Really!'

As Mr. Le Eoy uttered this, his favourite
adverb, an expression of supreme ill-humour
and contempt darkened his handsome
face for a moment, and silence
ensued ; but he soon broke it.

*You say Miss Marmont does not like
Searle. Is that because he is my confidential
agent ?'

It was now George's turn to be silent.

Although his one desire was to be useful
to Mimics, and slacken the bonds of tyranny
that restrained her powers, he was
scarcely diplomatic enough to effect this
without offending her uncle, and compromising
her with him. Besides, he had
an astute interrogator, who knew exactly
what he wanted to discover. After a
pause, however, George replied :

^Mimi wishes you would read her letters
instead of Mr. Searle's, because she thinks
she explains things differently to him.
She is quite sure that, if you knew about
the tenants and poor people, and how
Courtleroy is going to the dogs, and the
old servants ask her for things which she
cannot do for them, you would go down
and see for yourself.'

Really ! and what does Miss Heath
say?'

That Mr. Searle probably knows best,
and that it must cost a lot of money to
keep such a grand house, and servants,

and carriages, and an establishment like
this. And I suppose it must, sir.'

George said this confidentially, first
looking at Mr. Le Roy, and then at the
luxurious and artistic surroundings. The
Le Eoy frowned, and said,

It is very impertinent of dependents
to make such remarks at all. Searle has
carte blanche to satisfy all reasonable
demands

That is just what Mimi is sure of.'

Here luncheon was announced, and Mr.
Le Roy led his young guest to the diningroom.
If George had been astonished
before, he was still more so now. All that
money, art, and taste could do was done
here. The table was as sumptuously laid
as if there were a party of hons-vivants^ and
two men waited as sedulously as if the
said ions-vivants had demanded incessant
replenishing of plates and glasses. Yet
did Mr. Le Eoy ate sparingly, and George
was almost too astonished to eat at all.

Padre would like to be here !' lie exclaimed,
glancing at the walls, covered
with pictures, the carved oaken furniture,
mantelpiece with modern innovation of
ancient shelves holding china of fabulous
value, and painted ceiling, with peacocks
of blue and gold.

Really ! He probably affects old pictures.
I am tired of dining-rooms full of
portraits and the old masters. These are
chiefly Millais', Rossetti's, Burne-Jones',
Caldron's, Riviere's, Tadema's, Leighton's,
and other modern painters.'

If only Mimi could see them ! She
has copied all the pictures at Courtleroy,
and sketched everything in the park.'

What an industrious young person !
Yet she wishes to do good in the way of
the world as it goes at present. An amateur
artist is endurable, even if she be a
woman ; but your ladies who leave their
homes to become domestic servants should
be expunged from creation.'

Mimi says she has no home-ties, since
Miss Heath has madre, and could do without
her.'

Mr. Le Roy, perceiving that the servants
were listening, made no reply, and the
remainder of the luncheon was passed in
silence. The men were evidently accustomed
to be mutes, and glided about over
the soft carpet like animals on the watch
for prey. Harsh sounds jarred on Le
Eoy's fine organization, and they were
even careful to avoid any collision of silver
or of china. He was, in short, what used
to be called ' a fine gentleman ' in the days
of that ^ finest of gentlemen, George lY.'

After luncheon they went into a library,
the windows of which opened upon steps
leading to the well-kept gardens at the
back of the Gate. On one side a door
opened into a conservatory, whence the
choicest exotics sent their delicious perfumes
into the library, which was wholly
lined with shelves full of valuable books,

many of whlcli were priceless from their
antiquity ; for Le Eoy was more of a
collector than reader. That is to say, he
liked best the modern works of the day,
and the periodicals, newspapers, and books
of fiction, travel, and disputation that
covered the tables were legion. Before
all, he delighted in sceptical and agnostic
disquisitions, which affected him the more
because he rarely gave vent to his views.

He told George that he intended to
drive him back to Sydenham, and employed
the interval by asking more questions
; indeed, continued them during the
drive. It was strange that a cold, cynical,
disappointed man of the world should meet
with his match in an open-hearted, clear-sighted
boy, and that he should be so
interested in him as to prolong his interrogatories
as much for the mere pleasure
of discovering how George would reply to
them as from a sort of curiosity as to
what was passing in his old neighbourhood.

He pressed him concerning Searle,
and referred more than once to what he
had said of his present establishment. No
one knew better than he did the enormous
expense of keeping it up ; but then he
considered himself enormously rich, and
repudiated the notion that there was anyone,
human or divine, who had the right
to interfere between him and — himself.

He chose to live luxuriously, to visit
and receive when and whom he liked ; to
have a great town house furnished with
every appliance for ease and pleasure, and
to be his own idol. Who dared to argue
that it was his duty to superintend personally
the property whence he derived
his wealth, and to return to the place
where he had suffered the one great disappointment
of his life, and received that
wound to his pride and self-esteem that
would not heal ? He had never yet found
any person — not even his own mother —
bold enough to make the attempt, and.

having been a monarch from infancy,
resolved still to rule. Bat George? How-was
it that he tolerated this boy, who,
unintentionally, he knew, spoke home-truths
that no other individual had ventured
to speak, since the days when he
governed the nursery as despotically ashe
now governed, by letter and substitute,
the home and domain of which that nursery
was once the centre ? Because of
the mesmeric power of his eyes, and the
truth that lay beneath them. He was,
however, too cautious to let George perceive
that his communications touched
him, if indeed they did, until a chance
allusion to Mimics's mother recalled some
event that struck a chord on the rusty
instrument called his memory.

Mimics and Miss Heath live in the old
school-room,' George had said. 'They like
it best, because it is full of Mimi's mother's
drawings and books, and they make Mimi
think that she must be there herself.'

Is there — is there any portrait drawn
by Mrs. Marmont — in the school-rooms''
asked Mr. Le Roy, with a hoarse and
hesitating voice.

^ There are two or three, sir. One of
Mrs. Le Roy, and one of a sweet young
lady '

Enough. Be silent. We have talked
too much,' interrupted Mr. Le Roy, and
he spoke no more until they reached
Major Percy's gate.

Here he dropped George, declining to
get out of the carriage himself.

Good-bye, sir. Thank you for my
pleasant morning. I am sorry I was so
talkative ; but padre often says I am quite
garrulous when my tongue is let loose
said George.

You must come again, when I am not
tired, and I will show you some battle
pieces in what I call my military academy
returned Le Roy ; and so they parted.

CHAPTER III.

Unit AND CO.

Years passed, and George did not again
visit Le E,oy. We will, however, renew
our acquaintance with him at his breakfast
table. We find him reading a letter, which
suddenly drops from his hand, while an
unusual gloom overspreads his face.

Unit & Co. failed ! Lawyers and
bankers smashed ! Call in the course of
the morning ! It must be something serious
to bring Sellon out of his office,' he
muttered, half aloud, reading the missive
again.

Then he swept up the letters, newspapers,
and such other matter as the post

had brought, and carried them off to his
library, leaving his breakfast untouched.
It must have been some wonderful stroke
of Fate that could move him thus suddenly
; and the failure of Unit & Co.
must touch him nearly, or his dearly-beloved
Self would never have been merged
in half-a-dozen lines of a letter.

When his servants came into the luxurious
breakfast-room, and saw how matters
stood, they were sure something wonderful
had happened, and went in search of his
valet. Barber, who was the only being
they knew who had any influence over
him. Barber had been with him nearly
twenty years, and was the medium of communication
between him and the rest of
his household. It was Barber who gave
his orders, and who was almost as fine a
gentleman as his master. ' Like master,
like man might be said of him with truth,
for he echoed his master's words, almost
in his voice, to the cook of a morning ;

and she and the housemaids scuttled off
at his approach at all other hours of the
day, just as they did when Le E/Oy himself
appeared. But they had an easy
place, and all the servants did much as
they liked, and would not have left it for
the world. Barber, like his master, was
musical, and excruciated the ears of the
household by scraping on a violin or blowing
the French horn, when Mr. Le Eoy
happened to be out of the way. No harsh
sounds were allowed to invade the sacred
precincts of the house during the presence
within it of that autocrat. The ashes
were removed from the hearth by some
occult and noiseless machinery, and the
very brooms and scrubbing-brushes were
made to order, so that the Le Roy temperament
might not be unexpectedly excited
even by a hair.

The female servants had only seen him
at a distance, and had never, so said the
head-housemaid, ' Come in contact with

him.' People wbo are crossed in love
have, from time immemorial, had queer
ways of showing it ; but Le Eoy's was,
to say the least of it, Sybaritish if eccentric.


I am afraid master must be ill, sir,'
said the footman, when Barber arrived.

They all called the major-domo, ' sir,'
knowing that their exceptionally easy
situation depended on their management
of him who managed their master They
at least knew when they were well-off;
a knowledge which the domestics of the
present age are supposed not to have acquired,
neither, according to them, have
their employers.

Tell the cook to prepare another omelette
; boil fresh eggs, and have relays of
everything ready,' said Barber, surveying
the untasted viands with solemnity.

He was familiarly called, behind his
back, the Method parson, or the minister,
on account of his grave manner, his long

V(Jl. II. D

face, untarnished black suit, and stiff shirt-collar.
As he left the breakfast-room, he
picked up a letter, which Mr. Le Roy had
dropped, and which served as an excuse
for entering the library. He found his
master seated at the table, with a packet
of letters before him, which he appeared
to be tearing open one by one. Barber's
practised eyes detected that the envelopes
had been addressed by a lady.

^Do you know anything of young Mr.
Hope, Barber ?' asked Mr. Le Roy, as soon
as he appeared, and laid the letter before
him on the library-table without speaking.

'Nothing particular, sir. Major Percy's
coachman said he had passed a first-class
examination, and had got a commission in
the artillery.'

Will you go to Mr. Prettyman's, and
inquire about him, Barber ? Should hebe
there, ask him to come here.'

Yes, sir. But your breakfast ?'

Never mind that. How long is it since
young Hope was here ?'

Tour or five years, sir.'

Four or five years ! Impossible !'

^ It do seem so, sir ; but, tempus fugit.
the years pass like days.'

Don't moralize, Barber ; but go.'
Barber went, walking out of the room

as solemnly as he entered it, shrugging
his shoulders, and saying to himself, that
time would fly in spite of us.

Four or five years ! Impossible !' repeated
Mr. Le Koy. ' I wonder he has not
some. To be sure, I did not want him,
and have not asked him. Besides, the
Percyss have been out of the country, and
I could not make acquaintance with those
common-place Prettymans. Unit and Co's
failure may complicate my affairs. I wonder
Searle has not written. 1 will just
look through these last letters froui Mimics.
She can have nothing to complain of

d2

now, since I gave Searle those orders
As Mr. Le Eoy said, he had not wanted
George Hope during the years which, in
their luxurious monotony, had passed so
rapidly for him and Barber. Each successive
day had been but a repetition of the
preceding, and no special event had occurred
to mark one more than another.
He had ascertained from Searle that Mr.
Prettyman had not returned to Summer-lands,
and he lost his interest in George
when he could no longer give him details
concerning Courtleroy. Indeed, George
had been too hard at work to do more
than keep up his correspondence with
Mimics; and the years Vv^hich had been
lost to Mr. Le E,oy had made a soldier and
a man of him.

Before Mr. Le Roy had read even one
of Mi mica's laconic and carefully written
epistles, Mr. Sellon was announced. He
was his London solicitor. He was a man
of gentlemanlike appearance and singular

good manners, who pleased Mr. Le Roy
because he had tact enough not to offend
his prejudices, or hurtle his peculiarities.

Will you kindly explain your brief announcement
?' said Mr. Le Eoy, when they
were both seated — the one at his table
still, the other in an easy-chair near a large
fire. It was early spring, and the weather
-was cold and foggy.

It is a fearful day,' said Mr. Sellon,
rubbing his hands over the fire, as if to
gain time. * The fog nearly chokes one.'

I had forgotten the fog in your strange
news. It is, in effect, thickening. We
will have the gas lighted,' returned Le
Roy, ringing the bell.

No sooner did the man appear than the
gas was aflame, kindled as by magic.
Most of the other rooms were lighted by
wax candles, and sometimes Le Roy preferred
their more subdued light in the
library; but on the present occasion he
forgot his sensitive organization and eyesight,

and submitted to that invisible
screw in the corner of the room which
turned density into clearness.

Now, Mr. Sellon ?' he said, interrogatively.


The fact is that the Units have utterly
failed. The lawyers are ruined and the
bankers have stopped payment. Prest-bury,
indeed the whole county, is in commotion
; for, as you know, the Units,
father and sons, bankers and solicitors,
have been generally trusted, and rich and
poor did business with them. Unit has
been a power in the land for ages.'

I suppose I must have had money in
their bank; but Searle is cautious. I
wonder he has not written,' said Le Roy,
affecting nonchalance, while he handled
one of Mimics's letters.

Is not Searle connected with them ?
Did he not come to you from their office ?*
asked the astute lawyer.

I almost forget. I really know nothing
of bis history,' drawled Le Roy.

^ He should have informed you yesterday.
Are you sure he is trustworthy ?'

Perfectly. He has been my bailiff fora
quarter-of-a-century. I receive my rents
and all other moneys regularly, and he
manages my property, funded and landed,
admirably.'

'May I ask i£ you have any other
correspondent, or—or — do your tenants
ever write to you, or your servants ?'

I fancy they did, but I never read
letters of that sort. I enclose them to
Searle, who manages admirably. Tenants
and dependants are generally discontented,
but you know they can always give notice,
and I would rather they left me than be
personally annoyed.'

Excuse me ; but have I not heard that
you have a niece who lives at Courtleroy ?
Does she not write to you ?'

She pestered me with letters at first,
but I found she had a vocation, and I
hate girls and women with that sort of
thing ; besides, I hate the sex, as you
know.'

Mr. Sellon saw the nostril begin to
work, and prudently kept silence till Le
Roy spoke again.

The truth is, I did not read her letters,
and she ceased to write. But of late they
have begun again, and I have just been
opening them to discover if there is any
allusion to this failure. She and George
Hope would convert the world between
them.'

Is that the young fellow adopted by
Prettyman ? I hear he has carried everything
before him at some military college,
won his spurs, or, in modern phrase, his
commission, and is off to Africa. Great
things are prophesied of him.'

'He is musical, too; played Mozart
fairly well. Would you mind glancing

through those letters. You need not read
them aloud.'

Mr. Le Eoy passed four or five letters
to SelloUj and in so doing moved a missive
that he had overlooked, and not opened.
It was directed in a round hand, and the
postmark was Courtleroy. He muttered
that he believed it was from the schoolmaster,
but condescended to open it.
Before extracting the letter from the
envelope, however, he was attracted by
exclamations from Seton.

A scoundrel, evidently a rogue,' he
cried. ^ A clever letter, straightforward,
like a man's.' Then, when he had read
them all, he turned upon Mr. Le Eoy, and
added, ' If only you had listened to your
niece in time ! She says that Searle is
distraining the tenants, turning off the
servants, and declaring that he has no
money for the household expenses. She
asks what they are to do, and in this last
letter declares her intention of seeking a

situation. There must be something terribly
wrong.'

'This, also, is from her. She has
disguised the direction,' said Le Eoy,
aroused to something like a natural manner,
and beginning himself to read the
few lines contained in the sheet he held.

My dear Uncle,

All sorts of reports are afloat.
It is said that your solicitors have failed,
and that Mr. Searle is ruined with them.
We are all afraid that you must also be a
loser.

Your obliged niece,

Mimic Marmont.'

'Brevity is the soul of wit. " Obliged !'*
She has chosen a safe term,' said Le Compassing
the note to the lawyer, with an
annoyed but scornful air.

'She would have made ,a safer steward
than Searle, who has evidently " wasted

your goods "; but will not, I should say, be
welcomed by your tenants. If you mean
to save your property, you must investigate
this yourself. You must go to Courtleroy.'
Had Mr. Sellon pointed a revolver at
his client, he could not have startled him
more effectually.

Go to Courtleroy ! What will you suggest
next ?' he asked, in a voice almost
sepulchral.

Nothing. Once there, you will see for
yourself. My opinion is that Searle will
have ruined you, and that, unless you come
upon him unexpectedly, you will never see
or hear of him again.'

Why cannot you go, Mr. Sellon ?'

Impossible. I know nothing of the
property or the tenants. You have trusted
Seale so implicitly that he alone can
help you, and you must, at least, know
something of your own possessions. Besides,
if I may remind you, this establishment
must be maintained, and, to judge

from these brief letters, Courtleroy has
been denuded to supply our gardens with
horticultural treasures. The country does
often suffer to maintain the town. Its
arteries dry up, for instance, while pouring
their best blood into London.'

Le E-oy winced. He knew well enough
that all his tenants and old servants — even
his mother — had thus bled for him. But
he scarcely thought of them : his one idea
was, what could he do without Searle ? A
sudden thought struck him.

I cannot go to Courtleroy ; but I can
have Searle up here,' he said.

Mr. Sellon laughed.

A half-way house to America, and you
to pay the expenses,' he remarked. * ^o ;
you must catch him on the spot, or you'll
not catch him at all.'

Le Roy rose suddenly, and rang the bell
violently. He inquired if Barber were returned,
and, being answered in the affirmative,
requested his presence. The valet

\

appeared instantly. He saw, from his
master's irritable face, that some ill-wind
blew, and he bethought himself of the best
shelter. This, he knew, he should find incaution.


What of young Mr. Hope T asked Le
Roy.

He is with his regiment in Africa, sir.
I saw Mr. and Mrs. Prettyman, and they
said he was doing wonderfully well, and
had expressed a desire to call on you,
sir, only, as you had not invited him,
he '

*That is of no consequence, Barber.
Did they speak of Oourtleroy ?'

'Well, sir, the lady would have sent
you a message, but the gentleman said
she was not well enough acquainted with
you for that, as it was no affair of hers.'

What did she say ?'

That all Courtleroy was in an uproar,
because it was reported that the bailiff
was about to leave, his family having left.

Ifc was from Miss Heath sbe heard the
news this very morning, and, if I may
make so bold . . .'

Speak out. What else did Miss Heath
say

Well, sir. It isn't quite for me to tell,
as Mr. Prettyman remarked ; but she did
say, that — it was generally reported — that
the bailiff and the lawyers had made
ducks and drakes of your money, sir,
amongst 'em.'

Pack up my things, Barber. I will goto
Prestbury by the next train.'

Mr. Le Eoy had turned vivid with suppressed
rage ; not only the Le Roy nostril,
but the imperious family temper worked.
Barber stood motionless before him, a pillar
of solemnity, being accustomed to similar
outbursts occasionally, but not to similar
orders. He would have packed up for
New Zealand without a word — but Prest-bury
! his master was mad.

I will accompany Mr. Le Roy if he will

I

stay for the night express,' put in SelloD,
quietly, with a glance at Barber, happily
unperceived by Le E-oy, who, incapable of
speech, rose and stamped his foot in insane
fury.

Barber disappeared, saying, * I will
obey your orders at once, sir,* but feeling
sure they would be countermanded.

Shall I accompany you ? I can spare
the night if not the day. I will meet you
at Haddington at six-thirty,' said Sellon.

Le Roy nodded assent ; he could not
speak. His face was white, his hands
were clenched, and his tall figure shook
with agitation. A fight between two
opposing powers was going on within him :
one, the terror of facing the past ; the
other, the need of meeting the present.
Self was the only umpire. Which was
worst, to ignore for a time pride, resentment,
the sense of unforgiven wrong, and
the hate of years ; or to relinquish the
luxury, refinement, and ease by which he

was surrounded ? Assuredly the former.

Thus Self, combating Self, chose the
better part without intending it ; but the
struggle was awful. Never before had he
retraced a step. He might now have to
go back through his whole life. Even Mr.
Sellou, accustomed to the agony of unfortunate
clients, was confounded by the
appearance of this man, usually so proudly
self-contained. What must he have
suffered on that morning in the church at
Courtleroy, when no promised bride appeared,
if, after the lapse of so many years, he
suffered so intensely now ?

Can I do anything for you ?' he asked,
as he rose, not knowing what to do for the
best.

Haddington — the night express,' replied
Le Roy, opening the door, and waving his
guest out. Then he let his rage have way,
until it wore itself out.

CHAPTER IV.

Mimic AND THE TENANTS.

CouRTLEROY, house and village, was certainly
in confusion. Mimics was the centre
round which it all seemed to whirl. She
was besieged by people from far and near.
She was always so helpful herself that they
would not believe that she could not help
them. During the years which we have
allowed to slip by almost without comment,
she had become a woman, and had identified
herself with her surroundings. Owing,
she supposed, to George Hope's interview
with her uncle, her life had been made
happier by certain concessions of Searle,

VOL. II. E

who supplied her with the funds for
housekeeping, instead of Mrs. Stone, and
paid her pension quarterly. She was thus
enabled to do more for the poor, and by
clever management to appear, at least, like
a young lady.

But during the past few months the old
state of things had returned, and no funds
were forthcoming. Miss Heath and she
were seriously contemplating seeking remunerative
occupation of some sort or
other, and accepting an invitation to the
Prettymans in order to discover it. The
brunt of everything fell on Mimics, for
Miss Heath, in addition to her usual
reticence, was developing a nervous fear
of intercourse with her fellow mortals.

On the morning after her uncle and Mr.
Sellon had read her letter, Bezley appeared
at the house. He was one of her uncle's
principal tenants, and often talked to
Mimics of Searle's doings, though, he said,
not personally interested in them. He was

safe enough ; for he paid his rent regularly,
and kept friends with the bailiff.

*The bankruptcy of Unit & Co. is
announced, Miss Marmot began Bezley,
when Mimics met him in the hall. ' We
don't know what to do with Searle, for he
declares it is no affair of his, whereas weare
sure as he is as good as one of 'em. I
have wrote to Mr. Le Eoy, but what's the
use ? He don't pay no attention.'

'So have I, Mr. Bezley. Where is
Searle?' replied Mimics.

Following his wife and family to the
sea, I take it,' returned Bezley, with a
chuckle. ' They took a lot o' luggage.
But he was at home last night.'

If you please, miss, Farmer Marks is
asking for you,' here interrupted Mrs.
Stone.

What am I to do, Mr. Bezley ? I have
neither money nor power ?' asked Mimics.

It is a comfort just to see you, miss ;
because you sympathize if you can't do

e2

\;Ssa.o0.v o.^

notliiri2:. He is to be sold up tomorrow,
and he can t help himself. Times is bad,
and you can't get blood out of a stone.'

Farmer Marks came in, looking desperate,
and asking at once if Mimics had
heard from her uncle.

If we had the means, we'd go in a body
to London, and put it all before him,' he
said. ' A deputation of tenants might do
something. If you was to go, miss, and
insist on seeing the squire, you're so
persuasive like, that you'd be sure to have
your way.'

ril go to Searle and tell him that I will
go to London tomorrow, if he dares to
proceed farther in your case,' exclaimed
Mimics.

'The Lord bless you!' cried Marks.
'My wife's just out of her mind with
terror; and there's my eldest boy, vows
he'll shoot Searle if he has the chance.
Everybody's up in arms, and there's no one
to help us but you.'

Poor Mimics ! "What was she to do ?
She had energy and good will for anything,
but she was so crippled by circumstances
that she felt bound, hands and feet.

Pray sit down, Mr. Marks,' she said,
seeing that the farmer was standing in
the middle of the hall, looking hopelessly
bewildered. ' When is this sale to begin ?'

At two o'clock, and now it is ten. If
Madam Le Roy was alive, it would never
have happened ; but the squire has a heart
of stone.'

Not so bad as that, friend Marks,' put
in Bezley. * He had his good parts, and
was generous enough. I mind me when
we were boys together, and father had
Court Farm, that he came to see me everyday
when I was ill, and brought me all
sorts of presents. I'm not like to forget
that. But you and I have got the wives
of our choice, and the squire was terrible
ill-used.'

Oh, Mr. Bezley, you have taken quite

a load from my heart,' exclaimed Mimics.
If my uncle did that, I feel sure I might
make friends with him. I will go to
London if Searle will not give in.'

Mimics's animated face and resolute
manner inspired confidence even in the
melancholy Marks, who at best was of a
desponding turn of mind.

'We all say that, if you could just get
hold of the squire for half-an-hour, you'd
surely make him get rid of Searle,' he
remarked. ' But there's no time to lose.
What is to become of us ?'

Perhaps you had better go home while
I try to see Searle,' said Mimics. ' Has
my uncle much money in Mr. Unit's bank,
Mr. Bezley ?'

'Nobody knows but the bailiff, Miss
Marmont. But all of us are in for it
more or less. We trusted the Units, and
banked with them, and did our law with
them, and many of the poor trusted their
savings to them because they promised

higher interest than the post-office savings
bank, which only gives two-and-a-half percent.,
and '

That was all Searle's doing broke in
Marks. ' He persuaded my boy to invest
the hundred pounds his grandfather left
him in Units', and now that's gone. He's
sure to shoot him.'

I will go at once cried Mimics. ' I
see more people turning down the back
drive. Will you go to them, Mr. Bezley,
and tell them I will do my best both with
Mr. Searle and my uncle. I will look in
upon you on my way from Court House,
Mr. Marks. Try to keep up your spirits
for poor Mrs. Marks' and the children's
sakes.'

*A11 ruined together, thanks to that
blackguard,' ejaculated Marks, as Mimics
ran upstairs to put on her things and to
explain to Miss Heath.

She was soon on her way to Court
House, taking a cut across the fields to

avoid the villagers. She fell in with Mr.
Leste, and told him whither she was bound.
She asked him to accompany her, and he
did so, premising that she had better try
to see Searle alone, as he was shy of him.
They hurried on, and, just as they reached
a meadow at the back of Searle's house,
they saw him in his yard about to mount
his horse. Mimics literally fled through
the field, and caught him before he had
mounted. Mr. Leste called after her that
he would go on to Marks' farm.

I must speak to you, Mr. Searle,' she
said, as well as her breathless state would
let her. ' It is of no use to make an
excuse, for my business is imperative, and
concerns my uncle and yourself.'

I have no intention of making an
excuse, Miss Marmont,' he replied, 'though
I am pressed for time. Important business
calls me to Prestbury.'

I know, I know, Mr. Searle. The
Units have come to grief, and that is the

reason of all our late trouble and inconvenience.
Will you allow me to go into
the house ?'

Searle was taken aback ; but he led the
way into his business-room, through a
passage filled with boxes. Mimics perceived
that the house was in confusion.

My wife has been ill, as you know,
Miss Marmont, and my daughters are
gone with her to the sea,' said Searle,
apologetically, glancing at the packages.

Mimics thought they must need much
luggage, but said nothing. Once seated
in the business-room, she was not long in
broaching her subject.

I have come about poor Marks she
began. ' He must not be ruined. You
must stop those proceedings, Mr. Searle.'

r cannot, Miss Marmont. It is no
affair of mine. He has been in arrears
for several years, and won't pay.'

'Cant, you mean, Mr. Searle. His losses
have been great, his crosses greater. Mr.

Leste knows that be could not help himself,
and so do I.'

I am sorry for him ; but he is a helpless
fellow, and, come what will, he must
pay ; for your uncle will have the money,
and, now that Units have stopped payment,
I can't raise funds at the moment.
It is no easy matter to keep the town and
country establishments going, and a very
difficult one to make the tenants pay

up;

They complain of your increasing the
rent, Mr. Searle, and they tell me of more
executions in prospect.'

Searle's face grew dark.

They tell you everything, ma'am. It
is a pity you are not steward,' he muttered,
between his teeth.

I wish I were. Marks should not be
ruined. But I came to say that, if the
sale of his stock is allowed to come off, I
will start for London tomorrow, and represent
the matter to my uncle. He cannot

be as cruel as sou make bim out
to be.'

Searle's fist, already clenched in anger,
fell heavily, though unpremeditatedly on
the table. His face was livid, and he
trembled perceptibly. But he commanded
himself. He had, of late, had frequent
encounters with Mimics, and began to
perceive that she was asserting herself,
and had no fear of him or anyone else
when she was pleading for the poor or
oppressed.

I have never made out Mr. Le Eoy to
be cruel, ma'am,' he said, when he had
recovered himself. ' It is I who have to
bear that character, because I must raise
the wind for him. He is odd — not like
other gentlemen or — or landlords ; and,
when I say I cannot get the tenants to
pay the rent, he says — he says — distrain.'

Mimics fixed her singularly penetrating
eyes upon Searle, and felt sure he was
telling a lie. She knew, from George

Hope, that her uncle was certainly ' odd,'
that he must need great resources to live
as he did, and that ifc was quite impossible
to penetrate his proud reserve ; yet she
was convinced, in her own high-mindedness,
that her mother's brother would
never be guilty of meanness, if only he
were to know the ' rights of the wrongs '
he inflicted. Those words, the * rights of
the wrongs,' were George's, and set her
thinking how best to unravel them.

Can you put off this sale until I have
seen my uncle, Mr. Searle ?' she resumed,
while his eyes wandered furtively away
from hers.

He will not see you, Miss Marmont.'

He must ; for I shall get Mr. Pretty-man
to take me to him unannounced. Will
you stop the sale till I have seen him?
Surely that is not much to promise.'

You cannot understand, ma'am, what a
delay involves. The hour is fixed, the
bills are out, the people will assemble.

and the auctioneer arrive; and it would
be impossible to stop the sale. Indeed,
your going to London would be useless,
since the first day's sale would be over.'

I should at least open my uncle's eyes
to the state of his tenants. All the people
on the Summerlands property are allowed
to remain, and have had a large percent ^
aofe returned on their rents during the
late bad years, though Lord and Lady
Manville seldom stay there long at a time ;
and nobody ever heard of trouble among
the Monkton people. Sir Joshua gets his
rents too, and is not the most lenient of
landlords.'

Really, Miss Marmont, I am only
steward — I beg your pardon, bailiff; but
people will say steward — and am not in a
position to act as I — as I — might wish

Searle began to move uneasily : rose
from his seat, sat down again, and finally
said he was obliged to keep an appointment
at twelve o'clock, and afterwards to

be at Overton Farm, which was where the
auction was to take place. He appeared
to have forgotten that he had said he was
going to Prestbury.

I will meet you at Overton, and I hope
you may settle to stay the execution,' said
Mimics. ' Mr. Leste has just gone there.
He came here with me. He thinks it all
very cruel, and, if he had but the money,
would advance the rent himself. He has
children, and feels keenly for poor Marks
and his family. But then he is a Christian
man, and believes every word of the New
Testament. I do not know what my uncle
is ; but you — you go regularly to church,
Mr. Searle, and have also children.*

Mimics spoke these words without any
intention of adding more wounds to those
she had already inflicted. But they were
all as swords to the bailiff. She did not
actually know whether he were merely the
instrument in her uncle's hands that he
represented himself to be, or not ; but she

knew there was terrible injustice and mismanagement
somewhere, and in her straightforward
nature she wished to know where
the fault lay. She was of those who would
have righted the world if she could, and
she ' kicked against the pricks ' of her * inactive
life as she termed it. She watched
Searle grow pale and red by turns, and
finally rise and look out of the window,
which was at the side of the house, and
commanded the high-road. Mimics also
rose. In her eagerness to begin the subject
uppermost in her mind, she had not
before perceived the confusion of the room.
Ledgers, tin-boxes, parchments, filed bills,
papers were scattered everywhere, and
the apartment was generally neat.

I will not detain you now, Mr. Searle ;
but if you will come to Overton and stop
proceedings you will also stop my visit to
London,' she said.

Too late ! too late !' he replied, in a
hoarse voice. ' Who on earth is this ?' he

added, as a fly and pair suddenly pulled up
at his gate. ^ I — I — cannot see them.
Excuse me, Miss Marmont. My horse is
waiting.'

He pushed by Mimics, who followed
him into the yard, saw him mount his
horse, and then preceded him to the gate,
just as two men descended from the fly,
whom she met face to face.

CHAPTER V.

SEA ELL TASLX ABACK.

Thebes is Searle on horseback,' Mimics

heard one man say to the other, as she
approached the gate.

Had she glanced behind her, she would
have seen that Searle uec:.i\Y fell from his
horse at sight of his Visitors. She also
started back, for surely she had seen one
of them before. They were both gentlemen,
and this one. as he passed through
the gate, held it open for her. He was a
tall, thin, stately man, and, as their eyes
met for a moment, she stood hesitating
before him, instead of walking out into the
road. He also paused, for her appearance

TOL. n. F

was striking enough to arrest any man,
even a misanthropic Le E^oy. Large,
earnest, grey eyes, with long black lashes,
were turned upon him, and made him, too,
start a little ; but she soon arrested him
entirely with the words,

*You are my uncle. I am, indeed,
thankful you are come. I am Mimics
Marmont.'

She held out her hand, and he took it,
just as Searle approached, having dismounted.


*Mr. Le EoyI This is a surprise. I
hope you are well, sir. I am glad to see
you again at Fauntleroy,' stammered the
bailiff.

How d'ye do, Searle ?' was Mr. Le Eoy's
greeting, just as if they had met but yesterday.
* This is your new house, eh ?
May we be allowed to penetrate it? A
nice place enough, but not quite in keeping
with Fauntleroy.'

It is rather in confusion, sir,' replied
Searle, himself greatly confused. ' Allow
me to put up my horse.'

A man appeared opportunely, who took
the horse, while he led the way to the
front entrance. Mr. Le Roy glanced about
him. His face wore as much surprise as
so lofty a countenance could wear, and
Mimics watched him with a sudden personal
interest that she had never felt
before. She followed him, uninvited, into
the dining-room, where the mahogany furniture
alone remained. Searle apologised
for a certain lack of its usual uniformity,
as he placed seats for his unwelcome and
unexpected visitors. But, if their presence
was undesired by him, his was evidently
more so by his patron, whose features were
so compressed by some sudden access of
pain that Mimics was in the act of going
towards him when he spoke. The fact
was that he saw, for the first time, the

f2

spire of the church through a side window,
and would fain have fled, had flight now
been possible.

Mr. Sellon will enter upon the business
that brought us here,' he said, mastering
some powerful emotion, as he pointed to
the lawyer.

Searle turned a face, white as his neckcloth,
towards Mr. Sellon, who bowed.
He knew him by name well enough, and
his presence filled him with alarm. Mr.
Sellon feigned not to notice it, and said
that the news of the failures at Prestbury
had seemed so serious that he had persuaded
Mr. Le Roy to run down himself
and have a personal interview with him —
Mr. Searle, in order to save time.

^ Of course, quite right, sir,' muttered
Searle.

Not on your account, Searle ; I have
faith in you,' put in Mr. Le Roy.

But for the satisfaction of all parties
concerned, yourself included,' continued

SelloD, with a sharp look at Searle. ' Mr.
Le Roy at first intended to stop at Prest-bury,
and summon you there ; but we were
told that the people who have been ruined
by these failures thronged bank and office,
and besieged the Units so persistently that
we got a fly and came on here.'

Poor things !' ejaculated Mimics. * There
is nothing but distress everywhere. I am
sure she added, turning to her uncle, ' if
you could only see Marks and his family,
you would pity them, and stop the sale.'

^ What sale ?' he asked, returning her
gaze.

The sale of all they possess in the
world to pay the arrears of rent. Perhaps
you forget that you ordered it, as well as
others soon to follow,' she returned, rising
in her eager zeal and facing her
uncle.

Her back was towards Searle, so that,
happily, she could not see the hateful expression
of his face.

*What does she mean, Searle ?' asked
Mr. Le Eoy.

^ Miss Marmont refers to — to — what I
mentioned to you, sir, the necessity of distraining
to get — well, sir J to get the money
you require. They would not pay without

it;

Indeed, uncle, they could not. The
times are bad, and poor Marks and his
wife have both been ill ; the children are
sickly, and they have suffered immense
losses. Will you come and judge for yourself?
There is just time to save them.
It is one o'clock. The sale begins at two.'

Marks ! I do not remember the name,'
mused Le Roy.

They have only been at Overton six or
seven years. You remember the old
tenants, the Summonses, were ejected because
they could not pay. The land is ina
bad condition, and the buildings in wretched
repair. You will have the farm on
your hands if something is not done.'

While Mimics spoke, her uncle looked
hopelessly from her to Searle. She had
found her opportunity at last, and did not
mean to lose it. Searle had had his for
years, and certainly in his case he verified
the French proverb, occasion fait le larron.
She had been so long thrown on her own
meagre resources that she had grown
bold and independent ; he had so long
traded on the resources of others that he
had become cowardly and secretive. Sellon
looked on with an amused air. He
longed to clap and say, ' brava,' as Mimics
poured out her bottled-up complaints.

*Miss Marmont wishes to manatee the
property,' said Searle, with an awful
glance at her back.

So it would seem,' said Le Roy, looking
coldly at his niece. * What do you say,
Sellon?'

That you can easily judge for yourself.
How far off is this farm, Miss Marmont ?*
replied the lawyer.

Mimics turned her flushed face towards
him, and said it was less than a mile.

What if we all drive there ? You
have no objection, Mr. Le Roy?' asked
Sellon.

Overton ! It is on the Monkton Road,'
returned Mr. Le Eoj, slowly. 'No,
I have no objection,' he added, more
briskly, remembering that he would turn
his back on the church, village, and his old
home.

Indeed, he scarcely knew what he was
doing, or what was actually passing. He
was in an awful nightmare ; the past and
present weighed upon him, and he could
no more uplift the one than the other.
In his waking dream he forgot the very
bearings of the country in which he had
spent his best and happiest years, as
people are known to forget their native
language after long disuse. But he allowed
himself to be impelled by Mr. Sellon
to the Prestbury fly, and found himself

seated in it by the side of Mimics, while
Searle and Barber were interchanging the
courtesies of auld lang syne without.
Searle begged hard to be allowed to walls,
but Sellon overruled him, and he had no
escape.

You will not mind a little pressure for
ten minutes or so,' said Sellon to Mr. Le
Eoy, who did mind it, but was too much
pre-occupied to say so.

He had never before driven four in a
fly ! and in such strange company, under
such apparently awkward circumstances.
Not a word was spoken. He fixed his
eyes on the once familiar scenes through
which they drove, and Mimics, whose whole
system was perturbed by what she had
accomplished, sat wondering whether he
saw the budding beauties of the spring.
In all the orchards apple-blossoms were
bursting forth; in the cottage gardens the
polyanthus and wall-flower were beginning
to assert themselves; round about

the picturesque farms the vine, virginian
creeper, and japonica were putting forth
their orreen adornments. In the hedgerows,
primroses, celandines, and violets
were peeping forth, while above them the
hawthorn was in leaf, the blackthorn in
flower, and the ferns unfolding their
fronds. Tbe graceful larch hung out ibis
tassels in the midst of tender green foliage,
and birch, ash, and elm were beginning to
renew their youth ; while the cautious oak,
even, sent out a few leaves upon trial of
March winds. But the sun had put down
the winds, for was it not Ladj Day ?

Does he bear the birds ?' thought
Mimics.

Impossible to say. Their exultant
choruses, the lambs' innocent bleat, the
happy low of cattle, the cheerful voices of
the village children fell on his ears ; but
oh, the past ! the past !

A carriage suddenly passed them.
Mimics shrank back into her corner, for

it contained Sir Joshua and Ladj Helena

Carew; but her unconscious uncle continued
his gaze into apparent vacancy,
startled bv the proximity of his early
friends. Mimics fek convinced that they
sa and recognised him. "When they
turned from the high-road into the by-way
that led to Overton Farm, he aroused
himself, or was aroused by the recollection
that it joined Monkton. Here was the
boundary-line that Lady Helena wished to
overstep by the union of her son with
Mimics, and here poured in upon the
owner of Courtleroy a flood of memories
that the sluice-gates of years had only
served to restrain, and which now overwhelmed
him with their liberated waters.
He groaned aloud ; his nostrils worked,
his forehead was wrinkled, and he exclaimed,
' Turn back.'

Involuntarily Mimics placed her hand
on his, and whispered,

For pity's sake, think of poor Marks.'

The touch and words recalled him to
his present position, and he put his head
out of the window as if to recover himself
and avoid observation.

But he attracted it. The lane was full
of people going to the sale ; men on horseback
and on foot, who all turned round at
the sound of wheels. They were mostly
farmers and labourers from far and near,
for the stock was to be sold that first
day. Some of the older ones recognised
Mr. Le Roy, who was wonderfully little
altered, considering the lapse of time.

The squire ! I say 'tis the squire his-self
!' echoed from man to man ; and, as if
by some sudden contagion, pedestrians
-and equestrians halted, faced round, and
arrested the horses. * And that's Barber,
as sure as Tm alive,' shouted an old man,
looking up at the box-seat.

It was useless for Le Eoy to draw in
his head ; he had been recognised, and

The squire ! the squire ! Mr. Le Roy
himself !' echoed through the lane.

In another moment hats were off and
waving in the air, and a hearty shout
resounded.

Look at them ! speak to them !' cried
Mimics, standing up, in her excitement,
and laying her hand on her uncle's shoulder,
her eyes full of tears.

Miss Marmont ! God bless her ! She's
brought the squire. We shall have justice.
Down with Searle !'

Uncle, speak to them !' repeated
Mimics.

'Will you not get out?' pleaded Mr.
Sellon, half opening the fly-door.

He did get out, and Mimics followed.
But he stood hopelessly silent, as not
knowing what to say, and bewildered by
such an unexpected reception. He took
off his hat, however, and stood erect
amongst them, taller than most. Farmer

Bezley was there, on horseback. He
dismounted and approached.

Welcome home, sir. Miss Marmont
won't want to go to London now,' he said.
My father was at Court Farm when you
left us, and now I am its tenant. Perhaps
you remember Tom Bezley that you used
to condescend to play with.'

Pride, reserve, anger, gave way for a
moment, and the squire held out his hand
to his old playmate. That delicate member
had not been grasped so tightly for
many a year ; the valuable ring on its
little finger inflicted pain on its next
neighbour. Emboldened by this sight,
several elderly men came forward, and,
with words of welcome, offered their
hands. Le Roy gave his.

'We have missed you sore, sir,' said
one. ' The place hasn't been the same
since Madam Le Eoy left us,' said another.
^1 hope you are come back for good,' said
a third.

Shall we walk on ? We may be too
late,' said Mimics.

They proceeded, the centre of the group,
the fly following ; Sellon keeping watch
on Searle. Mimics was on one side of her
uncle, Bezley on the other.

What does all this mean ?' asked Mr.
Le Roy, who looked about him as a criminal
might, escorted by two policemen, and
meditating escape.

'Ask him, sir — your bailiff and confidant,'
replied Bezley, pointing back to
the fly.

Searle, like his master, would doubtless
have escaped if he could ; but, finding that
impossible, he was informing the lawyer
of the incessant demands made upon him
for money by Mr. Le Eoy, and the difficulty
of meeting them, when tenants did
not pay. Mr. Sellon acknowledged the
truth of this, and proceeded to make inquiries
concerning the cause of the failure
of the Units. He understood it was

speculation, but Searle professed ignorance.


We must look into the affairs together
to-morrow said Sellon. ' I shall stay till
the evening, when, I believe, Mr. Le Roy
purposes to return to London. You will
go with me to Prestbury in the morning.
This afternoon we shall have work at
Courtleroy. You alone know how much
Mr. Le Roy is likely to lose.'

'A trifle — a mere trifle. His money
could never lie idle ; for he wanted it as
soon as it came to hand,' replied Searle,
putting his head out of the fly window, as
if to avoid further inquiries.

As he did so, a shot whizzed past him.
He drew back, pale and terrified. Mr.
Sellon heard the report, and asked whence
it could come.

^ That fool of a — a — Tompkins — Sir
Joshua's — under-keeper — I — I wager — or
or — young Master Carew,' stammered
Searle, scarcely able to articulate ; pressing

into the corner of the fly, and drawing
up the sash.

The shot had startled the crowd in advance,
just turning into the road that led
across a field to the farm. Mr. Le Eoy
grew as white as his bailiff. Were they
going to shoot him in revenge for his long
absenteeism ? But he was personally reassured
by Mimics's involuntary words to
Farmer Bezley.

Searle is in the fly. Do you remember
what Farmer Marks said this morning ?'

Bezley gave her a warning look, and
turned back towards the fly. He walked by
its side, watching Searle cowering within.

What did Farmer Marks say ?' asked
Mr. Le Eoy.

That Searle's life has been threatened
replied Mimics.

Why ?'

You will understand directly. See I
the sale has begun. Stop it, uncle, for
Christ's dear sake.'

VOL. II. G

CHAPTER VL

ABOUSZ: -I LAST.

• F: 3 God's sake, sir, have pity upon hb,'
5 need through the air, in response to

- -f ' Here's the squire.' In another
L^-j'^z- roman was on her knees at
Mr. Le It,:-j s feet; her hands clasped, her
voice c noted with sobs. He looked 
: jlimica, who entreated the
-iut to rise, and proposed that they
should go into the house.

Stop the sale meanwhile,' she whispered
to him.

I do not understand this, but I request
that proceedings be stayed while I make
inquiries. I am Mr. Le Foy he said, to
the auctioneer.

g2

His manner was stately, his voice
assured.

Three cheers for the squire ; he become
whuome/ cried a by-stander, and
farmstead and meadows re-echoed to a
hip, hip, hip hurrah,' that stunned the
polite ears of him in whose honour they
arose.

He hastened after Mimics, who was
supporting Mrs. Marks into the house ;
while the hammer dropped from the hand
of the astonished auctioneer.

If Mr. Le Eoy still possessed human
feelings, they were aroused by the sight
that met his eyes. Poor Marks was seated
on the settle in his once comfortable, but
now dismantled hall, bowed down with
grief. Half-a-dozen children were clinging
to him, while their tender pastor, Mr.
Leste, was standing over him, trying to
comfort him. Barbara was also there, a
baby in her arms.

What is to become of us ? Where

shall we go ?' he was groaning, as Mr. Le
Eoy entered.

'Look up, my friend. The Lord is a
stronghold in the day of trouble,' replied
Mr. Leste, in the words of the prophet
Joel.

The Lord have mercy upon us, since
man won't,' returned poor Marks ; then,
perceiving Mimics, he jumped up, exclaiming,
' Oh, Miss Marmont, dear miss : are
you going to London to see the squire ?'

He is here, Marks,' replied Mimics,
quietly.

He has stopped the sale,' added the wife,
falling on his neck, and fainting.

The dawn of hope on despair had overpowered
her, who had been, hitherto, the
mainstay of the family. All, with the
exception of Le Eoy, gathered round her,
the husband and children believing her
dead. Mimics and Barbara laid her on
the floor, asking for wine, but there was
none. Mr. Leste fetched some water, and

that, together with the cry of her infant
placed hastily by Barbara in its cradle,
restored her to consciousness.

Where is he ? The squire ?' were her
first words.

Here,' said Mimics, forcing her uncle
forward.

Never had a proud, reserved, unforgiving
man been so situated before.
He winced as he stood in the midst of this
group, the observed of all. Had he really
been the unconscious cause of so much
misery ? Certainly, if Marks spoke the
truth.

It is no fault of mine, sir, that the rent
has not been paid. I have done my best,
working early and late. If you will give
me time, even now, I will pay it by degrees,'
he began, his sickly face flushing with painful
eagerness.

Who is that gentleman ?' whispered Le
Roy to Mimics, indicating Mr. Leste, and
apparently ignoring the plaint.

Has he no feeling ?' she thought, her
own soul absorbed in the farmer's troubles ;
then aloud, ^ It is Mr. Leste, our clergyman,
who should be our vicar.'

He walked towards Mr. Leste, pushing
through the flock of children and past
Barbara.

Might I speak to you alone ? I am
utterly confused by what I hear and see
he said.

'May we go into the parlour, Mrs.
Marks ?' asked Mr. Leste.

Yes, sir, but it's all in a muddle, ready
for the sale,' she replied, making an effort
to rise, as if to prepare the room for such
distinguished company.

Never mind. I know the way,' said
Mr. Leste, kindly.

He took Mr. Le Roy into a pretty room,
looking through a stone-framed window
into a garden, full of early flowers. Some
sudden memory overcame the squire, who,
turning his back on the parson, stood in

the embrasure of the window gazing at
the distant landscape of meads and trees.
There was a pond at the bottom of the
kitchen-garden on one side, and an orchard
on the other. It was a sweet, rural spot,
of which any owner might be proud ; but
it was bounded in the distance by Monkton,
and the scene recalled the past.

Mr. Le Eoy looked stern and pale when
he turned from it and faced Mr. Leste.

Might I ask you to be so good as to
explain the state of affairs here and elsewhere,'
he said, seating himself in the
window. 'As briefly as possible, if you
please.'

Mr. Leste sat down opposite him. The
furniture was in confusion and ticketed
for the sale ; the room looked desolate and
mournful. Mr. Leste knew that his chance
companion was patron of the living of
which he was curate, and that the present
incumbent was old and in failing health ;
an absentee, in short, like Le Koy himself.

He knew, also, that bis parishioners would
ask that he should succeed him, and he
desired nothing better. Must he tell the
truth, and probably lose his one chance of
improving the temporal condition of his
large family ? A silent prayer was the
answer to this silent question.

I will be as brief as I can,' he began,
fixing his earnest eyes on Mr. Le Roy ;
indeed, the whole may be summed up in
the one word, absenteeism. Everything
amiss in the parish of Courtleroy has been
done in your name, and, ostensibly, with
your authority. 1 greatly fear that, when
you look into your affairs yourself, you
will find them complicated, if not irretrievably
entangled. As a looker-on, and a
hearer of all the complaints in the parish,
I have striven to discover the source of the
evils ; but not having been here when Mrs.
Le Roy finally left, and never having had
the pleasure of your acquaintance, I found
it impossible to trace it.'

What are the evils ?' asked Le Roy,
sternly.

Tenements falling into decay, ill-drained
land, ejectments ; tyranny, in short.'

And the cause ?'

That is known only to yourself and
your bailiff, humanly speaking; but, to a
still higher Being, speaking as a Christian
believer.'

Le Eoy winced, and the nostrils moved
ominously.

^ And these failures at Prestbury ?'
'It is rumoured that you will find yourself
deeply involved in them. 1 hope not,
for the sake of your numerous dependents,
as well as your own.'

I trusted Searle implicitly. What of him ?'
He covers himself entirely with your

cloak, Mr. Le Roy. Your niece, Miss
Marmont, can give you more information
than I can on this head. She is intensely
interested in your tenants, and has made a
study of the property.'

With a view to future heirship ?' asked
Le Roy, sarcastically.

She is far too high-minded to think of
that,' replied Mr. Leste. * She has sought
and found work amongst her surroundings,
and is much beloved.'

Just as Mr. Leste spoke these words,
Mimics entered.

They are mobbing Searle,' she said,
with agitation. ' They have found out
that he is in the fly, and if you don't stop
them they will kill him. He has already
been fired at. Will you go to them, Mr.
Leste?'

The curate hurried off.

'Uncle,' continued Mimics, 'no one but
you can stop this riot. The crowd that
came for the auction are besieging the fly,
and the gentleman who accompanied you is
trying to keep them at bay by promises in
your name. But they will only believe
you. I will go with you. They all know
me.'

The Le Roy spirit was aroused at last.
Be hastened after Mimics, and, threading
the crowds outside the house, reached the
beleaguered fly. Searle was crouching
down out of sight, Sellon was addressing
the people from window to window, and
Mr. Leste was striving to calm them. As
may be imagined, Searle had not intended
to be there, and had not been expected.
Again a cry of * the squire ' arose, and
everyone made way for him and Mimics.
He beckoned to the alarmed Barber, who
was rejoiced to get off the box, and
mounted to his place. Waving his hand,
he commanded instantaneous silence.
Voice and words came to him unexpectedly.
He had imagined that he had nearly
lost them.

If you will all disperse quietly, I will
look into this,' he began. ^ I have stopped
the execution, therefore there will be
no sale at Overton to-day at least. I will
see into your grievances with Mr. Searle,'

a hiss — 'and — and redress them, if I can.'
'Too late,' from a voice. ' Never too late

from another.

Mr. Le Roj paused, looking angered

and cowed. He had never before been

subjected to contradiction.

Listen. "What would sou have more ?'
remonstrated Mr. Leste, who was striving
to quiet the most excited.

Our savings from Units' bank — our

money invested by Searle — our ' from

the bystanders, interrupted by a movement
from Le Eoy.

To-morrow. Come to me tomorrow,'
he said, waving his hand. ' Get into the
fly, Barber,' he added to his valet, who was
standing near the wheel.

Mimics was behind, with one hand on
the window. She knew that, so long as
she stood there, no harm would happen
to Searle. She heard her uncle tell the
driver to turn his horses, and she hastily
got into the fly.

Have patience. All will be well now,'
she said to those nearest to her, as Barber
also entered.

Three cheers for Miss Marmot came
from somebody — it was Bezley — and the
current of opinion turned. ' Miss Mar-mont
! Miss Marmont !' reached the ears of
Le Eoj, as he sat down on the box-seat at
the driver's side.

To Courtleroy,' he whispered, for he
was really in mortal terror, feeling that
so long as Searle was with him he was not
safe.

Mr. Leste came towards him.

May I assure Marks that you will give
him time. He will not be satisfied without
a direct message,' he said.

The farmer was at his heels.

He shall not be molested again, provided
I am allowed to get safely out of
this disagreeable encounter,' replied Le
Eoy.

Marks heard, and raised his hat. Mr.

Le Roy took off his, whether to the farmer
or the clergyman, he scarcely knew; but
the watchful crowd saw it, and uncovered
also, as the patient and wearied horses set
off at a trot. Mimics waved her handkerchief
and nodded from one window;
Sellon looked out of the other, and so they
covered the retreat of the offending Searle.

Mr. Le Roy glanced back at the farm,
and wondered what was to come next.
Excitement had for the moment overpowered
those buried feelings of his, and
he looked with a sort of admiration on the
pleasant scene he was leaving. Overton
was a picturesque house, built in the now
almost obsolete style of woodwork and
plaster. The black framework, with its
white interstices, showed well among their
setting of elms and surroundings of meadows,
while the garden, orchard, and pond
seemed to indicate the well-to-do farmer.

The sight of the assembled people and
the recollection of the interrupted sale and

troubled family, half-opened the eye of the
sleepy conscience of the owner, who turned
his back upon his property with a slight
touch of remorse.

Drive as fast as you can he said, and
he was thankful to be once more upon the
high-road.

When they reached Searle's house, that
worthy requested to be put down ; but
Mr. Sellon overruled his plea that he had
an appointment at Prestbury, by quietly
informing him that he must first attend to
business at Courtleroy.

It is all on Mr. Le Roy's account,' said
Searle, who had recovered his natural
effrontery. ' I have had to bear the
burden of his demands. Mr. Barber must
have some idea of what they have been.'

Whatever idea Barber had, he was wise
enough to hold his tongue. Besides, he,
like his master, was intent on the familiar
scenes through which they drove.

Mr. Le Roy had some difficulty in keeping

his seat, old memories crowded so
thickly upon him, Not that he was recognized.
He passed the village, by the
church and vicarage, and even went
through his own lodge-gates, as a stranger.
The lodge appeared to him dilapidated,
the drive grass-grown, but he scarcely
realised these facts. He was in a dream.
Still even waking somnolency could not
deaden his senses to the fact that Courteney,
as he approached it, looked shabby.

When they pulled up at the door, no
servants awaited them ; the cawing of the
rooks was his only welcome home. Although
he knew that he was not expected,
and that his long absence had been voluntary,
he felt chilled by this non-reception.
No obsequious domestics to receive him as
in London ; no affectionate mother and
sister, as formerly, here at Courtleroy —
nothing but silence and decay. These
were his reflections as he looked at his
closed doors.

VOL. II. H

But in another moment a graceful figure
stood beneath the portico, and the doors
were thrown open, revealing the hall as
it used to be, with a bright fire, and the
other old accessories. It might have been
his sister, for Mimics resembled that dead
playmate and friend. Barber also got out
of the fly, and helped his master to
descend from his elevated position.

I am so glad, so thankful !' said Mimics,
holding out both hands, as he slowly
advanced to the portico.

This involuntary act, and the tears that
shone in her clear eyes, overmastered his
pride, and he allowed himself to be led
into the hall. Miss Heath was there, who
also recalled the past. She approached
him with a sort of timid astonishment
which was too meekly unobtrusive to oppress
him. She muttered a few words of
welcome, touched his limp fingers, and, at
an aside from Mimics, went to inform the
housekeeper of the wonderful arrival.

Meanwhile, Searle, at the instigation of
Mr. Sellon, had directed the driver to
take the fly round to the yard ; and lawyer
and bailiff did not dismount at the principal
entrance. The former had his plans,
and kept to them. Barber also went
round to the servants' entrance, walking
as if afraid to move on, and uplifting
hands and eyes, while he muttered concerning
the changes he saw on all sides.

Thus Mr. Le Roy and Mimics were left
alone. The former went to the fire, and
stood erect, his back to Mimics. She also
remained standing, her hand on the carved
oak table in the centre of the saloon.
There was a long silence, which he broke
at length.

What is your dinner-hour ?' he said,
turning round and facing Mimics.

Was he startled by her attitude, her
beauty, or the resemblance to her mother :
He looked at her a moment, sat down,
leant his elbows on the arms of the 



fashioned oaken-chair, and covered his face
with his hands. She moved towards him,
and stood at his side.

Dear uncle, I am so sorry for you,' she
whispered, not knowing what best to door
say.

But he brooked no sympathy.

^ Thank you,' he said, apathetically, letting
his hands fall, turning to the fire, and
taking up the poker. * Will you kindly
tell the housekeeper — I beg your pardon.
Barber will communicate with her. Where
is Barber?'

He rang the bell furiously, and Mimics,
fearful of the effect their one female attendant
might have on him, went in search
of the valet.

CHAPTER VII.

DRIVEN TO BAT.

Barber looked sadly crest-fallen when lie
answered Mr. Le Eoy's summons. He
received his orders like a mute. He was
told to see that everything was prepared
for the autocrat — dinner, his room, and
sundry other matters.

I will do my best, sir,' he said at last.
But Mr. Sellon would be glad to see you
at once. Searle is anxious to be off.'

Ask them to come here, and send refreshments
for Mr. Sellon and me.'

How can I go through with it ?' mused
Le Eoy. ^ This place will kill me. I wish
I had read the letters, and attended more

to George Hope. But Searle must be
honest

Mr. Sellon came in alone. He besran
upon business at once.

I find that all your papers are either at
Mr. Searle's house, or with the Prestburj
firm he said. ' I propose to return with
him, and look into the affairs to-night.
To-morrow morning, we can all three proceed
to Prestbury, and see after the Units.
I have asked Mr. Searle to give me a bed,
as your establishment here is not — well —
not quite equal to your London one, and
Miss Marmont is not accustomed to chance
visitors. I fear Searle is a scoundrel ; and
we must not lose sight of him for a moment.
I have left him under your man's
special care at present, lest he escape us.
The scene at the farm was ominous, and
I think you must be prepared for the
worst, since it is impossible to say what
excesses he may have been guilty of in
your name. Of course I do not know

what yoa have actually ordered and approved
of; but it seenis scarcely probable
that you can have willingly let your property
go to rack and ruin.'

'I trusted Searle — and — I trust Lira
still !' said Mr. Le Roy, coldly and majestically.


We shall discover tomorrow whether
your confidence has been misplaced or not.
To-day you can remain in happy ignorance.
I had no idea that you had been living in
the dark for the best part of twenty years.
The little I have gathered from Miss Mar-mont
proves that a system of extortion
and neglect has been carried on here
during that period on the plea that
money must be secured for Mr. Le Eoy's
needs at all costs. Excuse my speaking
plainly, but you must face it at
last.'

I shall return to town tomorrow, and
leave the affair between you and Searle
returned Mr. Le Roy.

'We shall see added Sellon, significantly.


I have ordered — dinner — you will stay?'
asked Le Roy, pausing long and doubtfully
on the name of the proffered repast.

No, thank you. I dare not leave the
lion's provider, alias the jackal, Searle.
He will hunt up food for me, I daresay,
knowing that he is in my power, in the
same way that he cannot refuse to find mea
lair. I wish you a good appetite and a
good night's rest.'

Mr. Le Eoy was offended at Sellon's
ironical tone, scarcely understanding that
the lawyer was worked up into a state of
indignation at what he saw and heard. He
rose, however, and opened for him the
door which led into the passage.

You know your way to — to — the library ;
the business-room — the — where is Searle ?'
he asked, with affected indifference.

Barber appeared, his lugubrious face
longer and more melancholy than ever.

^ Those rooms are no longer habitable,
sir ; but Mr. Searle won't wait. He is off
by the path across the park. There he is,
sir. You will catch him if you make
haste,' he added to Sellon.

^ Send my portmanteau in the fly,' cried
Sellon, and rushed out of the hall-door.

Mr. Le Roy looked after him with some
show of interest, but when be saw him
overtake Searle he turned from the window.
In the centre of the room he saw an elderly
woman, leaning on a stick. He made
a sort of bow — for with all his faults he
was a gentleman — but did not recognise
hier.

I am right glad to welcome you home
again, master,' she said, with an attempt at
a curtsey. ^ I'm thankful to a' lived to see
this day. You don't remember me, sir,
and no wonder, for I'm near seventy now,
and when you saw me last I wasn't much
over — I beg your pardon, sir, I didn't
mean to speak of that time ; indeed, I made

a solemn vow not, but rheumatism do make
one so forgetful !'

Mrs. Stone ! I beg your pardon,' said
Le Roy, going towards her, and shaking
hands with her, as if some sudden memory
impelled him.

He had never so honoured her before,
and the good woman's stick slipped, and
the rheumatic hip gave way in her attempt
at a second curtsey, so that she nearly fell.
He was obliged to support hei', and the
kind act brought tears to her eyes. He
helped her to a seat near the table, seeing
that she had difficulty in standing.

Thank you kindly, sir. The doctor
says my rheumatism's crowning, and sure
enough, like an old crow 1 am. But the
offices are damp, and the rain comes into
my bed-room. There now ! I come to ask
about dinner, and I'm a-talking of myself
instead. I'm afraid, sir, that we're not
prepared as we ought to be, seeing you
were not expected ; but if you'll be so good

as to make a 'high tea with the ladies tonight
we'll manage better tomorrow.
Miss Marmont says we can lay it here,
sir, instead of in the school-room '

Why not in the dining-room ?' interrupted
Mr. Le Roy.

Well, sir, it's damp, and there's no
fire ; and, if I may make so bold, this
'all is more comfortable. Miss Marmont
has made a porter to draw right across
the windows ; so it's the 'attest place in
the winter, and, as you may remember,
sir, the coolest in summer. There now !
I'm forgetting again.'

He remembered but too well.

Settle it as you will ; only let me have
something to eat and drink,' he said,
between irritation and a sort of desire
not to be exacting under the circumstance.


Yes, sir. There are spring chickens,
and early vegetables, and blancmange, and
tea or coffee, or both '

•VTine, if you please. I bate tea and
coSee with meat.'

Tell, sir, the ladies are teetotallers —
I mean, they haven't taken the pledge —
bur they don't take wine ; so they don't
chance to have any just now. There's
good cider, sir; but Mr. Searle stopped
oar beer.'

Le Roy's face suddenly assumed its most
portentous expression. Stone recollected
it, and rose with difficulty. She knew
that she had said something to annoy him.

I'll do my very best, sir. It shall be
served in half-ans hour,' she added, humbly.

Send Barber,' he ordered, as she hobbled
out.

But, instead of Barber, in came the old
coachman and gardener. * Hobbled ' would
have been the word to use aorain, only
repetitions in writing are to be avoided.

'Welcome home, sir. Thank God that
you have come.' was the involuntary cry
Ci both, as Le Rov. who was standing

Trben they entered, made a duty of necessity,
and once more held out that limp,
white hand of his.

'Lord bless us I You saint so young as
you was. sir, no more than Grant and me
cried Gandy, the gardener. 'Not but that
you be as fine a gentleman as when you
went away, a-nigh twenty year ago. I
hope as the Brussels-sprouts and aulis
please you. I does my best to
keep up the kitchen-garden, and Miss
Marmont, she's as fond of flowers as
madam was, and works like a labourer,
'Twill be a sight for tou. master, must
come from Lunnon, to see her crocuses,
and anemones, and all the spring flowers
as forrard as they can be. And no thanks
to anybody but her. Searle, he don't pay a
penny towards the garden.'

If you please, sir, the fly-driver says
he 'ave baited his horses, and would be
thankful to go,' put in Grant, in a voice
so querulous that his master looked at

him inquiringly. ' He is waiting for his
money.'

Pay him, Grant,' replied the wearied
Le Roy.

I haven't the money, sir, or I would
have done it. My wages are in arrears ;
but Searle says — and I daresay he speaks
the truth — that I'm past work, and not
worth my feed, like poor old Shock. He's
alive still, sir, thanks to Miss Marmont,
who coddles him like a child. And she
can groom him, and harness and saddle
him, and drive him a main deal better
than I can. But for her, I should be in
the workhouse. She won't let me go, and
argues with Searle that, after forty years'
service, I'm worth my keep.'

She is right,' said Le Roy, the nostril
working vigorously, and the hand so nervous
that a sovereign he had taken from
his pocket fell to the ground.

The old man stooped to pick it up, but
sovereigns evade rheumatic backs and

horny bands ; so Mr. Le Eoy was compelled
to bend his own stiff back to the
rescue.

Pay the man what he asks, Grant; I
shall see you both to-morrow he said,
and there was an almost imperceptible
inflection in his measured voice.

They departed, and he threw himself
into a high-backed, cushioned chair, which
he drew close to the fire, behind a tall
screen. His feet on the fender, his arms
on the elbowed chair, he resumed a trick
of his youth which he had believed cured
he began to bite his polished, acorn-shaped
nails. Therewith he began to
think. As a rule, he never thought. He
read, he listened, he looked upon the
world, he amused himself ; all to banish
thought. Now that forsaken friend returned
to him uncalled, and would not be
dismissed. It was the three old servants
that brought him back.

In former days there had been a stately

housekeeper, but she had accompanied his
mother to London. Stone had been cook,
and was left in charge when the house was
under embellishment. There had also
been a head-gardener — where was he ?
Gandy was under-gardener in the old
days. But Grant had always been coachman,
and remained as such after the fatal
day that decided his own career.

Unconsciously he began to reckon up
their ages, and compare them with his
own. Stone and Grant were old people ;
there was no doubt of that, but Gandy was
not old. He remembered him in the
gardens as a young man, not so very
much older than himself. And yet, how
bent he was ! Of course this was caused
by stooping and exposure to the weather,
since he, Le E-oy, was comparatively young.
Gaudy's words, you saint so young as
you was, sir,' had wounded his self-love ;
for he hated, of all things, the idea of
growing old, and no one had ever before

ventured to hint at such a possibility.
How old was he ? Not much over fifty.
In the prime of life, and everybody asserted
that he looked about thirty. He might
live to be a hundred — but was that desirable?
He had often considered this
problem, not in the spirit of the * Is life
worth living?' pessimist, for he enjoyed
his easy existence, but with a feeble inquiry
concerning the hereafter. However, he
always put that from him.

Now his mind was too busy with the
present to consider the future. From his
three old servants it reverted to Searle, to
Mimics, to the scenes of the afternoon,
and to his possessions. Why had he been
induced to come to Courtleroy, and subject
himself to excitement, which always interfered
with his digestion ? Searle was
honest, if misguided, he was sure of that.
Yet why all these demonstrations against
him ?

Here his thoughts were stranded, and

VOL. II. I

he fell into a maze of perplexity. Strange
to say, that ' crossing in love ' of which
everyone else was thinking never once
occurred to him. It had been hammered
out of his brain by this later ' crossing
just as ' one nail knocks out another

While he was thus musing and biting
his nails, he was unconscious of what was
passing near him. Indeed, he gradually
fell into a doze, and, being hidden by the
high screen, he was as in a separate
establishment. Mimics, Barber, Jane, the
rough young housemaid, and even Miss
Heath crept stealthily in and out, laying
the big, round oaken table. As to Barber,
his finger was continually on his lips,
with a ^ Hush ! he sleeps,' and Jane was
frightened to death at him. How they
managed to bring china, glass, and plate
forth from their long seclusion ; to wash,
dust, furbish up the same ; to gather spring
flowers, and finally to arrange all on table
and dumb waiter, none of them could tell.

But when it was accomplished, even Barber,
contemplating it from a distance with
folded arms, declared that it would do.
Mimics had been at work ever since her
return, and she, during her desultory life,
having studied Courtleroy within and
without, knew where to find most things.

Barber, with a solemn grandeur far
exceeding his master's, declared his intention
of ^ waiting,' since

Mr. Le Roy would never endure that
young woman,' he said to Miss Heath,
pointing to Jane. He knew Miss Heath,
and confided in her rather than in Mimics.
He can't bear a sound, he is that nervous
and particular,' he whispered.

'I remember,' returned Miss Heath,
who was far more nervous than he.

Happily Mimics did not know what
nerves meant, and overruled Miss Heath's
request to absent herself.

I would rather not be tete-astute with
him this first day, and, as we begin, so we

i2

must go OD,' she said, with shrewd discrimination.


'But my dress — and yours, Mimics?'
suggested Miss Heath.

1 had forgotten that. 'We are both
neat, and must apologize. He lives alone
and cannot know much about it.'

He is in the habit of dining with peers
and peeresses,' put in the magnificent
Barber.

*We are all peers here, Barber,' laughed
Mimics, for this conversation took place
outside the hall.

It was between seven and eight o'clock,
when all was ready. The room looked
delightfully comfortable. The ' porter,' as
Stone called it, was drawn across door and
windows — a bright lamp stood on the
dumb waiter, and candles on the table —
the tea and coffee services looked cheerful
and Mimics inwardly prayed that Stone's
assurance that the ' chickens were done to
a turn ' might prove true.

Dinner is served, sir,' said Barber, behind
the screen.

Mr. Le Roy started up with an exclamation,
and an angry

'I am not dressed.'

Neither are we, uncle,' said Mimics,
presenting herself. ' "We did not like to
disturb you, and we thought you would
kindly excuse our high tea and country
ways.'

There was a natural grace and dignity
about Mimics irresistible even to her uncle.
She was dressed in what is called a
peacock-blue serge, with lace collar and
ruffles, and had a bunch of 
in her bodice. She was never seen
without flowers.

Esthetic!' murmured her uncle ; and
Barber knew that the first bridge was
passed.

Miss Heath was always well dressed,
and always looked a lady, so Le Roy's
nerves were not shattered at a blow.

Mimics at the tea-table, and the others on
either side, precluded formality. Fortunately
Barber carved, so Le E,oy was not
scandalized, or Miss Heath paralyzed.
Indeed, Le Eoy was so vulgarly hungry
that he forgot the paucity of the repast in
that appetite which seemed to * come with
eating ;' and, to Barber's amazement, he declared
he had not eaten such chickens for
years. He even drank coffee with some
enthusiasm, and behaved himself generally
so much like an invited guest that
Mimics thought she might like him in time.

There was not much said during the
repast, but, when it was over, Mimics
asked if he would like to be alone, adding
that his room was ready.

^ I have two or three questions that I
wish to ask you,' he replied, resuming the
cold, formal manner.

Miss Heath rose immediately, and with
a * good-night, Mr. Le E-oy,' left uncle and
niece together.

CHAPTER Vii

AN Out-and-out VILLAIN.'

Can we not go into the drawing-room or
library ?' asked Mr. Le Roy of Mimics, when
Miss Heath had left them.

There is no fire, and the rooms are not
not exactly ready,' replied Mimics.

^ Will you come with me into them, at
least ?' he returned.

She assented, glad to get the inspection
over by candle-light. She rang, and the
bell was answered by Barber. She begged
him to see that the table was cleared, while
he gravely assured his master that his
room was ready, but not what he was
accustomed to.'

Mimics took a candle, and led the way
into the drawing-room. Her uncle shivered
as he stood inside the door, and glanced
round. It was in nauch the same condition
as when Mimics first saw it ; for
she and Miss Heath had done their best
to have occasional fires in it, and to keep
it arranged in some sort of state, though
they had never occupied it. But the damp
was there still, and walls and furniture
were affected by it.

That will do,' cried Le Roy, hurrying
back to the hall.

They crossed it to reach the large diningroom,
which looked still more deplorable.
There was mildew on the faces of the pictured
Le Boys of old times, and even the
portraits of his parents were suffering
from the cruel neglect of their only son.
He paused before them and frowned.

I have often tried to wash them, but it
will not come off,' remarked Mimics, apologetically.


A flush actually mounted to bis pale
face. Was he beginning to feel shame, or
was he only angry that others had neglected
what he had ignored? Again he shuddered,
and no wonder; for the apartment
felt like some subterranean catacomb ; the
portraits being the buried skeletons.

Shall we leave the library till tomorrow
?' asked Mimics, with a ring of
sympathy in her voice.

'No, I wish to see it,' he replied,
frigidly.

This was, truly, a melancholy place, for
damp and worms had taken possession of
the books, and not all Mimics's endeavours
could eject them.

This used to be a pleasant room,' he
muttered, thinking of the luxurious library
he had left behind him. 'Young Hope
said you were a reader.'

Yes, I read and air the books, and dry
them by the fire, as 1 turn over the
pages ', but Mr. Leste says nothing but constant

fires here will avail replied Mimics*

Then why are they not lighted ?'

You must ask Searle.'

Ask Searle ! is he the lord of the
manor ?'

The tenants say he is. But shall we
go back to the hall?'

Mimics felt a sudden pity for her uncle.
Something had affected him, for there was
an instantaneous change in his manner.
He gazed into the furthest corner of the
room as if he saw a ghost. It was merely
a memory of the past, and his lost love
seemed to stand there for the moment,
fair to see, as he had seen her shortly
before the intended marriage. Mimics
returned to the hall; he followed. The
indefatigable Barber had made up a splendid
fire, replaced various books on the
table, and drawn two chairs at convenient
distances from the hearth. Here the
antlers, old armour, escutcheons, and torn
flags of generations of Le Eoys looked as

they used to do, and Mimics's feminine art
bad supplied what was wanting to make
the large room habitable. The ghost had
vanished, and Le Roy sat down with a
sigh of relief, pointing to the opposite
chair for Mimics. They sat awhile in
silence, then he bade her tell him all she
knew of Searle.

What a task for a young girl ! How
could she execute it ? She began by enforcing
the fact that everything done by
the bailiff was done in Le Roy's name, and
by his authority, and that no one knew
who was to blame when people cried for
redress and obtained none.

As Mimics's sympathies were always
with the poor and oppressed, a natural
indisposition to accuse Searle vanished as
she proceeded, and she gave the history of
her residence at Courtleroy with animation
and naivete. She began at the beginning,
and Mr. Le Roy grew so interested that
he actually leaned forward to listen — a

position some people declared impossible
to him on account of his stiff back.

It is not necessary to recapitulate Searle's
shortcomings, but it was evident to Mimics
that they were his own, and not her
uncle's. His occasional exclamations of
annoyance convinced her of that. The
house had been left to take care of itself ;
the servants had been ill-paid ; she and
Miss Heath had been grudgingly supplied
with food and money, the poor neglected,
the tenants badgered and oppressed, and
all for some end besides the principal one
of obtaining funds to supply her uncle's
lavish expenditure.

Of course I required money, but I knew
nothing of all this,' he volunteered.

And no one here knew what Searle
meant by curtailing our expenses, and so
crippling us that Miss Heath and I think
of seeking situations. It was better during
the three years that I received my pension
from government; but that ceases

now that I have finished my education.'

Mimics had naturally a satirical turn,
and this touch of sarcasm slipped out in
spite of her desire to keep to bare narrative.

'Pension? Surely that was paid regularly
to Miss Heath.'

*Only the last few years. I was told to
inquire about it, and Searle informed me
that it had not been claimed, but that he
would see into it. He did so.'

This must be investigated. He must
give an account. There must be a mistakes

Le Roy was roused into something like
energy. Here was a clear defalcation,
since the pension, at least, had not been
sacrificed to his demands for money. But
he did not choose to allow his niece to
suppose that he acknowledged himself
victimized, or his trust in Searle misplaced.

Had you allowed me to write to you, I
could have enlightened you on many points
continued Mimics, who, in her zeal for
justice, forgot discretion.

Thank you. Letters weary me,' replied
her uncle, relapsing into his usual
manner. ^ I fear I am keeping you up.
What time do you breakfast?'

Generally at eight ; but we will have it
when you like.'

'You breakfast here?'

No, in the schoolroom ; but I will order
it here.'

Pray do not. I will arrange for mine
with Barber. I am not an early riser, and
he knows my ways.'

This was a relief to both ; yet Mimics
was annoyed. She wished to be a comfort
and help to her uncle, and felt repulsed.
However, she would not be repressed as
well, but added, as she rose from her seat,

I wish I could be of use to you, uncle.
I think I could if you would let me. Goodnight.'


She had a low and somewhat pathetic
voice, and the tone and words touched Le

Roj. He rose also, and took the hand
she held out to him. Again a slight flush
tinged his cheek. He was not quite so
apathetic as he seemed, and kinship is
kinship after all. Besides, she was so
like her mother, and he had loved his
sister once upon a time, before the blight
of that great disappointment fell on his
life. He secretly admired the beauty,
frankness, and truthfulness of the girl
who stood before him, her liquid eyes
fixed kindly upon him, as if she longed
for the love of one who was her true kith
and kin. It was long since he had seen
so sweet and fresh a country girl, yet he
felt, cynic as he was, that he could put no
positive faith in her. Had he not loved
just such another specimen of humanity,
and had she not deceived him ?

'Good-night, Mimics,' he said, looking
down upon the graceful head, and into
those eyes upturned to his.

^ God bless you, uncle,' she returned, and
hastened from the room, thankful that he
had called her by her name.

God bless you !' the words rang in his
ears. He looked after her astonished.
Was she one of the religious enthusiasts of
the age, who went about trying to convert
their elders by texts and tracts ? No, she
wore neither conventual veil nor hallelujah
bonnet. No one had bade him be divinely
blessed since his mother died ; and now, a
mere child, for as such he looked upon her,
had invoked a blessing on his head ! He
hated cant, yet this seemed real. However,
he would not believe in it, but took
the poker, split up a piece of coal with a
vigour quite unusual to him, and rang a
violent peal for his major-domo.

Meanwhile, Mimics went upstairs to the
room she had vacated for him. It was
impossible sufficiently to air and heat either
of the state apartments so as to make it
safe for sleeping, and she remembered her

fever when first sbe came to Courtlero}^,
therefore she settled to share Miss Heath's
bed for the night. The morrow must take
care of itself. She had removed all trace
of feminine occupation, and left Barber to
make his arrangements. She met him in
the passage, hastening to answer his
master's summons.

*Is all ready ?' she inquired, anxiously.

^ As ready as such a chamber can be
made, ma'am,' he replied, much aggrieved.

She thought it very ready, indeed, with
its bright fire, unusual show of candles,
and dressing-table elaborately arranged
with her uncle's ivory and silver-mounted
accessories, and a nosegay of spring
flowers.

Anyone could sleep there !' she said to
Miss Heath, when she went into the schoolroom.
' I hope he will not think my
flowers ridiculous. He seems very odd.'

Very,' echoed Miss Heath, drily.

Yet I think I shall make him love me,'

VOL. II. K

said Mimics, with youthful hopefulness.

Miss Heath looked inquiringly surprised,
but made no response.

He called me Mimics for the first time.*

really, how condescending !'

'Milly, when you do speak, you are
always satirical. I learnt the trick from
you. Hush ! here he comes.'

The door was ajar, and Mimics placed
herself behind it, her finger on her lip, her
frame trembling with fear.

Why have they put me here ?' reached
her from her uncle's angry voice. ' I
cannot sleep in this part of the house.'

The other chambers are not aired, sir.
It would be as much as your life is worth
to sleep in either of them. One shall be
ready tomorrow,' from Barber, in a pacificatory
voice.

I shall not be here tomorrow,' cried
Le Roy, stamping past the school-room
with the tread of a dragoon.

In another moment Mimics heard a door

slammed fiercely, and there was silence.
She did not hear Barber creep, with
mouse-like tread, down the passage about
half-an-hour afterwards, or know that he
preferred slumbering in the big chair by
the fire in the hall, to trusting his precious
life to such dangers as might await it in a
shake-down prepared by Mrs. Stone. Enveloped
in rugs, no member of that disturbed
household slept so peacefully ashe.


I always sleep well, thanks to a good
conscience,' he said to the housekeeper the
next morning.

Your conscience haven't got the rheumatics
like mine, Mr. Barber,' she replied,
tartly.

These remarks passed while Barber was
seeing to his master's breakfast, laid by
him in the one reception-room, i.e.^ the
saloon ; and Mrs. Stone was superintending
Jane's dusting. Mimics came in to
see how matters stood, and asked Barber

kat

what hour her uncle had ordered breakfast.
He replied, 'At 9.30 punctual, and
I hope the broiled chicken and the
omelette will be ready, ma'am,' he added,
looking at Mrs. Stone, who hurried off to
prepare them.

How did my uncle sleep, Mr. Barber ?'
asked Mimics.

When I took him his hot water, ma'am,
he hadn't slept a wink — so he said — but
my opinion is he hadn't slept so badly. I
always know by his voice. He's musical
and, as you know, ma'am, the voice is an
instrument easily put out of tune, and
want of sleep unstrings it, as you may say.
This morning Mr. Le Roy's was in beautiful
order. I am a bit of a musician myself,
and sympathise.'

Mimics laughed merrily, telling Barber
that her instrument must be always in
tune, since she always slept well.

Yes, ma'am, I have remarked that your
voice resembles Mr. Le Roy's,' said Barber,

going in search of the broiled chicken
and omelette.

Mimics heard her uncle's footsteps on
the stairs, and disappeared through one
door while he entered by way of a curtain
hung to exclude draughts from the staircase.
The hall was properly only a summer
room, but circumstances, as we know,
had adapted it for all seasons. It was a
bright, but cold, March day, and the east
winds whistled round about the house, and
blew fiercely amongst the trees, causing
commotion in the rookery, where the birds
were beginning to build.

How I hate that eternal caw P muttered
Le Soy, as he stood shivering over the
fire. ' Where is Miss Marmont ?' he added,
as Barber came in with his savoury-smelling
breakfast.

Barber said that she had just been there,
and had inquired for him. Le Roy seated
himself, muttering, ' No papers — no letters,'
and began to eat with an appetite.

^ His native air is doing him good
thought Barber, as he stood behind his
chair ; his thoughts were his own, and he
smiled grimly as he silently congratulated
himself on his universal talents. 'Footman,
butler, valet, and page-boy all in one.'

Barber, has Miss Marmont a maid ?'
asked Mr. Le E-oy, breaking in on his
meditations.

Well, sir, not to say a maid. There's
Mrs. Stone and a girl, and that is the
female establishment.'

Ask the girl to tell Miss Marmont I
should like to see her.'

Barber disappeared, and Mimics soon
came in, looking fresh as the morning.
Her uncle begged her to excuse his sending
for her, but he wished to make two or
three inquiries on the subjects they had
discussed the previous evening. His manner
was irritable, and his usually composed
face showed chagrin. Scarcely had she
assured him that her only wish was to aid

him if she could, when a horse trotted upto
the hall door.

It is JVJr. Sellon. I daresay he hasn't
breakfasted !' she exclaimed, the rider
being visible through the windows.

As she opened the door, he jumped off
the horse and burst in upon * the autocrat
at the breakfast-table.'

Searle has decamped !' he cried. ' I
knew he would.'

When ? — how ?' asked Le Roy, dropping
the fork he held.

Give me time. I have galloped here
like mad. It is Searle's horse ; will somebody
see to him ?'

Mimics was already holding the bridle,
and Barber relieved her of it, saying, half
aloud,

'And now I'm groom.'

We shall want you, Miss Marmont,'
said SelloD, sitting down. 'May I have a
cup of coffee ? I have had no breakfast,
and have already ridden to Sir Joshua

Carew's to get a warrant to apprehend
Searle. Your good parson, Mr. Leste, told
me be was the nearest magistrate.'

Mr. Le Koj's face turned livid, but
Sellon affected not to perceive it, and
Mimics had slipped out to bid Jane bring
in the things necessary for the lawyer's
breakfast. Happily Le Eoy was too much
pre-occupied to notice the somewhat rough-looking
maiden when she laid them nervously
on the table.

Searle and I were at the accounts till
two o'clock,' said Mr. Sellou, losing no
time either in eating or speaking. ' We
had dined previously, for the fellow knows
how to live. I had a capital room and too
comfortable a bed, for I slept till eight
o'clock. When I got downstairs a maidservant
accosted me in some consternation,
saying that her master had left the house,
and that his bed had not been slept in. I
understood. His horse was in the stable,
saddled, for the boy told me his master

had ordered him to have it ready at five
o'clock. But he thought better of it, and
took himself off on foot, knowing that 1
have not lost my hearing, and that hoofs
make a noise. So I mounted, fell in with
Mr. Leste, told him ; rode on to Monkton,
saw Sir Joshua, told him ; got my warrant,
and here I am. Now we must all be off to
Prestbury ; here. Sir Joshua says, affairs
are in an awful state. He thinks Searle
an out-and-out rogue. He will set the
one policeman and the old constable after
him, and offer a reward for his apprehension.'


I wish to have no dealings with Sir
Joshua Carew,' interposed Le Roy, loftily.

Cannot be avoided. How are we to get
to the Summerlands station ?' asked Sellon
of Mimics.

Shock only goes at a foot's pace. Could
not Searle's horse be harnessed to the
pony-carriage ?' she replied, considering.

A capital idea. You have a head on

your shoulders, Miss Marmont,' said
SelloD, admiringly. ' There is no time to
lose. Will you manage it ?'

Mimics looked inquiringly at her uncle
and told him that there was a train in
about forty minutes, and no other till the
afternoon. He seemed bewildered, and
could only say,

Kindly arrange for me.'

She did so. Grant and she put Searle's
horse to the shabby old pony-carriage,
much to Shock's disgust, who watched the
proceedings from his stable, and whinnied.
It was soon ready, and, almost before Mr.
Le Roy had time either to think or remonstrate,
he found himself by the side of the
old coachman, in the old machine, as he
used to call it, on the way to the new
station, with Mimics and Sellon behind
him.

CHAPTER IX.

RUINED.

Miss Heath and Barber had their hands
full on that eventful morning. A few-hasty
words from Mimics to the effect that
she was going with her uncle and Mr.
Sellon to Prestbury was all the household
knew of so wonderful a movement ; and
the above-named pair drew such conclusions
as the event naturally led to. But
they had not much time for reflection.
Courtleroy was besieged by tenants and
people anxious to see Mr. Le Roy. Finding
that both he and Miss Marmont were
gone to Prestbury, they asked for Miss
Heath, and, receiving no definite information

from that reticent lady, they had recourse
to Barber. He, as his master's
mouthpiece, inspired hope ; and said confidently
that Mr. Le Roy would assuredly
return, because he had left him. Barber,
behind.

'He cannot do without me,' he said,
which was strictly true.

The news of Searle's disappearance had
spread, and the general impression was
that the result must be favourable to
Courtleroy. even if he had half ruined its
owner. ' Matters couldn't be worse,' was
the dictum of tenants and cottagers. Man
of these had trusted their small savings to
Searle in promise of high interest ; others
had left them in the Prestbury bank ; all
were involved in the failures more or less,
and all hated the man in whom, nevertheless,
they had trusted. But, with the
return of their lawful landlord, matters
must mend. The domestics shared, equally,
this confidence, and Mrs. Stone was

heard to declare that she felt as if she
could dance a hornpipe, in spite of her
rheumatism.

Upheld bv the wings of hope, and the
absence of Searle, she engaged a friend as
help — lighted fires everywhere — prepared
a sumptuous dinner, and rejoiced in the
pleasure she should give her dear Miss
Marmont. She and Gandj were quite
excited over the vegetables, and the week's
allowance of meat was sacrificed to the
exigencies of the day. Even Miss Heath
breathed with relief when she heard her
here noire had vanished, and Mimics's spring
flowers suffered from her temporary
exhilaration. She filled many vases with
them, and pondered over the changes that
must take place. Barber was very confidential,
and said he hoped this sudden
move might overcome Le Poy's antipathy
to the old place.

We are nobodies in London, Miss
Heath. Here we are kings, as our name

implies,' he said, using the royal pronoun
to suit the occasion.

He assumed the major-domo, and gave
his orders so majestically that he offended
Stone; nevertheless, he managed to procure
wine, through the kind offices of
Farmer Bezley, and to have two of the
best bed-rooms made habitable for his
master and Mr. Sellon. There had not
been such a commotion at Courtleroy for
nearly twenty years.

What will be the result ?' mused Miss
Heath, as she sat alone in the schoolroom
tired with the excitement. ^ I will
put away this picture, in case he should
some here.'

She unhung the portrait of a lady from
a conspicuous place on the wall, and laid it
aside in a cupboard.

Poor Margaret !' she sighed, ' how
little you knew,' — then she suddenly perceived
the square of bright green left, by
its removal, on the time-worn paper, and

essayed to cover it with one of Mimics's
sketches. She was some time in finding
one large enough, and the occupation
diverted her thoughts. After all, it did
not cover the space properly and it was
apparent that the sketch had usurped a
place.

It does not matter. He will never
come here,' she muttered ; then, feeling
singularly restless, she went downstairs.

Dinner was laid in the hall for four.
Barber had essayed the dining-room, but
it smelt of damp and must, and looked so
cheerless that he gave it up. Miss Heath
rubbed her hands over the magnificent
fire, and thought what a pleasant thing
was an inhabited house ; hoping, against
her own interests probably, that Mr. Le
Eoy might tenant it again. After all,
society was best, she thought. She dressed
herself carefully for dinner, remembering
that he used to be very particular as
regarded ladies' adornments, and had been

known to remark in the old time, ' Milly
Heath is always becomingly dressed
They had all called her Milly, both at
Monkton and Oourtleroy. But she had
not succeeded in making Mimics as precise
as herself. Still, she must allow, the girl
always looked well with an ease and grace
peculiar to her, though preferring her own
taste to that of the fashion-books introduced
by their one village mantua-maker.
Miss Heath pondered long over that fire
of logs and coal. Barber came in and out
continually to replenish it, and to say the
dinner would be spoilt. The housekeeper
and her aide-decisive waxed wrathful over
the delayed meal, and yet the expected
friends returned not. The last train stopped
at Summerlands at half-past eight, and
therefore they could not arrive till nine
o'clock. Despondency and disappointment
took possession of those who had been
working so hard to give pleasure. How
often it happens that expectants suffer for

the thoughtlessness or delays of the expected.
However, the expressed fears that
something must have happened were
groundless, for, about nine o'clock, the
trot of Searle's horse was heard, and Miss
Heath, in her thankfulness, actually
opened the door, exclaiming, ' I am so
thankful.'

Mr. Le Roy was the first to dismount
and come in.

I am afraid we are late,' he said, with
his customary manner, glancing at the
table.

Yes, sir. I fear that dinner will suffer,'
replied Barber, who appeared. ' We have
prepared chambers for you and Mr. Sellon.'

Le Roy signified his intention of going
to his, and Barber had the satisfaction of
carrying off both his master and the lawyer,
leaving the two ladies. Mimics looked
very pale, but hurried to her room, followed
by Miss Heath, who had laid out a
dinner-dress for her.

VOL. II. L

Thank you, dear, there is no time to
change. I will just wash my hands and
smooth my hair said Mimics. ' I never
had such a day in my life. I fear Searle
has quite ruined my uncle, though he will
not see it. Mr. Sellon told me almost as
much on our way home. E,uin for him
means ruin for us. But I am not afraid.
I never felt so excited and self-reliant
before.'

She hurried Miss Heath back to the hall,
where they were almost immediately joined
by Sellon. He glanced from Mimics to
Miss Heath inquiringly, and the former
said she knew the state of affairs.

They are as ominous as possible,' said
the lawyer, standing between the two
ladies by the fire ' Unless we can catch
Searle, it will be next to impossible to disentangle
them. Warrants are out, and I
have caused advertisements to be put in
all the papers ; but he bas been mixed up
with the Units, and has spent his employed's

money to keep them and himself afloat.
They have been hand-in-glove, in short,
and seem all to have decamped together,
except the banker, who has stopped payment,
but may recover himself. It is an
awful mess

The arrival of Mr. Le Roy stayed the
conversation, and they immediately sat
down to dinner. He was precisely attired
by Barber, and his manners that of a felt
or assumed indifference. Stately and
haughty, he maintained a sort of majestic
composure, and took the place of host as
if he had never left Courtleroy. The
dinner had been so managed by Stone that
it was less spoilt than might have been
expected, and Barber contrived to cover
deficiencies. But a prophetic silence reigned.
Mr. Sellon made an attempt at conversation,
and Miss Heath so far overcame
her reserve as to reply to him, but uncle
and niece scarcely spoke. Mimics was
trying to realise what the word ' ruin '

l2

meant, which had slipped from Sellon unadvisedly;
while Le Eoj was beating off
the thought by which he was nearly
overwhelmed.

The courses, which had been prepared
with so much thought and anxiety, came
to an end at last, and the wine so covertly
procured by Barber alone remained on
the table. Dessert there was none ; but
then Le Roy rarely touched it, as his valet
knew. The ladies moved to withdraw, but
Sellon said, looking at his host, that he
should like to make a few inquiries of Miss
Marmont.

Will you kindly remain ?' asked her
uncle, politely, and she stayed behind,
while Miss Heath retired.

Mr. Sellon went into the affairs at once,
and strove to rivet Mr. Le Roy's attention
to them. But business had ever been his
nightmare, and he had put it from him ashe
would that nocturnal enemy. Mimics
on the contrary, had a head for it, and

liked it. Mr. Sellon turned to her for
information, and was astonished at the
amount she had acquired. He had engaged
a lawyer at Prestbury to work with him
in elucidating matters, and had arranged
to remain a few days at Courtleroy. He
had made Mr. Le Eoy accompany him in
his voyage of discovery that day, but could
not fathom his mind. The fact was that
the transactions since he had come into
the country, and the excitement of the
events, had nearly upset his mind altogether.
He was literally bewildered, and
his one idea was to escape again to London
from memories of the past, and realities of
the present.

I see nothing for it but to make you
temporary steward, Miss Marmont. Do
you understand book-keeping?' said Sellon,
half laughing.

A little. I could master it with instruction.
I should like to be my uncle's
steward,' returned Mimics, gravely. ' I

would labour day and night to remedy the
evils of the people. Besides, I want definite
occupation.'

Le Roy actually looked her in the face.
Their eyes had never met so directly
before, and she smiled at the surprise
visible in his.

You are not strong-minded, I hope ?'
he said.

I think I am, rather,' she replied,
reflectively. ' I do not mean that I could
address a public meeting, or do many
things which women seem called to achieve
in your world, uncle ; but I would be anything
to help the poor here in the country

Member of a school-board ?' asked Le
Eoy, sarcastically, but interested.

I am not clever enough ; though some
of our local members are very dull. But
I think I could make a better guardian
than some of the farmers, and Mr. Leste
would like me for churchwarden. I should

be delighted to serve as guardian of the
poor if you were chairman, uncle.'

Mimics looked down as she made this
little speech, but there was an amused
smile about her mouth.

Sellon longed to clap her, and glanced
at Le Roy to discover what effect it had
made upon him. It was simply amazement.
His niece ! A steward, guardian
of the poor, churchwarden ! what next ?

How have you learnt these principles,
Miss Marmont?' he asked, coldly.

*From newspapers, and books, and an
occasional periodical. Mr. Leste, and the
boys, and Barbara, and I talk about them
sometimes, for you know Miss Heath is
not naturally strong-minded, and thinks
them quite wicked.'

She could not help looking up at her
uncle as she made this allusion to Miss
Heath, and he could not help laughing.
She had never seen him laugh before, and

was surprised at the change in his face.

You will do. We will make you
steward first, and guardian afterwards
said Sellon. ' What of the chairmanship,
Mr. Le 'Roy ?' he added, more cautiously.

M hope to be in London in a few
days,' replied Le Roy, momentary laughter
changed to hauteur.

Impossible ; unless you wish to be
present at the sale or letting of your
house,' returned Sellon, who had been
waiting for an opportunity to make this
announcement. ^ I am afraid you must
give up one establishment, and this would
require a fortune expended upon it to
make it eatable. The town house would
either sell or let at once. We must look
things in the face, sir, and you have trusted
your affairs to Searle until he has nearly
ruined you. This much I discovered from
him and by the inquiries made to-day. Of
course his sudden escape confirms our
worst fears. There is little doubt of his

having embezzled largely, and you are the
principal victim.'

Mimics looked entreatingly at the lawyer,
but the time had come to be explicit,
and he lost all patience at Mr. Le Roy's
pride and supineness. Yet he little knew
the fire that smouldered beneath all the
assumed languor and indifference, and both
be and Mimics were terrified at the result
of his words. With a blow on the table
that shattered a wine-glass, and an exclamation
near akin to an oath, he cried :

Give up London ! Live at Courtleroy !
What next? Have you come here to
insult me ? Have all these stage effects
been got up to frighten me ? You have
terrified Searle from the country, who was
faithful to me, and now you propose to
kill me.'

He rose while he spoke, and, seemingly
not knowing what he was about, rushed to
the door which led to the library, and left
the room.

Mimics looked at Sellon in consternation
but he soon recovered his composure.

'I knew it must come to this,' he said.
He must bear the consequences of his
absurd neglect and wilfulness. I fear you
have much trouble before you, Miss
Marmont.'

I do not mind that, if only I can be of
use. Do you think I may follow him ?'

^ Certainly, if you have the courage ; but
you had better wait a few minutes.'

Those minutes seemed hours. Mimics
stood at the library door and listened, and
at last fancied she heard a groan. She
took up a candle and went in. Her uncle
was standing in the middle of the room, as
if unable to move for the dark. The sudden
light startled him, and when he saw
Mimics he waved her from him, and sank
down on a couch which was at his back.
She went to him, and, fancying him insensible,
was about to summon Mr. Sellon.

Stay ! Don't call that fellow. Being

for Barber, lie knows,' he said, with some
difficulty.

The library bell would not ring : she
returned to the hall, warned Mr. Sellon,
and begged him to send Barber ; then she
went back to Le Eoy. She laid her hand
on his shoulder with the words, ^ My dear
uncle, you are ill,' but he shrank from her.

Viper ! you deceived me ! How dare
you come back ?' he muttered ; and she
knew that he must be thinking of Lady
Margaret.

Barber came.

It is one of his attacks. A glass of
wine will restore him. You had better
come to your room, sir. You will catch
your death in this damp place,' he said.

Mimics fetched the wine, and he took it
from her hand, which she thought a good
sign. He recovered, and, with a shiver
that seemed to penetrate her veins also,
got up, and was himself again.

Good-night, Mimics. Thanks. I will

go to my room. To-morrow I should like
to ask Mr. Leste a question about Searle.'
He extended his hand, went into the
hall, followed by Barber, nodded to Sellon,
and finally retired for the night.

CHAPTER X.

ANOTHER PROPOSAL.

Perhaps I have found my vocation, Mr.
Leste,' said Mimics, the following mornings.
when she appeared at the vicarage, out of
breath with running.

I hope you have, my dear. What is
it ?' asked her pastor.

That of bailiff to my uncle, or, to speak
more genteelly, steward. He wishes to
see you to consult you about my predecessor.'


Sit down, Mimics, you look frightened
to death, and are trying to make grim
jests,' said Barbara.

'I will, I will, if only Mr. Leste will goat

once gasped Mimics. * My uncle will
not believe in Searle's dishonesty, and you
will tell him what is true and just, without
prejudicing him either way,' said Mimics.

•I will go with pleasure; but what is
expected of me ?' returned Mr. Leste.

Mimics recounted the adventures of the
previous day, and Mr. Leste saw at once
the difficulties of the situation. As there
was no time to lose, he started for Courtleroy,
bidding Mimics follow when she was
rested.

Barbara and she were good friends again,
but the Carew thorn still festered in the
constant breast of the former. Captain
Carew came home from time to time, and
she always saw him, but they maintained a
polite reserve towards one another. Mi-mica
avoided him, and neither she nor
Barbara could discover what were his real
sentiments. Strange to say, however,
George Hope was in Captain Carew's regiment,
and, in his regular letters to Mimics,

he did not fail to mention him. Both were
in Africa at that time, and the heart of
Barbara was sore for her life's love, while
that of Mimics trembled for her devoted
friend.

How is your mother, dear?' asked Mi-mica,
for Mrs. Leste was in failing health.

She was better yesterday, but this
morning a telegram has come summoning
Horace to join his ship. It is ordered off
to the coast of Africa, to the scene of the
war. Everybody is there, Mimics.'

Everybody !' echoed Mimics, with a
sigh. ' Where is Horace ? When does
he go ? I must bid him good-bye.'

'He is with mother. He leaves tomorrow,'
replied Barbara, with a searching
look at Mimics. ' You will find them in
the school-room.'

Mimics went upstairs to the apartment
known as the school-room, but converted
now into a sitting-room for the invalid
mother. She had been ill over two years.

having had, the doctors said, too much
wear and tear for her delicate frame.
Still, she considered herself a most fortunate
and happy woman, for were not all
her children prosperous and obedient ?

Many have been the changes amongst
them since we made their acquaintance
about a dozen years ago. Leila and Laura
have married those worthy vicars who
came, ready armed for proposals, to the
hop-pickers' tea, and both have now children
of their own. Helena and Totty, now
grown up, supply their places as lady-helps.
Dick, who was educated at the
clergy-school, thanks to Barbara's indefatigable
exertions, is now, himself, in
orders, and has a curacy in a neighbouring
county. Octavius is in Mr. Prettyman's
office, and bids fair to be the rich man of
the family — so says his worthy employer.
Barbara we have just seen, and Horace,
the eldest son, Mimics finds with his
mother.

Mimics !' he exclaimed, coming towards
her, a flush on his bronzed and honest
face.

Horace ! must you go away ?' she cried,
her hand in his.

They, like Captain Carew and Barbara,
had always been friends, and Mrs. Leste,
with womanly and motherly instinct, had
woven her little romance. Was it to be
realized ? Let us conjecture.

Mimics only remained at the vicarage
long enough to sympathise with Mrs. Leste
on her health, and Horace's speedy departure.
Anxiety about her uncle was
apparent in her face and manner, and nobody
attempted to detain her ; but Horace
walked back to Courtiers with her.

Perhaps you may see George Hope,
Horace, in that awful Africa,' she said.

He and Carew are on land, I shall be
on sea ; but we may meet, Mimics. I see
this morning there has been a battle, and
he has already distinguished himself by

VOL. II. M

rescuing bis colours from the niggers.
He is specially mentioned. You may be
proud of your 'protege, I wish you cared as
much for me, Mimics.'

How absurd you are, Horace. I care
for you both, but oh ! I am glad he has
done bravely I feel that he will be 
some day.'

'And I? shall I not be admiral? Dear
Mimics, I am already lieutenant, and, if
promotion in the navy were not so slow, I
might hope for a berth on shore, and then
1 might tell you how dearly I love you.'

Mimics started, and a flush spread over
her pale face. What did he mean ? Was
he in earnest ? She quickened her pace as
if to avoid an answer to these questions,
for were not the Lestes all her brothers
and sisters.

Dear Mimics, do not hurry so,' he continued.
' We may not meet again for ever
so long — perhaps never. I know I should
not say what has been in my heart for

years, but I have loved you ever since we
Lave known one another.'

'Yes, Horace, and I you replied Mi-mica,
calmly and even considerately. ' I
am your adopted sister, just as George
Hope is Mr. Prettyman's adopted son, and
my adopted brother.'

But I cannot look on you as a sister,
Mimics. It is not that sort of love,' said
Horace, ruefully.

He was every whit a sailor, and shy and
bold by turns. He had a frank, honest
face, a broad and somewhat stocky figure,
the kindest and tenderest of manner, and
eyes beaming with good nature. Mimics
would not have wounded his feelings for
worlds. But she had never thought of
him as a lover ; indeed, her thoughts did
not, naturally, turn on lovers.

I do not quite understand you, Horace,'
she said, after a pause. ' You have your
profession to follow, and I think I have
found my work. Why should you wish to

m2

change our mutual relations ? Anything
new between us would complicate them.
And what would be the use of that ?'

You are so matter-of-fact, Mimics. If
I could only be assured that you feel forme
as I do for you *

I love you sincerely, Horace. "What
would you wish more ?'

The — the — sort of love a man wants, if
he could afford to — to marry. That is
what I want more.'

'But you cannot afford to marry, Horace;
and you know I am penniless, and my
uncle is said to be ruined. What would
be the use of our saying all sorts of ridiculous
things to one another, and losing our
characters as practical, sensible people?
But perhaps you understand those matters
better than I do.'

Don't be satirical, Mimics. I understand
that I love you dearly : I have said
it, and, I suppose, there's an end of it.
You are always the same to everybody, and

don't love one person better than another.'

Indeed I do, Horace. I love you all
better than anyone else, except, perhaps,
George Hope, whom I knew first, and who
is an orphan like myself.'

That is only natural, Mimics. He is
almost a boy. You and I are man and
woman, and I, at least, long for a different
kind of affection. I know I am wrong to
have said this. Forgive me ; but remember
that, wherever I am, I am always
thinking of you.'

Dear Horace, what can I do to repay
sou for such love ?'

Write to me sometimes, think of me
often ; pray for me always.'

I will ; but I have always done that.
Give me something more difficult.'

^ Keep Montague Carew at a distance.
Try to remember that Barbra was his first
love, as you are mine ; only I could never
change.'

I wish you would not be always talking

to me about him, Horace. Cannot you
see that it troubles Barbra ?'

It is good for her. He thinks more of
you than her. Come round by your garden,
Mimics, and give me a spring nosegay
as a last remembrance.'

They went through the small side-gate
to the shrubbery which led to the garden.
It was, as old Gandy had said, trim and
beautiful. Blackbirds and thrushes were
welcoming the spring with joyous carols
overhead, smaller birds were hopping about
below, for Mimics fed them all. She
gathered a bonny bouquet of snowdrops,
crocuses, and other cultivated flowers ; then
from her ' wild corner,' as she called it, she
plucked violets, primroses, and forget-me-nots.


No need of those, Mimics ; I shall never
forget you,' said Horace, tears in his honest
eyes.

nor I you, Horace; but I love the
flower,' she replied. * It is a pretty posy.

What will you do with it T she added, giving
him her flowers.

'Keep it till I die. God bless you,
Mimics. We are brother and sister at
least. May I kiss you ? We may never
meet again.'

Before she could reply, he had pressed
his lips on her forehead, and was gone.
She sat down on the rustic seat he had
made for her, covered her face with her
hands, and burst into tears. Was it love ?

When her agitation calmed, she asked
herself this question. She could not answer
it. Love it certainly was, but she knew
not if it were the passion she had read of,
and which she feared Barbara still nourished
for Montague ; or that of a sister for a
brother. She suddenly found herself comparing
his square form with the symmetrical
figure of Captain Carew, and wondered
if people in love ever thought of exteriors.
She had seen so few young men that she
may be excused her comparisons. She

even admired Dick, the clergyman brother,
most personally, but she certainly loved
Horace best. But What had she to do
with any of them just now, when she was
about to become a useful member of
society ? when she hoped to repay her
uncle for his scant provision for her 
? She was thankful that she had
given Horace no ^ encouragement,' as she
had once heard Miss Heath express it.
Yet, on second thoughts, she perceived
that she had. She flushed all over, as she
suddenly remembered that she had actually
said she loved him, and that he had even
kissed her. After all, he was not her
brother, and she was a thoughtful, sensible
woman — she feared he might misunderstand
her. Yet how ? for she really loved
him ? It was sadly perplexing. She felt
a new trammel on her life, since she would
not, for worlds, give him pain.

^ It cannot be undone now!' she exclaimed,
rousing herself from her abstraction,

and walking slowly to the house.

There she was soon absorbed in other
things. Her uncle sad been inquiring for
her, and was evidently annoyed at her
absence. She found Mr. Leste still with
him, Mr. Sellon having started for Prest-bury.
At his request, Mimics remained
with him and Mr. Leste.

'You have been crying — what about?'
asked Le Roy.

'I have just said good-bye to Horace,'
she replied, looking at Mr. Leste, and
colouring slightly.

My eldest son. He joins his ship, the
Andromeda, tomorrow. Mimics and he
have been playfellows and friends,' apologised
Mr. Leste.

Le Roy bowed stiffly, then told Mimics
that Mr. Leste appeared to be of her and
Sellon's opinion regarding Searle, and that,
as he was well acquainted with the parish,
he was bound to believe him.

'Not that I put more faith in priests

than people,' he added. 'What do you
advise me to do ?'

Since you ask me, I should say, remain
here, for a time, at least, and look into
your own affairs,' answered Mr. Leste.

Mimics perceived that her uncle took
this advice more quietly than he had Sel-ion's
the previous evening. He winced,
and the nostril worked, but he had self-command
enough to restrain his feelings
before Mr. Leste.

If I am ruined, I may as well be ruined
abroad as at home,' he said.

'You may retrieve matters here. Your
tenants are prepared to have their rents
raised, or to submit to almost anything if
you will only stop amongst them.'

I should not raise their rents. Could
not Miss Marmont supply my place ?'

There was a slight annoyance perceptible
in this question, as much as to say
that she had usurped his dominion.

'She could assist you, Mr. Le Roy; but

no one could supply jour place, or ever
has supplied it. Searle, having unlimited
power, was tempted to do what he could
never have done had you resided here
even a small portion of the year ; and, now
that he has disappeared, there is literally
no one but yourself to fight for yourself.'

'Except me ; I will help my uncle,' put
in Mimics, quietly.

Just as she spoke, a carriage and pair
drove up. Le Eoy saw and heard it, and
was in the act of flight, when in burst Sir
Joshua Carew, unannounced.

'Welcome home, my dear fellow. So
glad to see you. Saw you through the
window, so didn't give you time to runaway.
Bless my soul, you don't look as if
nearly a score of years had passed since we
met. Just the same — just the same !'

Sir Joshua seized Le Roy's hand, patted
him on the back, and showed such genuine
pleasure that the so-called misanthrope
was taken b}^ surprise. He had not a

word to say ; but, fortunately, Sir Joshua
had plenty.

How d ye do, Leste ? Hour d'ye do,
Miss Marmont ? Lady Helena's kind regards.
Quite time he came back, isn't it?
Searle's a double-distilled rogue, Le Roy,
and no use mincing the matter, "scythe
estate's going to rack and ruin, and
the house is tumbling about Miss Mar-mont's
ears, and the funded property —
whevr I My private opinion is, you may
whistle for it

'Will you not sit down?' asked Le
Roy, his manner restrained, his voice
impeded.

Of course I will. The old hall just as
it used to be. What jolly days we have
passed here, Le Roy ! "We'll have some
more yet. Time you came back, for the
neighbourhood's deserted, isn't it, Leste ?
nobody at Summerlands, though there is
some hope of Prettyman's taking it again.
Very good sort of man ; liberal and all

that sort of thing. But a sportsman, lia !
ha! not a bit of it! Don't knovr a cock
pheasant from a hen. Clever young
fellow that adopted son of his. Distinguished
himself already, and is sure
to be promoted if those confounded
what-d'ye-call-'ems don't tar and feather
him. My son Monty out there too, and.
yours just going to prowl about, Leste.
Better without children. Le Roy. and better
without foreign settlements to swallow
'em all up. That ? going, Leste? I've
come for a regular gossip, and ordered the
carriage to be taken round.*

Mr. Leste rose, Le Eoy looked despairingly
at the drive and saw that the carriage
had disappeared, and Mimics wondered
what Grant would do with horses and
coachman. She followed Mr. Leste out.
who advised her to leave the old friends
alone together. He said that he had done
his best to reconcile her uncle :o the inevitable,
and that Sir Joshua would hammer

away until he knocked out the rusty
old nails that kept up the ancient animosity,
and hang the flag of truce in its
place.

You have good work before you, my
dear, God helping you. I believe you may
win your uncle by loving patience, and by
so doing you may be a blessing to us all.
Indeed, you have been one already,' he
said.

^ Thanks to all of you who have been so
kind to me, and set me such a good
example,' replied Mimics. * I will do my
best, but my uncle is not like you, dear
Mr. Leste.'

They certainly were opposed as bright
May and chill November.

CHAPTER XL

My dear fellow, nobody thinks of matrimonial
and love disappointments nowadays,'
said Sir Joshua, hammering away
just as Mr. Leste had predicted. ' I'm sure
you've had time to get over yours. Bless
my soul ! if Margaret had belonged to this
generation she'd have been screaming at
amateur concerts and penny readings,
while you'd have been fiddling and performing
on the psaltery or sackbut to
crowded audiences. You wouldn't have
had time to be miserable. " There's safety
in numbers, says Tory More," and so

there is. Our young women go in for
cramming, and nursing, and mentioning,
and doctoring, till they don't care a jot
for the men, nor the men for them. Just
the same in country and town. Now,
Lady Helena has set her heart upon patching
up old garments by a marriage between
our son and your niece — as nice a girl as
I know, only never to be seen — but I tell
her 'tis all nonsense, for love's not the
fashion. They'd be a good-looking couple,
all the same, and would join our properties
as well as themselves. But, my good
fellow, there's that handsome Barbara
Leste in the way. I can't find out which
Monty inclines to, if to either ; but mum's
the word with Lady Helena. I only want
Monty to marry and settle, but 'isn't a
marrying age. You should hear Barbara
sing. You'd fall in love with her yourself,
I wager. You'll hear her at church next
Sunday.'

Sir Joshua paused for the first time.

'I never go to church,' interposed Le
Roy, stiffly.

Never go to church ! Then what's to
become of your soul ?'

Sir Joshua suddenly collapsed. He
fixed his eyes on Le Roy as if he and they
had been caught in a trap. Le Roy looked
down upon him, cold and stormy-eyed,
as if he were the trapper. The one sat
high, the other low.

^ Never — go — to — church ?' repeated Sir
Joshua, pausing between each word.

Never.'

Not go to church ? Are you a dissenter,
or will Margaret have to answer
for this as well as the rest ? Then God
help her. Property ruined, tenants in
despair, soul lost,' muttered Sir Joshua, as
if to himself.

The words startled his companion.

Is she alive ?' he asked, hoarsely.

Nobody knows ; but that makes no
difference. You are alive, and never go

VOL. II. N

to church ! Are you an atheist, or an
infidel, or — or — an agnostic, as I hear
they call the brazen-faced unbelievers ? A
grand-sounding name indeed ! Better call
them " miserable sinners," as our church
does. I never thought to have seen the
day when my oldest friend, who has fished,
and hunted, and larked, and danced, and
gone to a place of worship every Sunday
once at least with me for the best part of
a quarter-of-a-century, should look me in
the face and say he never went to God's
House. Good-bye, Le Eoy. I can t shake
hands with a man who forgets his Maker

They both rose to their feet.

Carew !' exclaimed Le Roy, and it was
the first time he had so addressed him.

His voice faltered slightly, and his compressed
mouth relaxed. Sir Joshua looked
at him. There was moisture in the eyes
of the worthy baronet.

'Perhaps it is poor Margaret's fault,
after all,' he said, * and you've come back

to be cured. Leste will do it if anybody
can. He's comforted my soul many a
time, and lie hasn't a parishioner who
wouldn't say the same ; and, as to those
vagrants of hop-pickers and gipsies, he's
just like an apostle to 'em. But they want
a strong hand all the same, and, as I say,
a magistrate must do his duty

The allusion to the hop-pickers and
gipsies turned Sir Joshua's thoughts, for
the moment, from the graver shortcomings
of his old friend, and he sat down again.

'You'll have work enough as magistrate
when you settle down,' he resumed.
'What with the vagrants and the poachers,
and the Searle, one has enough to do.
And they say somebody shot at Searle at
the Overton sale. Lucky you came intime
to stop that, Le Eoy. It was dastardly
work. But you'll have to show
yourself, and do a lot of good, if you
mean to prove that Searle was to blame,
and not you. It will take a long time to

n2

convince people t.bat you two weren't .'


Le Roy's features stiffened again.

*I and — my bailiff!' he exclaimed.

^ He was a cunning, clever rogue,' continued
the baronet. but, you see, Le
Eoy, it takes two to ruin an absent landlord.
You must have given consent to all
these restraining, and mortgaging, and
money-lending, and jobbing with Unit
and Co., and refusing of your niece, and
stingy housekeeping, and grindings of the
poor '

Sir Joshua Carew ! This is my house,'
interrupted Le Roy, with a voice quite
unlike his usually measured one, and a
face as much distorted with anger as even
Sir Joshua could have wished. He was
still standing, and moved towards the door.

^ Don't be too sure that it is your house,'
returned the resolute and obtuse Sir
Joshua. when a man has absented himself
for twenty years, I believe the property

lapses to the next heir. It ought, anyhow.
But 'tis no use to be angry with
me. I am the only friend who stands up
for you, for I know you wouldn't do a
dirty action, and tell everybody it is poor
Margaret's fault. The whole county's up
in arms ; has been for years, and I can
tell you, when a county's up in arms, they
shoot with a long bow. They don't care
whether they hit the mark or not. If you
want to recover your character, you must
stop here, and — my dear fellow, go to
church. We ain't used to those newfangled
heresies down here, and, as I tell
my son Monty, when he talks about 'em as
if he understood 'em, which he don't,
Better not touch pitch, or you'll be
defiled." I know a lot about your estates,
and can help you through if you don't
stand on your high horse ; for I'm getting
too old and stiff to mount him with you.
Nothing like living amongst your people.
Why, Monkton's worth a thousand a year

more than when I came into it ; and I
never had a hard word with a tenant in
my life, and always gave back ten per cent,
of their rent in bad years. What do you
say to that, Le Roy ? Can't afford a house
in town, though.'

I am glad you are so prosperous,' said
Le Roy, ironically.

No reason that you shouldn't be prosperous
too, if you'll forget the past and
turn over a new leaf,' replied Sir Joshua,
rubbing his hands. ^ Come over to dinner
tomorrow, and we'll talk it out. Only
Lady Helena and myself. Bring Miss
Marmont and Miss Heath. A change will
do them good. A very handsome, clever
girl is your niece, but shy , and no wonder,
shut up as she is with Milly Heath, who
would make a Gorgon shy. I'll tell Lady
Helena you're coming.'

Thank you. I could not possibly accept
your invitation,' said Le Roy, coldly.

Well, another day. But, before I leave, I

must tell you a few of Searle's delinquencies
that have come to my personal knowledge

Le Eoy felt obliged to sit down and to
listen to a repetition of some facts that he
had heard before, and to some that had
not been related to him. For a thin-skinned,
proud, reserved, misanthropic individual,
he had, certainly, much to endure.
Sir Joshua, for one, did not spare him.
He had come primed by a resolution to tell
the truth, and he did not falter. "When
at last he asked for his carriage, and Barber
came in response to his host's summons,
he began again.

Barber ! impossible !' he said. * Why
you look as young as your master. Scarcely
a day older. You must both have lived
an easy life.'

Yes, sir. There's so much to entertain
and amuse in town. In the country
we vegetate,' said the valet.

Le Eoy longed to knight him on the
spot, for so helpful a reply.

Vegetate!' repeated Sir Joshua, thoughtfully,
as Barber went to order the carriage.
'Better if you had vegetated more, and
entertained yourselves less. Good-bye,
Le Roy, I shall come again soon. Make
me of any use you like,' he added, rising
and holding out his hand.

CD

I thought you did not mean to shake
hands with me,' replied Le Roy, not taking
it.

There you are, at your old tricks. I
had forgotten all about church and state.
I suppose you don't want to separate them,
even if you neglect your duty to them.
You ought to be in Parliament, though
I'm heartily glad you're not ; for no man
should be allowed to vote for queen and
country who don't go to a place of worship
to prays for 'em. How can anybody, who
neglects his duty to his God, do his duty
to his neighbour ? Here's the carriage.
Shake hands for old times' sake.'

They shook hands, and, as Le Eoy stood

in the centre of the wide-opened glass
doors to see his old friend off, every sort
of feeling was struggling for the mastery
in his steel-guarded breast. Shall the
good or the evil conquer ? He shut the
doors, and threw himself into a chair near
the fire. He had not perceived that Barber
was in the room, until he began to
replenish the said fire.

If anyone should call here at any time,
do not admit them,' he said.

No, sir. What am I to say to the
tenants ? There are three or four with
Miss Marmont at this present moment,
asking to see you,' answered Barber.

Beg Miss Marmont to be so good as
to come here,' returned Le Roy, with a
gasp, as if for breath.

Mimics came almost immediately. She
was distressed at her uncle's jaded appearance.
His face was white, and had an expression
of pain, while his hands rested
listlessly on his knees.

What do these people want now, Mi-mica?'
he asked.

One the renewal of an old lease ; another
time to pay his rent ; a third a reduction
of rent ; and Farmer Lang the
payment of money lent on mortgage. He
is afraid that Searle has misappropriated
the money.'

What am I to do ?' asked Le Eoy,
hopelessly. ^ I really cannot see them.
Will you promise them all and everything.
Mr. Leste says you are well acquainted
with them and their needs.'

May I say that you will inquire into
everything, if they will have patience
asked Mimics. 'I have told them that
Mr. Sellon will be here this evening, and
will see into their affairs. I should be
afraid to promise what I could not perform
; and they wish to see you personally.
Your presence seems to inspire them with
hope : they have been so long depressed.'

Say anything you like, provided I am

not obliged to *' interview " them, as those
vulgar Americans express it.'

But — uncle — I shall be only Searle reproduced
if I take your work upon my
shoulders. They have had such lessons of
late, that they will believe nothing but
your word. He has got all their savings
out of them, and . . .'

For heaven's sake, leave me, and
promise them anything you like. Say
they shall not lose a sou through me — say
I will turn bankrupt, and they shall each
have so much in the pound — say that I am
going abroad to retrench, and leave you in
my place — say '

Anything but that, uncle. I will work
with you here, but not for you if you are
absent.'

Le Roy's eyes, which had been cast
down, looked up suddenly at Mimics. He,
who had been accustomed to obedience
and suffered no interruption when he
spoke, saw before him a young girl, resolute

as himself. And what a face and
figure she had ! Despite his early disappointment
and subsequent misanthropy,
he was by no means a misogynist, and
was not indifferent to personal beauty.
Mimics had more than beauty, she had
the indescribable charm of varying express
grave, now gay, now determined,
now submissive. She was personally
like him in all but this. At the moment
he almost saw himself in the clear-cut
features, working nostril, and resolved
mouth ; but he had not those liquid eyes
and tell-tale dimples that drew all hearts
towards his niece. She had approached
him as she spoke, and stood near his chair,
so that he seemed almost to see her properly
for the first time. She did not wait
for him to speak, but with a voice full of
pathos, and eyes full of tears, poured out
her commentary on his words, even while
his cold glance chilled them.

^ If you will stop here to prove to them

that they shall not be losers if they will
wait, you need nofc be bankrupt for them.
The farmers are so generous, the poor are
so patient, that kind words and hope help
them to bear bad crops and poverty without
much complaint. Oh, uncle ! if only
you could know how affectionate they are,
and how they would love you, and cling
to you, and stand by you, you would
never go away from Courtleroy. There is
not one of Mr. Leste's parishioners who
would not almost die for him, and he is
so poor that he can give them nothing
but kind words, and good advice, and
comfort in sickness, and good for their
souls '

Have you and Sir Joshua Carew been
agreeing to harass me with that spiritual
jargon about souls ?' interrupted Le Roy,
almost fiercely.

I have not spoken to him for months,'
replied Mimics, startled by his manner;
but he is the last person whom I should

have thought likely to discourse on such a
subject

She smiled, and her uncle's face slightly
relaxed.

You appear to study character he said.
^ I have not much opportunity, but it

interests me to think how different people
are, and yet how much alike in the main
she replied.

What opinion have you formed of
mine?' he asked, with his impalpable
manner.

I will tell you when I know you better,
after you have visited all your people, and
set us our tasks here in the house, and
told me exactly what to say to the tenants
who are now waiting for you.'

Le Roy sighed heavily, but the expression
of his face had softened. Mimics's
slightly bantering tone had done what
argument could not.

Tell them that I cannot see them today,

but that 1 will visit them with you
before I leave Courtleroy/ he said.

And I will add that I am sure you have
a very good character, or you would not
have been kind enough to promise this,'
she returned, her face lighting up with
sudden joy.

He watched her as she went hastily to
give his message, and, strange to say,
wondered if she always wore that broad-brimmed
straw hat, with its strip of black
velvet : that greenish gown and black cloth
jacket. He wondered, also, if other girls
would look so graceful and well-dressed in
such simple attire. He was actually beginning
to feel a sort of interest in his niece ;
and all of a sudden Sir Joshua s hint concerning
his son occurred to him.

Lady Helena scheming still,' he almost
said aloud. ' Not tired of wrecking lives.
I should like to circumvent her.'

He fell into a reverie, which ended iu

sleep ; for he was literally worn out, mind
and body, by the rapid occurrences of the
last few days. When Mimics returned
with messages from the tenants, she found
him thus.

Dare I ? He is my mother's brother ?'
she thought, as she leaned over his chair.

She pressed a light kiss on his forehead
and drew back affrighted, for his lips
moved, and she did not wish to awaken
him.

Margaret !' he murmured, and a smile
so tender touched his mouth that Mimics
was astonished.

^ Is this what it is to love ?' she thought.
Poor Horace ! I do not dream of you,
or think of you thus, and yet I am truly
attached to you. 1 wish you had not said
those words to me.'

CHAPTER XII,

AN ATTEMPT ON LIFE.

Me. Sellon brought no good news from
Prestbury to Courtleroy. Searle could not
be found. Neither police nor advertisement
reached him, and private inquiry was
not more successful. The affairs of the
Units were in such confusion that it must
take weeks or even months to disentangle
them, and beyond the fact that Searle was
one with them, and the probability was that
he had done his best to feather their nests
from that of his employer, no certain
information was, as yet, obtained.

The bank had stopped payment — the
lawyers had failed, what more was needed?

VOL. II. O

Sellon grew interested as the plot thickened,
and promised to undertake the business
himself if Le Roy would promise to remain
at the Court. He would return to London
on the morrow to make arrangements
with his partner, and be back again the
following day.

I will throw it all up if you stir from
here,' he said, decidedly, and Le Roy had
no alternative but to submit.

How long will it take to wind up the
Units' affairs ?' he asked.

Impossible to say, and yours are as
complicated as theirs, only Searle has
simply ruined you and some of your dependants,
whereas they have ruined the
county,' was the reply.

Le Roy got no comfort anywhere. Was
it possible, he asked himself, that one man
could have been the cause of so much mischief
? He meant his bailiff, not himself ;
for how was he to blame? The property
was his own, and, if he chose to manage it

through another man, that was his affair.
It was not his fault if that man turned
out a scoundrel. "With sophistries such
as these, he sought to quiet his own conscience,
and it was only when his personal
comfort was affected, that he caught a
glimpse of his own shortcomings. The
contrast of Courtleroj with his luxurious
town mansion, gave that same conscience
an occasional twinge, and a foreboding of
rheumatic pains from the dampness of the
house, caused him intense anxiety. Never,
since the old days, had such loads of coal
and firewood appeared in the yard, and
never bad such fires burnt in every room
of the moulding house. It was again in
the hands of a master.

He consulted with his factotum, Barber,
on the advisability of papering and painting
at once, with a view to his immediate
comfort ; but that far-seeing manager,
who loved the country as little as his mason



ter. counselled delay until Mr. Sellon had
investigated matters.

*You see, sir, you would not like the
smell of paint and plaister ; it would affect
you,' he argued. ' Besides, it would take
a lone title to remunerate the placet and
before i: ^as finished you would return to
town. If I mi^^it over an opinion, you
:i.: £:: ■ :'ii "r" wfn^ quite dry. and

T - ' T 5 ?. T i : 5 : anxious to accommodate
you.'

'You know I lire : t ^t^: ~ iag/ he

'Yes, sir. Bat, in case of the damp
hmfdncr on rheumatic fever, it miorht be
awkward. Mrs. .S::-f-::rzis sie that
Ifiss Marmont was ?: . : -g time recovering
from hers when se nest came here.'

'Had she rheumatic fever?'

A twinge in that paralyzed conscience
made him start.

'Yes, sir; but when she and Miss Heath
took to ^le ^r5t whig t'lej ve all right.

There are s::'/- :~o chambers that might
be arranged, and that do not 5u:Ser from
the damp

• Have them prepared immediately.

Rheumatic fever! It might keep me here
for months.'

'Just so, sir: an:: : r :^:;L::;er you
sleep in eras :Le r e !Miss Marmont had
when the fever : :^ her. It is a mercy
that no :.- cZr::5 1.' rrn the result. I
L.-.-: from Airs. AIu- - : Mr. Hawkins
this morning, sir.'

Barber approached this li::z': ^;.'.'fc:
on tiptoe, for these " rie :' e ::" housekeeper
and butler.

'Yes; "h:,: f: :hf-v-.\nt r'

'Money, sir. The general allowance
has come to an end."

Ash Searle — I me:.::. Miss Marmont,
or Mr. Selon, or — :n short, z::.-i: -r it
yourself.'

• I am at a loss to know how, sir : for,
you see, Mr. Searle can't be found, and the

bank has stopped payment, and Mrs.
Stone says they are in arrears in the house,
and as to Miss Marmont . . /

'For heaven's sake stop your impertinent
gabble cried Le Roy, and his
words electrified poor Barber, who was
not used to hear his choice phrases so
calumniated.

Certainly, sir,' he replied, loftily. *I
will see that the chambers in the west wing
are prepared.'

'Do.'

This conversation took place in the hall,
when Sellon was in London. Never had
Barber been insulted before in all his service
; never had Le E,oy been known to
forget himself, or to hurl a word of two
letters after his valet, as if it were a stone
out of a sling. He was mortally offended
and inwardly resolved to give notice at
once. On his way to the west wing Barber
met Mimics.

I think Mr. Le Eoy is going mad, Miss

Marmont,' he said, assuming a dignity
beyond his custom.

Mimics took him into the school-room,
and drew from him what had passed. Miss
Heath was present.

It will bring him to his senses,' said
that observant lady.

What do you mean, ma'am ?' asked the
offended valet.

You remember that Mrs. Le Roy always
said a burst of temper cleared the air ?' she
replied.

Besides, he is attacked at all points,'
put in Mimics. ' It is enough to drive
anyone out of his senses. Have patience
with him, Mr. Barber. What could he do
without you ? What should we all do without
you ?'

I am glad you perceive that I am of
some slight service, ma'am. At your request
I will remain, for the present at
least,' said the mollified major-domo.

Then they proceeded to consult about

file change of tix>ms. Monica at once
decided to yacste her?, and to occapj a
dress-room bel.zr'zr to Miss Heath.
Barb was to hire a neighbouring'
apartment.

• He slept well in jour chamber tLe Irsz
z.:z'i- ]!:-? shannon; he has certain j had
^ ^ / S3^A the valet. * Perhaps

:: T ; - 1 t . y : .'.zd upon to come in
L - T r night be attracted to the piano ;
:- :i i 11 : \ panacea for every ill.'

Mim: :. bat hindered her morris

: T i ig personal bj striking a
i 1 -r instrument which made
Z :: his hands and shrug his

7 lotos it all waa^ however, that Mr.

Le Eo :/:: :o his niece's room without
comment or inquiry, and that Barber
waited n in majestic silence.

The : of money was not resumed

until S ^ v::~:iTi to Courtleroy after
an ?/:^7i:- :: c-al days. He bad been

AN ATTEMPT OE Lit. 201

detained in London, and had also spent a
night at Prestburj. and the news he
brought eras a-ivrhing but consolatory.
He found Le Hzj strangely irritable. He
had been ::-:::2ed to his reserve, but,
likeBarbr :^ astonished at Lis temper.
He icl: iz:\[-i^'. ::-r:-. - :L ::-= Heath
that it was a h ;: :. ^ ri ^^ ~": le
heard from Mimics : i : L t : : f Lad
promised to go with hfr :: : :: : : malcontent?.
he u:rf^ : ::: he: :: rail on
his: :: :: :-:v : ': :: she z-ijz'. :: excite
him. h:.-:::, "h:ie^sf^ his ^;. '. "t^ ;;::-:s::-3-
tion in the libra : ; , : his s e i s i : i " . .: e s 5 in
his : f--hr :::i Mr. Sellon of the
gs L i v::.dj money, and he said

tha: eras :. :hhi:.h:-r-rh':h .is: ':e 5f::'e'

-•as a iir^coiny aiier-

nooij, for the hi; :i. ^v:!:ds had gone off
with the suiishiLiC ;o :^o east, and westerly
breezes had brought the rain to Courtleroy.

Mimics assured her uncle that the change
would bring up the spring flowers and
further vegetation generally : to say nothing
of giving ease to the aged, suffering from
rheumatism. He disliked all allusion to
age and rheumatism, and she feared she
had made an unfortunate speech ; nevertheless,
he requested her to remain when
Sellon joined them, primed for a disagreeable
encounter. The trio were seated
round the table, with heaps of documents,
brought by the lawyer, in their midst. Le
Eoy looked bored, Sellon brisk, Mimics
attentive. Sellon said that he must begin
at the beginning ; which was lack of funds.
Every available penny had been spent.
Le Roy, remembering Barber's announcements,
awoke at once.

I have been to Prince's Gate,' said the
lawyer, 'and drew from your butler with
some difficulty that the tradesmen were
expecting their weekly and other payments,
but that no one but your valet, Barber,.

knew anything about them. I then went
to Spencer, the London bankers, and
found your account overdrawn, and they
in a pretty fix at Units' stoppage of payment.
I knew already that there was no
prospect of money either here or at Prest-bury,
so I came to the conclusion that your
only chance of obtaining it — and it must
be had — is by either selling or letting your
town house. One of my clients, Lord
Mardofen, who, unlike the general run of
the nobility, is rich as Croesus, would take
it at once for the season and give us
our own terms, paying part in advance.
He has heard of the wonderful appointments
and ornamentation of the house —
as who has not? and might be inclined to
purchase if necessary ; but, pro tern., a
few thousands would suffice to pay off
servants and meet present liabilities.'

Thus far Mr. Sellon had hurried through
his disagreeable task without looking at
Le Roy, making believe to arrange a number

of bills which lay before him, but he
now paused and glanced up, just to seethe
effect produced by his proposal.
3Iimica had been watching it all the time.
Both were surprised at the apparent nonchalance
of Le Eos manner, and the
curtness of his words.

Manage it as you will, Sellon, only
don't bore me,' he said.

You won't make a second Searle of me,'
returned Sellon, drily. 'Unless you go
through all the affairs, and take Courtleroy
in hand yourself, I throw them up.'

My niece, Miss Marmont, knows all
about them, and will undertake them with
you,' said Le Roy, coldly. 'If my townhouse
is let, I go abroad.'

• Then you must find another lawyer,
Mr. Le Rov. If I undertake the affairs,
you must remain here and economise as
best you may. Miss Marmont will, I am
sure, be your right hand, but all our hands
and heads too will be needed to remedy the

oppression, neglect, and swindling of the
past twenty years.'

Mr. Sellon ! sou forget !*

Not at all, sir. I merely speak plainly.
You trusted Searle ; he has ruined you.
You trusted Barber ; he is as honest as he
is consequential, only unequal to the management
of a great London establishment.
Now you would trust me, and I decline to
be trusted, unless you overlook me. If
Miss Marmont is wise, she will follow my
example.'

*I would do my best to help you, and
to make you happy,' here broke in Mimics,
looking kindly at her uncle. ' If only you
could make up your mind to remain here
for a time at least, say through the summer
and autumn, I think the people might
be pleased and satisfied. So little would
serve to give them encouragement and
help, and your presence would be everything.'


Impossible !' exclaimed Le Roy, rising

E^eiuiig and twilig^fc were approatiaDgg

zzi'i the ^^^TiT'^g- afternoon was doll and

'i-:-~" . r T : : re of t^li^ fiecB looked limB

- 7 — tZ*s- the birds 1 : l :-

s: . : :-ishmbss:! - ^

garden, tmmpliz
a shady walk tL

i^g into ils

but be w: :.

wood-wal£ :::
bad not f i

or str-fir:- tl: .:.
sc :-5: :L : 7 :

ev^^ r . ; :

quitted by wild-ducks, and full of rushes
and sedges.

She was quite breathless when she
reached the stile over which he had strode
easily, and she paused a moment on the
wood side of it, to glance down into the
field and water that lay below. She saw
her uncle's form distinctly, though by this
time twilight had set in. He was standing
on the brink of the pond, as if looking at
the wild-ducks that he had startled, and
which, with their young, were fluttering
and swimming about in much confusion,
and filling the air with their harsh notes.

She knew the pond was deep at the spot
near which he stood, and a sudden terror
seized her. Had he come all this way to
put an end to his life ? Was he momentarily
beside himself, as she had thought
when he left the house ? and, if so, ought
she to return to the keeper's cottage, and
summon aid? He moved towards the
very edge of the pond, and stood there a

moment with folded arms. She was over
the stile and down the path in a second,
reaching him unperceived just in time to
hear the words, ' I will end all this,' and
to see him plant his feet as if with the
intention of jumping into the cold, dark
water.

It was the work of a moment. She
stood behind him, clasped her arms round
him, and with all her strength, pulled him
backwards. Both fell to the ground, he
on the very edge of the pond, she somewhat
withdrawn from it. His feet and
legs were immersed in the water, but he
was saved ! She rose instantly, and seeing
his condition, and that he was struggling
to rise also, and muttering incoherent
words as he did so, she laid hold of his
arm to assist him. With great difficulty,
she dragged him from the water, and he
finally got up, being unconscious of the
identity of his deliverer, who was all the
while at his back.

VOL. II. P

The partial bath must have brought him
to his senses, for he stood a few seconds
regarding his dripping extremities, and
then began to stamp as if to get rid of the
water and duck-weed that saturated and
impeded them. The cold grey of the damp
March evening enveloped the scene, and a
heavy mist was rising from pond and
meadow. The aroused wild-fowl still continued
their cries, in which the neighbouring
night-birds joined, and even brave
Mimics shuddered as she stood wondering
what she should do or say. Her actions
or words were anticipated, for her uncle
turned round and said, with something of
his usual manner, but in a quivering, half-drowned
voice,

Thank you. I slipped and fell.'
As he suddenly faced Mimics, there in
the semi-darkness, enveloped in cloak and
hood, and surrounded and even half-obscured
by the thick mist, it is not surprising
that he took her for some unearthly

creature, and uttered a sharp cry as he
shrank backwards towards the pond.

Have you come to haunt me at such a
crisis, Margaret ? You, who have ruined
my life ?' he said, sternly.

In another moment he would have been
again at the brink of the pond, and would
probably have fallen in backwards in his
retreat from his imaginary lost love, had
not Mimics seized and held his hands, outstretched
as if to wave off his spiritual
visitant.

It is I, uncle ; it is Mimics. Take care,
or you will be in again,' she cried, as
naturally as she could.

She drew him towards her, and led him,
unresisting, to a felled tree near at hand.
He sank down upon it, and either fainted
or fell into the strange fit from which
Barber had aroused him, when, once
before, he imagined he had seen the apparition
of his Margaret. He was evidently
unconscious, and Mimics had no means of

p2

bringing him to life. She was swift of
foot as of thought, and ran past the pond
and up the path which led to the keeper's
cottage, calling aloud as she went. Her
cries had reached the house, and brought
out the keeper, who met her at the stile.

Come,' was all she could articulate, and
he followed her back to her uncle.

Tom is within, Miss ; we can get him
up between us,' said the keeper, putting
a whistle to his lips and giving a shrill
call.

The sound partially aroused Mr. Le
Eoy, who made an attempt to rise, with
the words, 'Where am I ?' on his lips. It
also brought two dogs bounding to the
spot through the obscurity, and followed
by Tom.

You are at home, please, sir,' said the
keeper. ' Will you let me help you up the
bank ?'

'Margaret — Mimics — where are you?' he
murmured.

Here, uncle. Will you try to come
home vrith me ?' she replied.

Home ' eras an impossibility ; but she
and the keeper managed to prevail on him
to rise, and allow himself to be helped up
the bank, and over the stile.

"We drill rest a fear moments at the
keeper's lodge, uncle said Mimics, with
decision.

He was too weak both in mind and body
to resist, and the two men half carried
him through the dark wood to the clearing
there the cottage stood. Here a
kindly L; use wife received them, who was
loud in her exclamations of wonder when
Mimics entered first.

'It is my uncle. Mrs. Suckling. Would
you mind sending the children away she
said.

They were packed into an adjoining
room just in time for her uncle to be
brought in and laid on the settle before
the cheerful fire. The warmth revived

him, and a cup of hot tea restored the
circulation ; but again, when he looked
vaguely about him. he asked where he
was, and the reply was still the same, ' At
home

CHAPTER XIII.

TRUST TOUBSETJ

VThz.v Mr. Le Roy realized at last that he
was in the bouse of one of his keepers, he
strove to assume his usual manner. But,
when a man has made an attempt on his
life, it is almost impossible to pick up the
thread of that existence just where it was
before the loom that held the web was disarranged.
He could not clearly recall
what he had done, for when he left his
house he had become uncontrollable from
suppressed passion, and the events of the
preTious week.

I: seemed to him that he was butted on
ah 5:5 e?. and his intense pride and reserve.

together with the old festering wound,
refused to succumb to the misfortunes
which they had brought upon him. Everyone
conspired to insult and annoy him,
and his idol, self, was shattered. He had
no religion to sustain him against these
sudden attacks of ill-fortune, and the good
that was in him was too feeble to struggle
with the evil. Thus the demons that
possessed him suddenly urged him to the
deed which might have been fatal, but for
Mimics.

She understood him as by intuition, and,
in order to cover his confused manner,
almost interpreted the questions he asked
of the man and his wife, whose acquaintance
he made for the first time. They
made so bold ' as to propose that he
should remain at the keeper's lodge for
the night; this he declined, and Mimics sent
Tom to Courtleroy for the pony-carriage.

'Where is Mason ?' he inquired, as one
awaking from a dream.

*With Sir Joshua Carew, sir. He
haven't been here a many years replied
Suckling, the new man. Mason was keeper
in the old days.

'Why did he leave?' asked Le Roy,
angrily.

Mimics took Suckling's words from his
lips. He was about to say that the man
had left because Searle accused him of
selling the game on his own account,
which the bailiff professed to sell for his
master; but she felt that her uncle had
been sufficiently goaded by Searle's offences,
and wished to spare him.

I can tell you all about that another
time, uncle,' she said. ' Do dry yourself
before the carriage comes.'

'What carriage?' he asked, moodily.

The only one I can drive,' she replied,
and he relapsed into silence.

No one ventured to speak, but all were
deep in thought. Suckling and his wife
were wondering what could have brought

their unexpected guests to the duck-ponds
in the dark ; and Mimics was praying that
the solemn warning her uncle had had,
might arouse him to the reality of his
position, and bring him to his senses. She
believed that he was literally out of his
mind, and that his early disappointment
had unsettled him.

Tom brought the pony-carriage, according
to Mimics's order ; for she knew that
the old coachman could not see to drive
in the dark. The park road was partly
through the wood, and the old lamps were
lighted in the old vehicle. As they were
dim enough, Tom had furnished himself
with a lantern, and Mimics bade him
precede the carriage until it emerged into
the open. Their young lady's word was
law with all the inhabitants of Courtleroy.
The road was near the house, and the
Sucklings attended Le Roy to the carriage
with lighted candles.

'A torchlight procession,' he said to

Mimics, who welcomed the words as
oracles.

Good-night, sir. Glad to have you at
Courtleroy. Everybody is glad, sir,' said
Suckling, heartily.

Thank you. Good-night,' was the
rejoinder. * Where is the coachman ?' to
Mimics.

Here,' she said, getting up beside him
and flourishing her whip. ' Unless you
prefer driving yourself,' she added, with
natural tact.

I never drive ; but are we quite safe ?'
he asked.

Miss Marmont's the best whip about,
sir,' put in Suckling. ' Old Shock's sure
o' foot, though he be a bit blind or so ; but
he's growing old like the coachman.'

Mimics wished Suckling in the pond
for his speech, and bade Shock proceed
with a cheerful chirrup. The old pony
trotted off obediently, and Le Roy said,
with grim humour, that she had earned

her reputation as ' The best whip about
easily.

Ah ! 1 never whip Shock,' she said,
but when the Prettjmans were at Summerlands
I used to drive them sometimes,
and Mrs. Prettyman was in mortal terror.'

Le Roy was also in some fear, but, seeing
Tom in front with his will-o'-the-wisp
lantern, he gave himself up to his charioteer.
After a long silence, he asked her,
shivering as he spoke,

^ "What brought you to the wild-duck's
pond so late ?'

I followed you, uncle,' she replied, with
natural truthfulness.

^ Why?'

Because you — you looked so worried
and unhappy when you left the hall.'

Why did you throw me down, and then
counterfeit a ghost ?'

You stood so near the pond, uncle, that
I believed you would fall in — or — were
thinking of putting an end to the great

sorrows you have had in this world. I
counterfeited nothing. I try to be real
and myself.'

What do you know of my sorrows T

I imagine them, and see their effect.
We all have sorrows, but God gives some
more grace to bear them than others : tho
poor especially.'

Ybu preach, Mimics.'

Do I ? It is unintentional ; forgive me
if I said what displeased you.'

Shall you take the events of this evening
for your text, and preach of them at
Courtleroy ?'

I shall never mention them, uncle.'

'Not to Miss Heath?'

Not even to her.'

Thank you. I think we understand
one another.'

Nothing more passed until they reached
Courtleroy. Here they found all in confusion
and anxiety. Tom had told the
coachman that the squire had fallen into

the water, and the news soon reached the
house. Mr. Sellon alone had an uncomfortable
suspicion, and was walking up and
down the drive in much suspense. Barber
had prepared his master's room — Stone a
hot posset — even Miss Heath had assumed
the responsibility of turning out blankets
and airing them by the school-room fire.
She was so engaged, when the sound of
the swing door at the end of the corridor
startled her, and she looked out. It was
Le Roy followed by Mimics and Barber.
She lost her self-possession for a moment,
and, in retreating, left the door open. Le
Eoy looked in as he passed, and, as if from
old habit, glanced at the wall opposite the
door, on which had been wont to hang the
picture of his Margaret. He saw only the
dust-framed space where it had been.

Put her back,' he said, sternly, pausing
and pointing to the half-covered spot, and
looking at Miss Heath.

Yes, uncle, it was I who unhung the

portrait,' returned Mimics, courageously.

He staggered slightly as lie passed on,
and with a * Good-night, Mimics. Thank
you,' entered his room. She joined Miss
Heath, but, before she could frame a reply
to that lady's questions, Mrs. Stone appeared
with the posset, and told Mimics
that Sellon was anxious to see her.

*I think we have done all we could,
miss,' she added. ' "We have taken the
big bath to master's room, and the large
kitchen kettle full of boiling water, and
here are blankets, and, if only he will
drink this and stop in bed, he may be
saved a fever. However did he manage to
fall into that awful pond, and how did you
get there ?'

Mimics did not stay to reply to these
questions — she had, subsequently, hundreds
of similar ones to evade — but went straight
to Mr. Sellon in the hall. He anticipated
her lame explanations by beginning,

I understand it all, Miss Marmont. A

case of felo-dense. It was partly my fault,
for I got into a passion and pressed him
too hard. He would not speak to me when
he met me just now ; but he can't be in
his senses. I heartily hope a good attack
of rheumatic fever may chain his body and
divert his mind while you and I manage
his affairs. How did you save him ? Oh !
I understand. A secret between you and
the suicide. Do you know that we might
shut him up for this, and get all the property
settled on you as next of kin —
heiress, in short? What do you say
to it ?'

'Mr. Sellon, what can you mean?' asked
Mimics, indignantly.

That many a poor fellow is in a lunatic
asylum for less cause than this escapade
and the eccentricities that preceded it.
You would be a better landlord than he.
Excuse my wrong gender, but in these
days of female M.d's and B.A.'s sex
don't signify. You needn't look so angry,

Miss Marmont, I am only jesting, though
it would be a glad day for Courtleroy if
the Lord Chancellor were to make you one
of his numerous heirs, and we could ^' inhibit
" your uncle, 'pro iem^

Were he put away tomorrow I would
not take a shilling of his money. But do
you think him really insane T asked Mi-mica,
turning very pale.

'No, I do not; and if we could depend
upon the rheumatic fever, and so prevent
his going abroad, I believe he might come
round. But 1 have frightened you. What
an old fool I am. Let me ring.'

There would be no one to answer. I
am only cold.'

You are a brick, Miss Marmont,
and . . .'

Mimics, your uncle wishes to know if
you have taken cold here broke in Miss
Heath. ' He sent Barber to inquire, and
I came.'

I am all right. How is he ?' replied

VOL. II. Q

Mimics, joining in a laugh which the law-e'er
could not restrain.

Barber says be is languid as a lamb,
and has taken a sedative.'

He'll do ! He has probably taken
fright said Sellon, and even Miss Heath
smiled at the recollection of the valet's face
and manner.

He bad taken fright in effect, and it
subsequently evolved from Barber that he
had submitted to the remedies prepared
for him, hot bath, blankets, posset and all.

He has never before been so amenable'
Barber said, *and, Miss Marmont, I am
thankful to say that I left him asleep,
and in a profuse — alien — I beg your
pardon, ma'am, but it is not a word for
ears polite.'

In spite of ' The profuse — ahem !' Sellon
had his wish, and the master of Courtleroy
was so ill the following day that the
nearest medical man was summoned. It
was he who had attended Mimics in her

illness, when she first came to Courtleroy ;
happily neither she nor Miss Heath had
needed him since ; but they knew him
well. It need scarcely be said that the
confusion caused by previous events was
trifling; compared with this. Mr. Sellon
took counsel with Mimics, and promised
her to continue the management of the
affairs until her uncle was capable of
undertaking it, which, he assured her,
would be ' never '; said he would put up at
the ^ Prestbury Arms,' whence he could runover
to Courtleroy, when he was not in
London; and that she must be steward,
amanuensis, confidential clerk, and lawyer.
Both he and Miss Heath perceived that
Mimics was herself suffering from the exposure
and shock to the system of the
previous evening. She was profoundly
religious, and the thought of a fellow-creature,
and that her nearest relative,
wishing to take his life, and appear unprepared
before his Creator and his judge,

q2

g gil

serf

Bet

L tlieref ore Mr. Sdkm did nofc
r iiizi. Berber was the only

::iiz: :i : :i :?r no one dse

lawyer.

to Ulla

reconc

retom 10 L:

to coe:

that's La
moi::i :: >

establishment, hour, became in due time
only too apparent.

Sellon remained yet a few days in the
country, during which he ascertained with
some accuracy the state of affairs, and
detailed them to Mimics, either personally
or by letter. Searle, who could not be
traced, had embezzled his employers
money and oppressed his tenants — had
even appropriated Mimics's pension for
some years and stinted her and the establishment
at Courtleroy, in order to supply
money for various speculations in which
he was eDgao:ed with the Units.

It would be tedious and unprofitable to
enter into the details of these speculations
and the consequent ruin of all concerned
in them. Sooner or later, failure is sure
to follow unholy greed, but, unfortunately,
the innocent super with the guilty. In
the gigantic frauds of the few, the many
are the victims, and, as in the case of the
firm of Units and their coadjutor Searle,

thousands lose their all and sink, to keep
the speculators afloat, maybe for a few
days or months, or at best a year or so, on
the frail raft of hazardous enterprise.
Still there is no excuse for those who, like
Le Eoy, trusted implicitly to one man, and
let his affairs go, haphazard, without looking
into them. These are commonplaces,
no doubt, but great failures and consequent
ruin occur so often that one wonders
why victims allow themselves to be victimized,
seeing that everybody is alive to the
possible shortcomings of everybody else.

CHAPTER XIV.

MUSIC HAS CHARMS.

'A LITTLE music might rouse him, ma'am.
One may as well be out of the world as
without music,' said Barber to Mimics,
when they were consulting upon the state
of Mr. Le Eoy some weeks after the scene
at the wild-duck's pond.

^I am not musical, Mr. Barber, and the
piano is out of tune,' replied puzzled
Mimics, who was getting very anxious
about her uncle.

He still kept his bed, though he was not
exactly chained to it by rheumatic fever as
the lawyer desired, but rather by a chill
and nervous debility. He declined seeing

anyone but Barber, and the household was
in a state of excitement all day long, striving
to satisfy the valet's demands for his
masters gratification. The doctor said
he must be roused ; but who or what could
rouse him? Sir Joshua had called and
called ; even Lady Helena had ventured a
visit ; Mr. Leste had made daily inquiries,
and all the neighbours who had known
him formerly had once more rejoiced
Courtleroy with their presence ; but Barber
had the same message for all : ' Mr. Le
Eoy's compliments, and is much obliged
for kind inquiries, but is unable to leave
his room.'

Mimics, who was roused, if her uncle
was not, received ber visitors gladly, and
made herself and her one reception-room
as pleasant as possible. She suddenly
found herself converted from a recluse to
a lady of society, and even Miss Breath
declared that she acquitted herself well
As to Sir Joshua, he became as anxious as

was Lady Helena to join the estates of
Courtleroy and Monkton. But his son was
in that fearful Africa, and who knew if he
would ever leave it and the native hordes
alive? He discoursed to Mimics of Boers,
niggers, and English soldiers and sailors
indiscriminately, abusing them all by turns,
and the Government always.

I have hit on a plan, Miss Heath,' said
Mimics, after her consultation with Barber.
'I will ask Barbra to come and sing tous.
My uncle will hear her if we leave
the door open, and, if music is to rouse him,
surely hers will. She need only touch the
piano occasionally.'

He will not like it, Mimics. It will
remind him of old times when your mother
and Margaret played,' responded Miss
Heath.

So much the better if he is to be
roused,' said Mimics.

She hurried off to the vicarage, and held
a consultation with Mr. Leste and Barbara,

which ended in her persuading the latter
though reluctantly, to return with her.
On their way, Barbara said she had heard
that morning from Horace, and that he
had sent a long message to Mimics.

You had better read it,' she added, taking
the letter from her pocket, and looking
keenly at Mimics, who received it with
a quick gesture and blush.

The message was one of earnest affection,
concluding with the words : ' Tell
her I have the wild posy still.' There
were not many secrets in the Leste
family, and they all knew how well Horace
loved Mimics.

'Dear Barbra, I wish he were safe at
home was all that Mimics said.

You will send him a few lines in my
next letter ?' asked Barbara.

Oh, yes, if you wish, but I have now
so much on my mind that I seem to have
time for nothing but actual business. If
I cannot write, tell him that I wish him

and our other friends safe at home out of
these unnatural wars ; only I cannot help
hoping that each step we take is an advance
towards the suppression of slavery.
Oh! Barbra, that has always been at my
heart ever since I was a child, just as it
was at poor mamma's, and is at George
Hope's.'

You write to him ?' said Barbara, reproachfully,


Of course I do. Is he not my younger
brother — am I not his sister ? We keep
our journals now as regularly as ever, but
I find his much altered since he has been
in the army, and the change troubles me.'

^ He must have grown into a man,
Mimics, since you saw him last.'

Scarcely he is — he must be a boy still.
At least, he is so by comparison with me.
I always think of him almost as my son.'

Mimics laughed, and Barbara, looking
at her beautiful, animated face, said,
hastily,

'You will send your love to Horace,
Mimics ?'

Of course. Perhaps he and George
and — Captain Carew have met ere this.
How strange it seems !'

'Yere. "When they return, you will
have to decide amongst them

Barbra, how frigidly you speak ! how
changed you are ! If you could only
believe that such thoughts are distasteful
to me, and that my one desire is to devote
my life to good works and to helping my
uncle, and this is how I am beginning !
Dawdling and dallying with you, instead
of trying to rouse him. Quick, Barbra!
quick.'

Mimics was soon far in advance of the
quieter, statelier Barbara, who, however,
hastened after her. They were not long
before they reached the school-room, where
they found Miss Heath as usual. She said
that Barber had been there, and that Dr.
Lumley had also been. Both had agreed

in the necessity of rousing the patient, and
Barber had persisted in his opinion that
music was the best chance.

Begin at once, dear Barbra !' said
Mimics. ' It should be sacred music at
such a time. George says he likes the
old masters and oratorios, and the music
you love best yourself; so you must please
him. Sing what you will.'

Barbara misdoubt her powers, as well
as the propriety of exercising them under
circumstances so peculiar ; but she believed
implicitly in her father, and obeyed him.
She seated herself at the piano, and began
sone of Handel's sacred songs. Her voice
was clear, sympathetic, and penetrating ; a
mezzo-soprano, with a compass mounting
and descending beyond that special sphere.
She had not sung long before a door was
heard to open slowly, and, when Mimics
glanced out into the passage, she saw that
it was that of her uncle's room.

ego on !' she whispered, breathlessly,

standing on tiptoe on the threshold of the
school-room.

Barbara went on, and Handel still
echoed through the passages. Mimics
heard a voice and stir in the invalid's
apartment, succeeded by the appearance
of Barber, who arrested her by the words,
uttered in an oracular whisper,

He is roused. I knew he would be.
Will the prima-donna sing him something
of Mozart ? Let it be cheerful, ma'am, if
you please. He is fond of the " Nozzle di
Figaro." '

Mimics could not help smiling at the
incongruity of things, as Barber returned
to the sick-room, and she delivered the
message.

You are the prima-donna, and are requested
to sing of the wedding of Figaro !
Who knows what may be the result ?' said
Mimics.

In a moment Barbara began, ' Voi che
sapete,' which she knew only too well, for

Captain Carew loved it, and both of them
had known well enough die cosa e more.

That is for a contralto. Margaret
used to sing it exclaimed Miss Heath, in
mortal terror.

But stoical Barbara went through with
it, and as she ended, the door, which had
slowly opened, was as slowly closed, and
there was a strange silence. She had not
time to stay for results, but was obliged to
hasten home to a sick mother and her
multifarious duties. Soon after she had
left. Barber appeared with the wonderful
news that his master was about to get up.

' - Music has charms to soothe the savage
breast," ' he said to Mimics. ' Not that
my master is savage — far from it, he is
too civilized ; but music is his passion and
mine, therefore I speak from experience.
He says that if it is not inconvenient to
you, ma'am, he will join you here this
evening.'

Here !' exclaimed Mimics, in some dismay

* How can we make him comfortable
r

I will do my best to arrange ; but,
being roused, we must not let him relapse
into a dormant state, as Dr. Lumpy
suggested.'

The oracular Barber was right, and
once more Mimics's inventive powers were
put to the test to re-organize the old
school-room. Some great change must
have come over her uncle, as the result of
that awful night ; or was he, she reflected,
out of his mind. A terror took possession
of her, and she contemplated the possibility
of another attempt on his life. Miss
Heath announced her intention of leaving
her alone with him at first, because Barber
had pointedly addressed her, and had not
named Miss Heath.

She had not, however, much time for
reflection. The room was scarcely ready,
and Lady Margaret's portrait replaced,
when there were symptoms of her uncle's

VOL. II. B

advent. Barber brought wraps, which
were arranged over Miss Heath's high-backed
easy-chair, and they were soon
followed by Mr. Le Roy, leaning on his
valet's arm. Miss Heath made her escape
before he appeared, and terrified Mimics
met him at the door. It must be remembered
that she had not seen him since that
drive home in the dark, and the * I am so
glad you are able to leave your room,'
with which she greeted him, were anything
but natural words from her. She longed
to embrace him, and to say a hundred
things which were uppermost in her mind,
instead of merely offering her hand, and
hazarding that cold, calculated sentence.

Thank you, Mimics. Are you quite
well?' he said, and his manner betrayed
some emotion.

He looked very ill. Mimics was frightened
at the change in his appearance. He
was dressed with care, as usual, but his
iron-grey hair and moustache seemed to

have whitened, and his pale face to have
assumed a leaden hue. He took the seat
prepared for him, and he and his niece
were alone together.

Will you allow me to drink tea tete-astute
with you ?' he said. * I see your tea-table
is arranged, and I feel sure Miss Heath
will not mind imbibing hers elsewhere.
Her '^ silence " always ^' gives consent,"
and we know one another too well to care
to be much together. Intimate knowledge
breeds dislike, as familiarity contempt.'

Mimics had yet to learn that her uncle
was the most sarcastic and cynical of men,
and her face betrayed curiosity and amusement.
She was delighted to find that he
could be anything but a felo-dense j as
Sellon had called him ; words which had
haunted her ever since. She replied that
she would seek Miss Heath, and explain
that he was not well enough to see her
as yet.

Diplomatic as well as business-like and

r2

sensitive. What a miraculous girl !' he
muttered, as she left the room.

She returned almost immediately, having
found Miss Heath only too glad to be released,
and anxious to pay a visit to
Mrs. Leste, with whom she had contracted
a friendship. She busied herself at
once with the tea-table, which she drew
near her uncle, and they were soon seated
on either side of it, with cups of hot tea
before them. It was a cold April, and
the east winds still prevailed, so the
fire was welcome to the shivering invalid,
and the steaming kettle sang cheerfully.

This is what is termed, I suppose,
sociable,' began Mr. Le Roy. ' You must
get the piano tuned or procure a new one.
That was a courageous venture of yours,
Mimics,' he added.

You are musical, uncle T she returned,
timidly.

Yes. I should never have left my bed

in that dreary room of yours but for that
voice. Whose was it ?'

Barbara Leste's. You saw her at
Overton.'

The curate's daughter, eschewed by
Lady Helena.'

^ His eldest daughter. Have you heard
of her, uncle ?'

^ Sir Joshua named her casually during
his agreeable visit. She will come again,
I hope. You do not sing, Mimics. So
much the better, for you can never arouse
dead feelings by foolish love-songs, such
as she sang. You are not in love, I hope ?'

This sudden question was accompanied
by a piercing glance of inquiry from the
usually cold grey eyes, which startled
Mimics. She coloured, and felt that her
uncle misinterpreted the blush. His countenance
became sombre, and the nostrils
began to work.

I do not quite understand what to be in

love means she said, frankly. * I have
read and heard of it, but the expression is
problematical and ungrammatical. I know
what ifc is to love and to be loved, but the
in love " is simply ridiculous.'

It is madness — it is loss of self-respect,
self-restraint, manliness, purpose, religion
even, and for what ? Look at that portrait
and it will tell. For life-long anguish
and neglect of duty — for — ruin.'

My poor uncle ! If only I could help
and comfort you.'

These pitiful words were drawn from
Mimics by the sudden excitement of Le
Roy, whose voice rose and fell as he uttered
them, while gazing at the likeness
of the Lady Margaret, and pointing towards
it.

You may help me to forget and begin
life anew,' he replied, more calmly. ' You
witnessed my sin, you may teach me to
repent.'

She rose instinctively and stood beside
him. There was a wildness in his look
and manner which terrified her. Once
more she laid her hand on his shoulder
and pressed her lips on his forehead ; she
breathed a prayer as she did so.

I will devote my life to you, God helping
me,' she said.

Thank you; sit down,' he replied.

His face resumed its calm, his voice its
measure ; he might have been stone, but
for that sensitive nostril, and Mimics knew
not what he suffered, when he spoke again
in his stateliest manner.

Henceforth you are mistress here.
What has happened during my illness ?
"What of Searle and Sellon ? of money and
of means ?'

Searle has not been heard of. Mr.
Sellon has let your London house, and the
rent will keep Courtleroy going till the
affairs are settled, and, if you think well,

will help to restore the place. The tenants
are hopeful and everyone will rejoice if
you will settle here.'

Mi mica spoke rapidly, scarcely daring to
glance at Le Roy. She felt rather than
saw his look of anger at the announcement
that the town house was in the possession
of another, and awaited anxiously some
sort of response. It came with measured
deliberation. Some remarkable change
had operated during that month of illness.

I shall remain at Courtleroy for the
present, premising that you communicate
with Sellon and the tenants. Stop, Mimics,
do not expostulate ; I cannot go amongst
them yet. But I will do them justice and
repair the breaches of that ungrateful
rogue, Searle. We will restore this house
gradually, you and I ; for I can bear no
third person. Miss Heath must leave.'

Miss Heath leave !' repeated Mimics, in
unfeigned dismay. * Where can she go ?
What can I do without her ?'

You have promised to devote yourself
to me, and she can scarcely be necessary
to so helpful and resolute a young lady as
you are.' This was said with some irony.
Of course we must pension or provide
for her elsewhere.'

^ She is as proud as you are, uncle !' cried
Mimics, indignantly. ' Although she has
devoted herself to us, she will accept no
alms.'

You must settle that between you. She
recalls my past at every turn, and I could
not remain here if she did. You can still
choose between us. Sbe has certainly
more claim on your consideration than I
have.'

This was said with some sort of feeling,
and Mimics was touched. She perceived
that everything must give way to her
uncle's prejudices if he were to continue
at Courtleroy. But what of Miss Heath ?
He was gazing at Mimics while playing
absently with his tea-spoon. His brow was

contracted, and the memories of years
were seething in his mind. She looked at
him, and was alarmed by the strange and
irritable expression of his features. The
scene at the wild-duck's pond arose before
her, and she remembered that the opposition
and contradiction of Mr. Sellon had
been the turning-point in that catastrophe.
She must content him at all risks.

'I will do as you wish, uncle. Miss
Heath has visits to pay, and '

Let her pay them at once. I will not
see her again.'

He rose as he said this, and walked
towards the west window, turning his
back on the portrait of his Margaret. It
was evident to Mimics that events connected
with that sketch and the schoolroom
had decided Miss Heath's fate. The
sun was just thinking of setting behind a
distant wooded hill, and rosy beams penetrated
through some wild cherry-trees clad
in their virgin white, to the window where

be stood. He turned and said he would
walk towards the sunset.

*Maj I go with you, uncle?' asked
Mimics, alarmed.

If you like. But you need have no
fear. I shall not visit the dick's-pond
to-night.'

He hurried down to the hall : she followed,
and they were soon afield. Mimics,
with admirable tact, urged him *to come
and see the garden of blue hyacinths in
the wood, before they hung their heads in
sleep.' He went, and she found that the
love of flowers was shared by each, and
that a sudden boyish enthusiasm awakened
in him at sight of a wilderness of daffodils
rejoicing in the sun. Herrick's

Fair daffodils, we weep to see you
Haste away so soon,'

rose to the lips of both, and something
like a tear to the eye of the disappointed
and misanthropic owner of that fair but
neglected property.

CHAPTER XV.

SHORT NOTICE.

The sun had nearly set when Mimics and
her uncle returned to the house. Her
arm was within his, and she felt that the
bloom of the flowers, the vesper-chaunts of
the birds, and the soothing influence of
slowly-dying day had been more effectual
in creating sympathy between them than
had any previous events. The ways of
God in Nature are mysterious, and tend to
still the perturbations which the human
has aroused.

Mr. Le Roy went to his room, Mimics
in search of Miss Heath. Her temporary
joy at her uncle's sudden display of natural

feeling vanished before the prospect of
telling her friend what he had said concerning
her. She found her in the schoolroom,
and her manner soon betrayed that
she was burdened by a secret. But Miss
Heath was not one who could help to
unlade the mind, as Mimics knew, so she
began by making inquiries concerning the
family at the vicarage. She learnt by
degrees that Barbara and her father were
well-pleased that the singing had produced
some effect, and that Mr. Leste intended
to call on the morrow. Miss Heath had
taken tea with them, and looked quite
cheerful.

The little change has done you good,
Milly dear, after your long anxiety,' began
Mimics.

Any change is good. It is time that
you should have one. What does your
uncle say ?' replied Miss Heath.

I have small chance of change ; but I
am as strong as a horse. He intends to

take up his abode here, and adopts me con
amove ; only I must devote myself entirely
to him

^ Self ! always self ! What does he mean
by that ?'

I suppose that I am to be, as Mr.
Sellon expressed it, steward, amanuensis,
companion and all. But, dear Milly, what
is to become of you ?'

Of me ? I shall be very lonely.'
Would you not like to pay your long-promised
visit to Mrs-pretty man, dear?
It would do you a world of good. She is
always asking you, and you might, perhaps,
be with her when George returns.'

A flush overspread Miss Heafch's pale
face.

You want to get rid of me, Mimics.'

No, no, dearest friend, I never wish to
part with you.'

Then he does:'

Mimics burst into tears, and threw her
arms round her patient, silent, long-sufferings

friend. She knelt at ber side, and
took her cold hands, but extracted no
other words, and spoke none herself.
What could she say? The secret was
guessed, and half the burden removed ;
but the worst part remained behind. She
could not repeat to Miss Heath what her
uncle had said. At last,

'Dear Milly, say something,' she sobbed.

I have nothing to say, Mimics. I will

go.'

He only says that you recall his past.'

I know. I understand. He is right.
I will go at once.'

I cannot part with you ; I cannot bear
it. My one true and life-long friend,'
sobbed Mimics, abandoning herself to a
grief she was surprised to feel, for had she
not sometimes been guilty of wishing
to be rid of one whose secrecy irritated
her?

Mimics, you really love me !' exclaimed
Miss Heath, laying her hands on the head

of the kneeling girl, and letting fall a few
slow, sad tears.

Love sou ! Have you not been everything
to me? Mother, teacher, friend, all
in one. And I have been often so ungrateful
! Oh ! Milly, will you forgive
me, once and for ever. Often as I have
said those words to you as child, I never
felt them as I now do, as woman.'

Hush, Mimics ! you will break my
heart.'

These words from Miss Heath ! They
terrified Mimics almost as much as her
uncle's excitement had done. She sprang
up, and perceived that her friend was
breathing with difficulty, and that she was
overcome by the emotion to which she was
at last obliged to give way.

Everyone I ever loved !' she said, as
Mimics stood over her. ' It is hard to go
forth into the world again ; alone, forlorn,
old !'

*You are not old, dearest friend, nor

forlorn, so long as Mrs. Prettjman lives,
nor alone, while I exist. Our separation
will only be temporary, for my uncle will
tire of me, and then I shall fly to you.'

No one tires of you, darling, because
you are unselfish said Miss Heath, a concession
so unexpected that Mimics was
moved by it ; never before having been so
praised by one ever scant of compliment.
'Must I leave at once?' added the poor
lady, struggling to recover composure.

Certainly not. We must manage somehow.
It seems unfortunate that my uncle
should have returned to this room ; indeed,
everything is strange, but it must
work together for good if he remains
amongst his people ; for I feel sure there
is kindness somewhere below the crust of
selfishness.'

What did he say about me?' interrupted
Miss Heath.

Mimics told her as well as she could,
hinting at the offer made to provide for

VOL. II. s

her as delicately as possible. This met
with an instant cold refusal.

I can still work she said.

While they were talking, they were
surprised to hear Le Roy's door open, and
his step in the passage. To their relief he
passed the school-room, and went downstairs.
Soon afterwards Barber appeared
with a message to the effect that his master
would like to see Mimics when she was at
liberty. He expected dinner in the hall at
eight o'clock, and the establishment was
astir to satisfy his expectations, for the
half-hour bell had rung.

You had better dress,' said Miss Heath,
and Mimics made herself presentable.

Now, dear, you must rest in this chair
till I come back,' she said, placing Miss
Heath comfortably, kissing her, and leaving
her to her overwhelming thoughts.

She found her uncle seated behind the
screens, which she had managed to arrange
so as to make of the hall two rooms.

Barber's * Diner is served !' sounded, and
was received by her uncle as a sort of grim
jest. To her amazement he asked, when
Barber was out of the room, where Miss
Heath was. She replied that she had
dined in the middle of the day, and was
resting after her walk to the vicarage.
She spoke with a slight embarrassment
which her uncle perceived.

You have already told her ?' he said.

She has guessed.'

What did she say ?'

'That she will leave at once, is still
able to work, and would not be pensioned.'

I did not mean at 07ice, Mimics. Let
her remain as long as she likes, only her
presence oppresses me. There should be
room for us both in this large house. Will
you set the painters and paperers to work
and render some apartment habitable ?'

Mimics could not help laughing at the
prospect of superintending these men in
addition to servants and tenants, and he

s2

looked displeased ; laughter grated on his
refined temperament, especially when raised
by his own idiosyncrasies.

You appear amused. May I ask at
what ?' he said.

Forgive me, uncle, but I think our
walk among the hyacinths and daffodils
has brought back my spirits. They have
been nowhere lately,' she replied, simply,
evading his question.

They brought only melancholy memories
to me. You have yet to learn that
flowers, like our hopes, wither and fade

Mimics thought of the posy she had
given Horace, and of his message to her ;
but the re-appearance of the valet stayed
further remarks, and the remainder of the
meal was passed in silence. She fancied,
however, that her uncle's face was less
rigid and his manner less petrified than it
had been before their walk, and she hoped
that the sweet influences of nature might
have softened him. She was the more

persuaded of this when the retired within
the screen. She had managed to arrange
a table at his right hand, on which were
writing materials, and the papers and
magazines which had accumulated during
his illness, and he thanked her for her
thoughtfulness.

I leave you to arrange with Miss Heath,
but do not let her be put to inconvenience.
We will talk of business tomorrow — tonight
I will run through the Times'' he
said.

You are really better, uncle ?' she asked.

*I am as well as usual. Good-night,
Mimics,' he answered.

She went to Miss Heath, and found her
writing letters. She had written to Mrs.
Pretty man, explaining what had passed,
and asking her to endeavour to find her
occupation.

Why didn't you say you would accept
her invitation, pending for the last tea
years T asked Mimics.

'I force myself on no one.' was the
characteristic reply.

But Mimics wrote also to Mrs. Pretty-man,
and told her frankly the state of the
case. She made such excuses as she could
for her uncle, and said she had no doubt
he would ask bliss Heath to return when
his affairs were settled ; but that at present
he wished to be alone with her.

I am myself in such a whirl of excitement
and astonishment she added, ' that
I realise nothing. George, who sees everything
at a glance, and understood my
uncle, would, I think, help me ; but events
have passed so rapidly that I have not
even time to reflect upon them. George
writes of the horrors of war, and forgets
himself and his honours in them. They
say he was born a soldier ; but, if so, with
a heart too tender for his profession. How
I wish you would take Summerlands this
autumn. It is to be let again. Lord and
Lady Manville are always meaning to

come back, but never coming. I know we
shall bear from you by return of post.*

Mimics spent the next thirty six hours
in a fever of anxiety. Poor Miss Heath
collapsed, and seemed to age perceptibly
during their course. She grew limper and
limper, and would not be roused. She reproached
no one, but sat with folded hands
during the day, and lay with sleepless eyes
all night. Mimics scarcely left her. telling
her uncle she was ill.

Beg her not to inconvenience herself
he said. * Pray use your own discretion,
Mimics.'

I am sure she will leave at all risks ;
but I depend on Mrs. Prettyman/ replied
Mimics, irritated by his apparent lack of
sympathy.

'Oh! The Prettymans. I should like
to see their remarkable j^roUge again.
Have you written to the workmen,
Mimics? Has the tuner arrived ? I am
sorry to give you so much trouble, but, as

Barber says, *' We are creatures of external
influence," and I shall die of ennui if
mine are not more propitious."

Here is Mr. Leste I He is an " external
influence " in himself,' cried Mimics,
running to admit the clergyman, whom
she left tete-astute with her uncle.

Two nights and one whole day had passed
since Miss Heath's conger when she was
effectually aroused by a messenger that
had never before invaded the retired precincts
of her existence ; this was nothing
less than a telegram.

Tor Miss Heath! for Miss Heath,'
echoed through the offices, as a porter
from Summerlands railway-station delivered
the missive.

What can have happened ? I don't
think she has a near relation in the world,'
said Mrs. Stone, as she herself carried it
to the school-room, where Mimics was
engaged in writing to summon the tuner.

It will frighten her to death,' said

Mimics, as she took the telegram, and prepared
to carry it to Miss Heath.

The man wants to know if there is an
answer, I once had one, and I had to
open it first to see. What is the world
coming to that people can't wait for the
post,' said Mrs. Stone.

Here is a message for you, dear. I
feel sure it is an invitation from Mrs.
Prettyman. May I open it ?* said Mimics
to Miss Heath, who was sitting ia her
room ; for she declined to inhabit the
school-room lest Mr. Le Rov should find
her there.

I see ! It is a telegram I' she cried,
starting up. ' I will open it.*

She did so nervously, and read aloud,
Come at once. We are delighted at the
prospect of seeing you. I want you particularly.
Will write ; but shall expect
you Thursday.' Then she covered her
eyes, and wept silently.

just as I expected. I wish I were

going with you exclaimed Mimics. ^ You
will be so happy with Mrs. Prettymau.'
I shall ! My oldest friend ; but . /
*but me no buts." Let us be thankful.'
Any answer, Miss Marmont?'
These last words, accompanying a tap
at the door, brought Miss Heath to her
feet, and in a few minutes she was her
quiet, reserved self again. She said she
would go on the morrow, if Mimics would
write to Mrs. Prettyman, and explain.
Mimics, who did not know what was best
under the circumstances, decided to let
events take their course, forgetting that
she was the victim, turn which way they
would. Happily for her, she forgot self
altogether ; but she felt sure that her
friend would be better off in London than
at Courtleroy, and contented herself by
assuring her that * it was only for a visit
So they set to work to pack and make
arrangements at once.

CHAPTER XVL

THE LOST Statuaries.

Once more at Summerlands' station. Ho
the sun shone, and the birds sang, and
the breezes moved the young leaves and
blossoms that sweet April morning ! But
Mimics was sadder at heart than when she-first
set foot on that platform a dozen
years before. A hundred times over she
repeated to Miss Heath, * Only a visit
dear and as often waited for a response,
but received none. She felt as if she were
sending forth a child to struggle through
the sloughs of the world instead of parting
with a woman forty years her senior. She
knew she was the stronger of the two, and,.

as sbe stood waiting for the train, her arm
swithin Miss Heath's, she lamented secretly
over her uncle's selfishness. He had excused
himself from taking leave of Miss
Heath, having frequently repeated his wish
that she should be put to no inconvenience,
and it was apparent that he desired
to be rid of her.

The household speculated over the telegram,
and assigned that as the reason of
her sudden departure. The domestics were
neither glad nor sorry, for Miss sheath was
a sort of negative that gave the ' No ' to
general sympathy. They would have been
heart-broken had it been Mimics.

'We shall soon meet again,' were the
girl's cheery words as the train steamed
up, and she placed Miss Heath and her
wraps in the carriage.

A final embrace, and a ^ God bless and
keep you, my darling,' and the whistle
sounded, and Mimics was again on the
platform, watching — watching the train

steam off, but not imagining the burst of
grief that overwhelmed her passive friend
when it moved away.

How-do-you-do, Miss Marmont ? Yours
is the first familiar face I have seen
sounded at her back, and, turning, she
fixed her eyes, full of tears, on the speaker.

She did not recognise him, but at the
moment the Monkton carriage drove up
and Sir Joshua and Lady Helena got out,
hurried to the platform, and also faced tho
seeming stranger.

You none of you know me,' he said,
sadly, and instantly Lady Helena's arms
were round him, while Sir Joshua grasped
his hand ; and Mimics knew that the pale
thin man was Captain Carew.

He was leaning on a stick, had a soldier-servant
near at hand, and looked a miserable
invalid. He was such, indeed, having
returned invalided from the war. When
the parental embraces were over, Mimics
advanced and held out her hand.

^ Not flattering, Miss Marmot he said,
grasping it warmly. * But I am glad to
reach England alive.'

ewe only heard yesterday that he was at
Portsmouth said Lady Helena, ' and not
at all before that he was coming home.'

I was put on board the Basilisk at the
last moment. Your friend George Hope
saw me off, Miss Marmont. He is a
young hero, if you please. But I shall
see you again. Good-bye.'

He staggered, and she assisted him involuntarily.
His man was busy with the
luggage, so he went to the carriage between
her and his father, leaning on their arms.
Lady Helena stayed behind to recover
from an emotion that she could not conceal.
As to Sir Joshua, he could not
speak for the tears he was trying to hide.
Their eldest son ! their pride and joy, to
return to them a broken-down man, looking
twice his age.

^ And is this war ? And will George
come back to me like this?' reflected
Mimics, as Captain Carew got into the
carriage with difficulty, and gave her a
sad little smile as he essayed to lift his
hat.

Oh, Miss Marmont, it breaks my heart
to see him thus,' whispered Lady Helena,
as she shook hands with Mimics.

He will soon get well now he has come
home,' returned Mimics, as hopefully as
she could ; for it seemed to her that she
had never seen anyone look so ill.

Tell Le Roy he must come and see us
now,' said Sir Joshua, ruefully, as they
drove off.

Mimics had driven Miss Heath to the
station, and as she drove the old pony and
the old coachman back, followed by the
cart that had conveyed the luggage, she
was engrossed in thought. Her sorrow at
parting with Miss Heath was lost in her

sympathy with the Carews, and she was
led to reflect that pain and grief are more
endurable at home than in banishment.
What if George were wounded — what if
he were killed ? She had never before
realised how much she loved this, her
adopted brother, nor how empty her life
would be without him. She thanked God
for him, and prayed that he might be
spared to her and his other friends.

He do look shocking bad,' mused the
coachman, half aloud, and roused Mimics
from her reverie. *Why, heave got death
in his face.'

She found her uncle awaiting her with
some show of impatience. He was actually
walking up and down the drive when
she approached the house, and, as he saw
her turn towards the yard, he went thereto
meet her.

'What makes you take the back entrance,
Mimics ?' he asked irritably.

Shock likes it, and we never contradict

him — do we, Shock ?' she replied, taking a
biscuit from her pocket and presenting it
to the pony.

They walked together to the house.

You are sure she has gone? I begin
to breathe freely,' he said. ' She was an
incubus, but I trust she has not taken
offence. How have you borne it all these
years ?'

Do you mean Miss Heath, uncle ? Yes,
she has gone ; I have seen her off. We
have done very well together. Thank you
for giving her to me so long.'

Le Roy looked inquiringly at Mimics,.
as if to ask whether she were in earnest,
and, seeing tears in her eyes, turned suddenly,
and asked her to show him her
flowers. This was the first act of consideration
she had seen in him, and she
led the way to her garden. She delivered
Sir Joshua's message as they went, and
told him of Mr. Carew's return and of his
state. He made no comment. When

VOL. II. T

they reached the garden, Mimics feared
that old memories were again crowding
upon him ; for he turned pale, and looked
sternly round him. They were, in effect,
called up by every tree and shrub ; by the
tame birds that frequented the spot; by
the path through the shrubbery, even by
the girl herself.

This was your mother's garden. You
represent her well. Another race, that is
all the difference,' he said.

He sat down, and, with a sudden and
unexpected effort of will, asked Mimics to
tell him about the tenants, the Leste
family, and the parish generally. She
obeyed, and succeeded in interesting him,
most especially in the Lestes. He even
questioned her about the children, saying
that it must be impossible that so large
a family could have been brought up respectably
on such slender means. Time
sped on while they were conversing, and a

certain calm stole over Le Roy that he
had not felt for years. It showed in his
face, though his niece scarcely understood
what he meant by some words that he let
fall. They were,

'We must economise, if we redeem the
past.'

She comprehended them, however, as
time went on. That afternoon, the tuner
arrived, and the next morning came sundry
workmen of Mimics's acquaintance.
Letters from Sellon had advised her to
incur no expense that was not absolutely''
necessary, so she summoned her country
friends, and held a consultation. Carpenters,
masons, and painters believed themselves
up to the mark, but she was not
sure of her paperhanger. She must consult
her uncle ; and, with the natural buoyancy
and decision born with her, she went
to the school-room, where he had ensconced
himself, and asked his advice.

T 2

'Whatever will cost the least money.
The rest I leave to you, as steward,' was
all he said.

She was not daunted. She had been so
long used to economy that she would not
have known how to launch out had the
means been at her disposal. She took
Barber into her confidence, and he was of
opinion that, whatever was done, must be
effected without his master's knowledge.

'Bit by bit, ma'am. I consider the
change in him a miracle ; but workmen
and women are his abhorrence in a house,
and we must keep them out of his way.
If only he had his musical instruments I
I feel lost without my violin.'

Poor Mr. Barber ! You shall be found
directly. I know of one. Come into the
library,' said Mimics. ' There it is, on the
topmost shelf. You must use the steps to
get at it.'

Once in the library. Barber mounted the
ladder with difficulty ; for he was not, as

lie expressed it, *as ageel as be used to
be.' He was well rewarded for his effort,
by finding, stowed away far back on the
shelf, a violin case. He forgot his lack of
agility as he descended, and brought down
his prize triumphantly.

I wonder — can it be ? Scarcely possible,
I fear,' he muttered, as, with trembling
fingers, he tried to open the musty,
mouldy case. 'It is ! It is ! It is the
long-lost Straduarius !' he shouted, holding
a shabby-looking violin up before Mimics,
and dancing with delight. ' I am reconciled
to Courtleroy ; master will be reconciled
to Courtleroy; music, Heavenly Maid,
will return. Excuse me. Miss Marmont.
It is worth a fortune.'

Then we will sell it, for we want ready
money,' laughed Mimics.

Off went Barber with his prize, and she
followed, curious to know what he would
do with it. He carried it to the schoolroom,
and for the first time in his life

went summoned into the august presence
of his master.

I have found it ! We have found it !
I have found the Straduarius !' he cried,
almost dancing; up to Le Eoy, who was
seated in Miss Heath's chair.

*Got the Straduarius,' echoed his master,
jumping up with an elasticity that
astonished Mimics. 'Found the Statuaries
! Where — how — impossible. I cannot
believe it.'

He took the instrument from Barber and
examined it.

You are right. It is — it is the Statuaries
! How, where did you get it ?' he
asked, enthusiastically.

Miss Marmont pointed it out to me, sir,'
replied Barber, recovering his respectful
manner.

It has been on the library shelf ever
since we came to Courtleroy, uncle,' said
Mimics, coming forward.

Thank you, Mimics. You have, indeed,

performed a benefit to mankind. It
is, or was, one of the most valuable in
England — in the world.'

Mr. Le Roy laid it affectionately on his
shoulder, and drew the bow across it.
There was sound in it still, despite the
lapse of time, the damp, the decay.

'As I say, sir, music never dies!' said
Barber. ' The heavenly maid is a consolation
under all the ills of life. She is
superior to all other female characters
either in novels or life, for she '' soothe's
one's senses to forgetfulness," and women
mostly irritate them.'

Mimics wondered how her uncle would
receive his valet's poetical speech, and perceived
that he was so much engrossed with
the treasure found for him that he had
not even heard it. She left them together,
thankful that her curiosity and love of
literature combined had led to the discovery
of an instrument so highly valued
by its owner ; but distressed to think that

a mere violin could call forth feelings that
human griefs and privations had failed to
move.

She found Barbara Leste awaiting her
in the hall. She had come to console
Mimics for the loss of Miss Heath, and to
inquire if there were anything she or anyone
belonging to her could do for her.
But Mimics forgot her own troubles at
sight of her friend, and began to consider
the best way of breaking to her the return
and illness of Captain Carew.

One friend departs and another arrives,'
she said, as carelessly as she could. * You
vail be surprised, dear Barbra, as I was,
to hear that Captain Carew has returned,
and got out of the train just as Miss
Heath got in. Sir Joshua and Lady
Helena came to meet him, having only
heard of his return to England yesterday.'
She spoke rapidly, without daring to
look at Barbara, who received the news in
silence. Had she looked at her she would

have seen a flushed face, an erect and
haughty figure, and an unflinching mien.

^ He has come from Africa invalided,
Barbra,' she added, timidly, glancing at
her friend at last. * He looks ill, and I
feel so sorry for him and his father and
mother. Poor Sir Joshua was crying, not
having heard of '

*Xot wounded! not dying!' broke in
Barbara, roused from forced apathy to
fearful interest.

Only what they call invalided, dear,'
replied Mimics, sitting down at her friend's
side, and taking her hand, which was, however,
soon withdrawn.

He will soon be better, I hope, now
he is at home again ; but indeed he looks
dreadfully ill.'

I am very sorry, but what can it matter
to me ?' said Barbara, coldly.

'Oh, Barbra! if you had seen him, you
could not be so indifferent. Why are you
so stony and so changed ?'

I will tell you, Mimics. He was my
friend, mine till you stole him from me.
Why do you, of all people, mention him tome?
I forget him, and you remind me
of him ; I despise him, and you praise
him ; I am thankful for his absence, and
you tell me he is near me. Why do you
torment me so ? He has given you his
love : keep it, but do not let me be expected
to sympathise.'

'Barbra! you are unjust to him, to me,
and yourself. He does not care for me,
nor I for him.'

He proposed for you ; that you cannot
deny: and, if he did so without loving
you, he is — well, even worse than I thought
him. The ambition of a Lady Helena
might prevent his asking the daughter of
a poor curate to be his wife, but could not
oblige him to perjure himself by proposing
for another. I am not so blind as not to
perceive that the attractions of a Mimics

Marmontare sufficient to enslave any man,
and I have told him so.'

you were wrong, Barbra, so to speak
of me : unkind and unlike yourself. But,
if you saw him now, you would pity him,
because he is very ill, and you always feel
for the sick and dying.'

Dying ! You do not mean what you
say! Monty Carew dying, and I have not
forgiven him, or he me.'

Dear Barbra, be calm. I do not
think him dying, only — he looks so wan,
and thin, and changed that he alarmed
me. You will see him ; meet him as an
old friend, for all our sakes.'

I cannot, Mimics. You do not knows
you never will, I hope, what it is to be
deceived in one you love.'

During this conversation Barbara was
first stoical, then passionate, finally subdued.
She sobbed and wept for a few
moments, and Mimics was frightened at an

emotion lie did not understand, and kne^y
not how to allay. The Barbara whom she
loved and considered all but perfect was
but a weak woman after all, unable to
conquer evil feelings bred of disappointed
hopes. Was it this Ho be in love' ? Was
it thus her uncle, the strong man, had
suffered, when his prospects were so
strangely wrecked ? If so, better to steel
the heart against affections too strong for
its feeble powers of endurance.

Barbara rose suddenly to her feet, and
put her arm round Mimics.

Forgive this outburst, and forget it,'
she said. * I hold you blameless, but not
him. I will pray to forgive also — forget,
never ; but, Mimics, if I could be of use,
1 would die to serve or save.'

She kissed Mimics, and without another
word opened the hall-door, closed it after
her, and was half-way up the drive before
Mimics could realise the words she had
spoken.

CHAPTER Evil

PATRICK: AGAIN.

My dear Milly, I am glad to see you V
were the words that greeted Miss Heath,
when lie found herself in Mr. Prettyman's
spacious entrance hall.

They were accompanied by a warm
embrace, and Miss Heath felt that, if she
had been turned out of one home, she had
found another. And what a different one!
But for Mimics, regret for Courtleroy
would have ceased with the* hour which
brought her to London. Besides, she
loved London : the wildernesses of houses,
the ever-accumulating crowds, the shops,
the bustle, the noise, the rattling cabs, the

street cries, the placards, the sandwich-men,
every object that she had passed in
her drive from the station, delighted her.
To come to London once more on a visit
to a friend was elysium. No companion
or governess duties to perform ; no part
to play; but once more to be a guest !
Youth returned from the moment when
she was hugged by her old schoolfellow
with almost girlish enthusiasm. Mrs.
Prettyman forgot her Milly's silent secretiveness,
Miss Heath her Louisa's loquacious
openness, in the pleasure of the meeting.

Everything is more forward in London
than the country. Why, the trees in the
square are in full leaf,' said Milly, enthusiastically
for her, when she had taken off
her things, and was partaking of a dainty
little tea.

The parks are delicious. I shall take
you everywhere,' rejoined Mrs. Prettyman.
It is the height of the season, and though
Joe says the times are dreadful owing to

the war, and the ministers, and the
government, and all sorts of things, the
fashionable world don't know it.'

I wish Mimics were here !' sighed Miss
Heath.

I'm sure I wish she were, and Georgie
too. We heard from him this very morning.
He thinks he has heard something
of his father from a soldier who served
with him at the Cape, and who knows
all about a Corporal or Captain Hope,
who . . .'

His father ! George's father !' exclaimed
Miss Heath, with unusual vehemence.


'Yes. Here is the letter. I only hope
he will find that he is dead out-and-out,
and that will satisfy him. I don't mean
to have murder in my heart, you know,
Milly, for that is awful ! only when I look
on Georgie as my own son, and couldn't
love him better if he were, it is very trying
to have him hankering after another father

and mother who have done nothing for
him — deserted him, in short — isn't it,
Milly?'

Yes — certainly said Milly, poring over
the letter.

The intelligence it conveyed was slight
and uncertain. George Hope encountered
an Irish soldier who had fought in Africa
in a previous war with the disaffected
natives, and who had been in the regiment
with Corporal Hope. Having obtained
the name of the regiment, George felt
sure that he could trace his father, dead or
alive. »

Dead, or he would not have forsaken
his child,' mused Miss Heath, as she read.

That is just what I say, Milly,' cried
Mrs. Prettyman, joyfully. but Joe is so
provoking, and says George is sure to
come back, with his wounded and decrepit
father leaning on his arm. I say I shall
be glad if he comes back at all from those
burning deserts and savage demons. Have

you seen the pictures in the Illustrated
London Nemus and Graphic Milly T

Yes, they are exaggerated,' said Milly,
still studying the letter.

I'm sure I'm glad you think so. I want
to send out more missionaries to teach
them, instead of soldiers to kill them, orbe
hacked to pieces and tortured by them.
Only fancy George a prisoner with such
savages !'

Miss Heath's brow contracted with pain.

He writes in excellent spirits,' she said.
He thinks that peace will soon be made.'

He is so good, so wise, so brave, there
never was such a young man !' said the
ecstatic Louisa. ' Why, he has won honour
enough already for a major, or even a
colonel; Joe says so, and I am sure he
would be made a general at once if he
were old enough.'

Miss Heath laughed. It was delightful
to hear the innocent enthusiasm of her
friend once more.

YOL. II. u

When Mr. Prettyman came home, he
welcomed her kindly, and assured her that
she was quite a godsend, because his wife
did nothing but mope since George had
been engaged in active service. Thus
Miss Heath's drooping head looked up.

Besides continued he, * Sellon wants
to see you. He is a bachelor, you know,
and has lost his heart either to you or Miss
Marmont.'

'Mimics is much admired,' said Miss
Heath, colouring.

'And there is another friend of yours
who is a frequent visitor here. Not an
admirer, though. Mr. Patrick, of hop-picking
memory, has been to inquire for
George, and I am sorry to say his costume
has not improved.'

Miss Heath made no remark on this information,
and preparations for dinner
soon ensued. That first evening was
spent entirely by her in answering questions
concerning Courtleroy and Summer-lands.

Mr. Prettyman was acquainted
with Mr. Sellon, and had heard the state
of the Courtleroy affairs from him. He
had, indeed, lent money to Mr. Le Roy,
through Sellon, to stop the gap of his
negligence. He rang the praises of the
young Leste who was in his office, and
promised that Miss Heath should meet
him as well as Sellon. She did, in effect,
see them both frequently; and was able
to cheer Mrs. Leste by an account of the
prosperity of her son.

But Mr. Sellon had much to say to her,
and from him she heard, as time went on,
more of Mimics and her uncle than she
gathered from Mimics herself. He was
gradually disentangling the a:ffairs,and was
hopeful about setting them right at last,
but not of replacing them on the old footing.
Searle had not been traced, and his
wife and family were in poverty ; but, he
said, he had secured the house Searle had
built on Le Eoy's estate by an arranged



ment with the liquidators. It belonged,
in fact, virtually to Le Koy, having been
built with his money. The London mansion
was let at a fabulous price, and the
tenant was so well pleased with it, as to
be ready to purchase, if Le Eoy would
sell ; but this he positively declined.

Miss Heath's so-called ' visit ' seemed
interminable, and she was still with Mrs.
Pretty man at the close of the season. She
heard constantly from Mimics, but found
a constraint in her letters which she had
never been conscious of in their daily intercourse.
However, she was so well
amused, that it did not trouble her ; besides,
the whole of the Prettyman household
was engrossed by their hero George,
and had small space for heroines. Letters
from him had ceased, since the one Milly
read on her arrival, and his friends were
getting anxious. Mrs. Prettyman comforted
herself by repeating, ' Africa is sofar
off, you know. It takes so long to

bear ;' for, never having learnt geography
correctly in her youth, she could not realize
its position with regard to Europe, and
looked upon it as beyond all knowledge
being, ' The dark Continent She never
quite took in why the sun was so hot there
when it was ^ all so dark

There is that Irishman again, ma'am,
and he has a woman with him announced
Sampson, one morning, when she, her husband,
and Miss Heath were talking over
the last telegrams.

Clear away the breakfast, and show
them in here,' said Mr. Prettyman. ' I'll
be bound Pat has found his Biddy Malone

Mr. Prettyman was right, and the Patrick
of the hop-pickers' tea entered, pushing
a good-looking woman before him.
He was neatly clad, by comparison with
his former habiliments, and she was dressed
in the picturesque costume of an Irish
milk-woman ; for there is a certain amount
of picturesqueness in the short-petticoated.

white-aproned, and well-shawled Irish and
Welshwomen who trundle the noisy milk-carts
through the streets, or walk beneath
the yoke of well-poised cans.

I've found her, sort ; I knew I would.
She's Biddy,' cried Pat, cap in hand.

Biddy curtseyed and looked awkward,
but was soon set at her ease by Mrs.
Prettyman, who rushed up to her with
extended hands and beaming face, crying
out,

Are you the good woman who nursed
our Georgie ?' forgetting, for the moment,
that her ' good woman ' must have thrust
him upon her charity.

Yes, indeed, ma'am ; and Pat has made
me come to tell you all about it.'

I found her wit a milk-cart miles away ;
I knew I'd find her. She's dressed me up,
and we'll be married and go back to Ould
Ireland as soon as sleeve made a clean
breast of it said Pat.

'An' we come to-day because it's Georgie's

birthday, yer honours. He's twenty-one
this blessed day, the Lord preserve him,'
took up Biddy.

And we were never sure of his birthday.
We used to keep it on the anniversary
of the day he first came here,' said
Mrs. Prettyman. ' Was it you who brought
him here? Just sit down and tell us.'

*An' sure it was, my teddy, an' small
blame to me ; for them as paid for him
would me to bring him here an' sent me
the money to pay his carriage.'

Mr. Prettyman was about to speak, when
he was arrested by a voice in the hall.
He-was leaning against the mantel-piece ;
his wife was standing in front of Biddy,
who was seated on the edge of a chair with
Pat beside her; and Miss Heath was in
the background, her elbow on the table,
her face in her hand.

The door opened.

Padre ! madre !' sounded on the ears of
the worthy Prettymans, and, in another

^ JA - ^^T-Jir

^ ~ ir^aiiULniir

Zl^

Am" 1?T

^Vr^rMim

had joined the little group, he well-nigh
broke down. So did Miss Heath, watching
the scene, and struggling against an
emotion she rarely displayed.

We will celebrate your coming of age
by-and-by with historical reminiscences,'
broke in Mr. Prettyman, laying his hand
on George's shoulder. * But, first of all,
Mr. Patrick and Mrs. Biddy must drink
your health, and you must have something
to eat. I'll ring for Sampson.'

Scarcely did the bell-handle move before
Sampson was in the room. Behind him,
in the hall, were all the maids, Ada foremost.
George was amongst them in a
minute, shaking hands, and answering
questions : and the party in the diningroom
followed, like bees after their queen.
It was a scene as charming as it was
natural, and George Hope, the central
figure, was well worthy of the enthusiastic
welcome he received from the attached
household of his foster-parents. Biddy

said he was of age that day, but to look
at his manly figure, bronzed face, and
erect head he might have been five-and-twenty
at least. Strangers accounted him
so ; though the frank, clear, blue eye and
almost boyish manner recalled his childhood.
Sampson and Ada looked upon him
as belonging especially to them, and they
and their master and mistress could but
recall the night when they had first seen
bim, a little ragged urchin, ready to challenge
the world. Tom, who had been
page at that crisis, was now footman, and
he had been the first to greet their hero
when he arrived to pay his cab, see to his
luggage, and speak the news among his
fellow-servants.

The hubbub ceased at last ; Patrick and
Biddy were carried off to the servants'
hall, and, while a substantial breakfast was
being laid, George went to his room to
refresh himself after his voyage and subsequent
journey.

Mr. Prettyman remained at borne that
day, and * ordered everyone's goings.' He
and his wife might have been boy and girl
they were so hilarious, and their jollity
was so infectious that not only all the
domestics, but even Miss Heath caught it.
Biddy and Patrick were ordered to remain
the day. Tom was commissioned to ' run
to the Ragged School at the back and ask
the teachers to allow the children to have
tea and buns in honour of *' their hero's'
return.' Sampson was told to bring his
wife and such of his family as he could
get hold of to spend the evening, and the
fatted calf was killed, though there was
no prodigal. Mrs. Prettyman spoke the
truth when she said that had George
been their very own son they could not
love him better.

Mr. Prettyman had said * Captain Hope '
advisedly, for by an act of personal bravery
and moral courage George had defended

an outpost, saved his regiment, and induced
the natives to surrender. He was
promoted on the spot, and was the youngest
captain in the service.

CHAPTER XVIII.

ALL THAT BIDDY KNEW.

In the afternoon of that auspicious day
Patrick and Biddy were summoned to the
library, in order to tell all they knew of
George Hope's early history. This was
not much more than Patrick had already
made known; still, Biddy had a few letters,
or, more properly, memoranda in her
possession, together with some trifling
articles of dress which she was anxious to
place in George Hope's possession. He
and his foster-parents questioned her from
time to time as she told her story, and at
their request Miss Heath listened. She satin
a remote window, the others near the
large library table.

Biddy said she lived with her mother
on the outskirts of a place called Braghh,
where was a small garrison. One day she
saw a soldier with a child in his arms,
wandering about as if seeking some one.

He looked into their cabin, and was
invited to enter. This was Corporal Hope
and his little boy, who were received by
Biddy and her invalid mother with the
respect and admiration due to a red coat
and a beautiful child. Biddy made much
of George, who seemed happy with her,
and his father asked her to take charge of
him while he was with his regiment at
Braghh. He promised regular payment.
The bargain was soon made, and George
was transferred to Biddy's care. The
corporal said the child had lost his mother
just before he left England, and had been
brought over by one of the soldiers' wives
who, having a baby of her own, could not
take proper care of him. He was therefore
anxious to place him where he would

have plenty of milk and fresh air, and be
let to run about and grow strong ; for he
was weakly, and, they said, not as forward
as he should be.

That wasn't three, for yer honour was
as strong as a young lion,' put in Pat.

His account of George and his father
given at Courtleroy tallied exactly with
Biddy's, and it is needless to repeat it;
but Biddy alone knew what had induced
her to bring George to Mr. and Mrs.
Prefctyman. She described the departure
of Corporal Hope for Africa, and his
separation from George — then about four
years of age — with much pathos. She
said that he had promised to return and
fetch the child away, and had assured her
that she should receive regular remittances.
He gave her all the money he
could spare before he left, and bade her bea
mother to his boy.

An' sure we was two mothers, till my
mother died,' she said, ' an' thin I was but

one. But never a penny cum from the
corporal. They told me Africa was a
long way off, and, maybe, it was lost on
the road.'

'My father was dead. I have ascertained
that,' interrupted George : and his
announcement was variously received.

'I am thankful you are quite sure,
Georgie ; for now you will be content with
us,' said Mrs. Prettyman.

dead! When? How?' ejaculated
Miss Heath, half rising, and letting fall
the work she was making-believe to do.

Then, how did you manage to bring
Master George here, Mistress Biddy ?'
asked Mr. Prettyman.

'The receipts cum from London, yer
honour. Once or twice I had a five-pour'
note, which was a fortune ; an' wit it the
words, "for George Hope." Says I,
'* Money must be chape where you live,
my honey." At last I leaves a letter, wit
orders from the corporal's friends, to pack

VOL. 11. X

sup George, and bring him straight to
London. Here's the letter, Masther
George.'

Biddy took a well-thumbed missive from
her bosom, and put it into George's hands.
He opened it with some difficulty, and
read aloud as follows :

Biddy Malone,

*You are requested to bring
George Hope to London, and to leave him,
just as he is, at number — , Portman
Square. Being the bell, and put him inside
the door, and he will be taken care of.
His father's friends will see to him, and
you need not be troubled about him any
longer. The enclosed ten-pound note will
pay all expenses ; and you must call a cab
when you get to London, and tell the
driver where to take you. Pay him before
you leave the boy; and, if you love the
child, never go near him again, or tell anyone
about him.'

The writing of this letter was partly
obliterated by time and friction, but it was,
apparently, in a lady's hand. George's
eyes filled, and his voice trembled, as he
read it. Amazement seized on Mrs. Pretty-man.


How could they have known that we
were going to adopt a child? It is like
mesmerism, or some of those spirit-rapping,'
she said.

*My dear Lou, did you not visit every
orphanage in London ?' laughed her husband.
' Poor George ! You have certainly
been an unwilling victim. But
what have you discovered concerning your
father ?'

That he fell in this second engagement
with the Caffirs, after he had been raised
to the rank of captain, owing to bravery
in his first. He had risen from the ranks.
It was my name that recalled him to the
memory of General Banquet, in whose
regiment he was, and there is no doubt

x2

that he and the regiment left Braghh at
the time specified bj Biddy. The general
said I was like him.'

Like as two peas. An' sure he was as
fine a man ever the sun shone upon,' said
Patrick.

My dear Georgie, I'm so thankful you're
sure — I don't mean I'm thankful you've
lost him, you know, only that we're out of
suspense,' said Mrs. Prettyman, laying her
hand on her hero's shoulder.

I understand, dear madre. You are
the only parents I shall ever know ; and I
love you as such.'

I am sure of that, dear. Now, Mrs.
Malone, would you mind telling us why
you stayed in London?' said delighted
Mrs. Prettyman.

Not Mrs. yet, ma'am— but Mrs. Malone
next week, by your lave,' replied Patrick,
while Biddy explained, blushing at her
future prospects.

She said she had remained for sometime

in the neighbourhood of the square,
watching George, and earning her living
as she could. Having quarrelled with
Patrick, and finding London 'cheerful,'
and not having money enough to pay her
way back to Ireland, she had stopped on,
and, ' as luck would have it,' had met Pat
all of a sudden, and so had been induced
by him to make the disclosures she had
now made.

'If your father's friends as wrote the
letter should be angry, Masther George,
you can say as Biddy Malone was tired
of the secret, and have washed her hands
av' it all she concluded.

This was a strange coming of age for
George Hope. He did his best to be gay,
but the letter given to him by Biddy
weighed on his spirits. He locked it
away, when his friends had duly examined
it, and tried to divest himself of the wish
to know something of the writer. Who
would she be ? His mother was dead ; of

that he was assured — but these friends
of his father, who were they? At least
they were respectable, he thought ; for
the letter was well written, and correctly
spelt, though the writing appeared disguised.


'What does it matter?' he resolved at
last, rousing himself. ^ Padre ! Madre !
I used to celebrate my jour de fete by feeding
the hungry. What shall I do to-day ?'

Go and do likewise,' returned Mr.
Prettyman.

And he did likewise ; for, in the evening,
he and his foster-parents went to the
ragged-school in which he had taught as
child and youth. Miss Heath excused
herself upon a plea of headache, and retired
to her room. At Mr. Prettyman's
orders, Sampson and the other domestics
had done wonders ; for, knowing the family
proclivities, and being aided by kindly
schoolmasters and mistresses, well used to

treats,' an ad libitum supply of food had
been secured, and, as if by magic, guests
had been bidden to a feast. When George
sought his old and favourite haunt, he
found the yard already full of ragged
urchins waiting for admission, and no
sooner did they find out who he was, than
they began to cheer with might and main,
not ceasing until they were admitted into
the big ragged church at the top of the
building, and began to scramble into their
seats. Formerly he had been the hero of
the drum and fife band, now he was the
hero of colours rescued at an Indian fort,
and life saved in an African desert. His
fame had preceded him, and no sooner did
Sampson inform the teachers in whose
honour the feast was given, than the news
spread, and several friends from the
neighbourhood — voluntary instructors of
the ignorant — arrived to greet him. All
pupils, too, whom he had helped up the

steep ladder of poverty, were there, and in
the hearty grip of their hands and the
God bless yoa !* of their hearts, he and his
foster-parents found more satisfaction than
they could have found by any other means.
As to Patrick and Biddy, they were lost in
amazement.

Them's the slums you mentioned said
Pat. ' Ould Ireland and London may shake
hands, says I.'

George's eyes were as clear and honest,
his smile as winning, his manner as frank
and true on that his twenty-first birthday,
as they had been in his boyhood ; and as
be waited on the children and promised
the teachers to be at the school as had
been his custom, the following Sunday
afternoon, he won the hearts of old and
young, teachers and taught, clothed and
ragged. No wonder his madre blessed
him and congratulated herself that she
had no rival in that happy estate of
motherhood.

When they cheered him again, and welcomed
him home, and thanked him for the
treat, he said, as he had often done before,
You owe all of it, as I do, to these generous
benefactors ; nothing to me,' which
oiled the throats of the youngsters for
more hurrahs in honour of Mr. and Mrs.
Prettyman, names well known in that overcrowded
locality.

I have had a very happy birthday,' said
George to Miss Heath, when they returned
to the house.

He found her alone in the drawing-room,
and seated himself at her side. Mr.
and Mrs. Prettyman were making arrangements
v/ith the Irish fiances for their
intended wedding.

I am very glad. I wish Mimics had
been here,' said Miss Heath, with her
usual quietude.

*Is Mimi much altered? I have not
seen her since we were at Summerlands
six or seven years ago.'

She is scarcely changed at all ; but
you are grown out of knowledge. You
look older than you are, she younger.'

Is she happy ? Is Mr. Le Eoy good
to her? Why did you leave her, Miss
Heath ?'

Mr. Le Eoy dismissed me. I was in his
way.'

Poor Mimi ! My Mimi ! She has had
a lonely life. I have not heard from
her for some time ; but I have written
regularly. My last letter, just before I
left the Cape, was about poor Horace
Leste ?'

Horace Leste ? What of him ?'

Have you not heard ? How strange 1
He is dead.'

Miss Heath sprang up with a sharp cry
of ' Dead !' for this sudden intelligence
startled her terribly. George took her
hand and held it, as if to reassure her, and
either the sad news or the tender action

opened the locked heart, and she began to
cry copiously.

I should not have been so hasty, but it
is old to me, this sad event so new to you.
I wrote to Mr. Leste, and the captain
wrote, and ere this the letters must have
reached. It was not long before we left
the Cape, and I was with him. I went onboard
his ship to bid him good-bye, and
found him in the horrible African fever.
I was able to remain with him a day and
night, and to receive all his last messages,
and to take possession of his little property
and remembrances for home. Oh i
Miss Heath, it was a melancholy time, but
not half so melancholy as to see comrades
fall round you in battle, and not to be able
to offer a word of consolation, or to watch
them breathe their last. So fell my own
father, but Horace was surrounded by
friends who all loved him — for was he not
brave and gentle ? — and he was quite

ready. I was to tell his father that all his
lessons were remembered, and that he
trusted alone for salvation in his Lord and
Saviour, Jesus Christ

^ Poor Mrs. Leste ! Were you able— — '
sobbed Miss Heath.

Yes, he died his hand in mine. I followed
him as chief mourner, for they
buried him on land, and I promised him
to see his friends as soon as I came to
England. I must go tomorrow. "What
will madre say?'

Mrs. Prettyman came in just as he was
asking the question, and looked, at first in
amusement, then in surprise, at the pair
on the sofa. George still held Miss Heath's
hand, and she was still weeping. He soon
communicated to her what he had told
Miss Heath. She was all sympathy in a
moment, and when, almost immediately,
Mr. Prettyman entered, his kind heart was
equally moved.

*The eldest son — the apple of their eye
God help them !' he exclaimed. ' Of
course you must go tomorrow, George,,
and his brother shall go with you. He
will be a comfort to them ; but he has not
heard of it, I am sure.'

Horace asked the captain not to announce
his death by telegram, lest the
shock should kill his mother said George ;
'therefore, the news may only just have
reached them. I trust they may be prepared
by letters, and that I may not bethe
first to break it to them. I do not
think I could bear it. Mimi, too ! They
were '

Here George paused, while a flush of
colour overspread his face.

They were like brother and sister —
Mimics will feel it as much as anyone. I
wish she were here,' put in Miss Heath.

The melancholy conversation was interrupted
by Sampson, who came to ask

George to wish their Irish guests goodnight.
The little party went into the hall,
and were soon transformed from ' grave to
gay.'

'Ye'll come to our wedding', Masther
George,' said Pat; while the comely milk-woman,
Biddy, took George's hand and
gazed lovingly into his face.

'That I will returned George. 'And
one or other of you must write to me
regularly, and tell me all that happens to
you. I shall never forget when I came
away from Ireland.'

If you had stopped there, you would
have been a prize-fighter instead of — well,
what's the difference ? You are a prizefighter
as it is,' laughed Mr. Prettyman,
while George looked grave.

We will pay for the wedding, and the
passage home, and help you to set up in
life,' said Mrs. Prettyman.

'Biddy a' saved a lot o' money. 'Tis

the womens as is the wonders o' the
world remarked Pat. ' I never saved a
penny in my life, but I found her all the
same. Good-night, and God bless yer
honours for ever and for ever.'

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

LONDON: PRINTED BY DUNCAN Macdonald, BLENHEIM HOUSE.

3 0112 041389666

VOL. III.

>

Courtiers

ANNE BEALE

Author OF

'fay ARLINGTON," "THE PENNANT FAMILY,'
"SQUIRE LISLE'S BEQUEST,"

ETC., ETC.

Give unto me, made lowly wise,
The spirit of self-sacrifice."

"Wordsworth.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. III.

LONDON :
HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,

13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1887.

All rights reserved.

OOUI^TLET^OY.

CHAPTER I,

POOR HORACE.

There was a strange stillness about Courtleroy
village and vicarage when George
Hope and Ocfcavius Leste readied it the
following evening. They stood a moment
leaning on the vicarage gate, while the fly
that brought them waited.
^ * Go in first, Octavius, I will follow.
They must know all ere this,' said George.
Octavius went, and shortly afterwards
Mr. Leste appeared. He came to meet
George with extended hands, and the
words, * The Lord gave and the Lord hath

VOL. III. B

taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord.' Neither said another word, but
both went into the house, and upstairs to
the sitting-room. Mrs. Leste was on her
couch, and Octavia bending over her ;
Barbara and Leila and the younger girls
were there also, all surrounding Octavius
and their mother. They made way for
George to go first to her, and, as he stooped
over her, she kissed him, and whispered,
You saw him last. God bless you,' and
then she covered her face. As George
greeted one after another of his old friends,
he was surprised at their calm. The news
had only reached them a few days before,
but they seemed already resigned to God's
will, and were sustaining one another, and
especially their mother.

We have two sons here, love,' said Mr.
Leste to his wife, almost cheerfully ; ' for
George is like a son, and Dick will come
tomorrow.'

^ Yes. Horace is with us too, perhaps,'

replied Mrs. Leste. ' George will you tellus
everything

George, seated in the midst of the
family group, gave them, in detail, the
account of Horace's death. He had already
written much of what he had to tell,
and^he refrained as much as possible from
painful details ; indeed, his illness had been
so sudden and so short that there were
not many. He was sensible to the last,
and had sent none but messages of hope
and peace to his friends. To his mother,
especially, he had begged George to speak
only of his faith in the cross of Christ.
On his journey down George had wondered
what he could say to console his afflicted
friends, and lo ! God had already been their
Comforter. They had also been sympathized
with by friends and parishioners on
all sides. Everyone was ready to help
those who had helped others in times of
sorrow and suffering : and now Octavius,
the youngest born, was come to supply the

B 2

vacant place of the eldest, and Mr. Pretty-man's
kind thoughtfulness was well appreciated.


While they were still talking, Barbara
left the room. She had been, as usual,
the stay of her family, and had, from the
first, been calm and self-possessed ; she
who was Horace's nearest and dearest.
But she knew that life must still go on to
the survivors, whatever the loss and pain,
and she knew that the travellers must be
refreshed, and her own people sustained,
albeit grief was heavy. She went downstairs
to prepare the evening meal, and
while standing a moment, bewildered, her
hand pressed to her forehead, she saw a
figure pass the window. She heard the
front door open, and in another moment
some one came into the room, she could
not tell who. It was a man, tall and thin,
but she did not recognize him.

Forgive my intrusion, but I cannot rest
until I know from yourselves how you

all are,' said a voice lie knew only too well.
It was Montague Carew, and they bad
not met before face to face since his return
home.

Thank you — it is very kind of you — weare
— we are quite well,' she replied, while
he took her cold hand in his.

It trembled so that he could scarcely
hold it, and he saw that her face was white
as marble. She also looked at him, and
perceived the ravages that Africa, war, and
consequent illness had made in his once
strong frame and handsome face.

Horace was just like my own brother,'
he began, hurriedly, letting go the cold
hand and sitting down in answer to a mute
invitation from her. ' I have barely escaped
a similar fate, if, indeed, I have escaped
it. This is the first visit I have paid since
my return, and I am come now almost by
the sly. Mr. Leste has been so good tome,
and I wish, oh ! how I wish, I could
comfort him.'

Thank you — he is — wonderfully supported,'
replied Barbara, tears trickling
slowly down her white face.

And you ? — I am sure you are ill — and
your mother — and all the rest?' he asked,
not daring to use the once familiar name
of Barbara.

'We are all well, thank you. Mother
keeps up for father's sake, and we all do
our best ; but . . .' here a rising sob choked
the remainder of the sentence.

Yes, I understand. You would die
rather than give way and cause them pain.
But I know you are ill. What will become
of them all if you fail ?'

There was intense feeling in the voice
that asked that question, and Barbara's
lip quivered.

Even if I do, there are others to fill my
place. Octavius and George Hope have
just arrived; my brother Eichard comes
tomorrow. Leila is staying here, and
Helena is invaluable. Besides, Mimics

has been here almost all the day, and we
help one another.'

Montague Oarew sighed heavily. Was
he conscious of a certain quiver in the
voice when the word mimic' sounded,
or did memories of the old broken friendship
arise in the breast that breathed the
sigh ?

^ Can I be of service to anyone ?' he
asked. ' I stole a march on my mother,
who scarcely lets me out of her sight, to
come and ask this question, and to say
how much — how heartily I grieve for you.
You believe me— Barbara ?'

The name was spoken at last that had
not been spoken for years. They had
been Captain Carew and Miss Leste to one
another when they had chanced to meet,
which was seldom; and the man of the
world and the high-spirited woman had
greeted one another almost as strangers.
And Barbara knew that the fault was hers,
for had he not a right to love Mimics best ?

Now bis changed manner, his kindness,
and, above all, his calling her Barbara,
touched her, and she looked into his face.
If she appeared ill to him, what did he
seem to her ? She could not speak for the
emotion she felt.

We are friends again, Barbara,' he
said, simply, holding out both hands, as
they rose simultaneously. 'You will let
me help you, if I can. You will give my
love to your mother, and let me know when
1 may see her. You will give me your
precious friendship once more. 1 have
been drifting — drifting — ever since you
withdrew it.'

'Yes, be it so,' was all that Barbara
could say, as she laid her hands in his.

When he was gone, she smiled sadly,
and murmured,

" Affliction cometh not from the
ground," but for our grief and his illness
we had never been friends again.'

And she was happier for the renewed

friendship, and the mutual forgiveness,
feeling the brevity and uncertainty of life.

He might almost be dying,' she said to
Leila, when she came in search of her a
few minutes later.

who?'

Montague Carew. He has been and is
gone.'

The melancholy ceremonial of supper
succeeded ; nob absolutely melancholy, perhaps,
but quiet. No laughter, no jests,
for Horace could never share that usually
cheerful meal again. George Hope was
the chief speaker, and, as he had much to
tell and ask, he kept conversation going.
It was arranged that he should sleep at the
vicarage, and visit Mimics the following
day. He was to rejoin his regiment on
the next but one, and would have only a
few hours with his foster-parents.

He and Leila had a short conversation
before he retired for the night, and she
being, like himself, unburdened by reserve,

he learnt more of his friends from her
than he would probably have done from
anyone else. She gave him to understand
that she was herself happily married, had
four children, and was blessed with a
devoted husband.

Tour children since that memorable
evening ?' asked George, with surprise.

That is years ago,' she replied, with a
smile. ^ I am now an old married woman,
you are a young man, and the whole world
seems to have changed since then, but no
one so much as Barbara. This sad loss
has roused her, and will, I hope, bring
good from evil, for anything is better than
her strange indifference.'

• Bold Barbra indifferent !' ejaculated
George.

1 do not mean indifferent to her duties.
She is more intent on them than ever ; but
to herself. She lives and works for others,
but is always just as you have seen her
to-night. Mr. Le Eoy has taken a fancy

to her and her voice, and she might live at
the Court if she would ; but the glory of
his favour affects her not.'

There was a touch of the old Leila in
this, which induced George to ask about
Mimics and her uncle.

You will see them tomorrow. I would
not forestall your amazement for the world.
Mimics has the county at her feet, being
an acknowledged heiress and beauty ; but
she says she is wedded to her uncle.'

How did she bear this sad news ?' asked
George, with an involuntary flush.

She came here at once and comforted
us all. She loved Horace.'

This recollection of the departed brother
stayed further talk on indifferent subjects,
and brought it back to him. Soon afterwards
the family reassembled in Mrs.
Leste's room for prayers, and tears flowed
silently as the special petition for one
going down into the sea in ships ' was
omitted, and the father's voice faltered.

Immediately after breakfast the following
morning George walked to Courtleroy,
carrying a parcel. He was surprised at
the changes he saw. The lodge was indecent
repair, the drive no longer overgrown
with weeds and grass, the railings
freshly tarred, and the general aspect of
affairs sufficiently prosperous. It was a
bright July morning, and Nature wore her
summer garb jauntily. As he approached
the house, he perceived that it also was
restored to what must have been its
original appearance, and stood out from
amongst its background of trees as if
proud of rejuvenescence.

As he rang the hall-bell he stood wondering
who would answer it, and looking
through the still open doors at the room
he remembered so well. It was unchanged,
but the appearance of Barber in solemn
state altered its aspect. He had seen him
in London, and introduced himself.

Bless me ! I am proud to see a young

officer who has been such an honour to
his country said Barber. ' Walk in, sir
I think, at least 1 imagine, that my master
will feel equally delighted. He is at home,
but not always, ahem ! able to see visitors

^ If I might see Miss Marmont first, unannounced,'
said George, ^I want to surprise
her just to discover if she will know
me.'

By all means, sir. She is in the library.'

Barber led the way to the room so well
remembered by George as a mildewed,
mouldy receptacle for antiquated volumes.
As the door opened, he saw a lady seated
at a library table, writing, a perspective
of open windows through which
came branches of trailing roses and sounds
of summer, and greenery outside everywhere.


^ A gentleman wishes to speak to you,
ma'am,' said Barber, who entered grimly
into George's plan.

George went in, and Mimics rose and

made a polite little inclination of the head,
as to a stranger. She was his Mimi
still ; scarcely changed, only more graceful
and beautiful than ever, he thought. She
looked at him, asked him to be seated,
and said she would call her uncle. She
did not recognize him, how should she ?
A fine, handsome fellow, nearly six feet in
height and brown with foreign work,
instead of the slight boy, fair and frank,
who had been her Georgie. She was moving
towards the door, and he noticed that
she wore slight mourning; at least she
had some sort of black trimmings on her
grey dress, and he doubted not it was for
Horace.

YoM do not know me,' he said, as, coming
from behind the table, she stood near
him.

George ! Is it really sou ?' she cried,
for the voice, though deepened, was
familiar, and the smile that broke into
eyes and mouth were more familiar still.

^ Yes, it is George, Mimi he replied.

After all these years !' she said, as she
put her hands in his, and gazed up into his
face as if to discover some trace of the
child and boy she had adopted as her
brother and friend. * Impossible ! It cannot
be !' she added, and withdrew to a
little distance.

They looked at one another in silence
for a few seconds, and then Mimics's eyes
fell before his deep, loving, confiding gaze.
She coloured slightly, for the look was
that of the boy George, and the face that
of the man. He looked years older than
she had expected to see him, and she forgot
her own seniority.

I have brought you remembrances
from poor Horace,' he said, laying his
parcel on the table, and still watching her.

Poor Horace ! I wish I had loved him
better,' she returned, tears filling ber eyes.

They sat down by the long, paper-strewn
table, the parcel before them. He gave

it to her, and she laid her hand on it
reverently.

He bade me tell you, Mimi, that you
were always with him ; he sometimes
wandered a little, but your presence seemed
a reality to him. He told me of those
trifles which he wished you to have out of
his small property, the rest I have brought
to his family. He spoke of a posy you
had given him which I was to tell you
had never left him, and was to be buried
with him. The withered nosegay was
placed on his breast. Don't cry, Mimi, he
was quite happy, and went to heaven just
as if he were going a short voyage, after
which he would see us all again.'

George, you do not know ! you cannot
tell,' sobbed Mimics. ' I did not even
write to him, and was so ungrateful for
the love he bore me.'

But you loved him, Mimics ?' he asked,
taking the hand that still lay on the
parcel, and holding it as if to console her.

Yes, of course ; we all loved him ; but,
now that I shall never see him again, I
feel how slight the return I made for all
he did for me.*

I think it must be always so, my Mimi.
When my friends and comrades fell around
me, I asked myself, " What have I done
for them? What opportunities have I
lost which never can occur again ? But
they — he — only thought, at the last, of
our love, and of a greater love than ours.'

These are the mysteries of life and
death,' mused Mimics. * You have seen
much of them since we met last, and yet
you are so young.'

George smiled.

Youth and age are matters more of
temperament than years. Tell me about
yourself, Mimi.'

I have told you all by letter up to poor
Miss Heath's departure. Since then I
have filled my post as steward sometimes
well, sometimes ill. My uncle has worked

VOL. III. c

Tvitb me, or rather through me ; for I am
the active agent. We have made the house
habitable, and this is now mj domain. He
prefers to inhabit the west wing, which,
you know, Miss Heath and I used to live
ID, and I sit in solitary grandeur in the
state apartments. The school-room is now
full of musical instruments sent from the
town house, and he and Barbara Leste
forget their troubles in Beethoven and
Bach. I wish, for his sake, I had cultivated
music, but, as Barber says, *^ It
needs a refinement of soul," and mine is
fast vanishing in these piles of bills and
receipts.'

She pointed to the heaps of neatly-arranged
papers that covered her table.

Are you happy with your uncle, Mimi ?'
asked George.

'Hush, I hear his step. You must
judge for yourself,' she replied, and withdrew
to the seat which she had filled when
George saw her first. ' You must be, indeed

I think you are, an especial favourite
to bring him into these regions at so early
an hour.'

The door opened, George rose, and Mr.
Le Roy entered.

c2

CHAPTER II.

PARTIALLY EE STORED.

I AM glad to welcome you back to England
after your well-fought campaigns and
attendant honours,' said Mr. Le Roy,
offering three fingers to George. ' Mimics,
that draught pursues me, and the carpenter
is here.'

I will see to it, uncle. I will not belong,'
replied Mimics, rising, glancing at
George and leaving the room.

*None of these windows close, and I
abominate a draught,' said Mr. Le Roy.
Mimics is wonderful. She is a universal
genius in all but music. You play still,
Captain Hope ; I remember you mastered

Mozart creditably when a bos, and greatly
enjoyed the Handel festival. Why did you
never come again to see me ?'

I suppose because you did not invite
me replied George, meeting the very
critical survey of the fastidious Le Roy
with the resolute front he would have
shown in battle.

He was now a man and a soldier, and
his first impressions of the relation between
uncle and niece were not quite
favourable. He was, however, just as
natural and unembarrassed when he entered
into conversation as he had been when
a boy. He interested Le Roy at once by
telling him what had brought him into the
neighbourhood, and, while he was still
speaking of Horace, Mimics returned, and
joined, naturally, in what they were saying.
Before doing so, however, she told her
uncle that she hoped the draught was, or
would be, abolished. George was relieved,
for he saw that they understood one another.

I have never called on Mr. Leste. If
sou will stay to luncheon, and remark, I
ash you,' said Le Eoy, with a sort of condescending
sarcasm, * I will pay ray visit
of condolence with you and Mimics this
afternoon. Is that as it should be, Miss
Marmont ?'

Quite. We shall all be glad,' replied
Mimics, with an appealing look at George.
I must leave by the last train from
Summerlands,' said George, hesitating.

We can send you to Prestbury, eh,
Mimics ? You can then take the night
mail. Thanks to Miss Marmont, we have
now our brougham and a capable horse,
which she drives in the pony-carriage, and
which old Grant does his best to missive.
She kindly consented to carriage and horse
being sent down from Prince's Gate.'

Poor old Shock passes a happy old age
in the paddock,' put in Mimics, apparently
unmoved by the allusion to her management.


You remember that you told me, Captain
Hope, that my niece, or Mimi, as I
think you called her, was anxious to be of
use in the world. You said many flattering
things of her, from which I gathered
that she must be a very disagreeable
young person. I find her, on the whole,
better than I expected ; but so occupied
that her present leisure must be a miracle
wrought by you. I seldom praise her, but,
as you are such old friends, it may please
you to learn that she entirely governs me,
and has been the means of bringing me
back to my forsaken duties as squire, landlord,
and churchman.'

^ That was Mr. Leste's doing,' broke in
Mimics.

In return for which I have a nut to
crack with him this afternoon in your
presence, and that of your ally and most
voluminous correspondent.'

Mimics looked conscious for the first

time, but said nothing. What did her
uncle mean? What could he be doing at
such a time ?

'I trust it is a filbert-sith a large
kernel, such as old Gandy gave us, Mimi,'
laughed George ; but he paused on the
word Mimi, feeling that her uncle did not
approve of the familiarity.

'I feel sure that both Miss Marmont
and Captain Hope will find it to their
taste. Now let us go to the music-rooms
rejoined Le Roy, loftily.

Snubbed,' was George's mental word,
as he glanced at Mimics, and saw that her
face was flushed, and for the first time the
Le Roy nostril worked. He crushed down
an unusual burst of pride, as he followed
Le Roy to the old school-room, Mimics
remaining behind.

*Xot quite like the room in which you
played your bit of Mozart,' said Le Roy to
George, seemingly unconscious of having

given offence. ^ But it suits me better
than those below, where I am subject to
interruption. Sellon has managed to send
down some of the instruments, and, as
Barber puts it, " Half a loaf is better than
no bread"'

There was, in effect, a new piano,
a harmonium, and a medley of other instruments,
all of which George had seen
in the beautiful music-room he remembered
; but, otherwise, the school-room
was unchanged. There was Lady Margaret's
portrait, which had always interested
him, and the other pictures, and all the
furniture, as of old, but massed together
in some confusion, to make room for the
sackbut, batteries, &c.,' as Sir Joshua
called them. Le E,oy had appropriated all
the apartments of the west wing, retaining
Mimics's bed-room and installing Barber
in Miss Heath's. Mimics had not paused
to consider the selfishness of this arrangement,

but had adapted herself to it, taking
for herself a solitary chamber over the
library, whence she could look out upon
lawn and distant fir-woods.

I owe to you the first intimation I ever
received of the defalcations of Searle said
Mr. Le Eoy, as George stood near the
piano, professedly turning over music,
while hoping that Mimics would appear.
By a chain of unfortunate circumstances,
I am here.'

Mr. Leste says they have proved most
fortunate,' returned George, recovering
his frank manner. ' And, indeed, I should
scarcely have recognised the house or park,
they are so changed

That is my niece's work. She has
generously promised to devote her life tome
as her vocation and I give her caste
blanche to manage the property and people.
She and my lawyer do it all between them.'

you have a trusting nature,' laughed
George, who was amused at Le Eoy's still

casting all responsibility upon others. ^ It
is lucky that Miss Marmont should know
the people so well.' He slightly emphasized
the name.

Very,' replied Le Eoy, curtly, and took
up his Straduarius, lying near at hand.

He asked George to try it, but he waived
the request by begging Le Eoy to play
instead. He acquiesced, and had soon
forgotten other topics in his violin ; but
not so George, whose bright smile gave
place to a grave listening, as his friend
failed to appear. He did not see her again
until luncheon. This was served in the
dining-room, under the presidency of the
ubiquitous Barber, who had consented to
undertake every department, provided he
was not interfered with by anyone save his
master.

I have been accustomed to valeting all
my life, ma'am,' he had said to Mimics ;
I have also given orders ; but as regards
waiting, that is not in my line. Stilly

rather than leave Mr. Le Eoy in the present
predicament, I will do so, provided I
am not interfered with by women, and
have an apartment where I can " discourse
sweet music " unmolested.'

You shall have everything you want if
you will stay,' Mimics had said ; and accordingly
a certain business-room near the
butler's pantry was appropriated to him,
where he excruciated Mrs. Stone by scrapings
on his violin.

George found the large dining-room
cheerless and empty — not half so delightful
as the hall or school-room ; but Mr.
Sellon had suggested that, in order to
keep Le Roy in the country, the old regime
must be resumed ; and accordingly Mimics
had sacrificed herself and associations to
the formality of custom. She would not
discover whether her uncle liked it or not,
but as soon as the room had been inexpensive
done up, the meals were laid
there, and he submitted. Money was so

scarce that the house had to be repaired
by degrees, and the drawing-room and
principal bed-rooms were still untouched.
The servants' offices were, however, restored
to comfort, and a new maid or so
added to the establishment. As the affairs
righted themselves, Sellon said, the house
would right itself, but ' who goes slow
goes sure.' Mimics was compelled to add
secret ' to this axiom, and to keep her
workmen at one apartment at a time, and
out of her uncle's way ; but her self-dedication
to him was not merely nominal, but
real.

George was the chief speaker during
luncheon, for Le Eoy plied him with incessant
questions about the war ; and
Mimics's interest in them was so apparent
that he answered freely, and with such
evident knowledge of his subject in all its
bearings that she felt that her uncle was
surprised. She was becoming a politician
for his sake, but George fancied she had

lost the spirit and zest which used to
characterize her interest in all that happened
around her ; and he found himself
speculating as to whether she would be
still his Mimi. Doubtless Horace's death
had something to do with the change.
However, Le Roy perceived that she was
depressed, and, with more anxiety than
George would have given him credit for,
asked if any fresh misfortune had
happened. 'No unexpected bill or unpremeditated
law-suit ?' he added.

None she replied, forcing a laugh ;
for, truth to tell, she was pining to be
alone with George, and to talk of things
her uncle would not care to hear.

But no such opportunity occurred. After
luncheon they walked to the vicarage, Mr.
Le Roy between her and George. It all
seemed unnatural and formal to the friends
who had enjoyed so many years of unrestrained
intercourse, and George thought
the old times best.

the pleasure shall be yours. Give Mr.
Leste that letter,' said Le Eoy to Mimics,
when they were awaiting Mr. Leste in the
drawing-room.

He and Barbara came in at the moment,
and expressed their extreme pleasure and
gratitude at Le Roy's visit.

You have both comforted me, I wish I
could do as much for you. Help me,
Mimics. The letter,' he replied.

Mimics put the letter into Mr. Leste's
hands.

Head it, Leste,' said Le Eoy.

Mr. Leste read to himself, almost without
understanding it, the following words :

Dear Sir,

The Reverend John Luton,
incumbent of Courtleroy, died this morning;
I believe the living is in your
gift.

^ Yours faithfully,
James Hudson, Rural Dean, &c., &c.'

*Mem. — I give it to Charles Leste ; the
best man I have ever known.

Reginald Le Eoy/

What does it mean, Barbra T asked
Mr. Leste, handing the letter to his daughter
like a man in a dream.

Oh, father! If Horace were but here.
This is what he always hoped for, and
now it seems too late,' said Barbara, the
truth being clear to her while it was only
dawning on her father.

Both turned to pour out words of incoherent
gratitude to Mr. Le Roy, but he
had left the room, and the house. He had
merely whispered to George that the
brougham should be sent, and had shaken
hands with him.

Come up to your mother,' said Mr.
Leste, in a dazed way that almost frightened
Barbara, who followed him upstairs.


*You will stay with me, Mimi. It is

oar only chance,' whispered George, in
whose clear eyes tears were shining.

*I knew there was kindness and sympathy
somewhere,' said Mimics, a smile on
her lip.

She sat down on the cushioned bench of
the window-seat, George beside her. He
gave her hastily the account of his return
home, and the strange celebration of his
majority. She listened breathless, asking
eager questions from time to time concerning
Patrick and Biddy. It chanced
that he did not name his father, fancying
that he had written to Mimics the account
of his discovery of his promotion and
death. The conversation was hurried, for
there was much to tell and little time to
tell it in, but, according to his custom, he
concealed nothing from her. He fancied
her less communicative, and attributed her
reserve in part to sorrow for Horace's loss,
and in part to a dislike to speak of her
uncle.

VOL. III. D

I know not when we shall meet again,'
he said, when his story was ended. 'But
I shall continue my diary, and you will
not forget yours — promise me this, Mimi.
I may be sent off again, and duty would
seem hard without the prospect of your
advice and comfort.'

If anything should make me disappoint
you as I did Horace, what would you
think ?' asked Mimics, with profound pain
in her voice.

I should believe in you as he did — only
I should be wretched. You have been all
to me ever since I was a child, now they
they tell me I am a man.'

He looked at Mimics, and she returned
his truthful gaze with one as truthful.

Yes,' she said, with a sigh. ^ You are
no longer Georgie, but Captain Hope; my
uncle reminded me of that ; still, you are
years younger than I am, and, although we
must be respectful in public, 1 see no

reason why our old relations should change.
What would Miss Heath say ?'

It matters not much. It is what you
say, Mimic that signifies most to me, for
you know how well 1 love you.'

Never before had so vivid a carnation
tinged Mimics's cheeks : never before had
her pulses so quickened. Why ? George
Hope had said similar words to her ever
since he was six years old, and was she
not his sister, half-a-dozen years his
senior ? but, was he not now a mau, brave,
gallant, handsome, of winning manners
and manly bearing ? Although she knew
those vv^ords meant no more than of old,
she found it difficult to reply to them.
How readily she had answered poor Horace
Leste, how easy it had been to her to say,
I am like your sister ;' but now there was
some strange convulsion in her spirit, for
which she could not account. She forced
a smile, however, and said hurriedly,

d2

*Yes, George, whatever betide we are
friends for life

He took her hands, and. with a shade of
disappointment on his open face, accepted
the friendship as a matter of course.

Mother wants you to come upstairs
interrupted further discourse, and they
followed Leila.

They found the Lestes excited and
thankful. To be suddenly vicar where he
had been so many years curate was. indeed,
a subject of rejoicing to a good man,
and helped to change the current of
thought of his family. The one regret
was that Horace could not rejoice with
them : though !Mrs. Leste believed that he
was well acquainted with what was passing
; a creed which her husband called
The Communion of Saints.' The departure
of George was another diversion to
their minds, and tea was brought up to
Mrs. Leste's room, to enable her to partake
of it with him and Mimics. They

grew c

rim

•r,'

Yc u ~-*- -1 :: refuse, Mimics he pleaded.

WLd kzi'-s 7r en we r2/,T meet again ?'
• QfO, dear Aliniica. Life is sd uncertain,

:,. 1 :; ^r : u a -^ i G e : r r e :, r e s u : - a car friends.
E^ibj^ra S-ijii ^: erse:: ;i:^i- :o Youruncle,
vrliile OctaTiui :.:. :i. :Lr s: s:j.t with me
5-d Mrs. Lesse. 7ri.:se Trcrl tt^s i.T^toaU

So Minii::. r:.;i ^ii :isis. :,i.^ she and iMr.
Le5:e wer.: :o Prest. .irv :o see George oS
CT :i.e eveiiii^ mail.

Chapter III.

TAKEN AT i:>'AWAEZS.

It was a relief to Barbara Leste to be fora
short space alone. She walked almost
unsteadily, for her, from the vicarage to
the Court; for the tension of the past
months, it may be almost said years, had
told on her naturally strong frame and
resolute soul. She had borne labour and
love-disappointment so bravely, that few
guessed, and none knew, how much they
bad tried her; but Horace's death had
nearly broken her down. Still she nerved
herself to endurance for the sake of her
family, and was the mainstay of parents
and sisters. But she failed to realize

Hope. She could not understand that,
after so many years of penurious circumstances,
the remaining days of those she

loved best would be free from the pecuniary
anxieties that had haunted them
ever since she vas born. She had walked
so long in the shadowy ways of care, that
the sunshine of prosperity blinded her,
and. both literally and figuratively, she
stumbled as she went along.

Then she reached the Court, meditating
on what she should best say in the way
of gratitude for herself, and apology for
Mimics, she heard the sound of voices
through the hall-door. The moliere was
partly drawn, and she could not see the
speakers ; but she resolved to leave her
message, if Mr. Le Hoy were engaged.
She knew that she was always welcome to
him. because of her voice. She rang the
bell. Barber came. and. almost simultaneously.
Mr. Le Roy himself. He must
have seen her apprn-^^ch. She began by

an apology for her appearance at all, but
he cut her short by insisting on her coming
in, and assuring her she would find
none but friends. She felt a certain irony
in his voice, but went into the hall, where
she found Sir Joshua, Lady Helena, and
Captain Carew. She had seen them all
since Horace's death, for Sir Joshua and
Lady Helena had called at once ; so she
maintained a tolerable self-possession. She
shook hands with each, and was reassured
by the old friendly pressure of him on
whom she had once looked as lover and
friend combined ; but no tell-tale blush
coloured her cheeks.

*My mother sent me to tell you that
Mimics has gone to Prestbury, at my
father's request, in the brougham you
kindly sent for George Hope,' she began,
knowing intuitively that she should displease
the * autocrat,' as Mimics sometimes
called her uncle: first, by using her
Christian name, which slipped out inadvertently,

and secondly, by the fact that
she had gone without leave.

'To Prestbury? With Captain Hope!
She will not be back for dinner,' he said,
frowning ominously.

Hope ! Has he been in these parts ?
I would have given worlds to see him.
He was my best friend, as well as the
hero of the regiment,' cried Montague
Carew.

We would have had him to dinner, eh !
Lady Helena ?' broke in Sir Joshua. ' A
brave young fellow, worth knowing, in
spite of his uncertain family tree; haw,
haw. We can't all have family trees, like
the monkeys, eh, Le Roy ? though 'tis the
fashion to say we evolve from them ; so it
stands to reason they must be of the oldest
family, and have the longest line of ancestry.
Why didn't he come to see Montague,
Barbara?'

He only came yesterday, and was obliged
to leave to-day,' she replied. ' He

wa with dear HcrJijc tt'^zZl he died, and

Here sie paused for want of power to

Y : : I r ^ : re's a brick ! Tell him I say
so, my dear,' Dut in kind Sir Joshua.
How's your poor mother — how are you
all. in fact? If the sympathy of every
sool in the pans can cure, you ought to
be quite well ; and Fm sure we feel for
yoa from the bottom of our hearts; eh.
Lady Helena ?'

Barbara knows that' said Lady Helena,
with a manner so tmnsnally kind that it
surprised the little party, and nearly overcame
Barbara.

She resisted tears. littered. and proceeded
to deliver her other message.

smother begs me to say, Mr. Le Eoy,
::}.: ~e ^ .1 I'i be prratefolto you as loner
' ~T->e. Sbe has never seen you, but
i - T - : . : : : her it a great personal
favour if you would visit her. since she

c . .::: : : r " t r I: would be quite 
:: ^?.t -:' : : ~e feel

Three ^;:-.::s of C:/:"eT eves "ere turned
in uiri-, 7 en Le Eoj, who replied coldly,
tL: ^^1 : r i::?mwas replaced b j an attempt
at a smile,

'Thank jour mother for her kind invitation.
I will do myself the pleasure of
calling ;' then to Sir Joshua, * Old Luton
is dead, and of course the living lapses to
iMr. Leste.*

• L e Pl : 7 7 : *: e a — a — what are you ?
A trump, a joiiy good fellow," a !
all over.' shctited Sir Joshua, *I
a>rav3 said sd l~ :i:nsi the world. Shake
hands. Ycu mus:. 'Tis no good to resist
:. ^1:7, 7 cull give an impetus to the
oriole 001:1:17. There isn't a soul within
ten miles that iron": 5-7. ■" God bless the
squire of Courtiers. ' And now yoave
enriched the parson you be bound to
come to church that he may return the
c : n: r . : n: en t an d enrich you . M never say

again that you're " a heathen man and a
publican." '

Lady Helena had called several times on
Mimics, but had not seen Mr. Le Eoy
before. They had now caught him at unawares,
and Barbara felt, instinctively,
from his constrained manner, what this first
encounter had cost him. He was cold,
dignified, and reserved, and Sir Joshua's
-enthusiasm, instead of thawing, thickened
bis ice. He did not even take his old
friend's offered hand, but looked at the
door as if he was meditating an exit. The
meeting had, indeed, been very painful to
Mm, again reviving the old associations
which circumstances and Mimics had been
tending to deaden. He had hitherto carefully
avoided Lady Helena, who was,
woman-like, resolved to overcome his repugnance.
She could not congratulate
herself on the success of this raid upon his
prejudices; for although she put unbounded
faith in her rank, majestic carriage, and

personal influence, she found that time
had not destroyed the root of the old
offence. Thus poor Le Eoy stood between
two assaulters — Lady Helena with her
efforts at conciliation on the one side, and
Sir Joshua with his superabundant horn'
home on the other. Their son made an
effort as mediator. Looking first at Barbara,
then at Mr. Le Roy, he said,

I have had many a lecture for wishing
that old Luton would die, and Mr. Leste
reign in his stead. But the wishes of the
wicked do prosper sometimes, and mine
are fulfilled at last.'

The belligerents smiled, and Barbara,
feeling that she had made a mistake by so
public a thanksgiving, rose to leave. Lady
Helena proposed to take her to the vicarage
in the carriage, but she steadily and politely
declined. Le Roy heard her do so with
satisfaction, and both Lady Helena and
her son perceived a look approaching
admiration in his cold eyes, which they

interpreted according to their fancy. Her
ladyship had previously enlarged upon
certain reports concerning the squire's
liking for the curate's daughter, and Montague
had maliciously asked her as to
what would become of Oourtleroy and
Miss Marmont, if they should prove well
founded.

As is customary in all love-affairs, everybody
was speculating about everybody ;
and even the misanthropic Le E,oy found
himself watching the parting between Captain
Carew and Barbara. It was so undemonstrative
and common-place that he
could make nothing of it, and his own was
certainly more open to remark.

Give my compliments to your mother,
and tell her I hope soon to make her acquaintances
he said, while opening the
door. Then, as she passed out, he added,
sotto voce, and in a tone of annoyance : * I
am obliged for your visit, Miss Leste, but

sorry you should have delivered your messages
in public'

I am sorry also, Mr, Le E,oy,' returned
Barbara.

That is the best girl in the county !'
exclaimed Sir Joshua, with a twinkle of
his eye, not unperceived by Le Eoy. * She
was the handsomest, too ; but she isn't as
young as she was.'

She is the handsomest still, I should
imagine,' replied Le Roy, in his most
metallic voice.

The old humbugs !' mentally exclaimed
Carew.

Then the conversation turned upon
George Hope, and it was pleasant to hear
the senior captain enlarge upon the merits
of his junior, and declare that he deserved
all his honours. He did not add that his
own promotion was delayed by his illness,
but it was patent to everyone that his
recovery was still doubtful.

I hope you will soon come and see
us, and bring Miss Marmot said Lady
Helena, in lier friendliest tone, as the carriage
drove up ; but Le Eoy answered nor
yes, nor no.

When they were gone, however, he threw
himself into the chair behind the screen
and groaned, ' Thank heaven that is done !'
He was always chilly, and bent over the
fire kept alight for him. Then, with an
irritable gesture, he got up and went into
the library, where he seldom sat for long
at a time.

As well overcome it all — I have played
the fool long enough he muttered, shutting
the open French windows with a bang.
I wonder what Mimics will do next ? Weare
certainly an unconventional pair.'

He finally seated himself at her writing-table,
and began to turn over the neatly-arranged
business documents that lay upon
it. In doing so, his eyes fell on the small
brown paper parcel left by George. It

had been opened, and partially re-tied.
Seeing that it contained only books, and
one or two foreign articles, he glanced
into it, and, opening one of the little books,
read the inscription, ' From Horace to
Mimics.' He was too much of a gentleman
to pry further, but it set him thinking
of other than his own disappointments.
He reviewed the life to which ho
had doomed his niece, and wondered whether
it had given rise to an attachment for this
young man so suddenly cut off. He felt
an unusual sympathy with Mimics, although
he was so selfish as to rejoice that
there was now less chance of her leaving
him ; for he said to himself, ' I cannot do
without her.' Indeed, he went so far as
to believe that she was pledged to him
for life, and, had not his faith in woman's
truth been shaken by that unforgotten
incident of his youth, he would have been
happy in the belief.

Mimics came back at last, but did not

VOL. III. E

join her uncle until dinner. Her first
words were,

Mr. Sellon is at Prestbury, and will be
here tomorrow. He says that they are
tracing Searle. He is known to be in
America.'

Then let him remain. I would not
prosecute if he were found tomorrow,
and I suppose you could not,' replied Le
Eoy.

^ But others would,' said Mimics.

Let them,' was the curt reply.

She saw that he was displeased, and
dinner was scarcely over when she thought
she had discovered the cause. To her
surprise, he proposed that they should go
into the library, and, when there, she took
up her work lying at hand, and he apologised
for having looked into the parcel
which lay on her writing-table.

Poor Horace Leste's last remembrances
!' she said, colouring slightly. ' I

have scarcely had time to examine them ;
but they are very sad.'

'you seem to have more young men
friends than I should have imagined,
Mimics. How many Lestes are included
in your programme ?'

There are only three, uncle ; I mean,
there were. The second is married and
lives at a distance, and Octavius is in London
with Mr. Prettyman.'

Married ! A curate like his father,
and I daresay with as large a family.
Government ought to interfere.'

*Mr. Prettyman says it is the way of
the world for the poorest people to marry
and have no end of children,' laughed
Mimics. * But Dick is very clever, and is
second master at a public school.'

Do you call all the men you know by
their Christian names, Mimics ?'

Not all ; only the Lestes and — George
Hope.'

e2

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

'I think it is time to add ^' Captain " to
the latter gentleman's name. It is not
discreet for a young lady to be so familiar
with an officer already of reputation. And,
if I may ask, what could have induced you
to accompany him to Prestbury ? That
was a strong-minded proceeding, and you
well, you are not one of the representative
women of the day, though you are
strong-minded enough in another sense.'

Mimics laid down her work and looked
at her uncle with an indignant flash in her
expressive eyes, and such a flush on her
cheeks as he had never seen there before.
But she only said,

I really do not know what you mean,
uncle.'

That it is not usual for young ladies to
drive several miles to see off young men,'
he replied, frigidly. ' Besides, although
Captain Hope is distinguishing himself,
and is personally very charming, he is less
than nobody — a foundling on a doorstep —

afc best the son of a common soldier,

brought up by vulgar people '

*Mr. and Mrs. Prettyman are not vulgar
interrupted Mimics, her voice and
manner betokening grave offence. * They
are the best and kindest people in the
world. They have adopted George, received
Miss Heath, been good to everyone.
And Captain Hope — emphasizing the
Captain,' — ' has been my friend ever
since I came from Africa. I look on him
as — as my young brother, and cannot see
that there was any indiscretion in going
with him and Mr. Leste to Prestbury,
when we had not met for years, and may
not meet again for years, if ever — for he
will be sent to India or Africa, or some
awful country where death seems ever
ready to take the best and bravest. Poor
Horace first, who next ?'

Mimics's voice trembled, and tears filled
the lustrous eyes and hung upon the long
black lashes.

I did not mean to hurt your feelings,
Mimics, only to advise you,' said lier uncle
stifiOiy. ' You were children, you are now
man and woman, and '

I am years older than he. He is only
just of age, 1 am six-and-twenty — he is
still a boy, I a woman

mimic, pray use your common-sense.
A few years more or less scarcely count
when people are grown-up, and, I assure
you, uncomfortable complications may arise
from familiar correspondence with such a
man as Captain Hope. You had better give it
up. Besides, it takes your time from me,
and you have promised to devote yourself
to me.'

I will do my best for you, uncle, but 1
will never, never give up George Hope as
friend and brother.'

Truly a decided young lady ; but I,
too, can be decided occasionally. I will
never countenance your intimacy and correspondence

with him, so long as the respectability
of his parentage remains in
doubt. Good-night. Kindly tell Barber
to bring my coffee to the school-room.'

Mr. Le Eoy left the library, and Mimics's
first feeling was one of pure astonishment
at the sudden change in his manner.
He was excited and irritable, and she involuntarily
muttered, ' It will do him
good ;' but a few minutes of solitary reflection
altered her opinion. If she were to
be useful to him, she must strive to keep
him calm, lest there should be a repetition
of the awful scene of the wild-duck's pond.
But give up George Hope — never ! Were
not his last words to her, * Are you still
ny Mimi?' and had she not answered,
'Yes?'

My Mimi,' Still his friend, counsellor,
confidante, dearest and only sister! She
covered her eyes as she suddenly seemed
to see him standing there by the door, unrecognised

by her. Was he not now the
stronger of the two ? best fitted to be
counsellor ; a preux chevalier, like her hero,
Bayard ?

CHAPTER lY.

GRATITUDE.

'I POSITIVELY decline to have anything
more to do with Searle,' said Mr. Le Eoy,
when he, Mimics, and Sellon were discussing
business matters.

'You must prosecute him, if we can
catch him. Nobody else can do it,' returned
the lawyer.

And what would be the result ?'

The best part of the remainder of his
life in penal servitude.'

Will you undertake this, Mimics ? I
could not.'

Mimics could not help laughing. It
seemed to her so comical to be constituted
not only steward, but prosecutrix as well.

She would not have the power. Of
course you must have justice,' said Sellou.

The bankers and lawyers have come off
by declaring a dividend and bankruptcy''
put in shrewd Mimics. ' After all, Searle
was their tool. He got the money for
them, and the tenants lent it to the Units
with their eyes open.'

Yes, the rogue was cunning. His name
does not appear in any of the transactions.
You must have signed yours blindfold, Mr.
Le Roy,' said Sell on.

Hoodwinked rather. I trusted him
implicitly, and now I trust my niece. I
really am not equal to accounts. I cannot
reckon up a compound-addition sum, much
less go in for subtraction, multiplication,
or division. As to practice, fractions, algebra,
and so forth, my tutor failed to
indoctrinate me. Had my mother been
wise enough to send me to a public school,
they might have flogged something into
me ; but here I only learnt what I liked.

You have a head for figures, Mimica/
So had Searle, uncle,' said she, maliciously.


*Poor wretch! What of his wife and
family ?'

They are starving at Prestbury, uncle.
I went to see them yesterday.'

You seem to have done a great deal ina
few hours. Miss Marmont. I suppose
you helped them ?'

I gave them what I could.'

Le Roy looked first at his niece, then at
Sellon, with a puzzled air.

Perhaps the house he built and lived in
should be his after all,' he said.

My dear sir, I really must throw up
your affairs if you return to that question.
It was built with your money, on your
land, and by grinding down your niece and
tenants.'

I must say a word for him, even though
I criminate myself. He must have found
it difficult to supply the demands for my

town establishment, while helping to keep
the Units going. I begin to see this
clearly now, thanks to the superior vision
of my niece ; and, seriously, I am about to
manage my own affairs with her. I suppose
Searle got into a muddle between my
needs and the Units' speculations.'

Sellon looked at Le Roy in some surprise.
He really appeared to be alive once more,
and to be beginning to take some interest
in life. He, like Mimics, feared to drive
him to extremities, lest there should be a
recurrence of the excitement they had
witnessed before.

The fact is,' continued Le Eoy, ' that I
have been ejected from London and brought
into the country in spite of myself. You
have done it between you, and, I confess,
you have benefited me. So has our parson
by his example, if not his precepts, for I
have not yet been to church,' a shadow
passed over the face which had been unusually
clear, ' If, instead of prosecuting

Searle, we could get a statement from him,
what might be the result r'

We must catch him first replied Sellon.
But, if you will only work with us, I think
we might pull through in time. Matters
look more promising than they did, and
Miss Marmont understands the people so
well that she could make things smooth
for you.'

They blame me, I suppose ?' asked Le
Roy.

Well, when one does one's duty vicariously,
one is sure to be blamed. If I were
to depute you to do my law, or you me to
play on all these instruments, what a mess
we should make of it.'

Sellon pointed to the Straduarius which
lay on the piano as he spoke — for the trio
were in the school-room.

'If Searle is found, would it not be possible
to get him to help in clearing up the
difficulties about the mortgages, on a promise
that we will not prosecute ?' asked Mimics.

^ If you will do that, I will go with you
at once and see the farms and tenants
said Le Roy. ' I will do anything you
wish but bring myself and my affairs before
the public, in court ; to be a laughing-stock
and nine-days'-wonder to the county, and
to have my life for the last twenty years
revealed, I will not. I will put an end toit
rather.'

He rose and seemed about to leave the
room. Mimics rose also, and, with consummate
tact and as if merely following
his thought, said,

^ Oh, uncle, that is delightful ! "Wait
till I put on my hat, and, if Mr. Sellon can
spare the time, we will go first to Mr.
Bezley, who particularly wants to see you
about repairs, and then on to Marks, who
will never feel secure at Overton until you
have been there again, and then — '

'Enough for the present,' replied Le
Eoy, avoiding the earnest eyes of the
speaker. *I will go, provided you both

promise that no further publicity be given
to me or my affairs.'

Mimics promised readily, but Sellon demurred.
He perceived, however, that if
he persisted in his original plan, he should
only irritate Le Roy, so he made a half
compromise by saying that he would take
no steps against Searle, without his particular
request. And so, after many futile
attempts on Mimics's part to induce her
uncle to visit his tenants, a sudden selfish
fear of exposure to the public gaze accomplished
what she had in vain striven to
effect.

He was not, naturally, of a conciliating
or genial nature, therefore Mimics was surprised
at his tone, when at last he came
face to face with his people. His manner
was singularly courteous though reserved,
and he was quite ready to promise everything
they asked. Supported by Mimics
and Sellon, he made himself so agreeable
that not only his old friend, Bezley, but

others augured a golden age for the future,
We will defer Overton until I call on
Sir Joshua he said. ' I will go into the
village and wind up with the vicarage.'

Call on Sir Joshua !' mentally echoed
Mimics, but she little knew what the words
and resolution had cost the speaker.

She was not, however, quite easy in her
mind about him. As she took him from
cottage to cottage in the small, scattered
village, and occasionally reminded him that
some now antiquated man or woman remembered
him as boy and man, she felt,
instinctively that he was troubled by those
memories which had almost unsettled his
reason. Still, he appeared pleased and
flattered by the gratitude expressed for
his visits, and the thanksgivings for his
return, while he winced under the constant
reminders that he was growing old. Age,
to him, was despair; so was memory.

Let me see, sir,' said one old woman.
I be fourscore and two come next May,

and Madam Le Roy was anigli my age.
How the years do run along ! I was at
your coming of age going for thirty-five
year ago, and tasted the ale and cider as
was brewed when you was born. And I
was at the wedding, leastways I should a'
been, only — dear heart, I beg your pardon,
sir ; but we was all put about after
that great preparations and all.'

This unpremeditated thrust nearly overset
Le Roy, and Mimics looked at him in
terror ; but he kept his equilibrium somehow.
She rose hastily, however, and,
wishing the old dame good-bye, led the
way from the cottage. She saw him give
a great gasp when he got into the little
garden, and he walked onward as if for
life. Mr. Sellon arrested and diverted
him by saying that, as they had finished
actual business for the day, he would walk
straight to the station. He also had
heard the old woman's speech, and sought
to efface it by another.

VOL. III. F

If we find Searle, we will offer to condone
his offences if he will make a clean
breast of all his shortcomings either by
letter or in person,' he said.

'Do what you will, provided there be no
publicity,' was the reply, as Le Roy
strode on he knew not whither. Fortunately
it was in the direction of the station,
so the others strode after him.

*It was my fault ; I should not have taken
him to old Mary's,' groaned Mimics. ' She
has the memory of thevillao^e; and they
say she must have had it before she was
born

Do him good rejoined Sellon, pitilessly.
^ When a man makes a fool of himself
for the best part of his life, it takes
practical teaching to turn him into a wiseman.
In spite of his sins, Searle has had
a hand in this ; and, if you can maintain
your tact and patience, you will complete
his education.'

I !' ejaculated Mimics.

You,' returned Sellon. * I believe you
have an influence over him, and upon your
use of it depends his own happiness and
the prosperity of his people. May God
give you wisdom, for it is a weighty work.'

Too weighty for me, but I will do my
best,' murmured Mimics, running after her
uncle until she overtook him.

Enough to cow any brave heart,'
thought Sellon, following more leisurely.
But her schooling fits her for undertaking
his. Solitude has made her unselfish
and him selfish, anomalous results of the
same class of education, and meeting here
as extremes sometimes do.'

You. will not forget your promised visit
to the vicarage, uncle,' said Mimics, overtaking
Le Hoy by stress of running.
*Mrs. Leste is very excitable, and will
waste all her energy in expectation until
you have been.'

I cannot go to-day, Mimics. I have
really done enough for a first essay, which

f2

will probably be the last was the reply.

Only you promised, uncle.'

What of that ? Promises are made tone
rent, like the rags that they are. Who
keeps them ? Who can mend them when
torn asunder ? Have you ever kept a
promise, Mi mica ?'

I have not yet been tried, for I have
only made them quite lately — but I intend
to keep them. One was to devote my
life to you, the other to continue George
Hope's friend under all circumstances.'

Your life to me ! to me ! who have
done nothing for you. You will change
your mind like the rest when the temptation
comes.'

Le Eoy slackened his pace, and looked
into the firm, clear countenance of his
niece. She smiled, and put her hand
within his arm.

You are my dear mother's brother,' she

said.

You do not know what you promise,

for I am not always master of myself.
You have witnessed that,' he went on, with
agitation, not heeding her words. * Yet I
am not so heartless and egotistical as they
fancy.'

Then come with me and cheer poor
Mrs. Leste,' she said, smiling persuasively,
and trying, gently, to turn him back.

At this moment Mr. Sellon came up,
puffing and groaning under his exertions.
Le Eoy had forgotten him, and grew suddenly
as anxious to retrace his steps as he
had been to hurry forward.

I shall be in time for the train, taking
it leisurely,' said Sellon. * I should die of
apoplexy if I were to try to keep up with
you, so I will say good-morning. I hope
to be back again in a few weeks, by which
time we may have got hold of our missing
link.'

Spare me an apoplectic fit. I should
not know what to do with you, though ; I
daresay Miss Marmont would,' returned

Le Roj, recovering bis cold and stately
manner. ^ I am sorry you cannot stay to
dinner.'

They shook hands and separated, Sellon
giving Mimics a kind and pitying look
which she returned by one as bright, which
reassured him.

'Perhaps I may as well get over the
vicarage said Le Roy, and thitherward
they went. ' They are strangers, and did
not know me when I was a boy !' he
added, sarcastically. ' If there is one thing
more aggravating than another, it is to be
reminded of what you were and what
happened years ago, and of events you are
striving to forget. Can one ever forget,
Mimics ?' he asked this question hoarsely
and again quickened his pace.

I could not, uncle ; but I could forgive,'
she replied. 'And I think I am naturally
so proud, that I could overcome. Of
course the grace of God would enable one
to do this better than one's pride.'

preaching again, Mimics. You are too
like your mother.'

'Am I? How delightful! Did she
preach T

All women do ; I wish they practised.'

Mimics laughed so merrily, that her
uncle stayed his steps in astonishment.
He so seldom said anything to cause so
cheerful a sound, that he joined involuntarily,
and then inquired what they were
laughing at. Mimics scarcely knew herself;
at any rate, she could not tell him
that it was at his solemn irony. His mind
was diverted from himself, however, and,
when they reached the vicarage, he had
returned to his normal manner. Helena,
now a bright, handsome, grown-up girl,
let them in. They found Captain Carew
in the drawing-room with Octavius, and
Mimics began to speculate. To what would
this sudden return of intimacy lead?
Helena, who went upstairs, came back
with an apologetic invitation to Mr. Le

'Roy to go and see her mother, because
she was unable to come down to him. He
and Mimics went. They found Mrs. Leste
much excited, and the usually reserved,
quiet woman anticipated anything Le Roy
might have to say by pouring out a flood
of gratitude which overcame him.

Not for myself, but for my husband, I
thank you,' she said. ' He will have ease
when most we need it, in old age. I have
striven to throw all my care upon our
Heavenly Father, but the fear of poverty
for him has weighed me down. Now I see
how sinful was my fear, since competence
has come to him without the seeking. A
grief one day, a joy the next : such is the
Divine way of compensation. Oh ! Mr. Le
Eoy, you have indeed benefited a goodman,
and the Lord will reward you, and
we — we all shall be for ever grateful.'

'My dear madam — I — I — have only
done what was natural,' stammered Le
Eoy. ' No one else deserved the living so

well as be who has spent his life in working

it;

But it is not the way of the world, or
even of the church, to reward the most
deserving put in Barbara, who was sometimes
cynical from circumstances.

•I believe neither in the world nor in
the church returned Le E-oy, looking at
her. ' But I am learning to believe in
individual unselfishness. One example of
such is worth all the preaching from all
the pulpits.'

You have not heard Mr. Leste put in
Mimics.

I hope to hear him preach his first sermon
as vicar of Courtleroy/ he replied,
with a certain majestic gravity which made
Mimics smile.

He turned the subject by making some
casual inquiry of Mrs. Leste, which resulted
in their discovering a mutual friend
of long ago, and set them at their ease.
This diversion enabled Mimics to tell

Barbara that Captain Carew was downstairs.


Mother cannot see him to-day. He has
come to see her. Octavius went to tell
him that we were expecting Mr. Le Eoj,
and she was not strong enough for more
excitement,' returned Barbara.

Will you not go and explain this yourself,
Barbra ? He looks so ill and
dejected.'

I would rather not. I have seen him
we are friends. That is sufficient.'

Oh, Barbra ! You are not like yourself


No ; but I shall be, now " carling
care" is leaving us — I mean the grinding
of perpetual poverty. Dear Mimics, forgive
me all my injustice ; you are far, far
better than I.'

This little whispered interlude was disturbed
by Mr. Le Eoy, who signed to
Mimics that he meant to depart, and she
rose to take leave. But Barbara remained

with her mother, while Helena
marshalled them downstairs, and Mimics
knew that if Montague Carew had come to
see his first love, he was disappointed. He
left the vicarage, on the contrary, with
her, his second inn amo rata, and she was
undecided whether he was still playing at
fast and loose, or not.

CHAPTER V.

Reading HIMSELF IN.

Why is there always a cloud to overshadow
the sunshine of humanity? That Sunday
would have been a jubilee but for poor
Horace's death. Vicar of Courtleroy ! Had
it not been Sunday, the whole parish
would have danced for joy. They did at
heart, and Barbara chose the gladdest
hymns she could find to lead the measure.
When Mr. Leste 'read himself in,' his
congregation longed to cheer, and, that
being out of the question, they took to
using their handkerchiefs to wipe their
eyes, instead of waving them. Everybody
was at church. Mr. Le Roy kept his word,

and accompanied Mimics in state, not
venturing to confide to her that it was the
first time he had entered a place of worship
since he stood at the altar of that
church, awaiting his bride. Mrs. Leste
was so roused by sudden good fortune
from her nervous illness that she was also
there, and walked from the vicarage, leaning
on the arm of her clerical son Eichard.
All her children were present, and, but for
that far away African grave, she would
have been supremely happy. Leila and
Laura had forsaken their own country
vicarages and Sabbath duties for once,
and Octavius still lingered at home. Sir
Joshua, Lady Helena, and their sons were
in their pews, and all the farmers from
far and near swarmed to church, while the
villagers and Sunday scholars were legion.
For once, simple goodness, humility, rectitude
of purpose, and a laborious discharge
of daily duty were rewarded, and Mr.
Leste knew how well he was beloved.

The lesson was not lost upon the squire,
who went through the service in a sort of
dream, yet could not fail of realizing the
difference between the results of his lost
life and the well-spent years of him whom
he had benefited. He sat, stood, knelt
mechanically, and it was not until the
sermon that he awoke to consciousness.
'Thy mercies have followed me all the
days of my life,' was the text, from which
the preacher extracted nothing but thankfulness.
He showed how that even griefs
were mercies in disguise, and that the
bitterest of sorrows and disappointments
were intended to lead the soul heavenward.
Nothing absolutely personal escaped
him, but his hearers knew how personal to
himself and his parishioners were his
words. In all his sermons he ever uplifted
the cross, and preached the crucified Saviour,
and this was no exception. Did his words
go home to the heart of him who sat with
his eves covered by his hand in the chancel

of that church which he had so strangely
forsaken years ago? None could tell but
Him to whom all hearts are open ; but he
roust fain rejoice in the happiness he had
given, even though it had cost him
nothing.

"When the service was over he was about
to hurry home, but he was literally mobbed
by the congregation, who united in
showering blessings upon him for giving
them as vicar him whom they had so long
loved as curate. Old and young joined in
this paean, and, when he tried to escape,
Sir Joshua seized upon him with energetic
friendliness.

^ So glad to see you at church again,
Le Eoy. Like old times, when Madam
Le Eoy used to go out first, followed by
all the old women in the parish. But you
couldn't get away so easily, and now we've
caught you we'll keep you. Here are two,
four, six, eight, nine Lestes, all waiting to
shake hands.'

Truly it was an ordeal, and Mimics
trembled for her uncle's self-possession.
He was very pale, and looked strangely
stern and resolute, but his voice trembled
slightly, and she was convinced that his
feelings Averse moved. He must indeed
have been a stone not to have been melted
by the sight of the father, mother, and
their seven children, all in mourning,
pressing round him with tearful eyes and
thankful hearts to acknowledge him their
benefactor. This was not the first time
they had appeared at church since Horace's
death, so grief was relieved by joy.

The major portion of the congregation
dispersed, leaving him and Mimics with
the Lestes and Carews, standing near the
loch gate, in front of which was Sir
Joshua's carriage. Captain Carew was
talking to Mrs. Leste, and the vicar — for
so we may now call him — to Sir Joshua
and Le Eoy. Leila and her brothers and
sisters surrounded Mimics : all but Barbara.

Where was she ? Back in the
church arranging the hymns for the evening
service with her choir — away from
Lady Helena and her son. And Lady
Helena, meanwhile, was looking about for
her with a sort of angry inquisitiveness.

Bold Barbra is a match for her,' whispered
Leila to Mimics. * When will you
bring your uncle to see us ? Like Echo,
** We have called and called in vain." *

Ask him replied Mimics.

And Leila, who feared nobody, did ask
him, and elicited a partial promise that he
would ' do himself the pleasure of calling
some day.' He, too, was looking for Barbara,
and, not seeing her, asked her father
to come to luncheon one day during the
week, with his sons, ' and Miss Leste, if
she could be persuaded to join them.' The
invitation was accepted, and Eichard Leste,
whose acquaintance we have scarcely made,
told Mimics how glad he should be to meet
her once more.

VOL. III. G

During the remainder of that day, Mr.
Le Eoy spoke little. He appeared self-absorbed,
and Mimics could not discover
what effect the excitement had had upon
him. Her fears were roused by the gloom
of his manner, and she determined not to
lose sight of him, for she never lost the
dread of a possible recurrence of that
attempt on his life.

She did not go to church as usual, but
sought to distract his mind by such interruptions
of his prolonged reveries as she
could improvise. In the evening he went
into the library and she followed. It was
cheerful with a bright fire, and the many
little accessories which Mimics's womanly
instincts had arranged. He took up the
book she had been reading, which chanced
to be * Paley's Evidences of Christianity,'
and sat down in a large library chair, she
on a couch not far from him.

This is an abstruse book for a woman
do you understand it ?' he asked.

I think so ; it is not difficult, but the
Bible explains itself best she replied.
'I cannot understand how people can
doubt its inspiration who will candidly
compare one part with another, and see
how each evolves from the other.'

Indeed ! You are an evolutionist, then,
as well as a protectionist or abolitionist —
which is it ?'

Abolitionist decidedly. I don't understand
evolution, and I am sure it is not
scriptural.'

Mimics laughed, and coloured ; for she
knew she was on dangerous ground, upon
which she could not tread with safety,
though she set her foot upon it with her
usual decision. Her uncle laughed also,
cynically, while he looked at her inquisitively,
but not unkindly.

I would give all I have for your faith,
Mimics,' he said.

She went to his side impulsively, and
laid her hand on his shoulder.

g2

Ob, uncle ! It is so easy — so easy !'
she cried.

To you, and men such as Mr. Leste.
Sit down, and I will tell you why it is
impossible for me.'

He pointed to a small chair at the side
of the fireplace, which had been the favourite
seat of Mimics's mother, and which
was quaint enough even for modern taste,
and therefore for his. She leaned forward,
and gazed into his face, her own
quivering with excitement.

For heaven's sake, don't look at me so.
You are your mother,' he exclaimed.

Oh, no, uncle, I am only Mimics, at
your service,' she replied, jestingly, but
slightly terrified.

If "Mimics at my service," you, like
me. are never to be wed. You say you
have never been in love.'

'Never — at least, I — think not,' hesitatingly.


Happy girl. Perfect faith, and no disappointment.

I, on the contrary, owe all
the misery of my life to one fatal passion.
You know the story, but I will complete
the tortures I have borne on the inquisition
of late, by unburdening ray mind for
the first and last time to you — because —
because you are my niece, and have promised
to devote yourself to me.'

Mimics quailed inwardly, but maintained
her self-possession. She merely said, 'Yes,
uncle,' when he paused a moment, which
encouraged him to proceed.

Heir and idol ! worshipped and uncontradicted
from my birth, a monarch in my
world : this I was at Courtleroy. I had
my good impulses, but self overcame them.
Educated at home by tutors and governors
who had no control over me, I ruled
like a Nero. I travelled, and the world
taught me something, but not much. I
was still an autocrat. I came home, and
fell in love. Oh ! Mimics, what love it
was. I never doubted its return, for I

bad never been thwarted. My Margaret
was fair as the lily, pure as untrodden
Show. I believed it then, I believe it still.
She lived with Lady Helena, who was then
as she is still — proud, imperious, and ambitious.
I suppose she persuaded her to
accept me, and I, never having met with
opposition in my life, imagined that she
loved me as devoutly as I loved her,
though she never told me so. "What think
you, Mimics? Am I a man to inspire a
devoted love?'

This abrupt question startled Mimics.
lie waited for an answer, and she, ever
truthful, gave it.

'I should think so, uncle. Your parents
loved you with devotion, so did dear
mamma — and I — I am learning to love
you also. But perhaps the Lady Margaret
had some other, whom she may have loved
before.'

'Who? And what became of her?' he
almost shouted, and the cry made Mimics

start; but he calmed himself and resumed.
Everything appeared to go smoothly. I
was my own master, my father having died
when I was abroad, and my mother relinquishing
Courtleroy to us, and preparing
to live in her jointure-house in town.
The settlements were completed, and I, in
my mad love, settled everything upon her,
for the poor dove had nothing but her fair
plumage. And oh 1 Mimics, how fair she
was ! Let me talk to you of her whom I
have not named for two-and-twenty years.
She was, I now believe, too gentle, sweet,
and innocent for one of my overbearing
temperament — for, though I appear unconscious
of my faults, I know them tolerably
well. Ah! she was perfect in all but truth :
she cast off that lovely garment, but she
was yet too honest to take vows that she
could not fulfil. I have never blamed her,
though I have suffered mortally all these
weary years.

I was with her on the eve of the wedding,

and I could not understand why she
shed tears. I thought they were natural
excitement, but I now suppose she was
grieving for me who loved her so well.
Why do you shed them, Mimics? for
sympathy ! Thank you, it all seems to me
but yesterday ; still I cannot weep and
could not then. When I stood by the
altar which I saw to-day, awaiting her, T
was the happiest of men. What a scene
it was ! Outside floral arches, and within
crowds of friends and tenants — all for me
and her. Can you realize how this was
ended in a moment by the entrance of Sir
Joshua iu breathless haste, beckoning me
from my place of anxious waiting, and
hurrying me through the inquisitive throng
to his carriage? Can you imagine my
frenzy when I learnt that she, my bride,
my love, could nowhere be found? We
drove to Monkton like mad, and there all
was terror and confusion. Lady Helena,
the bridesmaids, and the household were

hurrying here and there in search of what
was never found. Nothing remained tome
of her but the bridal wreath — I have
it still, I begged it — and my own fatal
memories.

All through that day and night I roamed
about in search of her, knowing in my
heart that it was in vain, for a hundred
phantom thoughts rose before me, that
proclaimed, "She did not love you." These
and my wounded pride and undying affection
drove me to despair, and I left home,
mother, friends, if I had them, and country,
followed only by my faithful valet, who
has never left me. I sought her wherever
I went, sometimes expecting to meet her
in poverty and alone, at others with him
she had chosen in preference to me. But
who ? None of her lovers had been missing,
even for a day, and there was no clue
to her having eloped with one of inferior
station.

I gradually recovered, as one does, from

the delirium of disappointment, but not
from wounded pride. I could not bring
myself to return to Courtleroy, so finally
settled in London, near my mother, but not
with her, as you know. At first all companionship
was odious to me, and I took
no interest in anything but the beautifying
of my house, and the cultivation of my
taste for music. So long as Searle supplied
the means, I was nominally content,
and let everything go save the gratification
of the present moment ; but I had neither
hope in this life nor faith in another. I
have been strangely roused, and acknowledge
that my ruin has been compassed by
myself alone. I cannot tell how I have
been brought back here, nor what force
has been at work to carry me through this
new ordeal, nor why I am confiding these
secrets of my heart to you. Something is
driving me I know not how or where.'
" God works in a mysterious way," '

whispered Mimics, her voice betraying the
emotion she felt.

Preaching again ; but, if so, what am I
to do ?' he asked.

He will show you,' she replied. ^ You
are already making us all happy in and
about Courtleroy/

And myself ?'

^ I will strive to make you happy also.'

Silence followed these brief sentences,
during which Mimics felt a strange depression,
not only on her uncle's account,
but her own. Their lives seemed so solitary,
even in such companionship as they
gave one another, that she wondered how
they would flow on in this new and untried
channel. He again broke in upon
her thoughts.

'Is it Leste, or you, or circumstances
or what, that have driven me to church
to-day ? I do not understand it,' he resumed.
' But I bore it better than I

expected. Am I mad, or in a dream, or
"what is urging me on where I never meant
to have adventured again ?'

'1 think it is God's Holy Spirit returned
Mimics, very gently and very
humbly.

She did not venture to look at him, expecting
the usual sarcastic * preaching
again, Mimics,* but he was silent. He
took up the book he had laid down, and
Mimics fetched another, and made believe
to read. He did not, however, remain
long in the library, but left it so suddenly,
that she was frightened lest she might
have annoyed him, and stole out after him.
She perceived that he went to the schoolroom,
and soon afterwards heard him
playing Handel.

^ It is all right,' she thought. ' I wish I
were musical, like Barbara ; or that George
were here. How shall I exist, if I am
compelled to give up my correspondence
with him ?'

She felt strangely lonely, as she sought
by prayer and meditation to discover where
her duty lay, and how best she could
perform it.

CHAPTER VI.

CHRISTMAS DAY,

After storm sunshine; after despair Hope.
The Prettymans were at Summerlands
again. They came almost unexpectedly,
and everybody rejoiced, except, perhaps,
Mr. Le Roy. But he did not put himself
to any inconvenience about them, though
lie expressed himself bored by their near
neighbourhood. Miss Heath came with
them, and Mimics was not long before she
paid them a visit. It was the end of
november when they arrived, for they
had been, previously, to the sea-side, and
they said they meant to have *a merry
Christmas.'

Georgie will be down for Christmas,'
said Mrs. Pretty man. * Indeed, it was he
who made us come. He says he saw nothing
of you, Mimics. He went to Patrick's
wedding, and has heard from him
since he and Biddy reached Ireland. Of
course Mr. Prettyman has set them up,
and Georgie couldn't do enough for them.
He is the very nicest, and most attractive,
and '

'Now, my dear, let Miss Marmont judge
for herself,' broke in Mr. Prettyman. 'Weare
always in heroics when Georgie is
mentioned. But he really is a wonderful
young man, and brave as a lion. Isn't he,
Miss Heath ?'

Certainly, Mr. Prettyman,' said sententious
Milly.

If Mr. Le Roy did his best to obstruct
the intercourse between Mimics and her
adopted brother, these friends tried to
remove the obstruction.

George duly arrived for the Christmas

week, and was a hero to the neighbourhood.
Everybody called upon him and
feted him except Le Roy. He suddenly
shut himself up again, and said the weather
was too cold for visiting, when Mimics
urged him to call at Summerlands.

^ Besides,' he added, ' I did not know
the Prettymans in town — why should I
make their acquaintance here ?'

But you knew Captain Hope ?' she said.

Slightly, as a boy; I hate young men !'

Nevertheless, George came to Courted
and by the fascination of his manners
and the open-hearted simplicity of his mind
drew its master towards him, in spite of
his antagonism. The snow was on the
ground when he . paid his first visit, and
Le Roy chanced to be seated within his
screen in the hall. He heard the pleased
welcome of Barber, and came forward to
meet him.

I must apologise for coming uninvited,'
he said, ^ but I wanted to thank you for so

kindly sending me to Prestbury when I
was here last ; it gave me the opportunity
of seeing something of Mimics : but I
suppose I must learn to call her Miss
Marmont now. It will be difficult after
so many years of intimacy

In vain Le Eoy sought for words to
say that he considered the change indispensable
; he caught the winning smile and
frank look of the blue eyes, and could only
smile in return. Mrs. Prettyman was
right : no man nor woman could resist
George Hope. Mimics came in radiant
with delight, and her uncle watched the
meeting with something of envy mingled
with a kind of displeasure. He saw how
George clasped both the hands, and how
the eyes met in mutual and happy affection.

They are only brother and sister, of
course,' he thought. ' The disparity is on
the wrong side, and he is so young.'

I am off again the beginning of the
year,' said George. 'Whether to Africa,

VOL. III. H

China, or India, is not settled ; but there
are rumours of wars everywhere. I wish
they would cease.'

And what would become of you T
asked Le Eoy.

I would turn my sword into a ploughshare,'
he replied. * The padre and madre
would be right glad

He quite forgets his uncertain position,'
thought Le Eoy.

He also forgot it as he began to talk to
George. The charm which had conquered
him at the Crystal Palace won him now,
and before the visit was over he found
himself asking him to return.

Perhaps you will come and see us
first,' said George. 'We have our little
pride, and we should all feel that you
really wished to see me, if you would come
to Summerlands. Of course I shall be
only too happy to come here under any
circumstances.'

Once more that manner and smile subdued
Le Eoy, and he promised to call on
Mr. Prettyman when the cold was less
severe. As to Mimics, she looked on,
listened, and wondered. But no sooner
had George departed than Le Eoy regretted
the promise he had made. Still, having
made it, he kept it, and walked with
Mimics to Summerlands the following
morning. They found only Mrs. Pretty-man
and Miss Heath, and the visit was
rather awkward than agreeable ; still
Mimics felt that the ice was broken. Mrs.
Prettyman could talk of nothing but
George, and Miss Heath's monosyllables
did not help on conversation ; so Mr. Le
Roy was less communicative than usual,
and Mimics was glad when it was over.

Christmas morning saw a large congregation
at Courtleroy church. The weather
was frosty and clear ; the Lestes had returned
to their customary cheerfulness,

hand

rich and poor rejoiced together on
the festival which celebrates the birth of
the 'gentle child Jesus.' The church was
prettily decorated, and even Le Eoy seemed
cheerful and more at home in the sacred
building than he had been previously.
George Hope was the ' observed of all observers
and after service was surrounded
by friends. The Carews were foremost in
congratulations, and even his old enemy,
Bully, now in the diplomatic service, welcomed
him. But Montague was not there :
he had caught cold, and had been advised
to remain at home.

A merry Christmas, Le Hoy,' shouted
Sir Joshua. * I hear you have called at
Summerlands, and want to know when
you mean to honour us. It don't do to
make cheese of one and chalk of another,
you know — does it, Miss Marmont ? You
must make your uncle come to our jollification
next week, or I shall think he

owes me a grudge, as well as the rest of
the family.'

The concluding sentence was said aside
to Mimics.

I will do my best,' she replied.

Jollifications are not in my way,' said
her uncle, stiffly.

Meanwhile Lady Helena was talking to
Barbara with unusual eagerness. Her
face looked anxious and perplexed, and
Barbara's turned pale as she listened.

I should be much obliged if you would
come to Monkton tomorrow for a consultation
over my clothing-club. Monty is
too ill to admit of my going to the vicarage,
and I am sure we shall have to put
off our party. It is in honour of Captain
Hope, and Monty is very anxious about
it; but I assure you, Barbara, he is in a
very precarious state. He was much
better, but he has been very depressed
lately. I think he would like to see you,

and, if you will come to luncheon tomorrow,
we can look over the accounts,
and you can tell him why you so positively
declined to let us drive you home
when we met at Courtleroy. He has been
harping upon it ever since, and I begin to
be afraid his brain is excited. Will you
come ?'

Certainly, Lady Helena, if you wish it
As Barbara spoke, her brain was certainly
excited, for she knew not what it
all meant. This to her, from the Lady
Helena Carew who had kept her at arm's
length for years, and who, she knew full
well, had worked on her son's mind to
her prejudice ! She believed there was
mischief lurking beneath, for was not
Lady Helena worldly, ambitious, and immeasurably
proud? And had not Leila
overheard her endeavours to persuade him
to propose for Mimics ? But he was ill,
and the advance had come from her ladyship
; therefore she would go, whatever

the result. She had no one whom she
could consult, for she never primed Captain
Carew to her parents, who suspected
the state of the case, but had not dared to
question one whose resolute will sometimes
alarmed them.

In her excitement she left her friends
without adieux, and hastened home alone.
This did not surprise them, for they knew
she disliked what she called ' church gossip,'
and eschewed it when she could ; in
other words, she liked to be undisturbed
by general conversation after the service
and sermon. Not so Mimics, whose
Sunday gossip ' had been for many years
her sole recreation and chance of society.

I shall come and see you this afternoon,'
said George to her, and she had not
the courage to tell him that her uncle
might object.

She had, with a little management, provided
a substantial Christmas dinner for
all the old servants, and Mrs. Stone and

the coachman were heard to declare that
the good old times were coming back, when
they saw the servants' hall full of guests.
Their master was quite willing that this
should take place, provided he was not
expected to move in the matter. He now
relied as implicitly on Mimics as he had
done on Searle.

They are all superannuated,' he said to
her at luncheon. ' We must pension them
off and get a new establishment. Will you
see about it, Mimics ?*

With pleasure, uncle, when the affairs
are finally settled,' she replied, with a
laugh. ' I don't think we could afford it
now ; at least, Mr. Sellon says no change
must be made at present.'

What a bore Sellon is 1 I never understand
what lawyers were made for, except
to *' bind heavy burdens." I wish you
would ask your friends, the Lestes, not to
be so demonstrative. One would think
that I gave them a new living every week.

Miss Leste is a happy exception. Then
old Prettyman and his marvellous wife are
really too empresse with you, Mimics.
Excellent people ; but how can you put up
with them ? Still they are preferable to
Sir Joshua. He is intolerable with his
congratulations upon my going to church,
and his general want of tact. Could you
not give him to understand what a bore he
is ? You seem on excellent terms with
them all.'

I, uncle ? You have conceived wonderful
notions of my powers of management.'

^ Naturally. You have undertaken me,
corporeally and spiritually, and I feel convinced
you are equal to undertake my
neighbours. I do not mean to annoy you.
I am really grateful to you for your marvellous
consideration.'

Mimics knew not what to reply to so
enigmatical a speech. She was distressed
by it, and could not make out whether he
were in jest or earnest ; only he rarely

jested. She threw off her chagrin, however,
by following his beat.

If I am such a duenna, uncle, I shall
expect you to obey me implicitly. You
will have to go out to calls, and dinners,
and afternoon teas, and tennis-parties, and
no end of diversions.'

Do you like them, Mimics ?'

1 never tried them.'

Then I am sure you have too wise a
mind to care for such inanities ; and I
trust you will save me from them.'

Soon after this speech, he rose and went
to his sanctum, the school-room ; she to
the library, where she awaited George.
She felt her courage flag, and fancied she
could not encounter anyone but him ; not
even her guests in the servants' hall. But
Mrs. Stone came to her with an entreaty
that she would ' just come and have a look
at them,' and she went. The ' look '
cheered her even more than her uncle had
depressed her. She arrived just as the

plum-puddings stuck with holly were
placed on the board, and hope entered her
soul that better things were at hand for
her beloved poor. They drank her health
and the squire's, and she had the pleasure
of thanking them cheerfully, which restored
her spirits. Her uncle had said that he
hated Christmas, so she had not ventured
to remind him of it by ever so slight a
decoration ; but here were holly, ivy, and
mistletoe in abundance.

Soon after she returned to the library,
George arrived. He was resolved to make
the most of their tete-a-tete^ and began at
once by asking her why she had written
to him of late so rarely and so restrainedly.

Is it Mr. Le Eoy who has changed you
so?' he said. sam I to call you Miss
Marmont, and not "• Mimi'' henceforth, ashe
would wish ? Is our happy intercourse
to be stayed because he is proud of birth
and family, and I am — what I am ? If so,
the greatest hope and happiness of my

life will vanish almost at its beginnings,
and I shall have no incentive but
duty;

*Do not say so, George; do not change:
call me always Mimi when you think of
me or write to me, but perhaps — in public
I scarcely know myself ; I am so little
accustomed to conventionalities.'

I will be careful in public ; I will look
at you, and you will understand me, as I
shall you. Dear Mimi, your eyes speak
to me more eloquently than words, and I
should be content if I could be assured of
one or two things which trouble me. You
have trusted me so faithfully ever since I
first knew you that a doubt harasses me.
You have been so much to me.'

^ I will answer all your questions, George.
Ask them quickly, for my uncle may interrupt
us.'

Horace Leste loved you dearly ; he
told me so. Were you pledged to one
another ?'

No ; we were as brother and sister,
nothing more

Montague Carew transferred his love
from Barbara to you. Did you return it ?*

Oh, George ! can you ask me ? I would
die rather than supplant another, especially
Bold Barbra. He never really loved me,
and I never cared for him even as a friend.'

A smile so beautiful brightened George's
countenance that Mimics wondered — wondered
also at the piercing glances that
looked into her eyes.

continue your catechism she said,
with a smile.

Has Mr. Le Eoy told you not to write
to me ?'

*Not exactly. He said you were now a
mau, young in years, perhaps, but of
military reputation. That I should not
have gone to see you off, and that it was
time our correspondence ceased. It is
absurd, for I am years older than you, and
am ever your adopted sister, just as your

friends are the padre and madre of your
adoption also.'

Did he mention my uncertain birth and
position ?'

Yes.'

'I understand him. But you, Mimi?
Have his representations influenced you ?
Are our mutual relations changed in your
eyes ? In years you are slightly my
senior, but I am yours in all else. I have
never been young, and, now that I have
seen death, and war, and slaughter, I feel
as if each day had been a month, each
month a year. Thus I am older than
you.'

'Years need not influence friendship,
George. We are friends for life. Surely
nothing can ever come between us, who
have known one another so long and so
well ? If I were not to write to you at
all, or you to me, I should not change.'

Dear Mimi ! You look on me as a
boy still, whom you have benefited for so

many years, that you forget bow they have
passed. You think of me as an adopted
brother, and can speak calmly of a cessation
of our correspondence. I cannot
think of you as a sister, because I love
you with far more than brotherly love,
and yet my feelings have not changed.
You have been my guiding star ever since
that day when we played at soldiering, to
this time when I realise what the awful
work of soldiering is. I hate jealousy,
yet I have been jealous ; I know my uncertain
birth, yet I dare to aspire to you ;
I am aware of all the obstacles that lie
between us, and yet I want to call you
mine, now and for ever — for time and
eternity.'

George ! what can you, what do you
mean ? I am quite old in comparison with
you, and never thought — never dreamed of
this. I have promised to devote my life to
my uncle, and the people who surround us ;
and you come with these strange, unexpected

words. You cannot be in earnest.
Remember, I am twenty-six years of
age.'

'And I am twenty-one. I can wait till
I am older, if the chances of war give me
the advantage of years ; but I could not
wait to fell you this, lest I should die without
your knowing it. While I breathe, I
am yours, and God's. I can no more
change my love than my religion, for both
have grown with me, and are part of myself.
May I still call you my Mimi ?'

He looked at her, and saw that her head
drooped towards her folded hands as they
lay on her lap, and that a tear hung on the
long eyelash. She was seated by the fire,
he near the writing-table. He rose, and
went towards her. Without, all was white,
cold, still, with the hand of winter upon
it ; within, all was also calm, but for his
throbbing heart. At last she glanced up,
and gave him her hand.

*Dear George,' she said, 'I wish you had

not spoken thus. I can never change; you
are my brother still, my younger brother,
whom I love as myself. But the disparity
remains, for, as you grow older, I grow
older also.'

She smiled as she said this, but, when at
last she met his grave, clear, transparent
eyes, the smile passed away, and she realized
that the serious earnestness of the resolute
man was in his heart.

I will not press or torture my Mimi,'
he said, with his winning and irresistible
manner. ' She knows now all my heart ;
and, if ever she can give me more than a
sister's love, she will tell me, and I shall
have won not only my spurs, but what is
far more precious and enduring than they.
But I will not ask her again until I can do
so with hope and honour

Hush !' she exclaimed. ^ Some one is
in the hall.'

It was Barber, who came to request that
Captain Hope would kindly join Mr Le

VOL. III. I

Roy in the music-room, as lie now styled
the old school-room.

*I will come directly,' said George, and
the valet went away. ' Tell me that you
are still my Mimi,' said George once more,
standing near her chair.

^ Be it so : as it has always been,' she
replied ; and he left her, to ask herself if
this was love.

CHAPTER yjl.

SIMPLE Truthfulness.

George found Le Eoy in a state of excitement
and annoyance. He scarcely allowed •
him to be seated before he began.

I suppose it was an appointment, as my
niece did not follow me here.'

I told her I should call this afternoon
replied George, slightly flurried by what
had so lately passed ; ' but there was no
appointment. When we were last at Summerlands,
I came and went as I chose, and
now, perhaps, I have taken a liberty in
calling again without your invitation or
permission. If so, I hope you will excuse
it, Mr. Le Roy. Miss Marmont and I have

i2

been friends so long, and my leave of absence
is so short and uncertain, that I want
to make the best of my time.'

'Would it be an impertinence on my
part, Mr. Hope, to inquire whether you
write to one another the same minute diary
which you wrote as children ?'

I do, because I have nothing to conceal
; but Miss Marmont has ceased to
write confidentially for many months, and
I partly understand that, under new circumstances,
she cannot do so.'

You mean that she does not confide
my affairs to you ?'

^ Certainly not ; and she rarely writes
at all.'

So much the better. You will understand
some day that the complications
arising from a correspondence between
young men and women often become entanglements,
and are always better avoided.
I trust yours will cease, for my niece
has kindly promised to devote herself tome,

and what with my demands, and the
stewardship, she has more than she can do.'

George smiled as he perceived the selfishness
of the man ; but the next moment
looked gravely and steadily at him, as he
replied to his implied request.

I am Miss Marmont's servant in all
things, and yield to her wishes. She
commands, I obey. I have just told her
that she has always been and still is, the
guiding star of my life, and that without
her light I should grope in darkness, but
for the Sun of righteousness which never
fails. I hope, Mr. Le Roy, that you will
not intercept either star or sun.*

Le Roy had never before been spoken
to in this wise. He looked at the young
man in surprise and perplexity. He was
so simple, straightforward, and at the
same time captivating, that the caustic
answer he was prepared to give changed
into kindliness and persuasion.

You are young to speak so positively,

Captain Hope, and have yet to learn how
we all change. But Mimics, my niece ;
what did she say ?'

That we are adopted brother and sister,
she the elder, and shall ever love one
another as such. But, sir, I dare to look
forward to a tie more binding still. I can
wait.'

You, Captain Hope — for that is, I suppose,
your name — adopted, as you say,
yet venturing to look forward to a union
with a Le Boy ! You cannot be in
earnest.'

George coloured to the temples. Never
since his school-days, when Bully Carew
and a few other envious lads had taunted
him with his uncertain birth, had it been
cast in his teeth. And Le Boy, who was
a gentleman, was sorry for his words when
spoken, for he felt that he could have addressed
him without this slur. But George
also was a gentleman, and more, a Christian.
He commanded a rebellious inward

rising, and resisted the old impulse to
clench his fists ; but he rose from his seat
as he answered Le E-oy.

*My father was a soldier, like myself.
It seems to me that it matters little
whether we are in the ranks or in command
if we do our duty. The captain of
our salvation makes no distinction when
he bids us "" fight the good fight of Faith,"
and those who serve Queen and country
faithfully are all equal. Of my mother I
know nothing, and I hope and think she
was pure and good.' Here a flush coloured
the speaker's face, but he continued unfalteringly,
' My foster-parents are at
least without reproach, and in their exceeding
goodness they tell me I am to be
their heir, as they consider me their son.
They would have me take their name, but
my own suits me best, as offering a
chance of my discovering the friends of
my parents.'

sit is certainly more soldier-like than

Prettjman/ said Le Eoy, caustically. ' I
cannot imagine a General Prettjman.'

Why not? Deeds ennoble names, and
that of Prettyman is ennobled by endless
good works. I had never before thought
how my uncertain parentage might interfere
with my love and friendship for
Mimics. I see it all now and would not
add to her burdens one of mine, by bringing
misunderstanding between you and
her, since she has promised to devote herself
to you. Not that I give her up, Mr.
Le E-oy. T can wait till you are brought
to see our mutual relations more clearly,
and perhaps to sanction the renewal of
our old — correspondence.'

*Just so. If my niece will consent to
this, I think it will be best for all parties.
They are fools who ruin their lives and
prospects for women.*

Le Eoy said this with a bitterness that
touched George, who fixed his clear eyes

upon him, and said, with his usual convincing
truthfulness,

Sir, I think we need not ruin them if
we have faith in the Divine leadership and
do not quail beneath the difficulties we
meet. I know that I shall be guided
aright so long as I trust ray Commander.'

He held out his hand, and to his amazement
felt it grasped by Le Roy. He did
not know — how could he? — the strange
feelings of wonder and awe that his simplicity
of belief and frank geniality of
manner inspired in one who had never
before come in contact with such, and who
had fled from the world because he had
been once deceived. But George felt that
he parted from Le Roy as a friend, and
not an enemy, and in this assurance bade
him a hurried good-bye, not venturing to
wait for some remark he seemed about to
make, lest it should counteract the kindliness
of the handshake.

He went back to Mimics, and found her,
as he left her, deep in thought. There
was a pathetic ring in his voice when he
spoke to her, though his words were manly
and determined.

'Dear Mimi, your uncle thinks my
parentage uncertain, and my age and position
unstable. I will mend all that if you
will promise not to forget me. He wishes
us to abstain from writing to one another,
and says, what you have already told me,
that you have promised to devote your life
tD him.'

^ That need not deprive me of the only
pleasure I shall have in it,' cried Mimics,
passionately. *I look forward to your
letters as to my only comfort. I am quite
old enough to decide such matters for myself,
and, if I am to obey a tyrant, it shall
be in gaining my living elsewhere

Do you really care so much for my
letters, my Mimi?' asked George, the
pathetic voice changing to a glad cheerfulness.

* Then all will be well. I can wait,
and you can wait, until your uncle withdraws
his prohibition, which he will, for he
i3 not a tyrant, but a human being who
has suffered and been sinned against. Be
patient with him

George, 1 am not a child, and in noway
subservient to him, except in so far
as I serve him in return for food and
clothing. This I could do to a stranger.'

^ Think of his loneliness, his disappointments,
his almost ruin, Mimi. You may
save him, body and soul, with God's help.
He looks strangely beside himself at
intervals.'

Yes, George ; you are right — always
right and noble. I know this is my appointed
work, and I pray for grace to doit.
I thought I was strong of purpose and
had found the mission I had been looking
for; but I am weaker than water, after all. ^

And Mimics covered her face with her
hands and wept.

You had better go,' she whispered, ashe
laid his hand on her smooth, gleaming
hair.

He bent over her, and pressed his lips
on the folded hands. He had not dared sofar
since his boyhood.

God bless you, my Mimi. We will
wait he breathed, emphasizing ever so
little the toe.

And so they parted. When were they
to meet again? who should say ? for when
he reached Summerlands he found a telegram
awaiting him summoning him to rejoin
his regiment. It was ordered back to
Africa, and he was to be at headquarters
in two days.

'It is really too hard,' said Mrs. Pretty-man,
'just as we had made plans for a
dance, and have as many engagements as
we can get through, and everybody is in
love with you, Georgie, and Lady Helena
has written to beg you to go and see
Captain Oarew, and padre has got quite

into the spirit of it all. I'm sure those
Dutch African savages may well be called
Bores.'

You've put the cart before the horse,
my dear,' quoth Mr. Prettyman, * but you
know England expects every man todohi&
duty.'

'I think it's a man's duty to stop at
home, and not to go slaughtering those
poor, inoffensive blacks,' returned Mrs.
Prettyman. ' That wasn't Livingstone's
way, and I'm sure his way was best. You
may as well have stopped away altogether,
Georgie.'

Not quite, madre mia. I have seen you
all, and we have come to Summerlands
again. Besides, the dance, if it had come
off, might have been a failure. None of
the Lestes could have come so soon after
Horace's death, and I am afraid Carew is
worse.'

*I wanted you to see more of that sweet
girl Helena, Georgie. She is just the right

age, and I should like you to marry one of
the Lestes ; they are all so good.'

George winced. ^ The right age was
in everybody's mind but his own. Mr.
Prettyman interposed with his hearty
laugh.

You are not going to become a matchmaker,
Lou, in addition to your other
maternal propensities,' he said. ' Time
enough for George to think of marriage
when he's a general, which, Sir Joshua informed
me, he was sure to be soon. I
said, promotion cometh neither from the
east, nor yet from the west, nor yet from
the south. "Then," said he, "it must come
from the north, and as we're pretty sure
to have war with Russia, he'll get it from
there"'

All our plans for a merry Christmas
and a happy New Year, spoilt by those
horrid Bores !' sighed Mrs. Prettyman.
I wish you hadn't been born a soldier,
Georgie.*

Or rather bred one put in Miss Heath.

The following morning George hastened
to Monklands. He found Lady Helena
alone, awaiting him. She was sitting instate
in her morning-room, which was
furnished according to modern taste with
everything antique. He had never before
been tete-a-teie with her ladyship, and, wishing
to end the interview at its beginning,
inquired if he could see Captain Carew at
once, adding that he was ordered to rejoin
his regiment. He did not like Lady
Helena, and felt, instinctively, that she
was jealous of his success. She was, however,
so anxious about her son that all ill-feeling
was merged into maternal longings
for his recovery.

^ If you can say anything to quiet his
restlessness,' she began, motioning George
to a seat. ' He was much better, but the
fever has returned, and with it a nervous
desire to rejoin his regiment, which is impossible.
We want him to resign, and

settle down as a country gentleman

That would be dull unless be married,'
suggested straightforward George.

^ Of course we wish him to marry
rejoined Lady Helena. but you young
men are so contradictory and never follow
the wishes of your parents. I forgot. You
are your own master.'

Not so, Lady Helena ; I owe more than
obedience to my foster-parents, and wish
to please them. May I see Captain Carew ?'

One word first : if — supposing you have
the opportunity — will you persuade him of
the suitability of his marrying Miss Mar-mont
? You have an influence over him.'

I could not, Lady Helena. Miss Mar-mont
has often spoken to me of Barbara
Leste.'

Lady Helena frowned, and looked out
of one of the windows that made of her
boudoir a light and gladsome room. Broad
and wooded landscapes were before her
eyes, and these would descend to the son

she idolized. Not far off the lands of
Courtleroy joined them, and she coveted
them still. Had she not schemed enough ?
Was it not sufficient that she had ruined
the happiness of a sister and one owner of
Courtleroy ? Must she ruin that of a son
also ? George saw into her mind, but he
thought he saw also something of a
mother's tenderness in the eyes which
were gazing afar -, he was almost sure they
were moist.

^ It is a pity to cross true love, Lady
Helena,' he said, simply and dreamily.

Tell him what you will then, only give
him back to me — to me — his mother. He
is more to me than life.'

She rose and stood before George, with
her hands folded on her bosom. The tall,
dark, handsome, unapproachable woman
looked at him with a glance so supplicating
that it pierced him through. Why
did she appeal to him? She could not tell,
but the fascination of his truthful sincerity

VOL. Ill, K

bad broken down some barrier that she had
placed between herself and peace, and she
was striving to bring the pride within it
to some level that she had never before
faced. A bell rang violently.

It is Monty — come to him she said,
alarmed.

George found Captain Carew on a sofa
in the library. He looked very ill, and
was coughing violently. The room was at
fever-heat, and it was evident that he was
being killed, partly by maternal kindness,
partly by irritating contradiction. He
grasped George's hand, and Lady Helena
left them together.

CHAPTER Viii.

Confessions,

^ I WANTED to talk to you about Miss Mar-monte
Captain Carew began, as soon as
George was seated. He was much excited.
I have been tormented into making a fool
of myself, and, if she hadn't the sense of a
man, I should have made a fool of her too.
They say she tells you everything, and I
want you to give her to understand that I
am very sorry for having annoyed her
more than once. You see, a fellow isn't
always master of himself under certain
circumstances, and my mother was always
urging me to propose for her because she
is heiress of Courtleroy; though old Le

k2

Roj is as likely to many as not, and then
where should we all be ?'

I shall not see Miss Marmont aofain
before I leave,' said George, rather stiffly
for him.

You must, I shall go mad if I don't
get certain demons out of my head. This
is one of them, Barbara Lessee is another,
and you are a third.'

a— how?'

Well, I took considerable pains to make
the circumstances of your history known
in the army. My brother was at the bottom
of this, for he was always nagging
about you. I want to make a clean breast
of it before 1 die, and I ask you to forgive
me.'

You only told the truth. I have nothing
to forgive, indeed, something to be
thankful for. I should not have known of
my father had not the general heard my
story.'

You are a brave fellow, Hope. I wish

I and many another of us had your moral
as well as physical courage. I am many
years your senior, but have neither your
pluck nor forbearance. My own illness
and poor Horace's death have opened my
eyes to many things, and to none more
effectually than that I began life earnestly,
and lost purpose as I pursued it. Did
Horace say anything about me ? I have
never had an opportunity of asking you,
because you were off like a shot when you
came down last.'

Do you really wish to know what he
said ? It involves another, and perhaps I
should not repeat it.'

You mean Barbara ?'

Yes.'

Tell me all. Barbara and I understand
one another.'

Horace said that one of his regrets
was that he had never had the courage to
represent to you that you had ruined
Barbara's happiness, and his also, in part.

But he forgave you, and believed that all
would come right.'

sit never can. Barbara and I are
friends. She will not have me, even if I
tell her she is killing me by her cold
distance. But how have I meddled with
Horace's happiness ?'

He loved Mimics Marmont.'

Captain Carew covered his face with his
hands, and there was silence between the
young men, broken only by what in woman
would have been a sob, but in the invalid
seemed a convulsion of pain. George half
rose, but Carew bade him remain.

I deserve it all,' he said. * The revelation
is good for me. I have been despicable.
Loving Barbara alone, the grandest
woman living, I have sought others, partly
from ambition, partly for pastime, partly
from an inconstant nature. But Miss
Marmont was too single-minded to encourage
me, pointing by her grand decision
to Barbara. God knows it is bitter to me

now to feel that I have made the two
dearest, oldest, best friends I ever had
unhappy. I think I am a dying man.
How can I atone ?'

See Barbara, or write to her.'

She avoids me, and my mother does
her best to prevent our meeting. Barbara
is as proud as Lady Helena, and
would never come here without an invitation
from her ; scarcely with it.'

But you were not engaged to Barbara ?'
*No, not by mere words, but lifelong
deeds.'

It is not too late to make amends.
Confide in Lady Helena ; she will refuse
you nothing. She said as much to me.'

*Why to you, George Hope? Are you
in everybody's confidence — Barbara's, for
instance ?'

No, but I think she would listen to
you if you would say to her what you have
said to me.'

At this moment the hall-bell rang, and

shortly after Lady Helena entered, and
told George he was wanted for a minute.
She took him to the large dining-room,
and again stood before him, her hands
folded on her breast, her eyes dilated.

*I have heard all that has passed between
you,' she said. ' I remained in the
room behind the jportiere. Barbara has
just arrived. I asked her to come on
some trivial excuse, and she is here. What
shall I do T

Take her to Captain Carew, and leave
them together ; but leave them alone. Lady
Helena. Not even a mother should intermeddle
between heart and heart,' replied
George.

'Will you ask Barbara? I dare not.
Tell her it is my wish that she should see
Monty, and his — his — last — request. It
is I who have ruined their happiness. She
is in my morning-room.'

You will come with me, Lady Helena ?'

No ; I would rather you went alone.'

George found Barbara staudino^ not far
from the door. Lady Helena having left
her almost before she had greeted her.
She was meditating leaving, and looked, as
she felt, annoyed and grieved.

I have a message for you, Barbra,'
began George, who had certainly been
trained in no circumlocution office. ' Lady
Helena asks you to see Captain Carew, and
his one desire is to be reconciled to you.'

Reconciled ! We have not quarrelled,'
said Barbara, proudly.

*But you are not the friends you once
were,' pleaded George. ' He wants the old
friendship. I understand him; for I should
be wretched were I estranged from Mimi,
and, now he is so ill, he imagines, perhaps,
what does not really exist. He thinks he
is dying.'

*But he is not, he cannot be dying.
Horace and he could not both be taken
from us,' exclaimed Barbara, off her guard
for the moment.

'We cannot tell. His mother says he
will not live ; Sir Joshua is aroused to his
danger at last, and his feverish anxiety to
settle certain affairs of conscience is alarming.
Oh ! Barbra, come to him ! One
of Horace's last wishes was that you and
he should be friends again, as in your
sweet spring days." Those were his very
words.'

*I will go. But why does not Lady
Helena take me?'

She cannot. And what matters it who
takes you at such a time ?'

Barbara bent her proud head, and followed
George Hope. He went up to
Carew with the words :

She is here. Your mother has brought
her to see you.'

Barbra ! That is good ! That is kind !
That is your old, dear self,' cried the excited
man, struggling to rise from the
sofa.

She hastened towards him, took his extended

hands, and said, with a strong
effort at calmness,

George says you wish to see me — Lady
Helena asked me to come. I do not quite
understand, but — but — I am grieved you
are so ill.'

She sat down on the chair George had
vacated, and burst into tears.

Good-bye, Carew — good-bye, Barbra,'
said George, extending a hand to each, and
then hurrying from the room with a murmured
^ God bless you.'

He found Sir Joshua in the hall, stamping
up and down, fretting and fuming. He
asked for his horse, saying that he had not
many hours to spare, as he was to be at
head-quarters the following day. While it
was coming round. Sir Joshua exploded.

I always said you were a trump, Hope,
whatever your parentage ; and there isn't
a better fellow living than Pretty man, except,
perhaps, Leste. The women are at
the root of all the mischief, and I vow it is

better to be an out-and-out revolutionary
radical than a match-maker. I see no difference
between 'em. They meddle and
make, and change one thing for another,
and, professing to go to the root, absolutely
destroy it. When you fall in love, my
boy, stick to her. Don't go flirting off
from girl to girl. That's what I call
liberal. Now, a Liberal Government never
knows its own mind — it's a match-maker.
If Lady Helena had let 'em alone, they'd
be man and wife by this time, and Monty
wouldn't have caught that confounded
African fever. Keep out of that, my dear
young friend. Do you think he will recover
? He would, if Barbra would nurse
him ; she brings all the sick people round.'
George knew not what to answer, he
could only say, as he wrung the baronet's
hand, that he had seen men recover who
were worse than his son ; and, so saying,
he mounted his horse, and left the baronial
towers of Monklands.

He rode home at full gallop, and found
luncheon still awaiting him. His madre
would not have it removed until assured
that he had been regaled elsewhere.

I'm sure I wish we hadn't come to
Summerlands,' she groaned. 'If we had
been in town, we should at least have seen
the last of you, Georgia.'

Before he is eaten up by wild boars
put ia her husband. * But I shall run up
and join in the hurrahs of the multitude
who won't care much whether he is eaten
up or not. Such is glory.'

Yes,' sighed George, as he helped himself
to a comfortable portion of game pie.

After luncheon he waylaid Miss Heath.
He wanted a confidante, and knew that
this taciturn lady was safe. He found her
deep in a quasi-theological, quasi-scientific
book, seated over the fire in what was
called the small drawing-room. She eschewed
light literature, and was subjected
to many caustic remarks from her host,

who was always, as he expressed it, ' wishful
to improve his own mind by intercourse
with hers : only she locked it up with a
safety key made on purpose.'

Would you grant me a few moments'
conversation?' began George, as Miss
Heath looked up from her book.

Certainly,' she replied, and closed it.
He sat down at her side near the fire

over which she was shivering, for Milly
Heath felt the cold terribly. She was
discriminating, and saw that he was troubled.
His face always reflected the state
of his soul, and all who knew him read his
feelings through his eyes.

I shall not see Mimics again. Miss
Heath, and I have a message from Captain
Carew for her. You know or can guess
what has passed between Mimi and him,
and he wishes her to understand that he is
sorry for having annoyed her. You are as
secretive as we all ought to be, I suppose,

and I am not betraying confidence if I ask
you to deliver this message, as I cannot.'

Why not, Captain Hope ? I would
rather you took it or wrote it yourself returned
Miss Heath, who no longer called
her hero George.

I have wished Mimics good-bye : I
have seen Mr. Le Roy : I shall not be able
to go to Courtleroy again.'

But you can write. I dislike being
mixed up in the Carew affairs.'

Mr. Le Roy has requested me not to
write to Mimi, and has so worded his request
that I must abide by it. Indeed,
until I have made a name for myself, I
must be content neither to see her nor
write to her. This for her sake. You
will sometimes tell me about her, Miss
Heath, for you know how dearly I love
her.'

I do not understand. What has Mr. Le
Roy done ?'

Put a stop to our intercourse, and in
his view he is right. But what I ask you
to do, Miss Heath, is to tell Mimics from
me that she need fear no further annoyance
from Carew, if his proposals lucre an
annoyance, and 1 think they were. I was
too hurried to refuse to deliver this message,
or to remember that I was not about
to resume my diary.'

Here a melancholy smile passed over
George's face. How could he live without
that daily interchange of thought with his
Mimi?

'What has Mr. Le Roy said?' asked
Miss Heath.

That Mimics has promised to devote
herself to him and his affairs, and will
have no time to bestow on a nameless
soldier. Perhaps I may as well tell you
all. You know how I love her. I owe
more to her than to any human being, except
padre and madre. Ever since I was
a child I have looked forward to the time

when I could ask her to be ray wife . . . '
Your wife !' exclaimed Miss Heath, surprised
out of her ordinary quiescence. ' She
is years older than you ; she looks on you
as a bos'

^ That is what you all say ; but I am nota
boy replied George, laughing quietly.
Even Mimi spoke of our respective
ages, which I had not considered. Souls
count no years, eternity no time. Mr. Le
Roy thought more of disparity of condition
than of age.'

Surely you did not tell him ?'
*I did. I am glad he knows, so that I
can now fight in a fair field. I pity him,
and would not rob him of the only thing
he has to love. I am young and can wait,
and if Mimics loves me she will also
wait.'

George Hope, you are an enthusiast.'
'Am I ? Then I rejoice, for without
enthusiasm we win neither iu love nor war.
You will take my message ?'

VOL. HI. L

eyes, if you will tell me what Mr. Le
Roy said.'

That I, nameless and adopted could
scarcely aspire to be united to a Le Roy.
He thought I could not be in earnest — he
even questioned my right to the name of
Hope;

And you — what did you say ?'

I forget ; but something to the effect
that my father was a soldier, but of my
mother I knew nothing, though I doubted
not she was pure and good.'

Again George flushed as he said this,
and the colour seemed to be reflected on
Miss Heath's pale face. She shuddered
slightly, rose from her fireside seat, and
walked towards a window through which
the red glow of a winter sunset was penetrating.
The outer world was white and
crisp with frozen snow.

Should I have time to get to Courtesy
and back before dinner ?' she asked.

'There is no immediate hurry,' replied

George. ' The message can wait till after

O CD

I am gone.'

I have been thinking of going up to
London tomorrow with Mr. Prettymau
and you. If so, I must see Mimics, and
could deliver your message incidentally.
Will you come with me. What I have to
say nearly concerns you, and you must beat
hand. I would not ask you to do anything
to compromise Mimics, but my business
is important and you must witness
it. I mean, you should be in or near
the house.' Miss Heath was apparently
flurried.

I will walk with you and wait for you,
Miss Heath,' said George, puzzled by her
request and manner. *But, if I see
Mimics, I can give the message myself.'

Just so. I will put on my things.
Explain to Louisa. I fear she will be
annoyed.'

Mrs. Prettyman certainly was annoyed,

but, as she said, when Milly Heath took

l2

anything into her head, nobody could get
it out; but why she should carry off
Georgie at such a crisis passed her understanding.


You shall know, Louisa ; you shall
know afterwards,' whispered Miss Heath ;
and she and George walked forth together
in the frosty, darkening afternoon.

CHAPTER IX.

DISCLOSURES.

Is this to be in love ?' questioned Mimics
of herself, after George had left her that
Christmas Dav. * Is it for this I have
fancied myself his elder sister, his protector,
his adviser, and I know not what
else ? Am I not old enough to be his
mother? No, not quite. I am — let me
see — one, two, three, four, five years and —
a half, yes, a half, his senior. He is over
one-and-twenty, I am nearly twenty-six.
Yet I love him! But it must not be.
My uncle is right, it can never be. Yet
how can I live without the letters and

diaries which have been my happiness for
fifteen years. How can I say farewell forever
to one whom I have loved and cared
for so long ? Is this my mission, in addition
to that of waiting on my strange,
lonely uncle ? I have promised him, and
I must keep my word, God helping me.
All my aspirations after some great work
are merged in this dull round of business
and semi-servitude, and I shall have no
George to help and counsel me. But how
he loves me ! how he loves me ! In purpose,
foresight, faith, he is years older than I,
yet I had the misfortune to be born first
into this world. What a medley it all is !
And here comes my uncle. What will he
say ? what can I do ?'

Mimics seized the poker and began to
stir the fire, which was nearly out for want
of tendance. She usually kept it bright
and the hearth clean for her uncle's sake ;
whose mood depended, she had found, on
exterior objects. When he entered she

was on her knees poking splinters of wood
between the bars.

How gloomy !' he exclaimed. ' Hero-worship
has, I suppose, superseded fire-worship.
Achilles has extinguished the
vestal flame.'

'It is beginning to burn, uncle. The
gas has caught said Mimics, humbly.

He took the poker and severed a large
piece of coal, from which issued the pent-up
light.

'Emblematic,' he exclaimed, as the fire
began to burn in earnest. ' I suppose the
ardent flame that has just burst through
the breast of your adorer, may be compared
to that, Mimics. But a pint of water
will put it out. I trust you threw on the
cold element.'

I had none at hand to throw, uncle.
But I understand you did it instead. I
suppose, if a fire is to be put out, it doesn't
much matter who quenches it, or how it is
managed.'

It matters very much, Mimics. If extinguished
promptly and completely, it
does not break out again ; if allowed to
rage it destroys ; if only half put out it
smoulders. I trust we have entirely extinguished
the fires of your youthful lover.
They have not consumed much of him, and
he will soon get over the scorching, as men
do.'

You did not, uncle.'

These words escaped from Mimics involuntarily,
and she soon wished them unsaid.
She saw by the quickening firelight that
her uncle was excited, and feared his rushing
out into the frosty night. He did,
indeed, go towards the windows, but, to
her relief, it was only to draw down the
blinds. He then walked rapidly up and
down the room, and finally sat down near
her.

Do you love this boy — this foundling ?'
he asked, abruptly.

That is a secret I decline to tell,' she

replied, with spirit, and an offended tone.

If you do, you must choose between us,'
he continued, his manner betokening an
inward struggle. * You must break your
promise to me, and let Courtleroy go to
the dogs again. I would rather it went
to them than to a youth of uncertain
parentage, even though he is what he is,
and I like him. I have grown to love you,
child, and cannot do without you. You
saved me once from self-destruction, beware
how you leave me alone to be tempted
again. You are filling a gap yawning
for half my life, and through you I am
returning to my duties — by your instrumentality
our little world smiles again, and
I am learning to forget the past to which
you so roughly alluded.'

Forgive me, dear uncle. I will never,
never leave you,' exclaimed impulsive Mi-mica,
touched to the quick by this unexpected
revelation of feelings of which
she knew nothing.

You have wished him good-bye ?'

Yes.'

You will not be unhappy ?'

Not if you really love me.'

'Such love as I have to give is yours
Mimics.'

He held out his hand, and she laid hers
within it. He clasped and fondled it
gently, but happily did not see the tears
that filled her eyes. She forgot his selfishness
in the knowledge that he loved her,
and the sense of her duty towards her
mother s brother and the one relative she
had in the world, deadened the pain at her
heart. They sat awhile in silence, and then
he suddenly rang for lights.

Barber brought them, and with them life
and thought seemed to return to their old
monotony. She asked a casual question
about her guests.

'They are at tea, ma'am,' replied Barber,
solemnly. * They have greatly enjoyed
themselves. As they are no longer young,

Mrs. Stone persuaded them not to go again
to church, the afternoon being cold, so I
took mj violin and played to them sacred
music instead.'

What did sou play. Barber ?' asked Le
Rov. suddenly interested.

'Pieces suitable to the dav, sir — "Unto
US a child is born," and such-like. They
requested some hymns, and I selected a few
from the *• Ancient and Modem," Christmas
ones. sir. t : u drill comprehend. They sang
to mv accompaniment, and, although their
voices quavered a little. I assure you it
V s '„;: :,:;, sir. Te had quite an enjoyable
afieruoo::, thanks to you and Miss
marmot."

Xot to me. Barber, but I — hem ! am
o^lad your violin was of use.'

Music, heavenly maid, can soften
stones, as I have heard you remark, sir
said Barber, and bethought himself of his
master's dinner.

this is a ne act in our domestic

drama said Le Roy, when lie was gone.
Barber descends in the social scale, and,
for want of congenial spirits, amuses the
servants' hall.'

The next is Mr. Sellon's visit tomorrow.
He wrote a few lines to say he would be
here said Mimics.

Selon arrived about midday, and did his
best, by dry business details, to distract
her mind from thoughts and regrets connected
with George Hope. Still, she was
always thinking: of him. and his face was
ater before her. She little knew that he
was brinorinsr together her friend Barbara
and her supposed suitor Captain Carew,
while she and Sellon were talking of mortgages
and settling accounts. The lawyer
was, at last, in communication with Searle.
who had escaped to America. Acting on
Mr. Le Roy's resolution not to prosecute,
he had promised immunity for the past,
provided Searle made a clear statement of
his own defalcations and the liabilities of

Le Roy. This was in progress, and Sellon
said he saw daylight at last, while Le Roy
persisted in taking all the blame of his
losses and crosses on himself. ' If Searle
is a villain, I have made him one,' he
said : and it was difficult to contradict him,
since those who neglect their own interest
have no right to expect another to watch
over it.

Sellon had. with some difficulty, prevailed
on Le Eoy to join him and Mimics
in a revision of certain documents on the
afternoon when George and Miss Heath
were discussing what had passed at Courtleroy
on Christmas Day. They were in the
library, Sellon, Mimics, and the mortgages
near and en the table, Le Roy lounging in
his easy-chair. All were congratulating one
another on the possibility of a settlement
of the Courtleroy affairs at no very distant
date.

*I can scarcely see," said Himica, who
was poring over some bills. * The afternoons

close very early, and perhaps we had
better have candles.'

^iSTot yet ; the sun has not set returned
her uncle. 'What is to become of Searle's
family ?'

They are gone to America, bag and

baggage, thanks to your lenity, or '

began Sellon, and paused.

Or cowardice, perhaps,' supplied Le
Eoy. ' Who on earth is this ? We have
literally no peace, Mimics.'

The last words were called forth by the
sound of the hall bell, which was soon succeeded
by the appearance of Barber.

Miss Heath, sir. She particularly
wishes to see you and Miss Marmont,'
he said.

What can she want, Mimics ? Pray
find out,' said Le Eoy, irritably. ' But
bring her in, of course.'

Mimics went into the hall, and, to her
surprise and joy, saw George, and, for the
moment, no one else. Their hands had

scarcely met, when Miss Heath came forward,
and said, with unusual haste,

Mimics, I must see your uncle at once.
It is on an important matter, which concerns
us all. You and Captain Hope must
be present. Let us go to him immediately
; we have not a moment to lose.'

Mr. Sellon is with him,' said Mimics,
trembling between fear and the happiness
of once more seeing George.

So much the better. They are in the
library ? Come.'

Miss Heath went into the library without
further announcement.

Is she out of her mind ?' asked Mimics
of George.

I scarcely know, but she says she has
some important disclosure to make that
nearly concerns me, and that I must be
present,' he replied. ' I did not mean to
come again, though I longed to see you
once more. What can I say to Mr. Le Roy
in excuse ?'

Miss Heath was before him in this.
When he and Mimics followed her to the
library, they heard the words :

Captain Hope is with me, Mr. Le Roy.
He would not have come but for me. I
wish to prove to you that the slur you cast
on him yesterday was undeserved.'

Mr. Le Roy rose and offered a seat.
Happily the subdued light concealed the
annoyance of his face. Sellon came forward
to shake hands, and proposed leaving
the room, but Miss Heath begged him
to remain. Scarcely was the door closed
behind George, when she began what she
had to say with nervous haste. There
was no time for further greeting, so he
remained standing near the door, while
Mimics resumed her vacated seat at the
writing-table.

'I hope she will come quickly to the
point,' thought Mimics, who knew by
experience that when Miss Heath had a
story to tell she grew strangely puzzled.

It was so on the present occasion.
She went over and over the same ground
without seeming to advance, and evidently
dreaded the result of her communication.


Perhaps you had better begin at the
beginning, Miss Heath suggested Sellon.

That will be best,' she replied, turning
towards him, and so avoiding Mr. Le
Eoy's eyes. ' It must be between thirty
and forty years ago when I first came to
Courtleroy as governess to Mimics's
mother. I was quite young, and more of
a companion than governess. When she
married I went to Monklands to — to — help
Lady Helena, and be with Lady Margaret
You remember, Mr. Le Eoy. My parents
were both dead. After my father's
death my mother married again, and died
leaving an only boy. I had to look after
him, for her husband, a lawyer, was also
dead. He lived with an old servant until
he went to school, and I used to see him

VOL. III. M

during my holidays. Sometimes he came
to see me. He was very handsome and
taking, and everybody liked him

Here Le Roy made an impatient movement,
as much as to say, ' What is that tome?'


^ He was very fond of me, and when I
was in London would waylay me whenever
he could. He often met us in the
park or gardens '

Us ? Who ?" interrupted Le Roy.

My pupil and me. I got him a situation
as clerk in a merchant's office, but he
hated the desk. He was young and wild,
but not wicked, and never told a lie ; but
he soon ran out of all that his father left
him.'

What has this to do with Captain Hope
or our interview yesterday ?' asked Le Roy,
impatiently.

'You will see, you will see. But you
must prepare yourself, Reginald Le Roy,'

replied Miss Heath, who was so flurried
that she could scarcely speak, and whose
courage was failing.

Mimics came forward and sat down beside
her, taking her hand and whispering,
Tell the worst at once, and let it be over.'
The red sunlight and flickering firelight
cast fantastic glimmers over the room and
its inmates.

'The worst!' echoed Miss Heath.
'When was that? It must have been
when Lady Margaret eloped, no one knew
with whom. I never guessed. I was in
despair lest I should be blamed, but no
one blamed me. I was grieved from my
heart for you, Reginald, though I guessed
the match was forced upon her.'

Pray come to the point,' said Le Roy,
hoarsely, clenching the elbow of his chair.

I will, only I dread it now that I have
begun. Some time before this I had lost
sight of my brother, and was told by one

of bis fellow-clerks that lie had volunteered
for the army. I was very unhappy
about him, for I loved him dearly. I went
to live with Mrs. Le Roy as companion
after I left Monklands, and we settled, as
you know, in London. We had been
there over a year when I received a letter
from my brother, entreating me to come
to him at once. I went to the address he
gave me. It was near Regent's Park, and
I noticed that there were trees about
the place, and that it looked bright and
cheerful. My brother met me at the
door.

'* Come in, for God's sake," he said, and
hurried me upstairs.

^ I heard the cry of an infant, and he
took me straight to the room whence it
came. I saw that the mother lay on the
bed. My brother led me to her, and she
held out her hand. I nearly fainted, for it
was my darling lost Margaret.'

At this announcement an awful groan
broke from Le Roy, and exclamations of
astonishment from the others, George
Hope came up to Miss Heath with the
agitated cry,

She was my mother !'

Mimics turned to her uncle. All was
confusion, for the effort and the tension
had overcome Milly Heath's nerves, and
she became suddenly hysterical.

*Take her from the room, leave me,'
shouted Le Roy, with tones that seemed to
shake the books on the library shelves.
They steadied Miss Heath's nerves, however,
who rose, faced him, and said, humbly,

I grieved for you, for myself, for my
brother, for Margaret. But they were
married, and she died soon after the birth
of George Hope. 1 promised not to tell.
I have broken my promise for his sake and
Mimics's. Forgive me a secrecy which I
could not help and which has nearly killed
me.'

'Leave roe repeated Le Roy, more
gently, and George Hope took his newly-found
aunt from the room.

CHAPTER XI,

More THAN MY LIFE.'

George Hope did not wait for further
revelation, but hurried Miss Heath away
from Courtleroy, without leave-takings.
In his excitement he forgot even Mimics ;
he only felt that after such a disclosure it
was no place for him. The sun had set
and a clear moon arisen over the frost-bound
earth, as he and his companion
walked quickly back to Summerlands.
He offered her his arm silently and
supported her as she clung nervously to
him, but neither spoke. He could not ;
she feared to excite him by further disclosures.
They walked so rapidly that

there seemed no breathing space for
words ; their thoughts were scarcely controllable.


Mr. and Mrs. Prettyman were anxiously
awaiting them, and came out to the hall
to meet them.

I am glad you have been to see Mimics
again, but it is hard to have had you so
little this last day began Mrs. Prettyman,
aggrieved.

Come in here, madre,' cried George.
Padre, come in here.'

Very authoritative. What's the matter?'
responded Mr. Prettyman, following the
others into a small room inside the drawing-room.


Goodness me, Georgie, you are ill
exclaimed Mrs. Prettyman.

No, 1 am not ; but I am astonished,
perplexed, alarmed. Miss Heath has just
told Mr. Le Eoy that I am the son of her
brother and of Lady Margaret, his false
love.'

Miss Heath sat down and covered her
face with her hands, suddenly realizing
what she had done. Mrs. Prettyman
looked at her with ' Ah, Milly, what does
he mean ?' while her husband asked much
the same question of George. He recapitulated
breathlessly what he had so
lately heard, standing between his foster-parents,
and looking first at one, then at
the other. He was naturally much excited,
and took no heed of Miss Heath's
suppressed groans.

This is romance !' exclaimed Mr. Pretty-man,
when he paused.

Never mind what it is,' said his wife.
^ If it is really true, there is no one to claim
you, Georgie. You are just as much ourson
as ever.' She put her arm round
George, and he kissed her. * But, Milly,
what does it all mean ?' she added.

Miss Heath was unable to reply. The
efforts she had made and the subsequent
hasty walk had prostrated her. She now

sat motionless in her chair, her eyes fixed
on George,

'Milly! Milly! She has a fit cried
Mrs. Prettyman. ^ Bring wine. Go for a
doctor.'

No, no murmured Miss Heath, still
gazing at George, who suddenly perceived
that she was not herself, and aided his
madre in unfastening her bonnet-strings
and supporting her.

Mr. Prettyman brought wine, which he
insisted on her swallowing, and she
gradually revived.

Let me carry her upstairs,' whispered
George.

'No; I will go through with it,' she
gasped.

'What does it matter, Milly?' asked
Mrs. Prettyman. * You can tell us how it
happened some other time. It don't signify
to uSj so long as there is no one alive to
claim our boy.'

^ Ah, Louisa ! You will hate me when
you know all

We will decide that when you have told
us. You had better lie down on this
couch, and put off further disclosures,' said
Mr. Prettyman.

But Miss Heath, with a great mental
effort, recovered herself. She asked them
to sit down and took up the thread of her
story where she had left it at Courtleroy,
addressing George particularly.

'Your mother. Lady Margaret, was
dying when I reached her, but she was
quite sensible, and able to assure me that
the short period of her married life had
been the happiest she had ever known.
She made me promise not to tell Lady
Helena, or, indeed, anyone, her history.
She said her darling husband would take
care of you, and that her only regret in
marrying him was that she had deceived
Reginald Le Eoy. She died in my brother's

arms, with you, an infant, at her side. She
had everything she needed.

I was obliged to return to Mrs. Le Roy
with this secret on my mind. I managed to
see my brother most days, and to go to the
funeral. She was buried in Highgate Cemetery,
where you will find her grave well tended,
and marked with a white cross, on which
is inscribed "To Margaret." The landlady
took care of you, until your broken-hearted
father took you with him to Ireland, where
his regiment was ordered. I am afraid I
may have been cold, and even upbraided
him when he told me his story ; for, when
he left London, he did not write to me for
three or four years, and I lost sight of him.
His intercourse with Lady Margaret had
been secret, and carried on while I was
with her, which greatly offended my sense
of honesty. But they were deeply in love,
and she was not happy. Besides, her
engagement with Mr. Le Eoy was forced

upon her. They were married at Gloucester,
where I obtained the certificate.

^ About nineteen years ago, I received a
letter from your father, telling me that he
was ordered abroad, and obliged to leave
you in the charge of your Irish foster-mother.'


Another mother !' broke in Mrs. Pretty-man.
' But you only know me, Georgie.'

Only you, dear madre,' returned George,
looking at her with eyes brimming over
with tears.

Only you, indeed,' ejaculated Milly
Heath, and continued. ' My brother gave
me the address of the Malone, with whom
you must have lived about three or four
years. He asked me to look after you if
anything happened to him. I wrote to
Mrs. Malone through the good landlady at
Highgate. I mean the answers to my
letters were directed to her care \ for I was
afraid of receiving them direct.'

Even more timid and secretive than I
thought you put in Mr. Prettyman, almost
sarcastically.

I was not so by nature, but circumstances
teach one, and I had so many
people to please replied Milly, humbly.
'Still, I feel you will despise me. My
brother paid regularly for a year or more,
and then all remittances ceased. I never
was assured of his death, though I believed
he must be dead because the occasional
letters he wrote to me ceased also. Of
course 1 paid the Malone, but, being now
the responsible person, I was in constant
anxiety as to what was to become of
you, my only brother's only son— and —
Margaret's.'

Here Miss Heath paused.

You maintained him out of your small
salary, Milly ?' said Mrs. Prettyman. ' That
was very generous of you. But how queer
it was that he should have been brought

to US — and how very fortunate. But how
did you find it all out?'

My dear Lou, what an innocent you
are !' cried her husband. ^ Didn't we scour
London for a sou and heir, and didn't he
drop from the skies, or rather from Ireland,
at the right moment?'

'But how was Milly to know?' asked
still unsuspicious Mrs. Prettyman.

Dearest madre, it was a lucky day forme
when Miss Heath bethought her that I
should do as well as another to be adopted,'
put in George.

'And a lucky day for us, Georgie, but I
don't quite understand how it happened,
Milly,' said the madre.

'I — I — knew you and Mr. Prettyman
would be good to him,' replied Miss Heath,
nearly breaking down. ' You were seeking
a child far and near. I wrote to Biddy
Malone and told her to bring him. You
know the rest. I was alone in the world

but for him and you. I could not confide
in Mrs. Le Eoy, or I should have been dismissed.
Then came Mimics, and the secret
was riveted still more firmly. Since I left
Courtleroy, I have offcen wanted to tell it
on your account — my — my nephew — but I
had not the courage. To-day, when you
told me what might separate you and
Mimics for ever, the strength came to me,
I know not how. At all events it is out,
and everyone must know it — even Lady
Helena.'

Let her be spared till Oarew is better,
and I am off,' said George. ' Enough that
I know my origin. You have had much
to bear on my account.'

He did not know well how to receive
Miss Heath's communication. While making
excuses for her, his straightforward nature
condemned her. He almost wished he had
remained the unknown to the end, rather
than find himself the offspring of deceit,
and an interloper where he was assuredly

not wanted. He felt a keen pity for Le
Roy who lead undergone the brunt, not
only of the deception but the clearing up,
and would have given much to atone to
him for the conduct of his mother. Mr.
Prettyman broke a temporary silence by a
matter-of-fact statement.

'My dear boy, you still belong to us
exclusively. Had it not been for Miss
Heath's not unpardonable dilemma, you
would, perhaps, have been eventually presented
to Lady Helena and the rest as a
rough Irishman, the perfect master of the
shilellagh and prize-fighting you promised
to be when introduced to us; now you
have some pretensions to being a gentleman,
and your aristocratic friends needn't
be ashamed of you.'

I may never see them again. It is impossible
to say how long I may be absent,
or what may be the chances of war. Never
having known my real parents, I look on
you as father, mother, benefactors, every-vol.

ni. N

thing. I love and thank you from my
heart. I also thank Miss Heath for giving
me to you, and for her previous goodness tome
and my parents. I understand now, all
your secret kindness to me. Miss Heath, and
the strange interest I have felt you showed
for me even though I did not understand
it. When you see Mimics, tell her . . . .'

I shall never see her again,' interrupted
Miss Heath. ' To-morrow I shall go with
you to London, and then I shall seek
some situation where I can hide myself
from everyone.'

Indeed you will do no such thing,
shall she, Joe T broke in Mrs. Pretty man.

She must please herself,' replied Joe,
drily.

I cannot face any of them again,' said
Miss Heath. the burden of secrecy is
gone, but the shame remains. Mr. Le
Roy has driven me from his house ; Lady
Helena would crush with me a look ; for
didn't I eat of their bread and receive their

money all the while I was deceiving
them?'

My poor aunt ! All this for me !' said
George, drawing near Miss Heath.

Penal servitude would have been preferable
added Mr. Prettyman, while his
Lou began to cry.

I — I — have no more to tell murmured
Miss Heath, and went off into a low, hysterical
sobbing.

^ Take her upstairs, Lou,' whispered Mr.
Prettyman, and left the room.

George and Mrs. Prettyman supported
her to her room with some difficulty, and
shortly afterwards the two gentlemen were
seated at their long-delayed dinner, while
the kind-hearted Lou tried to comfort her
old friend and school-fellow.

Mr. Prettyman and George discussed the
strange events of the day calmly, when
relieved from female excitement. The
former assured George that Miss Heath

should be looked after, whether she conn



tinned to live with him and his wife or
not; and undertook himself to communicate
to Sir Joshua Carew the facts connected
with her disclosures. He promised to wait
until he could ascertain the state of Captain
Carew's health. George told him
under promise of secrecy, that he had left
Barbara Leste with him that morning.

Perhaps I can also give Miss Marmont
the message which Milly Heath declined
to deliver said Mr. Prettyman. 'Well
done, my boy. I m glad to see the light in
your eyes again. A woman put it out, a
woman rekindles it. What plagues and
blessings they are.'

Yes ; but madre is an unmitigated
blessing,' laughed George. ' If you see
Mimi, ask her to tell Mr. Le Roy, if she
have the opportunity, that had I known
the disclosure Miss Heath was going to
make I would not have been a party to it.
Also that I mil never intrude upon him
again without a summons from him. He

has been hardly used throughout. But he
now has Mimics, and she will console him.
Who will write to me of her, now that Miss
Heath will not see her?'

I mil, as long as we are at Summer-lands.
I begin a new role that of general
confidant. I suppose I must tell her all
about you?'

You may tell her that I shall miss her
letters, and that life will be strange without
them ; but I shall never forget her. Is
she not fair and stately, padre, and is she
not good as she is fair ?'

George, it cannot be that you love
her?'

As my life — more than my life.'

God help you, my boy ; I fear this can
never be.'

Padre, I have hope and faith. The All-powerful
can bring it to pass.'

A glorious light shone in George's clear
eyes, and the elder man sighed as he uttered
a * God bless you.'

The following morning they were astir
early. It was soon apparent that Miss
Heath could not accompany them to town.
She was unable to leave her bed. The
excitement of the previous day had quite
prostrated her. George went to her room
to take leave of her, and was much struck
by her haggard appearance. It is easier
to keep than to disclose a long pent-up
secret. He made her promise to write to
him, and by his warmth of manner comforted
her.

I am glad to know who I am,' he said,
gaily. you have taken a burden from
my life.'

And so, first embracing her affectionately,
he left her. He had a different leave-taking
to undergo With his devoted madre.
She had done everything that human
ingenuity could devise to prepare a suitable
kit, helped by Ada, now her maid, and
still devoted, as were all the servants, to
George. Sampson was to accompany him

and Mr. Prettyman to London where they
were to sleep a night, before proceeding to
Portsmouth. The Prettymans were noted
for never parting with a servant, and their
less constant friends were wont to say
that their domestics ruled them ; so George
was always greeted with joy, and parted
from with grief, by the friends of his childhood.
Tears and lamentations followed
him as he bade good-bye, first individually
then collectively to the household ; but,
when his madre clung to him as if she
would not let him go, he fairly broke down,
and had no words to tell her how he loved
her.

You won't change me for — for — Lady
Margaret,' she sobbed.

You are ever my dearest, dear madre,'
he replied, as he gave her the last, more
than filial kiss.

For many a year the scene of that leave-taking
was graven on his memory. As
they drove off, he saw her at the top of

the great flight of steps, weeping, surrounded
by the household, many of whom were
weeping also ; as he asked himself, * Who
am I to have gained this wealth of love ?'

CHAPTER XI.

EXCITEMENT.

George Hope left much sickness and
anxiety bend him. Miss Heath ill at
Summerlands, Captain Carew at Monkton,
and, worst of all, Mr. Le Roy at Courtleroy.
Miss Heath's story had nearly sent the
latter out of his mind. When she left him,
it was as much as Mimics and Mr. Sellon
could do to restrain him. He gave loose
to uncontrollable passion, the brunt of
which fell on Miss Heath's hapless head,
George, also, suffering, as is often the case,
the innocent for the guilty. He did not
blame the real culprits, Lady Margaret

and her lover, but let his anger fall on the
living rather than the dead. It was Miss
Heath who had encouraged her brother to
fall in love nth Lady Margaret ; she who
had ruined his, Le Roy's, happiness, and
she who had introduced the offspring of
so much deceit into the very midst of the
people she had injured. No epithet was
too bad for her. In vain did Mimics try
to reason with him, or Sellon to represent
the true state of the case ; he silenced them
both by his passion.

You would defend one who has been a
viper in your house for years, and stung
you in your tenderest part !' he cried.
Go to her, then, Mimics. Cling to her
and the other boy she has introduced
amongst us, and leave me for ever. I'll
have none of them. Brother and nephew
are like the spawn of the serpent, but in
her he is incarnate. Jesuits, Machiavels,
Jezebels are weak compared to this silent,
designing sycophant. Margaret ! my Margaret

! sacrificed to such a plotter — dong
in poverty, breathing her last far from all
who loved her : while I would have given
my life, my all to save her. Let me out !
Let me go.'

Dear uncle, it is so late !' pleaded Mi-mica,
laying her hand on his arm, as he
made for the door.

Are you afraid of the wild-duck's pond ?
Why did you rescue me for this hour?
Leave me,' he cried.

Never, uncle. I am too sorry for you
to leave you.'

Sorry ! All the world is against me.
All I have loved and trusted have forsaken
me.'

Not all, sir. Not all, master,' came
from the doorway ; and the valet entered.

Listening, eavesdropping ! You and
Miss Heath are akin,' burst forth from Le
Roy. ' You are an accomplice — you let
her in — you brought her here — you know
the shameful story.'

Indeed I do not, sir,' said Barber,
retreating, and speaking in an aggrieved
way. ' I've been as true to you as the
needle to the pole — as, as, the power of
music on the lacerated heart.'

Truer than I, for he has known you
longer,' urged Mimics, inwardly blessing
the sentimental valet.

The half-insane, whoUy-beside-himself
Le Roy felt himself suddenly surrounded.
Barber faced him, Mimics's hand was on
his arm, Sellon was behind, ready to hold
him back. He looked wildly from one to
the other, then, suddenly calming, said
ironically,

Who will tell this tale to Lady Helena ?
Will you, Mimics ? The fault is hers. I
should like to see how she receives the
news. Will you go to her with me tomorrow?'


Captain Carew is seriously ill, uncle.
The ball has been put off. We could
.scarcely go tomorrow.'

Why not ? She might be warned into
receiving Miss Leste as daughter-in-law.
She might save her son. Proud, worldly,
ambitious woman ! She told me that Margaret
loved me, and that maiden modesty
prevented her showing it. All because I
was Le Roy of Courtier oy, and oh ! so rich !
What will she say to her new nephew, I
wonder ? Nephew ! Margaret's son !
Incredible. And he wants you, Mimics.
They have made a nice hash of it amongst
them. Those worthy Prettymans — odious
name ! — and Miss Heath have managed it
famously, even bringing the spawn to our
doors.'

'- Uncle ! I cannot stand by and hear
George Hope called spawn. He is my
friend.'

Mimics spoke these few words haughtily,
and Le Roy looked at her. Her eyes
seemed to glow in the darkness like scintillating
stars ; her nostrils worked with a
sort of defiant pride, much as his did.

Pardon, Mimics, if you love the boy,'
lie whispered, scornfully, bending over her.
^ But you have chosen me.'

He is still my friend — and my equal,'
she replied. ' You are my natural protector,
and I belong to you.'

Barber was right. He is my only
friend,' half shouted Le Roy.

Then, perhaps, sir, you will come with
me and dress for dinner. There will be
time for an interlude said the astute
valet, who, after all, knew his master best.

'An anti-climax,' muttered Sellon, Who
had been watching an opportunity to
speak. '• It appears to me that it ought to
be cause of general rejoicing that the Lady
Margaret was decently married at all, and
did not destroy herself, as was generally
suspected ; but on the contrary gave birth
to a hero who is likely to live in the annals
of his country, and to be an honour to any
family, whether gentle or simple. Excuse
me, Mr. Le Roy, but we have had enough

heroics, and Miss Heath's hysteria should
be a lesson to us. I am not given to that
disease, but I should have thought myself
the likelier subject of the two.'

These commonplaces arrested Le Roy.
He quailed beneath them, but took no
notice of them.

I mil come to you. Barber, as soon as
I have spoken to Miss Marmont. Show
Mr. Sellon his room,' he said, quietly.

Barbermade a movement to Sellon, as if to
say, ' You had better come,' and they left
the library. Outside the valet added that
he would wait about, if the lawyer would
seek his apartment alone, for he was not
sure of his master.

^ He is subject to hallucinations whenever
Lady Margaret is on the tapis, and
nothing but music restores him to his
equilibrium,' he said.

Mimics trembled when she found herself
alone with her uncle, but he reassured
her.

Mr. Sellon is right. There is something
to be thankful for,' he began. ^ We will
end this subject, Mimics, so as never to
recur to it again. You knew nothing of
this secret — nothing of Captain Hope's
history ?'

Absolutely nothing, uncle.'

You are still willing to give him up forme?'


I am still willing.'

'Yet I think you love him?'

I have always loved him.'

You once said to me you knew not
Avhat it was to ''be in love." Do you know
now?'

I can scarcely tell. But nothing shall
interfere with my love and duty to you.
I hope to keep my promise. May I say
one other word?'

'As many as you like. I am calm
now.'

George Hope is not answerable for his
birth or his adoption. Miss Heath has

been the victim of circumstances ; both are
more to be pitied than blamed.'

You are a bold girl, Mimics. Is that
all?'

I think so. But you are ill, uncle.'

I certainly am not well. I hate scenes
and have been betrayed into one. I think
I shall leave the country before it is made
public. Will you come with me ?'

*Our work is not done, uncle. You
have a promise to keep as well as I. We
cannot leave Courtleroy half restored. We
must wait till the restoration is complete.
Individual grievances must yield to general
ones, and I am willing to forget mine if you
mil forget yours.'

I was beginning to forget them, thanks
to you, Mimics ; but now they are fresh as
ever again. I always suspected and disliked
Miss Heath, now I '

*Poor Miss Heath!' interrupted Mimics.
After all, you haven't seen as much of her
as I have, uncle.'

VOL. III.

Poor Mimics, rather ! You have had
a life of it between her, Searle, and the rest
of 'em. Let us wash our hands of the
brood, and begin life anew

All right, uncle, there is the half-hour
bell. Punctuality is the Courtleroy grace,'
said Mimics, with an attempt at gaiety.

She perceived that her uncle was still
excited, and when he rose she put her
hand within his arm, and went With him
into the hall. The slight action annoyed
him, and he let her hand drop and dashed
across the hall to the staircase. Barber
issued from behind the screen and followed
at a sufficient distance to avoid suspicion
of undue watchfulness.

Poor uncle !' sighed Mimics, as she
also went wearily to her room.

Arrived there, she gave vent to her
feelings. They were varied, for was it not
for her that George Hope had borne her
uncle's contumely, and for both that Miss
Heath had told his story ? His story ! She

could but rejoice that lie, her friend, her
hero, her lover, was assured of a name and
parentage, even though they might interfere
with her relations with him. Thoughts
of him gradually overmastered all others,
and she grieved to think that they had
parted, perhaps for years, without even
a good-bye, and in the excitement of disclosures
so unexpected that he must have
forgotten her in their importance. He
would not forget her for long, however, of
that she was assured, and at the moment
all his love and manifold acts of devotion
rose before her. Such disparity of years
as existed, vanished in the retrospect, and
she thought of him only as of the brave,
chivalrous friend whom she had always
loved. No wonder that she groaned inspirit
at the prospect of an indefinite separation,
without the consolation of letters,
diary, or any of the old associations.

If we do our duty, all will come right
at last,' she thought, remembering her

uncle and their late conversation. ' My
pleasures and comforts increase, may God
give me a thankful instead of a complaining
heart.'

She dressed hurriedly, and, at the sound
of the inevitable bell, joined her uncle and
Mr. Sellon. They went through the formality
of dinner, talking of indifferent subjects,
but it was apparent that Mr. Le Roy
was irritable and excited. Nothing pleased
him, and, when the meal was ended, he
"withdrew to his music-room. But no
sooner had he shut the door than it was
opened again. Mimics, who was on the
watch, heard the sound. She rushed down
the corridor and met him with Lady
Margaret's portrait in his hand. He threw
it down violently nth a ' Burn it, drown
it,' and returned to the school-room.
Mimics picked up the fair image of one
who had caused so much trouble, and bore
it to her room. She placed it against a
chair-back and knelt down opposite it.

What a sweet face it was ! George's was
like it, only his was truer, firmer, more
earnest. It seemed difficult to believe that
she was his mother. Mimics bent her head
before it, and wept. She prayed that George
might be kept steadfast to the right, and
that she might, herself, strive to atone in
some sort for the injury done her uncle.
With her strong sense of right and justice
and real craving to act aright, she forgot self,
as usual, and remembered, only, those more
to be pitied than herself. She had youth,
health, a clear conscience, the love of the
poor, work to do, and her ' mission ' still to
accomplish : she would not fret over
imaginary ills, or indulge in false sentiment
; she would labour and wait. She
rose and stood before the portrait with
eyes upturned and hands clasped.

Poor, sad mother of my dearest friend,'
she murmured. ' You shall be with me
always to remind me of him and duty.'

So saying, she cast a muslin coverlet

over the fair face, and went to discuss the
events of the day with Mr. Sellon. He
was inclined to think the clair casement
would eventually tend to cure her uncle,
affirming that certainty was more endurable
than doubt, and that a man's pride must
rise when he found that his imaginary
angel had forsaken him for an ordinary
mortal of a lower sphere.

Sellon's caustic common sense had always
a happy effect on Mimics, and, before
they separated, she was herself again.

Le Roy did not reappear, but Barber
came with an anxious face to announce
that his master declined his assistance, and
had actually retired for the night without
the aid of his faithful valet.

The first time during the thirty years I
have waited on him that I have not wished
him good-night, and said " Anything else,
sir?" It is portentous.'

'■ What a relief to both,' laughed Mimics.

Not at all, ma'am,' returned Barber,
offended.

He was re-assured the following morning,
for Le Roy breakfasted alone in the
school-room, and he waited on him.

she has recovered his tone, ma'am,' was
Barber's report.

Fortunately for all parties, Mr. Leste
called early, and was admitted to Le Roy's
sanctum. Sellon was obliged to leave,
and Mimics went to Summerlands to
inquire for Miss Heath. She did not think
it wise to relinquish her intercourse with
the Prettymans, and, feeling a feverish
craving to know more of George's history,
she started for the fountain-head. She
was aware that George must have left,
and was not surprised to find Mrs. Pretty-man
in floods of tears.

'How kind of you to come,' began that
lady. ^ Georgie is gone, and perhaps I
shall never see him again. And Milly

Heath is in an awful state. We have sent
for the doctor. Will you go up and see
her, tiny dear, and try to comfort her.
What do you think of it all, Mimics? It
wasn't right of Milly, though I'm sure I'm
very glad she did it. If she hadn't, we
should never have known Georgie, and I
feel that I couldn't have lived Without him,
though I mean no disrespect to my husband,
only a child is so different from a
man, you know, and there's nobody in the
world to compare with Georgie.'

You have been so good to him, dear
Mrs. Prettyman. But it is a strange story.
I will go to Miss Heath, if you please,'
replied Mimics.

She found Miss Heath very ill. The
unusual excitement had nearly killed
her.

what can you think of me?' she
answered.

That you must have borne a weight of
suspense ever since I have known you

that accounts for everything,' returned
Mimics, bending over her. ^ Dear Miss
Heath, tell me the rest of the story.'

She sat up and related what more there
was to tell.

I knew Mr. Prettyman and Louisa
vrould do better for him than 1 could,' she
sobbed, when she concluded her narrative.
Still I was wrong, and I ought to have refused
Margaret to conceal the facts. And
after all I broke my promise — for — your
sake and his — Mimics. I dread Lady
Helena even more than Mr. Le Roy. If
only I could have gone to London.'

You can go as soon as you are better,
and meanwhile you need see no one but Mrs.
Prettyman and me,' soothed Mimics. ' I
understand it all, now, dear ; and I am sure
the disclosure was right.'

But your uncle will hate me, curse me,
and his mother was always kind. Their
money supplied '

Our needs at Courtleroy,' putin Mimics.

^ We should have starved sometimes but
for your salary.'

This suggestion seemed to comfort the
patient.

I could not bear that you and he should
«i be separated through my fault. You are
all I have, Mimics ; you have been to me asa
daughter,' she said, meekly.

^ Dear friend, I owe everything to you,'
sobbed Mimics,

'You had better go. Your uncle will be
angry,' said Miss Heath with her usual
nervous manner ; and Mimics embraced her,
and obeyed just as she used to do in the
old days.

She found the doctor with Mrs. Pretty-man.
He had just come from Monkton,
and gave a somewhat improved report of
Captain Carew, Mimics speculated on the
how and when the revelation of her connection
with George would be revealed to
Lady Helena. She waited until the doctor
had seen Miss Heath, and heard from Mrs.

Prettyman that he considered her in a
critical state. He was afraid of brain-fever.
Promising to return soon, she hurried
home.

CHAPTER XII.

CO:MFOETDfG LADY HELENA.

While Courtleroy and Sunderland were
the scenes of all this excitement, their
neighbours. Monkton and the vicarage,
were not in their customary quietude.
George Hope left those whom he was so
soon compelled to acknowledge as near
relations, in fear of the result of the interview
between Captain Carew and Barbara.
They feared with reason, for Barbara was a
woman not easily handled. "When she found
herself seated face to face with the friend
of her childhood and youth, she trembled
slightly, but soon recovered her usual calm

dignity. She knew that he had not treated
her well, Idut she had no intention to let
him suppose that she shad felt his inconstancy.
But she was shocked with his appearance.
She had not met him since their
encounter at Courtleroy, when she refused
the offer of his mother's carriage, and he
was much altered. It may be as well to
preface their interview by the information
that he had more than once given her to
understand that he was attached to her, and
waited onh* promotion to declare himself
in due form.

'This is kind of you. Barbara.' he said,
as he held her hand.

• Lady Helena asked me to come about
some parish business, and George Hope
brought me to you. I do not quite understand
why I am here,' she replied, kindly,
yet ^vith her usual determination, as she
took the seat near him which George had
vacated.

I have been longing so much to see you

that I hope mesmeric power has been at
work between us, as it used to be. You
once said so : " Perhaps you come because I
have been thinking; only of you." '

We were children then ; we are wiser
now.'

Let us be children of an older growth,
Barbara.'

These sentences were spoken low, and
her voice faltered, but she soon gained self-possession.
She saw that he was in an
excited state, and she must be calm.

I am afraid you are suffering very much.
What can I do for you?' she asked, and
she thought her voice sounded hard.

That is what you used to say to the
poor people, Barbara,' he replied, with a
smile. ' I see you now at old Jane Siemens's
pillow, only you looked then to me like a
ministering angel. And I hear her reply
as if it were yesterday : " Dear heart ! your
kind voice and handsome face is better than

medicine. But you may read me a chapter
or a psalm." Do you remember how you
read or rather shouted the chapter, for she
was as deaf as a post, and how we went
off to the vicarage for your mother's
wonderful cough mixture and some broth,
and howl carried the jug and spilt half
the broth, and how you reproved me for a
careless loon, and how we laughed till we
cried ? Do you remember, Barbara ?'

Yes; I remember.'

I was a good lad, then, Barbara, and
not ashamed of being called a 'molly"
because I looked after the poor and was
tied to your apron-string. Neither was I
ashamed of all our choral practices, and
village concerts, and Sunday-school classes,
and treats: nor of our delicious "field days"
when we all went gossiping, or violating,
or nutting, and came home with trailing
wreaths of old-man's-beard, or wild
roses, or hawthorn according to the seasons.

Those were happy days, Barbara, when we
were all brothers and sisters, and loved
one another as such.'

Yes, childhood is happy and innocent.'
'We were not always children, Barbra.
How sweet the old name sounds ! We
thought ourselves grown up when we had
our Christmas dances and games and forfeits?
Do you remember, Barbra, how
you were always the belle, and how the
young beaux disputed for your hand at
the Monkton dances ? and how you scolded
me when I was jealous, yet never failed to
give me the last dance? Oh, Barbra!
Do you remember ? I have lived through
it all during my illness, till I have forgotten
all else, and am a boy again. This only is
reality, my soldier-life a dream. If only
you could forget the last half of your
life, and return to the green pastures,
and flowery hedgerows, and golden cornfields
of our youth, how happy we might
be!'

Pray, pray, do not talk thus. I cannot
bear it

I am not delirious, Barbra. I am
quieter already for what I have said. Let
me finish while I have you near me. You
are so distant usually, so unlike your old
self, that you freeze the words on my
tongue, when I try to speak them. Mother
thinks me dying ; perhaps I am ; but I
believe you could cure me. I will not cast
the blame on her. I have been fickle, inconstant,
unworthy of your friendship ; I
have been led astray by foolish fashion and
the gilt gingerbread of society ; I have
thought it fine to flirt ivith fashionable
girls, and to do in times of peace what my
compeers do ; but in times of war, fever,
wounds, in a long sickness ; oh ! Barbra,
dearest of friends, then I have thought and
dreamed only of you. I know what you
would say: "MimicaMarmontis no fashionable
girl, no practised coquette, yet you
would have married her if she would have

VOL. III. P

had you." I think not — at least, I did not
realize the consequences of what I was urged
to do. But I will not blame my mother.
Miss Marmont is beautiful, fascinating
without consciousness of fascination, a
possible heiress, perfection in her way ; yet
I did not love her. True, she rejected me
nth a scorn I deserved, for she knew my
previous history, and was not worldling
enough to understand how easily old loves
supplant the new. She piqued and angered
me; but it was your coldness and
haughty pride that piqued and angered me
most. Your words, when we parted after
the gathering of hop-pickers, stung me, and
I was assured you did not care for me.
Oh, Barbra ! I wonder if you ever really
loved me ! You never said you did in so
many words, but I used to fancy you did
up to that time when I came home on leave,
and found you changed. You remember,
Barbra?'

'- Yes, I remember.'

I know you thought me altered. So I
was. The world had changed me : ambition,
fast and foolish women, military life,
had turned me from the right road : I tried
to ignore or forget our past. As you know,
we rarely met. You avoided me, I accepted
what seemed to me your decision. I
was annoyed, but not strong-minded enough
to ask for an explanation. So we grew
estranged, and I made the acquaintance of
your friend Mimics, and estranged you
from her. She gave me no encouragement
by word or deed. All this time I loved
you, Barbra. I thought you superior to
all others. And now I come to you in
Horace's name as well as my own, to ask
you to give me back the old, old love of
our early days, and to believe in me once
more.'

Our early days ! They seem so long

ago. Horace was with us then — and my

sisters, and we were all so young. Now I

feel so very, very old.'

p2

Barbara spoke dreamily, and tears were
in her eves. Her head was turned from
Montague so that he did not see her, and
he thought the words cold. He sighed
heavily, and she looked hastily round. He
was very pale, and his wan face spoke for
him.

What if he is really d\-in2: ?' she thought,
and a sudden shudder went through her.
He perceived and misinterpreted it.

It is as I feared. The old love is dead.*
he groaned.

'True love never dies. It may be
crushed, but still it lives,' she said ; and he
saw the tears.

• line has been smothered by weeds, but
they are gone, and the plant is strong
as ever. Oh, believe it. cruel, dear Barbra,'
he pleaded.

She saw that excitement was overpowering
him. and, to calm him, said hastily,

• I believe it. I trust you again as when
we were children. We will start afresh

from there. But you are ill. and Lady
Helena ^\dll be angry, and I shall be the
cause. What is the matter ? Monty, tell
me what ails you?'

I — am only — faint he gasped.

She was about to ring the bell, but he
stayed her.

You — only you,' he murmured.

She grew calm instantly ; she bathed his
forehead T\'ith eau-de-cologne, gave him
water, and restored him ^\ith the remedies
she saw were at hand. He smiled as she
bent over him, and repeated her Avoids,
^ We Avill start afresh from there. So be
it.'

It was now her turn to be agitated, for
she scarcely knew what she had said, or
what her words might involve.

I am better ; I am happy ; are you
happy, Barbra?' lie breathed, as she stood
o:azino: at him.

Yes, Monty, as when we were children.
Let me call Lady Helena.'

'As you like. She cannot part us
now

He held out his hand. She took it, and.
overcome by feeling and the past scene,
exclaimed,

'Forgive my coldness, my pride, my
years of restraint. Let us thank God that
we are friends once more.'

More than friends, whether I live or die,'
he said. ' Perhaps you had better let my
mother come.'

And so she left him. Lady Helena was
in the hall, and saw her agitation.

You have not excited him, I hope, Barbara
?' she said. ' Do you think he will
die?'

I hope not. I think not, Lady Helena.'
What did he say to you ? What carriage
is that coming up the drive ? The
Courtleroy brougham ? Probably Mr. Le
Roy come to enquire, or rather Miss Mar-mont,
as he never comes. Will you go

back to Monty, or call the nurse, or do
something, while I receive her ?'

Barbara went in search of the nurse, fora
trained one had been some time in attendance,
while Lady Helena returned to her
morning-room,

Mr. Le Roy ; Mr. Leste,' announced the
footman shortly after, and those gentlemen
were instantly followed by Sir Joshua,
delighted and surprised at a first visit from
Le Roy.

^ Come at last. Better late than never,'
he cried, interrupting Lady Helena's more
stately greeting.

What a wonderful fellow you are, Leste.
You first drag him to church and then lug
him on here.'

Le Roy, meanwhile, stood at his stateliest
and looked about him. His features were
set and he had an unusually resolved air.
No one save himself knew what had brought
him to Monkton, for he had asked Mr.

Leste to accompany him while Mimics was
still at Summerlands, giving no reason. It
will be remembered that the vicar called
and was admitted j must as she was leaving
Courtleroy.

^ How your trees have grown ! The
plantation has become a wood,' remarked
Le Roy, frigidly.

Ah ! we don't stand 'still. Even down
here we advance somehow, don't we, Leste?'
returned Sir Joshua. ' Progress is the
watchword of the age. Between you and
me, I'm sick of it. IVe just seen that fine
young fellow, Hope, at the station, progressing
it, I suppose, by going off to Africa.
Why can't he stop at home with his padre
and madre as he calls 'em ?'

Ah ! I saw him yesterday. He and
Miss Heath honoured me with a call which
should have been made, I think, on you,
Lady Helena,' said Le Roy.

He was opposite her ladyship, while the

other gentlemen liaci seats between them.
All were near the fire.

He was here in the morning to see my
son,' replied Lady Helena. ' I am sorry
Monty is not well enough to see you, Mr.
Le Roy.'

It does not signify. Lady Helena ; I
came on business which concerns you, perhaps,
more than him. Miss Heath informed
us yesterday that Captain Hope is your
nephcAv.' This was said ^yith. premeditated
abruptness.

My nephew ! How absurd ; she is out
of her mind.'

So I thought ; but she affirms, apparently
vdih truth, that he. Captain Hoj^e, is
the son of her brother and your — sister,
Lady Margaret.'

As Le Roy pronounced this, he sat,
rigid as a statue, his face pale, the nostrils
moving fiercely. Lady Helena looked indignant
denial, and Sir Joshua exclaimed,

Bless my soul ! What does it mean ?'

That she who was to have been mine
preferred another, married him, and died
giving birth to a son — that son the young
officer who has just left Summerlands. I
have come to tell you this, Lady Helena,
because I believe I owe my misery to you,
and that your pride and ambition wrecked
my life. You knew she did not love me.'

Le Roy spoke as if he were acting a
part, and had learnt his role by heart.
He never flinched, and his cold grey eyes
were riveted on Lady Helena. She also
appeared transfixed for a few moments,
then rose, and with indignant face and
speech, addressed Le Roy.

'• My nephew ! That foundling the son
of Margaret ! Miss Heath's brother her
husband ! Can you credit such an absurdity,
Reginald Le Roy ?'

I credit marriage certificates. I believe
in Miss Heath's veracity. I know that
your sister. Lady Margaret, disappeared

when the marriage you forced upon her
should have taken place. And I know,
Lady Helena Carew, that I have passed
two-and-twenty years of self-imposed
misery, because I fancied myself the cause
of her possible suicide. Certainty is endurable.
I now know she was happy fora
brief space, and rests peacefully, and I
hope to blot out the past. I come to put
it at your feet, who were its creator. Beware
how you lay the foundation of another's
life-long torture.'

It is all a lie : a fiction. I believe
none of it,' cried Lady Helena. * What
could Miss Heath have said ? What did
she know of Margaret ?'

I must refer you to her for details.
The romance is strange, but completed sofar
as we are concerned. Margaret is
dead ! Margaret is dead ! Her son and
your son yet live. Let us make no other
holocausts.'

There was a slight inflection of Le Roy's

hard voice, but no change of feature or
position. He still looked at Lady Helena,
who was aflame with passion, and could
not restrain herself She did not believe
his half-told tale. The certainty that
comforted him made her indignant.
Suicide even would be better than a misalliance.


'What can it all mean? Say something
pious, Leste. It is like bull-baiting,'
whispered Sir Joshua, aside; then, as if
inspired, added aloud, ' I'm sure there's
nothing to be ashamed of, if he is our
nephew, Lady Helena. He's a splendid
young fellow, and Miss Heath's a most
respectable person, and I daresay her
brother was all right. As Le Roy says,
I'd rather think of poor Margaret decently
married than — why — than nobody
knows where. It's quite a relief to my
mind.'

Fool !' half shouted, half hissed Lady
Helena.

Le Roy rose, bowed, and prepared to
leave. Sir Joshua shrugged his shoulders,
and, with his usual good-humour, pressed
him to remain. mr. Leste wondered what
he could say to make peace. They were
all standing, when a servant entered hastily
and said Captain Carew was worse, and
the nurse wished for Lady Helena
presence.

^ Remember Margaret,' ejaculated Le
Roy, with cold severity, as she passed
before him and walked stately from the
room, followed by her husband.

I will remain. I may be of use,' said
the vicar.

And I will go, for my work is donee
said Le Roy. ' Take heed to your own
daughter, Mr. Leste.'

So saying he left the room, went through
the hall, and stepped into his brougham
which he had given orders should not be
put up. Mr. Leste saw him off, and stood

a few minutes under the old priory porch,
wondering at the late scene and the
strange man who had originated it.

CHAPTER XIII.

A MYSTERY TO HIMSELF.

When Mimics returned to Courtleroy she
was told that her uncle had driven out
whither Barber did not know. She awaited
his return with impatience, not knowing
what to think of this unexpected drive, and
fearing she knew not what. But had he
not taken Mr. Leste with him, and, under
all circumstances, would he not be safe
with that good man ? she thought. Still
the rapid events of the previous day had
shaken her nerves, and Miss Heath's state,
and her communications that morning, had
not tended to strengthen them. She failed

to realize the facts of George Hope's
history, and wandered from room to room
seeking occupation, but feeling unable to
settle down to anything. This was unusual
for Mimics, whose monotonous life
brought such regular occupations that, dull
as they sometimes seemed, they filled it.

Le Roy arrived at last, and she hastened
to the door to meet him. A sudden thaw
had just set in, and the weather looked as
grim and grey as he did. He shivered ashe
went to the hall-fire, and stood before it
warming himself

Come here, Mimics,' he said, moving
the screen so that it encompassed the fire.

You look so cold, uncle. Let me ring
for some soup,' she replied.

No. I will wait for 'afternoon tea." I
am going in for fashionable life again. Sit
down and listen. You look scared, Mimics.
How do I look ?'

Scared, also, uncle. But how are you
really?'

Better than I have been for years,
Mimics. I am revenged. I have told
Lady Helena. She does not believe in her
new connection, and will resent it when she
is convinced. I should not like to be Miss
Heath under her scourge. Have you seen
that secretive and cautious woman ? You
have been to Summerlands. What have
you heard ? Tell me all. I am better
prepared than I was yesterday.'

Mimics told him, as gently as she could,
what more there was to tell. It was simply
what Miss Heath had communicated to
George and recapitulated to her. He was
quiet and composed during the relation,
sitting; with his hand shading; his face.

Buried at Highgate. We will go together
and see her grave, Mimics,' he said
at intervals.

Sorry for me ! With reason. Had she
confided in me I would have helped her,
and she would have saved me. But
suicide ! It is awful, and that was what

VOL. Il Q

I feared. I went out of my mind, and but

for Barber, and afterwards for you,

Mimics, should . . .'

He shuddered, and she laid her hand on

his arm.

'Forget it, uncle. We will begin again.'
You will not leave me, Mimics ?'

'No;

He removed his hand from before his
face, and she saw that it was "viet with
tears. Her eyes were also moist.

Poor uncle ! Dear uncle !' she murmured,
sympathetically.

I have not shed a tear since that fatal
day, Mimics, I could not weep at my
mother's funeral. The relief is wonderful
already. The tension has been awful.
That is insanity. '' Sorry for me." Dear,
tender heart.'

Mimics took his hand in silence, and so
they sat awhile, the light of the short
December day dying out during the interval.

She thought his hand was cold, and,
chafing it tenderly, aroused him.

" Let the dead past bury its dead," ' he
quoted, and got up quietly. ' Now for the
afternoon tea, Mimics.'
'• In the library, uncle ?'
No, here. It is more cheerful.'
Was this Reginald Le Roy ? Yes. The
spectre that had haunted him all these
years had suddenly disappeared, and his
brain was clear again. It is often so with
delusions. Remove some trifling impediment,
and the mind recovers as by a
miracle. Is it the brain, the heart, or the
mind? Who shall say? So-called hysteria,
silent melancholy, cerebral fancies — whence
do they arise ? How do they disappear ?
No physician can tell — neither can the
patient. Le Roy was cured by the knowledge
that his lost love slept the last sleep
in Highgate cemetery, and had not taken
her own life in preference to sharing his.

q2

People have gone mad for an idea. The
asylums are full of melancholy maniacs
who have been made such by some delusion
either religious or, like Le Roy's^
caused by the freaks of love, or the disgrace
of friends. Where is the remedy
for all this ? It lies in individual responsibility
and straight-forwardness. Money
iste root of all evil, and secretiveness grows
out of it. But for greed first, and secrecy
after, this history would have been different.
As it is, the clearing up of one mystery
has changed the course of life and
thought of many of those concerned in it.

As to Le Roy, he remained more a
mystery to himself and others than he was
before. Barber confided to Mimics his
perplexity concerning him with a face
longer and more lugubrious than ever.

'He is surely going out of his mind
now. Miss Marmont,' he said. ' He has
been actually whistling, a species of music
he has always disapproved of, and that I

have never permitted in the house. Says
he to me, " Barber, I hope I may not be
quite so troublesome to you in future, as I
have been," and when I replies to him,
Trouble has been a pleasure to me, sir,"
he puts his hand on my shoulder and says,
You have been a faithful friend, Barber."
I consider these premonitory symptoms,
ma'am. Last night he was naturally
excited after Miss Heath's visit : there's a
remarkable woman ! — to-day he is unnaturally
excited. I never saw him so before.
I hope he mayn't prove too much
for us.'

Mimics hoped so also, for her book-lore
and slight knowledge of abnormal events
had not prepared her for so unexpected a
change. During the remainder of that day
Le Roy was in buoyant spirits, and talked
incessantly, so that she had no time for reflection.
He did not refer to George Hope,
but told her cheerfully that they must
inquire for the invalids on the morrow.

^ Our small neighbourhood is alive for
once,' he said, nth a laugh which Mimics
feared might be a ' premonitory symptom.'
Loquacity and silence have it all their
o^yn way at Summerlands ; violent indignation
rules at Monkton ; astonishment
pervades the vicarage, and — what shall I
say ? — unusual contentment overshadows
Courtleroy.'

Long may it last,' said Mimics, who
was afraid of every word she uttered.

'You and Barber look at me as if I
were some peep-show,' he remarked, later
on. ' I hope I may reward your curiosity.'

'Indeed, uncle,' — 'I am sure, sir,' replied
the offending parties, and he laughed
again.

The following morning Barber approached
Mimics cautiously, and in a whisper
confided to her further fears.

He is sleeping like an infant, ma'am.
He has slept all night. I have not once
heard him walking up and down the room

as usual. I hope it isn't softening of the
brain.'

I hope not, indeed, Barber,' replied
puzzled Mimics. 'But I think I have
heard or read that it is best to let people
sleep under such circumstances.'

She was wise, and ' Tired nature's sweet
restorer' took possession of Le Roy, who,
to the terror of his two slaves, did not
ring till nearly midday. He appeared at
luncheon, however, ' clothed and in his
right mind.' Even Barber could perceive
no suspicious cranny in his conduct.

Perhaps you mil go and inquire for
Miss Heath, and I will send and ask for
Captain Carew,' he said to Mimics.

I could do both, uncle, if you wish,'
she replied.

Yes, I should like to know the result
of the indignation meeting,' he added,
calmly. * You must have the carriage, for
it is raining.'

She drove to Monkton first, and learned

that Captain Carew was rather better, and
that Lady Helena had just gone out. She
was leaving her card, when Sir Joshua
bustled up, and begged her to come in.
She acceded, and he took her to the
morning-room, the scene of the previous
day's fracas.

Fm so thankful you've come, Miss
Marmont,' he began. ' I suppose Le Roy
told you what a row we had yesterday.
Lady Helena has been in a towering rage
ever since, though it did good and cleared
the air all the same. Never heard such a
romantic story, though I'm sorry for poor
little Margaret. She wasn't in love with
Reginald, that's the truth, and what's the
good of forcing people ? But he was awfully
severe on her ladyship, and read hera
fine homily — all in Monty's favour. He's
the better for it, and I trust young Hope
isn't the worse. He'll do honour to us all, as
Monty said when he heard the tale. And
now ril let you into a secret, Miss Mar-mont.

But no, somebody else shall tell
you. She won't like to be superseded.'

Sir Joshua went off like a whirlwind,
and was shortly afterwards succeeded by
Barbara Leste.

^ Barbara !' exclaimed Mimics, in unfeigned
surprise, as she advanced slowly.

In another moment the pair were closely
embraced, and Barbara was venting her
restrained feelings in Mimics's arms.

Forgive me all my jealousy and unkindness,'
she sobbed. ^I now know how
good you have been to me. Monty has told
me all.'

I am glad ! I am thankful ! Then all is
as it should be between you,' exclaimed
Mimics.

They sat down side by side, hand in
hand, on the nearest couch. Barbara was
very pale, and her stately head drooped a
little, but her voice and manner were
assured as usual, while she told her friend
her love-tale. Mimics's face and frame

quivered with excitement as lie listened.
She could rejoice with her friend.

I have been proud and unkind, Mimics,
but I am humbled,' she said. ' We had
an interview yesterday, and Monty told me
all that passed between you and him, and
what a loyal friend you had been to me.
Even then it was not till he nearly fainted
that my heart really softened. We then
agreed to forget some years of our life and
to begin again from our early days. When
we had made friends, I intended to leave,
and went for Lady Helena. Your uncle
arrived at the moment, and she requested
me to remain. I went back to Monty and
found him very ill. The nurse was with
him, and we both tried to relieve him from
what seemed hysterical affection of the
breath. She said the heart was affected.
She sent off for the doctor and called Lady
Helena. Fortunately he was relieved when
she and Sir Joshua came in. He was holding
my hand, and, when I tried to release it,

he resisted. He did not see, as I did, that
his mother's face was distorted with anger,
and that she could not sneak for it ; but he
said as distinctly as he could, for his cough
began ,

^ " Father, mother, if you wish me to recover,
or, failing recovery, to die happily,
you will consent to my marrying Barbara
Leste. I have always loved her."

I did not dare to look at Lady Helena,
but Sir Joshua cried out,

" With all my heart, my boy. I'm sure
your mother will say the same."

But she did not speak, for she could not.
She just laid her hand on our hands and
pressed them.

" Go, Barbara, I am better already," said
Monty, and I left the room. Father was
in the morning-room, and, seeing that I
was crying, asked what it was about. I
told him, and he said that some good
was coming out of much evil. Then he
related to me what had just happened,

which accounted for Lady Helena's furious
countenance, and probably for her confession.


" But you must not consider yourself
engaged," he said, and I certainly did not.

However, in about half-an-hour Lady
Helena joined us. She looked subdued,
and the horrible expression had left her
face. Still, it must have cost her something
to say what she did.

" You vnll give your consent to Monty's
marrying Barbara, Mr. Leste."

" Not if yours is forced from you by circumstances,
Lady Helena," replied papa,
and I never honoured him so much before.

" What do you say, Barbara ?" she
asked.

'exactly what my father says," I answered.
I fear my pride is not crushed.
Mi mica.

" You will leave her with me for a few
days. I know what an excellent nurse
she is," said Lady Helena.

" Certainly, if she can be of service," returned
papa. And so I remained here last
night. The doctor came and assured
us there was no fresh cause of alarm, but
that Monty was better than yesterday.
Before we went to bed last night, darling
Mimics, I was finally engaged to Monty, at
Lady Helena's particular desire. I have
no doubt that I owe this to your uncle's
visit, and to the sad fate of George Hope's
parents. I pity poor Miss Heath the most,
for she must have suffered martyrdom all
these years.'

Dearest Barbra, your whole face is
changed. You look as you did when I
first saw you with Captain Carew in the
vicarage school-room. Can this be love ?'
Mimics said this reflectively, and Barbara
coloured.

We have been friends so long, Mimics,
only separated,' she replied, more coldly
than before.

It seemed like a reproach, and Mimics

cast her arms round lier friend, and declared
this was one of the happiest days of her
life. She had, indeed, no happiness apart
from that of others, and always rejoiced
with those who rejoiced. Sir Joshua
bustled in, and she offered her congratulations
impulsively. He almost shook her
hand off.

I always wanted Barbra for a daughter,
so it's all right,' he said. ' At least it will
be if Monty gets well. He wants to see
you, Miss Marmont. He says he's a
hundred pounds better this morning. He's
one of those who won't lie in bed, you
know. Like me. If I was dying I should
be up and about. Can't bear being kept
in one room, you know. He's in the
library. Barbra, take Miss Marmont to
him, if she don't mind. I'll come too in a
feY\^ minutes.'

Mimics did mind, but she went.

I am in for all the secrets of the confessional,'
she thought.'

Captain Carew did not, however, confess.
He gave Mimics's hand a grateful pressure,
and asked if George Hope had delivered to
her a message from him. She replied in
the negative, and stayed its repetition by a
glance and congratulations. He saw that
she understood him.

And Hope has left before I knew of our
relationship,' he said. * I wonder what my
brother will think of it. He comes down
tomorrow.'

That matters little !' returned Mimics,
coldly. ' The tables are turned.'

Yes. Hope will win all the laurels,' he
added, with a sigh.

'But you have won our rose — our
Barbra,' she cried, enthusiastically, and the
trio became natural, as lovers and friends
should be.

CHAPTER XIV.

THE TABLES TURNED.

When Mimics reacliecl Summerlancls, she
found Mrs. Prettyman engaged in something
very nearly approaching a quarrel
with Lady Helena.

I came on purpose to see Miss Heath
said the latter, hotly, as she entered the
room, and ' Thank goodness, it is you,
Mimics,' ejaculated the former.

No sooner was she seated than both
disputants appealed to her. If there is one
thing more disagreeable than another, it is
to be suddenly made party to a dissension
and asked to become umpire. Lady Helena,

in all the magnificence of sable fur and
rustling silk, sat on one side of the fire ;
Mrs. Prettyman, in all the simplicity of cap-less
head and much-flounced merinos, on
the other. They were as well contrasted
in appearance as in speech. The one
proudly measured; the other truthfully
voluble. Mimics took a low chair between
them, opposite the fire.

I came expressly to see Miss Heath,'
repeated Lady Helena, turning to Mimics.
After her extraordinary revelations, it is
only proper that I should confront her, and
discover their exact truth, or falsehood. I
appeal to you. Miss Marmont. Am not I
the principal person concerned in this
matter, and should I not be at once admitted
to her room T

'That is just what I have been saying,
Mimics. She is under my care, and I cannot
have her frightened to death, poor
dear. Why, she might go oiF in a fainting-fit
at any moment, and she so weak and

VOL. III. B

timid ; and the very sight of Lady Helena
would bring on a collapse. Dr. Blending
says so.'

That the sight of me would cause a
collapse, Mrs. Prettyman? Dr. Blending
said that ?'

He said that any excitement might be
fatal ; and your ladyship must know that
since poor Lady Margaret was your sister,
and her husband your brother-in-law, and
our dear Georgie your nephew, and that
she concealed this from you — I mean the
marriage and the birth — for so many years,
and that she would have concealed it still
but for — for — I don't quite know the
reason even now, Mimics. What did she
say to Mr. Le Roy?'

Mrs. Prettyman was getting into a maze,
and Mimics did not choose to help her out
of it by entangling herself.

Miss Heath said that Captain Hope was
the son of her brother and Lady Margaret ;

and that she had kept it secret at Lady
Margaret's request,' she explained.

My sister marry the brother of her
governess, and give birth to that foundling.
I do not believe it, Miss Marmont.'

Milly Heath has the certificates of marriage,
birth, death, and burial,' said excited
Mrs. Prettyman. • And I think you might
be thankful, Lady Helena, that matters
weren't worse. As for our Georgie, who
is a captain in Her Majesty's service, and
has been the best of sons to us, and mil
have all my husband's fortune, and is sure
to be commander-in-chief, and is reckoned
the handsomest young man in the army,
and was far above your son. Bully Carew,
as they used to call him, at school, and
distinguished himself more than your
other son in the army — I think you might
be proud of such a nephew, don't you,
Mimics?'

I daresay Lady Helena will be proud

R 2

of him some clay, clear Mrs. Prettyman ;
but the disclosure was sudden, and we
were all taken by surprise, George more
than anyone

Mimics could scarcely help smiling as
she glanced from one to the other of the
belligerents.

Why should I be proud of him, Miss
Marmont ? I am astonished at your taking
their side. Miss Heath must have
plotted the whole affair and encouraged
her brother. She is at the bottom of it.
I insist on seeing her,' cried Lady Helena
in a passion.

'This is not your ladyship's house, but
mine for the present. Milly Heath is my
friend and guest, and my husband, Mr,
Prettyman, would not allow our Georgie's
own aunt to be annoyed and perhaps
killed by the very person who made her
do wrong.'

What do you mean, Mrs. Prettyman ?'

That you, my lady, wanted to force

your sister into marrying that proud, disagreeable
Mr. Le Ro}^ — I beg your pardon,
Mimics — and that rather than do it
she went off with young Hope — who had
been in the law, and was a respectable man
and very handsome and agreeable — and
Milly Heath kept the secret, because — well,
because she was afraid to tell it, and that
is the very truth.'

Here Ada came in, and went straight to
Lady Helena.

Miss Heath would like to see you, my
lady, if your ladyship would take the
trouble to go to her,' she said.

I cannot allow it. She must not be
excited,' cried Mrs. Prettyman ; but Lady
Helena hurried off with only an imperative
Yes.'

Mrs. Prettyman was about to follow, but
Mimics prevented her, saying that it might
be best to leave Miss Heath to tell her
own tale. She turned the current of that
good lady's wrath by asking her about

George. She had received a letter from
him that morning, which she produced.
It was written from Portsmouth, where he
was to embark nth his regiment the following
day, and contained this passage :

'■ I cannot yet realize the story of my
birth, but shall with time. Give my love
to my newly-found aunt, who has indeed
suffered much for my sake, and that of my
unfortunate parents. I trust she will
recover. Tell Mimics that my one regret is
not bidding her good-bye that eventful
afternoon. She will understand me. It
is all a dream, and I cannot believe in my
connection with the Carews. The only
reality seems what is unreal, that I am
your ever-devoted son.'

Mimics felt how strange it was, that
while she was reading this extract over
and over again his paternal and maternal
relatives were probably quarrelling about
him in the house of his foster-parents
She and Mrs. Prettyman remained for the

best part of an hour together, awaiting
the return of Lady Helena. Once only,
Mrs. Prettyman went upstairs, and listened
at the door of Miss Heath's apartment ;
but, as all was quiet within, she came back
to Mimics reassured.

What is the good of having rank and
riches if you abuse them ?' she asked. ' I
am afraid I forgot all about them, and was
very rude. But I couldn't bear to hear
poor Milly and darling Georgie treated as
if they were dirt.'

She ' forgot all about them' ao-ain when
Lady Helena reappeared. Her eyes were
red, her face swollen with weeping, and
she could scarcely speak the words, ' Kindly
ring for my carriage.' Mrs. Prettyman
was all in a flutter, and quite ready to
ask her pardon, or embrace her, or condole
with her ; but Mimics merely said, with
natural tact,

'I have just seen Captain Carew, Lady
Helena, and am so glad he is better.'

Lady Helena attempted no reply. The
carriage came round and she was at the
hall-door before the coachman had pulled
up, and in it almost before his reins were
loosened.

Mrs. Prettyman and Mimics ran up to
Miss Heath. They found her calm and
composed.

'What did you say to her, Milly?'
asked Mrs. Prettyman.

I told her everything. Now it is all
out and my burden has fallen off. Why
did I carry it so long?' replied Miss Heath.

You needn't have upset her so, poor
thing,' remarked kindly Mrs. Prettyman.
And I was quite rude to her ladyship,
Milly, because I thought she would have
upset you. How did it happen ?'

I scarcely know. She began by reproaching
me, and I told her that the
fault was hers, and that Margaret had
sinned from fear. I scarcely know what I
said, but, when I told her of Margaret's

death, she broke down. I acknowledged
my own faults, but said that I had such
confidence in your goodness, Louisa, and
Mr. Prettyman's, that I had preferred
trusting George to you to breaking my
promise to Margaret, and thrusting him
upon her. I did not excuse myself ; how
could I ? I have done wickedly. I have
eaten the bread of your kindness and Mr.
Le Roy's servitude lawlessly : and all for
fear of her. I told her so. Even had I
not promised Margaret, I should have been
afraid of telling her the truth. I have
lived a life of fear and secrecy, partly from
timidity, partly from terror. I was so
lonely ! I was so afraid of being cast upon
the world, and having no money to help)
my brother. You and Mimics have been
my comforts, and I often longed to tell you
everything, and should but for my promise.
After all, I have broken it. Lady Helena
asked me, in cruel haughtiness, why,
since I had kept it so long, I had not kept

it till it died mali me, instead of raking up
Margaret's buried name. I dared not say
that it was for love of George and Mimics,
and now they seem as much separated as
ever.'

You have cured my uncle said Mimics.
The fear that Lady Margaret had committed
suicide rather than marry him, caused
his misanthropy ; the knowledge that she
died a natural death has relieved his mind
and he is a new man. I have promised to
devote myself to him, and — and — we must
leave the rest.'

Why did you promise ? Why did you
not take warning by me ?' cried Miss Heath,
excitedly.

Nobody ever takes warning by anybody
else,' interrupted Mrs. Prettyman.
But, promise or no promise, Georgie will
stick to Mimics, if she will stick to him.
Isn't it pretty to think he always called
her " My Mimi " ?'

The recollection brought tears to the

eyes of the three ladies ; and, to conceal
them, Mimics said a hasty farewell.
She had, indeed, forgotten the flight of
time, and did not reach Courtleroy till
six o'clock. Her uncle was nervously
pacing the hall and wondering what had
happened to her. He was greedy of news
as any gossip, and would scarcely allow her
time to prepare for dinner before he overwhelmed
her with questions. She waited,
however, until they were alone in the library,
before she answered them fully. When
she told him of Captain Carew and Barbara's
engagement, he said, ' That was my
doing ;' and when she described the scene
between the angry ladies, with some
humour, he laughed and applauded Mrs.
Prettyman ; but when it came to the return
of Lady Helena, tear-stained and apparently
penitent, he was silent. Mimics had expected
him to rejoice, but, on the contrary,
his heart and conscience were touched.
After an interval, he said, quietly.

When Miss Heath is better, you must
ask her to come and pay us a visit, Mimics ;'
and made no further allusion to her two
calls.

But, as the days passed on, Mimics,
Barber, and the household generally found
a Teat change in him. He seemed, in very
deed, to have begun life anew.

In about a week, Sir Joshua Carew
called. He was very communicative, and
did not need much questioning to tell the
whole state of affairs at Monkton.

Monty has been getting better ever
since you and Lady Helena had that
shindy, Le Roy,' he said. * Bless my soul !
your face was enough to send her into fits,
let alone your speech. But I'm glad the
truth is out, you know. So is she, now she
bas calmed down a little. An awful
temper while it lasts, you know ; but all
this was a terrible shock. Glad you take
it so well, Le Roy. You see, you've got
your niece to console you, and we shall

soon have Barbra. Just met Prettyman at
the station, returned from seeing off our
bone of contention. I daresay we shall all
be reconciled to him when he comes back.
He's as fine a young fellow as ever wore Her
Majesty's uniform.*

Mimics glanced at her uncle, but she saw
no sign of assent in his face. He Alas reconciling
himself to everything but to this
son of his lost Margaret. She sighed and
he perceived it : but he avoided all allusion
to George Hope, and had evidently no intention
of fostering either friendship or
love for him. She sighed again when Sir
Joshua continued the conversation by adding
that Mr. Prettyman had told him that
business called him back to London, and
that he and his ife would shortly leave
Summerlands.

CHAPTER XV.

HONOURS.

Years pass as years will, but they never
seem to alter the aspect of the London
streets and squares. Mr. and Mrs. Pretty-man,
for instance, lived on in their square,
year after year, without witnessing any
great change in any of its mansions, and
certainly not in their own. When they
left Summerlands, not long after George
Hope's departure for Africa, they bade the
place a final adieu, for Lord and Lady
Manville returned to it, and it was not let
again. We will take up the thread of their

not very eventful history about a year
after we dropped it in the last chapter.
Over twenty have elapsed since we first
made their acquaintance.

It was midnight, or more properly the
small hours. Mrs. Prettyman and Miss
Heath were in the library, evidently ' sitting
up ' for somebody. Years had dealt
more kindly with Lou than with her friend
Milly. The one was little if at all altered,
the other much aged in appearance, if not
in mind. They were both in dinner dress,
an d unusually smart. Mrs . Prettyman wo re
her husband's favourite blue with filigree
silver ornaments ; Miss Heath a black
velvet of ancient date, soft lace cap and
shawl, and a handsome gold maltese cross
and bracelets. Even she was in a fever of
excited expectation, while her friend Milly
could not sit still a moment. Now she
was in the hall ; anon at the windows looking
through the half-closed shutters, talking
all the while.

'When will they come? I couldn't have
believed they would have been so late. I
hope nothing has happened. Suppose the
horses should have taken fright in the
crowd — for you may be sure half London
was there. Hush ! there's a carriage.
Provoking, 'tis only a cab. How late those
poor cabman are kept up. I'm sure I wish
things were more equal, don't you, Milly?
There's the quarter ! A quarter past two.
Do you think anything can have happened ?
I'll ring and ask Sampson.'

Things of that sort always take a longtime,
Louisa. Besides, it is a long drive.
Have a little patience,' returned Miss
Heath.

'Waiting up is dreadful, Milly. I'm
sure I should have gone out of my mind if
Joe had been like some men staying out
half the night, and dining at his club, and
going to the play, and perhaps coming
home half intoxicated. I'm sure I can't be
too thankful, can I, Milly ?'

*You have been a most fortunate woman,
Louisa.'

'And am still, Milly. I do believe I
am the very happiest woman in all London.
Hark ! Here they are. Yes. It is
our carriage. No, it is going past. How
disappointing. Yes ; it is them after
all.'

She was in the hall in a moment, while
Miss Heath actually got up and walked
after her. But she was met half Away by
Mr. Prettyman.

Good evening, Miss Heath. I am very
glad you came to dine with Lou,' said he,
jovially, ' I thought it never would be
over. Such toasts ! such laudations.'

Such humbug, padre. I hope I may
never go through the like again.'

This was spoken by George Hope, who
came in, hand in hand With Mrs. Pretty-man.


'Aunt Milly ! How nice, how kind!' he
added, embracing Miss Heath.

VOL. III. s

Does t lie look beautiful ?' asked the
admiring Lou.

He certainly did look beautiful, if regimentals
and a breast on which shone the
Victoria cross, constitute beauty. Moreover,
the handsome face was become
bronzed and manly through hard work in
many a campaign, and the eyes seemed
darker, deeper, bluer, more loving than ever,
as they smiled at the rhapsodies of his
devoted madre.

What did they say ? what did they do ?
Who was there ? Did the Prince come ?
and the Duke? Tell us all about it'
exclaimed Mrs. Prettyman.

*The Prince and the Duke, and all sorts
of grandees and celebrities were there, and
they all shook hands with George and complimented
and congratulated him,' replied
Mr. Prettyman. ' I have been at civic
banquets before, but never saw so many
distinguished men military and civilian.'

And did they drink his health, and had
he to make a speech ? Weren't you nervous,
Georgie T

No, madre mia. The honour was not
mine, but mv reo-ment's.'

Mrs. Prettyman would not be convinced
that the grand banquet from which her
hero and her husband had just returned
had not been given entirely in George's
honour. The truth was that George had
greatly distinguished himself in more than
one campaign, particularly his last, and had
been honourably mentioned in the dispatches.
Since we parted from him at
Summerlands, he had been to India as well
as Africa, and had won fame in both
countries. His last campaign was in Africa,
where he and his regiment had encountered
great hardships and difficulties. Many of
his brother officers had been killed, and he
had been brought to the front by his personal
courage as well as by what most men would

s2

hai-T : : Tr oircnmstaiioes.

Bn- 7 - - pi ^or tHe savage men

r 1'-1-1 lie fought, and possessed

: : : Tie spirit of a missionary than a

- liii. 11. spire of his dauntless prayer.
However, he had heesk particularly and frequently
named by his commanding officers.
and^had greatly distinguished himself when
Lf-^rs iz. I I: eras now rumoured

- - ~ :»n obtain his majority
L . need for promotion :

- silly youiig for this. He would
r : z rrn snarled out for mention, but

iir r valiant defence of his post, when
left with a couple of hundred men in care
of some of the sick and worded Savage
hordes poured down upon them, and they
were beaten off &c drc and so — and so,
as it ever is, glory and victory were the
result of death and destruction. We refer the
readers to the public papers, in which the
fierce encounters of the civilized and the
savage tend to show the horrors of war.

Xo one felt them more > wily than did
George Hope. Ye:. them, his

name and that «:: - :r^: at were
marked.

I: ~i>s in ther honour that the haiaquet

been held, for they had just leaned

L seat of Tear. It is unnecessary to

1 V r : : b details for the de¥ek>piiieiit rf

this story, though a mi:':: ii : : : King

romar.jr ii: : ^:: :: :: :ie

.r\J-i.- r" ' - - "5

as it majors. ?:::-;■: .;:: . '

questions :':::: :L r

troll &::::: : .*

con^deri: r- r .«:v :'-.- r : :f
them.

I saw so many celehirat r . r I

bewildered,' he sii b :: I "

several acquainted: ^ -^ ^ : i^,

Aunt Milly.

^ Of mine !' exclaimed Miss Heath
king up £rom a dream of the past.

Yes. The Carews were there ; Sir Joshua,
the captain, and my old enemy Bully.
They all came to speak to me, and you
would have thought Bully and I were
brothers at least. We are cousins and
they asked me to come and see my aunt —
I suppose she is really my aunt — and Mrs.
Montague Carew. It seems odd to think of
Barbara Leste raised to the peerage, or
whatever the rank of a daughter-in-law of
a Lady Helena may be. What is it, Aunt
Milly?'

Sir Joshua was as genial as ever,' broke
in Mr. Prettyman. ' He said they had all
come to London for the season, and have
a house in Grosvenor Street, where he
hopes we shall call upon them. He told
me that the captain and his wife had
turned Court House into a sort of Paradise,
I suppose you have heard, George, that
they rent it of Mr. Le Roy, and that Barbara
still '' works the parish." '

"Who did you see that you knew besides
?' asked Mrs. Prettyman. ' I want
to hear about the speeches, and toasts, and
the great people — and what they said to
you, Georgie.'

Mr. Le Roy was there,' said George,
colour mounting to his brown cheeks.

An exclamation from both ladies.

I scarcely knew him, he is so altered.
He has grown stouter and his manner is
almost kind ; he even said he had followed
my career with pleasure. There was no
time for more.'

'Where is Mimics? She did not say
her uncle was coming to town when I
heard last,' asked Miss Heath.

I did not venture to ask for her. You
know I have only heard of her through
you since we parted.'

Le Roy seemed to know everybody,'
remarked Mr. Prettyman. 'He was quite
at ease, and I saw him talking to several

of the officers, and heard them mention
George.'

^ I suppose he must have gone on purpose
to see you,' mused Mrs. Prettyman.
What can have brought him to London
? I have settled all about the treat,
Georgie.'

This sudden change of the subject was
due to a promise that the ' ragged '
should be fed on the morrow, and elicited
the warmest thanks from George, who
never forgot his old friends of the ' yard.'
His attention was also drawn to the ornaments
worn by the ladies, which had been
brought by him from abroad. He thanked
them for wearing them on this particular
occasion, and was told that every member
of the establishment had put on someone
of his various gifts, in honour of the
banquet at the Mansion House.

They separated at last, and, while they
seek that sleep which excitement so often
delays, we may as well relate that Miss

Heath is not an inmate of the house, but
only a guest for the night.

When she had cast off her ' burden ' at
Summerlands, she resolved to leave it behind
her. She only desired to quit the
neighbourhood, and all who had been
more or less affected by her secret, forever.
She resisted Mimics's entreaties to
stay with her ; she refused to say good-bye
to friends and acquaintances ; she kept to
her sick-room, in short, until she felt well
enough to travel. Then she came to London.
All she wanted was to be ignored,
if not forgotten. Mrs. Pretty man entreated
her to live with her, but this she
declined. She stayed with her until she
secured a small lodging at Highgate,
where she had lived ever since, working
amongst the poor, and pouring out her
thoughts by letter to her dear Mimics and
her beloved nephew. To her they owed
such knowledge of one another as they
obtained, for Mimics held to her promise

of self-devotion to her uncle and Courtleroy,
while George pursued his career in
the army ; and, though no letters passed
between them, he never forgot those
memorable scenes in the library and
school-room of Courtleroy, and respected
Mimics's feelings too much to intrude
upon them. He knew she was his friend,
but her own words forbade him hope for
more. ' You are my brother — my younger
brother, whom I love as myself Let it be
as it has always been.' He never forgot
them.

Now and again Mimics had sent him a
message through Miss Heath, but that lady
had learned her lesson of caution, and had
so carefully worded her letters that no
symptom of other than sisterly regard ever
transpired through them. Still, during the
weary years of longing for the old, old
intercourse, this was better than nothing.
Perhaps the happiest moment of those
years had been when Mr. Le Roy met him

that evening, and asked him to call upon
him. What was the banquet, the honour
the success, to the chance of being welcomed
by the uncle of her he loved, and perhaps
— perhaps of seeing her again?
Adhere, how, he could not tell, but he
would, at least, ask the permission of Mr.
Le Roy.

CHAPTER XVI.

^ TO Margaret.'

^ I would rather not meet any of them, and
they are sure to call,' said Miss Heath the
next morning at breakfast. ' I will go
home, if you please.'

This is your home, Milly,' answered
Mrs. Prettyman, in a huffy voice. ^ Georgie,
I wish you could persuade her to stop here
for a few days, at least.'

I have already tried and failed,' said
George, 'so I propose accompanying her
to Highgate this morning, if you do not
want me here.'

We shall want you for our small party

TO MARGARET. 269*

at five,' returned Mrs. Prettyman. ' Besides
Octavius Leste is coining to dinner.'

I will be back. Aunt Milly proposes to
leave early. We will take a hansom,'
returned George.

Accordingly, he and Miss Heath started
immediately after breakfast. They were
not long in reaching breezy Highgate, and
agreed to dismiss the hansom at the
entrance to the cemetery. They had been
there together several times, and threaded
their way through the tombs, cypresses,
monuments, and flowers till they reached
a halting-place half way up the hill, where
they paused to take breath, and to glance
at the fine view that spread before them.
Then they took a side path, and walked
slowly and in silence towards the spot
sacred to both, for a mother s grave is ever
sacred, even though that mother was unknown.


It was only one simple white marble
cross among many, but it stood on a slight

eminence, and was visible as they went
towards it. The rays of a bright May sun
glinted through the overshadowing trees
and across the cypress at the back of the
grave, and fell upon it, and on two figures
that stood contemplating it.

Some one is there : we will wait,' said
George.

People come and go. They will have
left before we reach it,' replied Miss Heath ;
and they walked on.

But these visitors tarried, and were still
gazing at the white cross when George also
stood before it. They appeared unconscious
of his presence, and he retired a pace
or two to await their departure. His mind
was preoccupied, and he did not look
particularly at them. But, when he found
that they did not move away, he glanced
at them more inquisitively. Their backs
were towards him, still that glance sufficed.
He made an involuntary exclamation, and

moved forward. They started and turned.
It was Mr. Le Roy and Mimics. George
just spoke Mimics's name and she his, and
their hands were clasped, there, over his
mother's grave. Mr. Le Roy either did not
see him, or was so much engrossed by that
inscription, ' To Margaret,' that he made
no sion of recognition. But George and

CJ CD O

Mimics stood in silence, hand in hand,
heart answering heart, on the sod that
covered the mouldering body of her whose
strange fate had been the cause of their
life-long friendship.

They looked at Mr. Le Roy, who stood
awhile immovable at the foot of the turfy
grave. His face was calm, his form erect,
but the moisture in his eyes proved that
memory even now recalled the Margaret
he had loved so well. At last he moved,
and said,

Now, Mimics, we mil go.'
Looking at her, he perceived George.

Strange that we should meet here !' he
added, and they, too, clasped hands over
that solemn spot.

'She passed away With the word
Saviour " on her lips,' murmured George.

I hope her soul is at rest with Him,'
returned Mr. Le Roy.

As he spoke he encountered Miss Heath,
who was nervously watching the scene.
Mimics also saw her for the first time, and
broke the awkwardness of the meeting by
her delighted welcome and affectionate
embrace. They all turned from the
marble cross with a lingering glance at it,
and went quietly down the tomb-lined
pathway : Mimics and Miss Heath in front,
the gentlemen behind. Mr. Le Roy was
the first to speak.

'Let me again congratulate you on
your success,' he said. ' Your history is
strange, but you have conquered the circumstances
that conquered me.'

^A Higher Power has shaped them forme,'
replied George.

I should apologize to you for ill-advised
words,' said Le Roy, hesitating and even
colouring. ' When we last met, I did not
realize who you were or how mixed up
with my life. We have met again. Let
us be friends for lie?' sake,' and he turned
and pointed in the direction of the cross.

Thank you,' was all George could say,
for his feelings overcame him.

When they drew near the cemetery
entrance Mimics joined them, Miss Heath
still keeping in advance.

Will you drive Miss Heath home, uncle,'
she said. ' She is very nervous and upset
by this sudden meeting. Besides, I should
like to see where she lives.'

Mimics's animated face was flushed nth
happiness, and it was no wonder, so thought
George, that Le Roy smiled and replied
that she was his mistress for the remainder
of the day.

VOL. III. T

'■ She is, if possible, younger and more
beautiful than ever,' reflected her brother-lover,
as she hastened to insist on Miss
Heath's being driven home.

A carriage was waiting for them, and the
man wore the Le Roy livery. Mr. Le Roy
asked George to accompany them, and they
all got in. Poor Miss Heath looked frightened
to death, and wished herself anywhere
rather than opposite Le Roy. But for
Mimics's insistence, she would have refused
that place of honour as resolutely as she
had refused the pension. But he asked
almost kindly after her health, and tried
to set her at her ease, although he felt
anything but at his ease himself. George
and Mimics were much more comfortable,
and had a thousand things to say in those
brief minuter.

Now you must come in and call upon
Miss Heath, uncle,' said Mimics, when they
reached Miss Heath's modest lodging.

^ You have constituted me your mistress
for the remainder of the day.'

Miss Heath was surprised at Le Roy's
willing acquiescence. Her countenance
showed it. He smiled, and said his niece
was commander-in-chief.

'Ah, Milly! this is delightful!' said
Mimics, with almost childish gaiety, when
they had mounted a narrow staircase and
found themselves in a pretty drawing-room.
All the old ornaments and work Tvith
which we adorned the Courtleroy schoolroom,
and white curtains and flowers, and
actually a view. Look, uncle. I have seen
nothing like this before in London. And
country air, and no smoke.'

Mr. Le Roy admired — George listened
entranced, and Milly Heath looked on.
When they had sat some time talking with
tolerable ease, Mimics broke out suddenly
with, 'This is my day! Uncle, you must
make Miss Heath come back with us.'

T 2

It would give me great pleasure was
the reply.

Mimics overruled all objections ; but it
was George who decided Miss Heath to
accept the invitation.

For my sake, Aunt Milly,' he whispered,
while Mr. Le Roy looked out of the
window.

And for his sake the shy, trembling
woman forgot her resolutions, and once
more entered Mr. Le Roy's carriage.

We can drop you in the square,' said
that gentleman, and George also followed
in her wake.

It would be difficult to say which of the
four was most surprised at the unexpected
juxta-position, but they all accepted it, for
was it not Mimics's day? When they
reached Portman Square she longed to
renew her acquaintance nth it ; but she
saw from her uncle's face that he was not
prepared for such renewal ; so they dropped
George at Mr. Prettyman's door. The

leave-taking was cordial on all sides — but
only the pressure of hands told what was
the joy of reunion between George and
Mimics.

You will explain to Mrs. Prettyman/
said Miss Heath, nervously.

And give her my dear love,' added
Mimics. ' I shall come to see her soon.
We are at Prince's Gate.'

The carriage drove off, leaving George
in a strange tumult of feelings. He recounted
what had passed to Mrs. Pretty-man,
and she more than shared them ; for
she was quite convinced that his military
renown had done for him what the honour
of belonging to Lady Helena's family
would never have done. But his old and
favourite haunt, the 'Yard,' compelled them
to forget awhile the more aristocratic
Gate,' and they were soon engaged in
preparations for a treat similar in character
to the one which celebrated his coming of
age. The like demonstrations on the part

of his old friends awaited him, and children
and adults, ragged and clothed, received
him and his foster-parents as they best
liked to be received.

There was, however, a new and striking
incident. In the midst of the hubbub
incidental on a ^ high tea ' of the ordinary
character, a carriage drove into the yard.
Instead of the Patrick and Biddy of the
last ceremonial, the outsiders saw a grand
gentleman and two fine ladies step out, and
request to be shown the way to the .
A dozen somewhat 
members of the rank and
file volunteered to escort them, and, after
mounting many stairs, they found themselves
at the top of the big building, in a
long room adorned with texts and flags.
They were greeted by a very babel of
sounds ; for hungry youngsters manage to
keep up a perpetual noise, whether their
mouths are full or empty.

George, who was eno^ao^ed in handing;
about meat, perceived his new guests, and
hastened towards them.

Miss Heath told me of your feast, and,
as this is my day, I made her and my uncle
come and see it,' said Mimics, meeting him
nth her usual frankness. ' I told uncle
it would be infinitely more effective than
the banquet at the Mansion House.'

It certainly is,' added Mr. Le Roy.

He was standing near the door, and
looking' over the heads of well-nigh a
thousand invited guests ; for this festivity
had been arranged beforehand. They
were all in their best, but, in most cases,
bad was that best. He frowned and shuddered
as he contemplated the rags, and
was conscious of certain odours not of the
attar of rose genus. Mr. and Mrs. Pretty-man
came forward to greet him and
Mimics, and to express their pleasure at
seeing them again. But they and George

were too busy to linger long. They
apologised for leaving Mr. Le Roy, who
said,

I have come uninvited, and should bethe
one to apologise. Will you excuse
further unceremoniousness, and all dine
with us at eight next Tuesday ? My niece
has so well managed her stewardship and
me that we are actually mistress and master
of my old town place. You remember
it. Captain Hope ?'

I'm sure we shall be only too pleased,'
said Mrs. Prettyman, more convinced than
ever that her Georgie was all but master
of the world.

Mimics had seized a dish and was helping
vigorously when Mr. Le Roy looked
for her to second his invitation.

Tell her I will return for her in aa
hour,' he added to Miss Heath, and withdrew
from a scene which troubled while it
astonished him. ' Why do they cheer
me ?' he added, to himself, as he stumbled

down the dark staircase and out into the
yard;

It was full, as is customary on such
occasions, with on-lookers, who hurrahed
with all their might as he stepped into
his carriage. It was certainly an unusual
sight there, and the poor like a vent for
their feelings, whether in cheers or curses.
They heard him say ' Grosvenor Street ' to
his coachman, and echoed his words at
the top of their voices ; while the policemen
tried to clear the way for the impatient
horses, as little accustomed as their
master to similar assemblies.

When he returned, the tea, with all its
accessories of fruit-tarts, cake, and buns,
was over, and the cheering had begun. It
sounded so hilarious that he actually mounted
to the topmost storey again. The
words ' Captain Hope, and Mr. and Mrs.
Prettyman,' resounded. But this was nothing
to what followed, for the 
band had mounted the platform, and

began military music in honour of the
occasion. George was in their midst, and
Le Roy trembled for the drum of his ear.
Both George and Mimics were on the
watch for him, and threaded their way
through the excited youngsters till they
reached the door.

Thank you. uncle, for leaving me so long.
Miss Heath will remain with Mrs. Pretty-man,
and I am quite ready,' said Mimics.

George went vrith. them to the carriage,
and then the cheers began again.

'This reminds me of our first day at
Overton, Mimics,' said Le Roy. ' But
Captain Hope's welcome home is less
stormy than mine was. How long have
you been excruciated by that awful band,
Hope ?'

Ever since I was a boy. T learnt music
for their sakes,' replied George.

'Come tomorrow morning and renew
sour acquaintance with my stringed instruments

said Le Roy, as George handed
Mimics into the carriage.

Thank you, I will,' he returned, with a
happy look at her.

CHAPTER XVII.

ANOTHER BANQUET.

Once more in the gorgeous music-room
with Mr. Le Roy, George Hope felt
strangely bewildered. But they tried
neither stringed nor recalled instruments
that morning. Le Roy had invited him to
come for a different purpose. He wished
to obliterate the slur he had cast on his
birth, by welcoming him as friend and
equal. That was done at once. Then
he recalled the day when he cast the slur,
and the subsequent disclosures of Miss
Heath.

Had I been then as clear-headed as I am

now, I might have acted differently,' he
said. ' But I was off my balance — had been,
indeed, since your mother deserted me.
Thanks to Mimics, I have regained my
equilibrium. I see things more clearly,
and hope to be less self-absorbed in future.
Thanks to her also, I have regained my
lost position. With the aid of Sellon, we
have righted the affairs. He came to an
understanding with Searle, who has helped
us by letter, upon promise of immunity.
Mimics has accomplished miracles in the
way of economy, and has been the means
of reconciling me with my tenants, and
placing matters on a right footing. This
has been the work of the years that have
passed since that unfortunate evening.
Our last stroke of good fortune is, that weare
rich enough to spend a season in London,
and that in our own house. Mimics
has kept her promise faithfully. She has
devoted herself to me, and, has, I believe,
not written to you.'

^ Not a line, nor I to her put in George,
startled by this last proposition.

She has restored to me my early faith
in woman. She has never deceived me. If
all women were truthful and straightforward
as she, the world would mend, and
society be less hollow.'

You must make the men equally truthful
and straightforward,' put in honest
George.

Impossible ! However, I believe you
to be a good fellow. Mimics is so clever
that it is possible she might devote her
life to both of us. We have now a
town and country house, and your
worthy parents have plenty of money.
You will probably be much abroad with
your regiment, but I shall be always at
home. We need not interfere nth one
another. Mimics and I never do. At this
moment, although she knows you are coming,
she is wise enough not to appear. But
she is not acquainted with the reason of

my asking you to come. It was simply to
give you and her an opportunity of renewing
your old friendship, and supplementing
it by that other stronger feeling in which
I have ceased to believe. I do not approve
of disparities — still, it is for you and
Mimics to settle that inequality. She is in
the book-room amongst the flowers, doubtless.
Come and see her.'

Mr. Le Roy gave George no time for
words. He rose, went downstairs, crossed
the hall, and threw open a door, with the
words,

Mimics, here is your old friend. George
Hope.'

He waited until George passed into the
room, then walked away with a ' Good-bye.
Remember our dinner on Tuesday.'

Once more George and Mimics were
alone together. She came to meet him
from amongst the flowers of the luxurious
conservatory ; he stood before her, shy
and diffident as he had never been before.

Mr. Le Roy lias brought me here,' lie
said at last, and then his words flowed
freely.

We need not repeat them, since they
were themselves but a repetition of those
he spoke some years before. Indeed, it is
not necessary to remain where our presence
is scarcely welcome. We have already
been interlopers at one or two love scenes
and have heard Mimics twice say ' Xo ;' we
will leave her untrammelled to say ' Yes,'
if so it be her good pleasure.

Mr. Le Roy was also considerate enough
to leave them, and, contrary to his custom,
wandered forth into Hyde Park. Here he
sat down and reviewed his life. Unlike
most reviewers, he did his work impartially;
and came to the conclusion that the latter
years of his career had been more to his
satisfaction than their predecessors. For
this he thanked his niece. He greatly
feared that his future might be less
pleasant ; still he owed her something, and

must trv to reconcile himself to beinor
superseded.

Besides,' lie thought, ' a military man
is so much from home, that, after all,
she ^vill be more mine than his. By the
time he is a general officer and retires, I

shall be ' he did not care to consider

where, so turned his thoughts to the
following Tuesday, when he was to be
honoured by the company of his nephew-elect
and his foster-parents.

He had planned this dinner with unusual
care, and his household understood
that it was the first event of the kind that
had happened to him for many years.
Barber superintended, and, when the evening
arrived, the sumptuous mansion was
ablaze with lisrht and slow with colour.
The dinner was worthy of the host, and
when Mimics. for the first time in her life,
presided at a giant London banquet in the
height of the season, she no longer wondered
that Searle had found it difficult to

VOL. III. u

supply means for the support of two
establishments. She was, herself, somewhat
uncomfortable, for, to please her
uncle, she wore the family diamonds.
They became her well, but her tastes were
simple, and she would have liked better
the natural flowers to which she usually
resorted for her adornment. But George
Hope cared not whether she wore diamonds
or natural flowers. She was 'His Mimi
now for ever and a day, and what did dress
signify? And she cared most for what
best pleased him.

But the dinner and the guests. The one
was almost regal, the others were old
acquaintances and friends. There were Sir
Joshua and Lady Helena, their two sons and
their daughter-in-law. Barbara had effected
Montague's cure, and Lady Helena had
submitted to the inevitable. Her ladyship
was resplendent with gems, and Barbara
handsome and self-possessed as ever. Mr.
and Mrs. Prettyman, George and Miss

Heath, made up the second family parts
The comely madre Adore her Joe's favourite
blue satin and pearls, and looked all smiles
and blushes ; just as if she, and not her
dear Georgie, had been the affianced. As to
Miss Heath, she Avould not have been there
but for the said Georgie and Mimics. She
could not resist their solicitations, and donned
the velvet and lace always kept at Mrs.
Prettyman's. In addition to these, our
special families, there were Major and Mrs.
Percy and their son, Mr. Sellon, and
Octavius Leste.

One thing alone troubled Le Roy.
There were ten gentlemen to six ladies ;
bathe thought, 'It is a period of disparities,
and this is on the right side.' He had
brought together all the people most concerned
in the history of George and Mimics,
and that was what he had intended. He
had scarcely expected, however, that they
would all have been so cheerful and

amalgamated so well. Of course Lady

u 2

Helena was seated next to him, but he had
so managed that George was on her other
side. They were soon in animated conversation,
and Lady Helena forgot her grievances
and laid aside her pride for the
occasion. George was always himself, and
Le Roy had no fear for him. Barber, standing
behind his masters chair, was much
affected by the patronizing aunt and unassuming
nephew.

There was no lack of talk, and the usual
dinner-party hum was kept up, broken by
the customary bursts of laughter natural
for once, since there were no young ladies
hooking for admiration or young gentlemen
paying compliments. These are the 'inanities
which disturb sociability.

Ton my word. Miss Marmont, you have
brought out your uncle ' said Sir Joshua
to Mimics. ' What a capital host he makes.
I hope he'll keep it up down in the country.
And there's her ladyship talking to young
Hope just as if she believed in him at last.

You'll hardly suppose that neither certificates
nor chapter and verse will convince
her

Mimics smiled, and looking across the
long and richly-mounted table caught
George's eye, and he smiled also.

When the dinner was over and the ladies
were in the magnificent gilded, mirrored,
be-pictured and sestheticised drawing-room
nothing but notes of admiration were
heard at first. Lady Helena congratulated
Mimics on being at last in town and
mistress of such a house, but regretted that
she had lost so many years in the country.
Mrs. Percy asked her if she remembered
the old Indian days ; and Barbara talked
to Mrs. Prettyman and Miss Heath who
kept side by side. In truth. Miss Heath
was so painfully shy and nervous that
Mimics regretted that she had brought her
and Lady Helena together. They had not
met since their interview at Summerlands.
As to Mrs. Prettyman, she knew that if she

spoke at all she must pour out her joy at
certain events communicated to her under
the seal of secrecy.

However, the gentlemen soon came in,
and the tiresome seal was broken. Mr. Le
Roy at once announced George Hope's
eno-ao-ement to Mimics. He did it so
naturally that there was no embarrassment,
though Lady Helena looked unaffectedly
annoyed. She could not get over her
disappointment, though she had sufficient
tact not to show it. All sorts of congratulations
and enquiries followed.

Why, we shall be related after all, Le
Roy !' cried Sir Joshua. ^ What shall we
be? Cousins-german, or uncles, or what?
Our nephew will marry your niece, instead
of — but never mind that old story. Lady
Helena, only think, Monkton and Courtleroy
will be joined at last. Haw, haw !
I was forgetting our own sons. But it is
strange that poor Margaret's son should

marry your niece, Le Roy, and that he
should be Miss Heath's nephew.'

Very,' returned Le Roy, coldly. ^ What
do Mr. and Mrs. Prettyman think ? Have
they given consent ?'

Oh yes, Mr. Le Roy : only we shall lose
our Georgie,' replied Mrs. Prettyman, in a
plaintive voice.

That need not be. He can stay with
you while Mimics visits me. We have
three establishments.'

There was a general laugh, which Sellon
turned to account by enquiring who would
now be steward.

Mimics. I could not do without her.
Courtleroy would go to rack and ruin
again without Mimics. What do you say,
George ?' answered Le Roy.

Time mil show,' was George's cautious
reply.

And time did show. Courtleroy continued
to prosper, and its people blessed the

day when Squire Le Roy gave his niece to
Captain Hope in the presence of all their
mutual friends, and in the church which
had been the scene of his early disappointment.
Mrs. Prettyman had no cause to
murmur, for, as she said, she had now an
adopted daughter as well as an adopted
son.

THE END.

wOXDON; printed by DUNCAN MACDONALD, BLENHEIM House.

-a

HURST & BLACKETT'S

STANDARD LIBRARY.

LONDON:
13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET, W.

B-

-#

OF CHEAP EDITIONS OF

POPULAR MODERN WORKS.

ILLUSTRATED BY

Sir J. E. Millais, Sir J. Gilbert, Holman Hunt, Birket Foster,

John Leech, John Tenniel, J. Laslett Foot, etc.

Each in a Single Volume, with Frontispiece, price 5s.

I.— SAM SLICK'S NATURE AND HUMAN Nature.

•'The first volume of messrs. Hurst and Blackett Standard Library of Cheap Editions
forms a very good beginning to what will doubtless be a very successful undertaking
'Nature and Human Nature ' is one of the best of Sam Slick's witty and humorous productions,
and well entitled to the large circulation which it cannot fail to obtain in its
present convenient and cheap shape. The volume combines with the great recommendations
of a clear, bold type and good paper, the lesser, but attractive merits of being well
illustrated and elegantly bound." — Morning Post,

IL— JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN.

"The new and cheaper edition of this interesting work wil doubtless meet with great
Success. John Halifax, the hero of this most beautiful story, is no ordinary hero, and
this his history is no ordinary book. It is a full-length portrait of a true gentleman, one
of nature's own nobility. It is also the history of a home, and a thoroughly English one .
The work abounds in incident, and many of the scenes are full of graphic power and true
pathos. It is a book that few will read without becoming wiser and better." — Scotsman.

This story is very interesting. The attachment between John Halifax and his wife is
beautifully painted, as are the pictures of their domestic life, and the growing up of their
children; and the conclusion of the book is beautiful and touching." — Athenaeum.

in.— THE CRESCENT AND THE CROSS.

BY ELIOT WARBURTON.

"Independent of its value as an original narrative, and its useful and interesting
information, this work is remarkable for the colouring power and play of fancy with
which its descriptions are enlivened. Among its greatest and most lasting charms is its
reverent and serious spirit." — Quarterly Review.

Mr. Warburton has fulfilled the promise of his title-page. The ' Realities of Eastern
T'n.vel ' are described with a vividness which invests them with deep and abiding interest;
while the 'Romantic' adventures which the enterprising tourist met with in his
course are narrated with a spirit which shows how much ha enjoyed these reliefs from
the ennui of every-day Me.''— Globe.

lY.— Nathaniel

JULL^ KAVANAGH.

'Nathalie 'is Miss Kavanagh's best imaginative effort. Its manner is gracious ani
attractive. Its matter is good. A sentiment, a tenderness, are commanded by her which
are as individual as they are elegant We should not soon come to an end were we to
specify aU the delicate touches and attractive pictures which place ' Nathalie ' high among
books of its cla.as."— Athenaeum.

v.— A WOMAN'S THOUGHTS ABOUT WOMEN.

BY THE AUTHOR OF "JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

"These thoughts are good and humane. They are thoughts we would wish women to
think : they are much more to the purpose than the treatises upon the women and daughters
of England, which were fashionable some years ago, and these thoughts mark the
progress of opinion, and indicate & higher tone of character, and a juster estimate of
woman's ]position."—Athen3mm.

This excellent book is characterised by good sense, good taste, and feeling, and i •
written in an earnest, philanthropic, as well as practical spirit"— J/t/rnjny Fast.

VL— ADAM GRAEME OF MOSSGRAY.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

'madam Gramme ' is a story awakening genuine emotions of interest and delight by its
admirable pictures of Scottish life and scenery. The plot is cleverly complicated, and
there is great vitality in the dialogue, and remarkable brilliancy in the descriptive pas-ages,
as who that has read 'Margaret Maitland ' would not be prepared to expect?
But the story has a 'mightier magnet still,' in the healthy tone which pervades it, in its
feminine delicacy of thought and diction, and in the truly womanly tenderness of its
sentiments. The eloquent author sets before us the essential attributes of Christian
virtue, their deep and silent workings in the heart, and their beautiful manifestations it
the life, with a delicacy, a power, and a truth which can hardly be surpassed." — Morning
Post.

VII.— SAM SLICK'S WISE SAWS AND
MODERN INSTANCES.

"We have not the slightest intention to criticise this book. Its reputation is made, and
will stand as long as that of Scott's or Buller's novels. The remarkable originality of
its purpose, and the happy description it affords of American life and manners, still continue
the subject of universal admiration. To say thus much is to say enough, though we
must just mention that the new edition forms a part of the Publishers' Cheap Standard
Library, which has included some of the very best specimen of light literature that ever
have been y^Titten."— Messenger.

Vii— CARDINAL WISEMAN'S RECOLLECTIONS
OF THE LAST FOUR POPES.

A picturesque book on Rome and its ecclesiastical sovereigns, by an eloquent Roman
Catholic. Cardinal Wiseman has here treated a special subject with so much generality
and geniality that his recollections will excite no ill-feeling m those who are most conscientiously
opposed to every idea of human infallibility represented Ifr Papal domination."
—Athenaeum.

IX.— A LIFE FOR A LIFE.

BY THE AUTHOR OP " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

"We are always glad to welcome Mrs. Craik. She writes from her own convictions,
and she has the power not only to conceive clearly what it is that she wishes to
say, but to express it in language effective and vigorous. In ' A Life for a Life ' she is
fortunate in a good subject, and she has produced a work of strong effect The
reader, having read the book through for the story, will be apt (if he be of our persuasion)
to return and read again many pages and passages with greater pleasure
than on a first perusal. The whole book is replete with a graceful, tender delicacy;
and, in addition to its other merits, it is written in good careful English"—
Athenaeum.

' A Life for a Life ' is a book of a high class. The characters are depicted with a
masterly hand ; the events are dramatically set forth ; the descriptions of scenery and
sketches of society are admirably penned ; moreover, the work has an object — a clearly
defined moral— most poetically, most beautifully drawn, and through all there is that
strong, reflective mind visible which lays bare the human heart and human mind to the
very core"— Morning Post.

X.— THE OLD COURT SUBURB.

BY LEIGH HUNT.

"A book which has afforded us no slight gratification." — Athenaeum.

From the mixture of description, anecdote, biography, and criticism, this book is very
pleasant reading." — Spectator.

A more agreeable and entertaining book has not been published since Boswell pro*
■iuctid his reminiscences of Johnson"— H&ferver.

XI.— MARGARET AND HER BRIDESMAIDS.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " THE VALLEY OF A HUNDRED Flies,"

"We recommend all who are in search of a fascinating novel to read this work for
themselves. They will find it well worth their while. There are a freshness and originality
about it quite charming, and there is a certain nobleness in the treatment both of
sentiment and incident which is not often found"— Athenaeum.

Xn.— THE OLD JUDGE ; OR, LIFE IN A COLONY.

BY SAM SLICK.

A peculiar interest attaches to sketches of colonial life, and readers could not have a
safer guide than the talented author of this work, who, by a residence of half a century .
has practically grasped the habits, manners, and social conditions of the colonists he describes.
All who wish to form a fair idea of the difficulties and pleasures of life in a new
country, unlike England in some respects, yet like it in many, should read this book."
John Bull.

Xni.— DARIEN; OR, THE MERCHANT Prince.

BY ELIOT WARBURTON.

This last production of the author of ' The Crescent and the Cross ' has the same
elements of a very wide popularity. It will please its thousands." — Globe.

Eliot Warburton's active and productive genius is amply exemplified in the present
booli. We have seldom met with any work in which the realities of history and the
poetry of fiction were more happily interwoven," — Illustrated News.

XIV.— FAMILY ROMANCE ; OR, DOMESTIC ANNALS
OF THE ARISTOCRACY.

BY SIR BERNARD BURKE, ULSTER KING OF ARMS.

"It were impossible to praise too highly this most interesting book, whether we should
have regard to its excellent plan or its not less excellent execution. It ought to be found
on every drawing-room table. Here you have nearly fifty captivating romances with the
pith of all their interest preserved in undiminished poignancy, and any one may be read
in half an hour. It is not the least of their merits that the romances are founded on factor
what, at least, has been handed down for truth by long tradition — and the romance
of reality far exceeds the romance of actions"— Standard.

XV.— THE LAIRD OF NORLAW.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

"We have had frequent opportunities of commending Messrs. Hurst and Blankets
Standard Library. For neatness, elegance, and distinctness the volumes in this series
surpass anything with which we are familiar. 'The Laird of Norlaw' will fully sustHiij
the author's high reputation. The reader is carried on from first to last with an energy
of sympathy that never flags." — Sunday Times.

' The Laird of Norlaw ' is worthy of the author's reputation. It is one of the most
exquisite of modem novels." — Observer.

XVL— THE ENGLISHWOMAN IN ITALY.

BY ]airs. G. Bretton.

"Mrs. Bretton had opportunities which rarely fall to the lot of strangers of becoming
acquainted with the inner life and habits of a part of the Italian peninsula which is the
very centre of the national crisis. We can praise her performance as interesting, unexaggerated,
and full of opportune instruction." — The limes.

"Mrs. Bretton's book is timely, life-like, and for every reason to be recommended. It
is impossible to close the book without liking the pariter as well as the subject The work
is engaging, because vea.V'-Athmxum.

Evil— NOTHING NEW.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

'Nothing New' displays all those superior merits which have made 'John Halifax'
one of the most popular works of the day. There is a force and truthfulness about these
tales which mark them as the production of no ordinary mind, and we cordially recommend
them to the perusal of all lovers of Action.' — Morning Post.

Xvii— LITE OF JEANNE D'ALBEET, QUEEN OP
NAVARRE.

BY MISS FREER.

"We have read this book with great pleasure, and have no hesitation in recommending
it to general perusal. It reflects the highest credit on the industry and ability of Misa
Freer. Nothing can be more interesting than her story of the life of Jeanne D'Albret,
and the narrative is as trustworthy as it is attractive"— i/orninfir Post.

XIX.— THE VALLEY OF A HUNDRED FIRES.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " MARGARET AND HER BRIDESMAIDS."

If asked to classify this work, we should give it a place between ' John Halifax ' and
'The Cantons.' 'standard.
"The spirit in which the whole book is written is refined and gQO±"—Athenssum.
"This is in every sense a charming-aoyeV— Messenger.

XX.— THE ROMANCE OF THE FORUM ; OR, NARRATIVES,
SCENES, AND ANECDOTES FROM COURTS OF JUSTICE.

BY PETER BURKE, SERJEANT AT LAW.

This attractive book will be perused with much interest. It contains a great variety
of singular and highly romantic stories." — John Bull.

A work of singular interest, which can never fail to charm and absorb the reader's
attention. The present cheap and elegant edition includes the true story of the Colleen
Bayou "— Illustrated News.

XXI.— ADELE.

BY JULIA KAYANAGH.

' Adfele ' is the best work we have read by Miss Kavanagh ; it is a charming Story,
full of delicate character-painting. The interest kindled in the first chapter bums brightly
to the close." — Athenaeum.

'" Adfele' will fully sustain the reputation of Miss Kavanagh, high as it already ranks."
•—John Bull.

* Adfele ' is a love-story of very considerable pathos and power. It is a very clever
noveL" — Daily News.

Xxii— STUDIES FROM LIFE.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

"These 'Studies ' are truthful and vivid pictures of life, often earnest, always full of right
feeling, and occasionally lightened by touches of quiet, genial humour. The volume is remarkable
for thought, sound sense, shrewd observation, and kind and sympathetic feeling
for all things good and beautiful" — Morning Post.

"These 'Studies from Life ' are remarkable for graphic power and observation. Tho
book will not diminish the reputation of the accomplished author"— .Saturday Review.

XXm.— GRANDMOTHER'S MONEY.

BY F. W. ROBINSON.

•' We commend ' Grandmother's Money ' to readers in search of a good novel The
characters are true to human nature, and the story is interesting"— J.i/iencEum.

XXIV.— A BOOK ABOUT DOCTORS.

BY JOHN Corny Jefferson.

A book to be read and re-read ; fit for the study as well as the drawing-room table and
the circulating library." — Lancet.

This is a pleasant book for the fireside season, and for the seaside season. Mr. Jeffrey
has, out of hundreds of volumes, collected thousands of good things, adding thereto
much that appears in print for the first time, and which, of course, gives increased value
to this very readable book." — Athenaeum.

XXV.— NO CHURCH.

BY F. W. ROBINSON.

"We advise all who have the opportunity to read this book. It is well worth the
study." — Athenaeum.
"A work of great originality, merit, and power"— ^iancfard

XXVI.— MISTRESS AND MAID.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

A good wholesome book, gracefully written, and as pleasant to read as it is instructive."
— Athenaeum.

A charming tale, charmingly told." — Standard.

All lovers of a good novel will hail with delight another of Mrs. Craik's charming
stories. "—/o/in Bull.

XXVII.— LOST AND SAVED.

BY THE HON. MRS. NORTON.

•• • Lost and Saved ' will be read with eager interest by those who love a touching story.
It is a vigorous novel." — Times.

"This story is animated, full of exciting situations and stirring incidents. The characters
are delineated with great power. Above and beyond these elements of a good novel,
there is that indefinable charm with which true genius invests all it touches"— Daily Neies.

XXVIII.— LES Miserable.

BY VICTOR HUGO.
Authorised Copyright English Translation,

"The merits of 'Les Miserable' do not merely consist in the conception of it as a
whole ; it abounds with details of unequalled beauty. M. Victor Hugo has stamped upon
every page the hall-mark of genius"— QuaHer??/ Review,

XXIX.— BARBARA'S HISTORY.

BY AMELIA B. EDWARDS.

"It is not often that we light upon a novel of so much merit and interest as
'Barbara's History.' It is a work conspicuous for taste and literary culture. It is a very
graceful and charming book, with a well-managed story, clearly-cut characters, and
sentiments expressed with an exquisite elocution. The dialogues especially sparkle with
repartee. It is a book which the world will like This is high praise of a work of art
and so we intend iV—TM Times.

XXX.— LIFE OF THE REV. EDWARD IRVING.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

A good book on a most interesting theme." — Times.

A truly interesting and most affecting memoir. ' Irving's Life ' ought to have a niche
in every gallery of religious biography. There are few lives that will be fuller of instruction,
interest, and consolations"— Saturday Review.

XXXI.— ST. Slave's.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JANITA's CROSS."

This novel is the work of one who possesses a great talent for writing, as well as
ei prince and knowledge of the world. The whole book is worth reading." — Athenaeum.

•' ' St Slave's ' belongs to a lofty order of fiction. It is a good novel, but it is something
more. It is written with unflagging ability, and it is as even as it is clever. The author
has determined to do nothing short of the best, and has succeeded"— Jfomtnfl' Point.

XXXII.— SAM SLICK'S TRAITS OF AMERICAN HUMOUR.

Dip where you will into this lottery of fun, you are sure to draw out a prize. These
• Traits ' exhibit most successfully the broad national features of American humour"— Post.

Xxxi.— CHRISTIAN'S MISTAKE.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

A more charming story has rarely been written. It is a choice gift to be able thus to
render human nature so truly, to penetrate its depths with such a searching sagacity, and
to illuminate them with a radiance so eminently the writer's own." — Times.

XXXIV.— ALEC FORBES OF Howled.

BY GEORGE MAO DONALD, LL.D.

"No account of this story would give any idea of the profound interest that pervades
the work from the first page to the la^sV— Athenaeum.

•'A novel of uncommon merit. Sir Walter Scott said he would advise no man to try
to read ' Clarissa Harlowe ' out loud in company if he wished to keep his character for
manly superiority to tears. We fancy a good many hardened old novel-readers will feel
a rising in the throat as they follow the fortunes of Alec and Annie"— Pati Mall Gazette

XXXV.— AGNES.

BY MRS. OLn>HANT.

'Agnes ' is a novel superior to any of Mrs. Oliphant's former-works"— Atherusum.

"Mrs. Oliphant is one of the most admirable of our novelists. In her works there
ere always to be found high principle, good taste, sense, and refinement 'Agnes ' is
a story whose pathetic beauty will appeal irresistibly to all readers"— ifamt/iy Post.

XXXVI.— A NOBLE LIFE.

BY THE AUTHOR OF '' JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

"Few men and no women will read 'A Noble Life' without feeling themselves the
better for the sort." —Spectator.

A beautifully written and touching tale. It is a noble hook"— Morning Post.

' A Noble Life ' is remarkable for the high types of character it presents, and the
iliill with which they are made to work out a story of powerful and pathetic interest"
daily News.

XXXVII.— NEW AMERICA.

BY W. HEPWORTH DIXON.

A very interesting book. Mr. Dixon has written thoughtfully and drew— Times.
"We recommend everyone who feels any interest in human nature to read Mr.
'Dixon's very interesting hooker"— Saturday Review.

XXXYin.— ROBERT FALCONER.

BY GEORGE MAC Donald, LL.D.

"robert Falconer' is a work brimful of life and humour and of the deepest hmruin
interest It is a book to be returned to again and again for the deep and search' acknowledge
it evinces of human thoughts and feelings"— ^^A^rwEum.

XXXIX.— THE WOMAN'S KINGDOM.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, Gentleman."

'The "Woman's Kingdom' sustains the author's reputation as a writer of the purest
quid noblest kind of domestic stories." — Athenaeum.

' The Woman's Kingdom ' is remarkable for its romantic interest The characters are
masterpieces. Edna is worthy of the hand that drew John Halifax"— i/omtn^ Pott.

XL.— ANNALS OF AN EVENTFUL LIFE.

BY GEORGE Webb DASEXT, D.C.L.

"A racy, well-written, and original novel The interest never flags. The whole work
sparkles with wit and humour." — Quarterly Review.

XLI.— DAVID ELGINBROD.

BY GEORGE MAC Donald, LL.D.

"A novel which is the work of a man of genius. It will attract the highest class of
readers." — Time*.

XLII.— A BRAVE LADY.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEiL/LN,"

"We earnestly recommend this novel It is a special and worthy specimen of the
authors remarkable powers. The reader's attention never for a moment flags." — Pott

"'A Brave Lady' thoroughly rivets the unmingled sympathy of the reader, and her
history deserves to stand foremost among the author's works"— Z>ai7y Telegraph.

Lin.— HANNAH.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " John HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

"A very pleasant healthy story, well and artistically told. The book is sure of a wi ■!
circle of readers. The character of Hannah is one of rare beauty"— ^famfard

"A powerful novel of social and domestic life. One of the most Successful efforts of
successful novelist" — Daily Newt.

Xlii.— SAM SLICK'S AMERICANS AT HOME.

This is one of the most amusing books that we ever xeaA." —Standard
'The Americans at Home" wil not be less popular than any of Judge Halliborton •
previous works"— if omtn^ Post.

Xli.— THE UNKIND WORD.

BY THE AUTHOR OF *' John HALIFAX, Gentleman."

These stories are gems of narrative Indeed, some of them, in their touching grace
and simplicity, seem to us to possess a charm even beyond the authoress's most popular
novels. Of none of them can this be said more emphatically than of that which opens th
series, ' The Unkind "Word.' It is wonderful to see the imaginative power displayed in
the few delicate touches by which this successful love-story ia sketched out"— 77i* ?:• iso

XLVI.— A Rose IN JUNE.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.
"'A Hose in June' ia as pretty as its title. The story is one of the best and most
touching which we owe to the industry and talent of Mrs. Oliphant, and may hold its own
with even ' The Chronicles of Carlingi'ord.' "times.

Xlvi— MY LITTLE LADY.

BY E. FRANCES Pointer.
"This story presents a number of vivid and very charming pictures, Indeed, the whole
book is charming. It is interesting in both character and story, and thoroughly good of
its kind." — Saturday Review.

XLVIII.— PHOEBE, JUNIOR.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.
"This last 'Chronicle of Carlingford ' not merely takes rank fairly beside the first
which introduced us to ' Salem Chapel,' but surpasses all the intermediate records.
Phoebe, Junior, herself is admirably dawns"— Academy.

XLIX.— LIFE OF Marie ANTOINETTE.

BY PROFESSOR CHARLES DUKE YONGE.

A work of remarkable merit and interest, which will, we doubt not, become the moat
popular English history of Marie Antoinette"— .S/iectofor.

L.— SIE GIBBIE.

BY GEORGE MAC DONALD, LL.D.

• Sir Gibbie ' is a book of genius"— Pa?Z Mall Gazette.
■ This book has power, pathos, and 'hvimouT."—Athenceum.

LI.— YOUNG MRS, JARDINE.

BY THE AUTHOR OF " JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."

'Young Mrs. Jardine ' is a pretty story, written in pure English"— 7%^ Tonnes.
"There is much good feeling in this book. It is pleasant and wholesome"— .4i/j«nce«//i.

Il— LORD Brandenburg.

BY AMELIA B. EDWARDS.

"A very readable story. The author has well conceived the purpose of high-class
novel-writing, and succeeded in no small measure in attaining it. There is plenty of
variety, cheerful dialogue, and general ' verve ' in the book." — Athenaeum.

Lin.— IT WAS A LOVER AND HIS LASS.

BY MRS. OLIPHANT.

"In 'It was a Lover and his Lass,' we admire Mrs. Oliphant exceedingly. It would be
worth reading a second time, were it only for the sake of one ancient Scottish spinster,
who is nearly the counterpart of the admirable Mrs. Margaret Maitland"— ri/nei.

LIV.— THE REAL LORD BYRON— THE STORY OF
THE POET'S LIFE.

BY JOHN Corny Jefferson.

Mr. Jeaffreson comes forward with a narrative which must take a very important
place in Byronic literature ; and it may reasonably be anticipated that this book will be
regarded with deep interest by all who are concerned in the works and the fame of this
great English poet"— 2%€ Times.

'SAI SUCK, THE CLOCKMAKER.'

Each ill One Volume, Frontispiece, and Uniformly Bound, Price so

NATURE AND HUMAN NATURE.

"We enjoy our old friend's company with unabated relish. This work is a rattling
miscellany of sharp sayings, stories, and hard hits. It is full of fun and f^ncYy—AthencEum.

Since Sam's first work he has written nothing so fresh, racy, and genuinely humorous as
this. Every line of it tells in some way or other — instructively, satirically, jocosely, or
wittily. Admiration of Sam's mature talents, and laughter at his droll yams, constantly
alternate as with inhaling avidity we peruse the work. The Clockmaker proves himself
the fastest time-killer a-going"— OJ^serrer.

WISE SAWS AND MODERN INSTANCES.

This delightful book will be the most popular, as beyond doubt it ia the best, of all the
author's admirable works." — Standard.

The book before us will be read and laughed over. Its quaint and racy dialect will
please some readers — its abundance of yams will amuse others. There is something to
aunt readers of every humour." — Athenaeum.

"The humour of Sam Slick is inexhaustible. He is ever and everywhere a welcome
visitor ; smiles greet his approach, and wit and wisdom hang upon his tongue. We promise
our readers a great treat from the perusal of these ' Wise Saws,' which contain a
world of practical wisdom, and a treasury of the richest fun." — Morning Post.

THE OLD JUDGE ; OrTlIFE IN A COLONY.

By common consent this work is regarded as one of the raciest, truest to life, most
humorous, and most interesting works which have proceeded from the prolific pen of its
author. We all know what shrewdness of observation, what power of graphic description,
what natural resources of drollery, and what a happy method of hitting off the
broader characteristics of the life he reviews, belong to Judge Haliburton. We have all
those qualities here ; but they are balanced by a serious literary purpose, and are employed
in the communication of information respecting certain phases of colonial experience
which impart to the work an element of sober utility'— Sunday Times.

TRAITS OF AMERICAN HUMOUR.

No man has done more than the facetious Judge Haliburton, through the mouth of the
inimitable ' Sam,' to make the old parent country recognise and appreciate her queer
transatlantic progeny. His present collection of comic stories and laughable traits is a
budget of fun, full of rich specimens of American humour." — Globe.

"Yankees, portrayed in its raciest aspect, constitutes the contents of these superlatively
entertaining sketches. The work embraces the most varied topics — political parties,
religious eccentricities, the flights of Literature, and the absurdities of pretenders to learning,
all come in for their share of satire ; while we have specimens of genuine American
exaggerations and graphic pictures of social and domestic life as it i& The work will
have a wide circulation"— loan Bull.

THE AMERICANS AT HOME.

In this highly entertaining work we are treated to another cargo of capital stories
from the inexhaustible store of our Yankee friend. In the volume before us he dishes up,
with his accustomed humour and terseness of style, a vast number of tales, none more
entertaining than another, and all of them graphically illustrative of the ways and manners
of brother Jonathan. The anomalies of American law, the extraordinary adventures
incident to life in the backwoods, and, above all, the peculiarities of American society, are
variously, powerfully, and, for the most part, amusingly exemplified."- loan Bull.

In the picturesque delineation of character, and the felicitous portraiture of national
features, no writer equals Judge Haliburton, and the subjects embraced in the present
delightful book call forth, in new and vigorous exercise, his peculiar powers. 'The
Americans at Home ' will not be less popular than any of his previous works"— i'wt

LONDON : HUEST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS.

JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN.

Each in One Volume, Frontispiece, and Uniformly Bound, price 5s.

JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN.

•' This is a very good and a very interesting world It is designed to trace the career
from boyhood to age of a perfect man — a Christian gentleman, and it abounds in incident
both well and highly wrought. Throughout it is conceived in a high spirit, and written
with great ability. This cheap and handsome new edition is worthy to pass freely from
hand to hand as a gift-book in many households." — Examiner.

"The story is very interesting The attachment between John Halifax and his wife is
beautifully painted, as are the pictures of their domestic life, and the growing up of their
children, and the conclusion of the book is beautiful and touching." — Athenaeum.

"The new and cheaper edition of this interesting work will doubtless meet with great
success. John Halifax, the hero of this most beautiful story, is no ordinary hero, and this
his history is no ordinary book. It is a full-length portrait of a true gentleman, one of
nature's own nobility. It is also the history of a home, and a thoroughly English one.
The work abounds in incident, and is full of graphic power and true pathos. It la a book
that few will read without becoming wiser and better"— Scotsman.

A WOMAN'S THOUGHTS ABOUT WOMEN.

"A book of sound counsel. It is one of the most sensible works of its kind, well written,
true-hearted, and altogether practical. Whoever wishes to give advice to a young lady
may thank the author for means of doing so." — Examiner.

"These thoughts are worthy of the earnest and enlightened mind, the all-embracing
charity, and the well-earned reputation of the author of 'John Halifax.' " — Standard.

This excellent book is characterised by good sense, good taste, and feeling, and is
written in an earnest, philanthropic, as well as practical spirit." — Most.

A LIFE FOR A LIFE.

We are always glad to welcome this author. She writes from her own convictions,
and she has the power not only to conceive clearly what it is that she wishes to say. but
to express it in language effective and vigorous. In ' A Life for a Life ' she is fortunate
in a good subject, and she has produced a work of strong effect. The reader, having read
the book through for the story, will be apt (if he be of our persuasion) to return and read
again many pages and passages with greater pleasure than on a first perusal. The whole
book is replete with a graceful, tender delicacy ; and, in addition to its other merits, it is
written in good careful Euslish."— Athenaeum.

NOTHING NEW.

"' Nothing New ' displays all those superior merits which have made ' John Halifax '
one of the most popular works of the day." — Post.

The reader will find these narratives calculated to remind him of that truth and
energy of human portraiture, that spell over human affections and emotions, which have
stamped this author as one of the first novelists of our day"— /o/jn Bull.

THE WOMAN'S KINGDOM.

' The Woman's Kingdom ' sustains the author's reputation as a writer of the purest
and noblest kind of domestic stories. The novelist's lesson is given with admirable force
and sweetness." — Athenaeum

' The Woman's Kingdom ' is remarkable for its romantic interest. The characters
are masterpieces. Edna is worthy of the hand that drew John Halifax." — Most.

STUDIES FROM LIFE.

"These studies are truthful and vivid pictures of life, often earnest, always full of right
feeling, and occasionally lightened by touches of quiet genial humour. The volume is remarkable
for thought, sound sense, shrewd observation, and kind and sympathetic feeling
for all things good and beautiful." — Most.

JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN.

(Continued.)

CHRISTIAN'S MISTAKE.

••A more channing story, to our taste, haa rarely been written. "Within the compass
of a single volume the writer has hit off a circle of varied characters, all true to nature —
some true to the highest nature— and she has entangled them in a story which keeps us
in suspense till the knot is happily and gracefully resolved ; while, at the same time, a
pathetic interest is sustained by an art of which it would be difficult to analyse the secret
It is a choice gift to be able thus to render human nature so truly, to penetrate its depths
with such a searching sagacity, and to illuminate them with a radiance so eminently the
writer's own. Even if tried by the standard of the Archbishop of York, we should expect
that even he would pronounce 'Christian's Mistake ' a novel without a fault." — Tie Times.

This is a story good to have from the circulating library, but better to have from one's
bookseller, for it deserves a place in that little collection of clever and wholesome stories
which forms one of the comforts of a well-appointed home." — Examiner,

MISTRESS AND MAID.

"A good, wholesome book, as pleasant to read as it is instructive." — Athenaeum.
This book is written with the same true-hearted earnestness as ' John Half az.' The
spirit of the whole work is excellent"— ^'xammer.
"A charming tale charmingly told." — Standard.

A NOBLE LIFE.

"This is one of those pleasant tales in which the author of 'John Halifax ' speaks out
of a generous heart the purest truths of life.' — Examiner.

Few men, and no women, will read » A Noble Life ' without finding themselves the
better." — Spectator.

A story of powerful and pathetic interest"— Dat7y Aetas.

A BRAVE LADY.

A very good novel, showing a tender sympathy with human nature, and permeated
by a pure and noble spirit" — Examiner.

A most charming Btovy."— Standard.

"We earnestly recommend this novel It is a special and worthy specimen of the
author's remarkable powers. The reader" s attention never for a moment flags." — Post.

HANNAH.

A powerful novel of social and domestic life. One of the most successful efforts of a
successful novelist" — Daily News.

A very pleasant, healthy story, well and artistically told. The book is sure of a wide
circle of readers. The character of Hannah is one of rare beauty"— .S(tt«c?arci

THE UNKIND WORD.

The author of 'John Halifax ' has written many fascinating stories, but we can call to
mind nothing from her pen that has a more enduring charm than the graceful sketches in
this work. Such a character as Jessie stands out from a crowd of heroines as the type of
all that is truly noble, pure, and womanly'' — United Service Magazine,

YOUNG MRS. JARDINE.

' Young Mrs. Jardine ' is a pretty story, written in pure English"— Tee Times.

"There is much good feeling in this book. It is pleasant and wholesome"— ^i^ncpum.

A book that all should read. Whilst it is quite the equal of any of its predecessors
in elevation of thought and style, it is perhaps their superior in interest of plot and
dramatic intensity. The characters are admirably delineated, and the dialogue is natural
and clear." — Morning Post.

LONDON : HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS.

MRS. Oliphant.

Each in One Volume, Frontispiece, and Uniformly Bound, Price 5s.

ADAM GRAEME OF MOSSGRAY.

«« • Adam Gramme ' is a story awakening genuine emotions of interest and delight by its
admirable pictures of Scottish life and scenery. The plot is cleverly complicated, and
there is great vitality in the dialogue, and remarkable brilliancy in the descriptive passages,
as v^ho that has read 'Margaret Mainland' would not be prepared to expect?
But the story has a 'mightier magnet still,' in the healthy tone which pervades it, in its
feminine delicacy of thought and diction, and in the truly womanly tenderness of its
sentiments. The eloquent author sets before us the essential attributes of Christian
virtue, their deep and silent workings in the heart, and their beautiful manifestations iu .
the life, with a delicacy, a power, and a truth which can hardly be surpassed"— J/ormns;
Post. '

THE LAIRD OF NORLAW.

"We have had frequent opportunities of commending Messrs. Hurst and Blankets
Standard Library. For neatness, elegance, and distinctness the volumes in this series
surpass anything with which we are familiar. ' The Laird of Norlaw ' will fully sustain
the author's high reputation. The reader is carried on from first to last with an energy
of sympathy that never flags"— ^wractoy Times.

•"The Laird of Norlaw' is worthy of the author's reputation. It is one of the most
exquisite of modem novels"— Oftserrer.

IT WAS A LOVER AND HIS LASS.

«' In *It was a Lover and his Lass,' we admire Mrs. Oliphant exceedingly. Her story is
a very pretty one. It would be worth reading a second time, were it only for the sake of
one ancient Scottish spinster, who is nearly the counterpart of the admirable Mrs. Margaret
Maitland"— ZY/ne*.

AGNES.

' Agnes' is a novel superior to any of Mrs. Oliphant's former yroTliB."—Athen(eum.

"Mrs. Oliphant is one of the most admirable of our novelists. In her works there are
always to be found high principle, good taste, sense, and refinement. ' Agnes ' is a story
whose pathetic beauty will appeal irresistibly to all readers"— if omtngr Post.

A ROSE IN JUNE.

"*A Rose in June' is as pretty as its title. The story is one of the best and most
touching which we owe to the industry and talent of Mrs. Oliphant, and may hold its own
with even ' The Chronicles of Carlingford.' "times.

Phoebe, JUNIOR.

"This last chronicle of Carlingford' not merely takes rank fairly beside the first
which introduced us to ' Salem Chapel,' but surpasses all the intermediate records.
Phoebe, Junior, herself is admirably dr&yfn."— Academy.

LIFE OF THE REV. EDWARD IRVING.

"A good book on a most interesting theme." — Times.

•'A truly interesting and most affecting memoir. 'Irving's Life' ought to have a niche
tn every gallery of religious biography. There are few lives that will be fuller of instruction,
interest, and consolation." — Saturday Review.

LONDON : Hurst AND Blackett, PUBLISHERS.

George MAC DOMLD, LL.D.

Each in One Volume, Frontispiece, and Uniformly Bound, Price 5s.

ALEC FORBES OF Howled.

"No account of this story would give any idea of the profound interest that pervades
the work from the first page to the last." — Athenaeum.

A novel of uncommon merit Sir Walter Scott said he would advise no man to try
to read ' Clarissa Harlowe ' out loud in company if he wished to keep his character for
manly superiority to tears. "We fancy a good many hardened old novel-readers will feel
a rising in the throat as they follow the fortunes of Alec and Annie." — Pall Mall Gazette.

The whole story is one of surpassing excellence and beauty"— 2)at7y News.

This book is full of good thought and good writing. Dr. Mac Donald looks in his stories
more to the souls of men and women than to their social outside. He reads life and
Nature like a true •poQi.'"— Examiner.

ROBERT FALCONER.

•' ' Eohert Falconer ' is a work brimful of life and humour and of the deepest human
interest It is a work to be returned to again and again for the deep and searching
knowledge it evinces of human thoughts and feelings"— ^i/ienoeum.

"This story abounds in exquisite specimens of the word-painting in which Dr. Mac
Donald excels, charming transcripts of Nature, full of light, air, and coIomx.'"— Saturday
Review.

This noble story displays to the best advantage all the powers of Dr. Mac Donald's
genius." — Illustrated London News.

• Robert Falconer ' is the noblest work of Action that Dr. Mac Donald has yet produced."
— British Quarterly Review.

The dialogues in ' Robert Falconer ' are so finely blended with humour and pathos as
to make them in themselves an intellectual treat to which the reader returns again and
a.g&in."— Spectator.

DAVID ELGINBROD.

A novel which is the work of a man of genius. It will attract the highest class of
readers." — Times.

There are many beautiful passages and descriptions in this book. The characters are
extremely well drawn." — Athenaeum.

"A clever novel. The incidents are exciting, and the interest is maintained to the
close. It may be doubted if Sir Walter Scott himself ever painted a Scotch fireside with
more truth than Dr. Mac Donald"— J/orningr Post.

David Elginbrod is the finest character we have met in fiction for many a day. The
descriptions of natural scenery are vivid, truthful, and artistic; the general reflections are
those of a refined, thoughtful, and poetical philosopher, and the whole moral atmosphere
of the book Is lofty, pure, and invigorating"— ffZo6e.

SIR Gibbet

Sir Gibbie ' is a book of geniuses PaZZ Mall Gazette.

"This book has power, pathos, and humour. There is not a character which is not
lifelike. There are many powerful scenes, and the portraits will stay long in our
memory." — Athenaeum.

' Sir Gibbie ' is unquestionably a book of genius. It abounds in humour, pathos,
insight into character, and happy touches of description"— G'rap/itc.

'sir Gibbie' contains some of the most charming writing the author has yet produced.
" — Scotsman,

' Sir Gibbie ' is one of the most touching and beautiful stories that has been written
for many years. It is not a novel to be idly read and laid aside ; it Is a grand work, to b«
kept near at hand, and studied and thought over"— Morning Post.

LONDON : HUEST AND BLACKETT, Publishers.

JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN.

A woman's thoughts

ABOUT WOMEN.
A LIFE FOR A LIFE.
NOTHING NEW.
MISTRESS AND MAID.
THE WOMAN'S KINGDOM.

christian's mistake,
a noble life.

HANNAH.

THE UNKIND WORD.
A BRAVE LADY.
STUDIES FROM LIFE.
YOUNG MRS. JARDINE.

WORKS by GEORGE MAC DONALD, LL.D.

Each in a Single Volume, with Frontispiece, price 53.

DAVID ELGINBROD.
ROBERT FALCONER.

ALEC FORBES.
SIR GIBBIE.

WORKS by MRS. OLIPHANT.

Each in a Single Volume, with Frontispiece, price 5s.

IT WAS A LOVER AND HIS

LASS
THE LAIRD OF Norland
ROSE IN JUNE.

ADAM GRAEME OF MOSS-gray.

Phoebe, JUNIOR.
AGNES.

THE LIFE OF THE REV. EDWARD IRVING.

WORKS by the AUTHOR of 'SAM SLICK:
Each in a Single Volume, with Frontispiece, price 5s.

NATURE AND HUMAN

NATURE.
WISE SaWS and MODERN

INSTANCES.

THE OLD JUDGE ; Or LIFE

IN A COLONY.
TRAITS OF AMERICAN

HUMOUR.

THE AMERICANS AT HOME.

LONDON: HURST AND BLACKETT.

MESSRS. HURST MD Blacker's

LIST OF NEW WORKS.

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY WAIFS. By John

Ashton, Author of ' Social Life in the Reign of Queen Anne, ' &c.

1 vol. small-to. 12s.

Shinar SKETCHES: With Notes ox Indian

Field Sports. By J. Moray Brown, late 79th Cameron Highlanders.
With Eight Illustrations, by J. C. Dorian, Rei. 1 vol.
small 4to. 12s.

CHAPTERS FROM FAMILY CHESTS. By

Edward Walford, Mea., Author of 'The County Families, ' &c.

2 vols, crown 8vo. 21s.

' Chapters from Family Chests ' are a great deal more exciting and absorbing
than one half the professedly sensational novels." — Daily TehgrapJi.

"Mr. Walford's volumes abound in what is known as the romance of real life,
and are extremely interesting reading." — Daily News.

"There is a mine of wealth in the 'Family Chests' which no one has yet
brought to the surf ace, and from this Mr. Walford has contrived to excavate a
mass of acceptable matter — a treasury of narrative curious and romantic." — Globe.

The reader will find much curious information in Mr. "Walford's chapters of
agreeable narrative." — Scotsman.

REMINISCENCES OF THE COURT AND

TIMES OF KING ERNEST OF Hanover. By the Rev. C.

A. Wilkinson, Mea., His Majesty's Resident Domestic Chaplain.

2 vols. With portrait of the King. 21s.
An interesting book, entitled 'Reminiscences of the Court and Times of King
Ernest of Hanover.' has just been published by Messrs. Hurst and Blackett. The
two volumes in which these reminiscences of a septuagenarian are comprised
abound in characteristic stories of the old king, in anecdotes of many celebrities
English and foreign, of the early part of this century, and, indeed, of all kinds and
conditions of men and women with whom the author was brought in contact by
his courtly or pastoral office'' — St. James's Gazette.

THE EGYPTIAN CAMPAIGNS, 1882 to 1885,

AND THE Events which led to them. By Charles Boyle,

Barrister at-Law, of Alexandria. 2 vols, demy 8vo. Illustrated

by Maps and Plans. sos.

"Mr. Royle has done well in the interests of historical completeness to describe

not only the entire military drama, but also the political events connected with

it, and whoever reads the book with care has gone a considerable way towards

mastering the difficult Egyptian question." — Athenaeum.

"The Egyptian fiasco has found in Mr. Royle a most painstaking, accurate, and
judicious historian. From a literary point of view his volumes may be thought to
contain too many unimportant incidents, yet their presence was necessary perhaps,
in a complete record, and the most fastidious reader will unhesitatingly acquit
Mr. Royle of filling his pages with anything that can be called padding"— <Sf.
James's Gazette.

NEW WORKS— Continued.

FOOTSTEPS OF JEANNE D'ARC. A Pilgrimage.

By Mrs. Florence Caddy. 1 vol demy svo. With Maj of Route. 15s.
"The reader, whatever his preconceived notions of the maid may have been,
swill Boon find himself in sympathy with a writer who, by the charm of her descriptive
style, at once arrests his attention and sustains the interest of her

subject." — Morning Post.

THE REAL SHELLEY: New Views of the Poet's

Life. By John Cord Jeaffreson, Author of " The Real Lord

Byron," " A Book about Doctors," " A Book about Lawyers," &c.

2 vols, demy 8vo. sos.

Those who have read Mr. Jeaffreson's account of B3rron will be prepared to

find that impartiality is the distinguishing feature of his endeavour to clear away

the fancies and misconceptions which have been given to the world in some of

the biographies of Shelley, and they will not be disappointed. The author has

striven to ascertain, fairly and fully, the truth concerning a poet whose influence,

while it has been greatly exaggerated by his most enthusiastic admirers, is still a

living factor in the life of many." — Morning Post.

THE FRIENDSHIPS OF MARY RUSSELL

Milford : As Recorded in Letters from her Literary
Correspondents. Edited by the Ret. A, G. Estrange,

Editor of " The Life of Mary Russell Mitford," &c. 2 vols. 21s.
"These letters are all written as to one whom the writers love and revere. Miss
Barrett is one of Miss Mitford's correspondents, all of whom seem to be inspired
with a sense of excellence in the mind they are invoking. Their letters are extremely
interesting, and they strike out recollections, opinions, criticisms, which
will hold the readers delighted and serious attention." — Daily Telegraph.

THE Bronze FAMILY, With Special Reference

to Patrick Branwell Bronze. By Francis A. Leland. 2

vols. 21s.

This book is so full of interesting information that as a contribution to literary
biography it may be considered a real success." — Academy.

"Mr. Leland's book is earnest and accurate, and he has spared no pains to
master his subject and present it with clearness; the book is valuable, and should
be read by all who are familiar with the previous works on the family"— Graphic .

MEMOIRS OF A CAMBRIDGE CHORISTER.

By William Glover. 2 vols, crown 8vo. 21s.

"In these amusing volumes Mr. Glover provides us with the means of spending
a pleasant hour or two in his company"' — Times.

These volumes contain a miscellaneous set of reminiscences, comments, and
anecdotes, written in a light and jocular style. Mr. Glover is always cheerful
and never dida,ctiQ."—Aihenceum.

WITHOUT GOD: Negative Science and Natural

Ethics. By Percy Greg, Author of "The Devil's Advocate,"

"Across the Zodiac," &c. 1 vol. demy 8vo. 12s.

Mr. Greg has condensed much profound thought into his book, and has fully

succeeded in maintaining the interest of the discussion throughout." — Morning Post.

This work is ably written; there are in it many passages of no ordinary power

and brilliancy. It is eminently suggestive and stimulating." — Scotsman.

THE PALACE AND THE HOSPITAL; or,

Chronicles of Greenwich. By the Rev. A. G. Estrange,

Author of ' The Village of Palaces,' ' The Friendships of Mary
Russell Mitford,' &c. 2 vols, crown 8vo. With Illustrations. 2 Is.
Sir. Estrange has provided for those who have a taste for topography, or
rather for the historical and biographical annals of a locality famous in history,
two volumes which are rich in romantic interest, and his pages abound incurious
and interesting glimpses of old manners "daily News.



THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF PEG

Washington : With Pictures of the Period in which She

Lived. By J. Fitzgerald ]Molly, Author of " Court Life

Below Stairs," &c. Second Edition. 2 vols, crovm 8vo. With

Portrait. 21s.

"Peg Washington makes a most interesting central figure, round which Mr.

Slowly has made to revolve a varied and picturesque panorama of London life in

the middle of the eighteenth century. He sees things in the past so clearly, grasps

them so tenaciously, and reproduces them so vividly, that they come to us without

any of the dust and rust of time"— G. A. S. in Illustrated London News.

WOMEN OF EUROPE IN THE FIFTEENTH

AND SIXTEENTH CENTURIES. By Mrs. Napier Higgins.
Vols. 1 and 2 demy 8vo. sos.
The work is likely to be of permanent value to the students of histories
Morning Post.

ON THE TRACK OF THE CRESCENT: Ratio

Notes from the Piraeus to Perth. By Major E. C. Johnson,
M.A.I., F. R. Hist. S., etc. With Map and Upwards of 50 illustrations
by the Author. 1 vol. demy 8vo. 15s.
"The author of this bright, pleasant volume possesses keen power of observation
and vivid appreciation of animate and inanimate beauty. It will brighten
hours for many readers who will only follow the track of the Crescent through its.
pages and its numerous illustrations"— J/brniKfir Post.

MEMOIRS OF MARSHAL Bureau, From

His Private Correspondence and Original Documents, 1784 —
1849. By the Count H. mandeville. Edited, from the French,
by Charlotte M. Yonge. 2 vols, demy 8vo. sos.
This is a work of great value to the student of French history. A perusal of
the book will convince any reader of Bureau's energy, his patriotism, his unselfishness,
and his philanthropy and humanity'" — Athenaeum.

GLIMPSES OF GREEK LIFE AND SCENERY.

By Agnes Smith, Author of " Eastern Pilgrims," &c. Demy 8vo.

With Illustrations and Map of the Author's Route. 15s.
A truthful picture of the country through which the author travelled. It is
naturally and simply told, in an agreeable and animated style. Miss Smith displays
an ample acquaintance and sympathy with all the scenes of historic interest"
—St. James's Gazette.

MONSIEUR GUIZOT in Private Life (1787-

1874). By His Daughter, Madame de Witt. Translated by Mrs.

Simpson. 1 vol. demy 8vo. los.
"Madame de Witt has done justice to her father's memory in an admirable record
of his life. Mrs. Simpson's translation of this singularly interesting book is
in accuracy and grace worthy of the original and of the subject." — Saturday Review.

PLAIN SPEAKING. By Author of - John Halifax,

Gentleman." 1 vol. crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.
"ewe recommend 'Plain Speaking' to all who like amusing, wholesome, and
instructive reading. The contents of Mrs. Craik's volume are of the most multifarious
kind, but all the papers are good ,and readable, and one at least of them
of real importance." — St. James's Gazette.

WORDS OF HOPE AND COMFORT TO

THOSE IN SORROW. Dedicated by Permission to The Queen
Fourth Edition. 1 vol. sraall 4tn n<i

LODGE'S PEERAGE

AND BARONETAGE,

CORRECTED BY THE NOBILITY.

FIFTY-SI Nth Edition N FOR 1887.

Lodge's Peerage and Baronage is acknowledged to be the most
complete, as well as the most elegant, work of the kind. As an established
and authentic authority on all questions respecting the family
histories, honours, and connections of the titled aristocracy, no work has
ever stood so high. It is published under the especial patronage of Her
Majesty, and is annually corrected throughout, from the personal communications
of the Nobility. It is the only work of its class in which, the
type being kept constantly standing, every correction is made in its proper
place to the date of publication, an advantage which gives it supremacy
over all its competitors. Independently of its full and authentic information
respecting the existing Peers and Baronets of the realm, the most
sedulous attention is given in its pages to the collateral branches of the
various noble families, and the names of many thousand individuals are
introduced, which do not appear in other records of the titled classes. For
its authority, correctness, and facility of arrangement, and the beauty of
its typography and binding, the work is justly entitled to the place it
occupies on the tables of Her Majesty and the Nobility.

LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL CONTENTS.

Historical View of the Peerage.

Parliamentary Roll of the House of Lords.

English, Scotch, and Irish Peers, in their
orders of Precedence.

Alphabetical List of Peers of Great Britain
and the United Kingdom, holding superior
rank in the Scotch or Irish Peerage.

Alphabetical list of Scotch and Irish Peers,
holding superior titles in the Peerage of
Great Britain and the United Kingdom.

A Collective list of Peers, in their order of
Precedence.

Table of Precedency among Men.

Table of Precedency among Women.

The Queen and the Royal Family.

Peers of the Blood Royal

The Peerage, alphabetically arranged.

Families of such Extinct Peers as have left
Widows or Issue.

Alphabetical List of the Surnames of all the
Peers.

The Archbishops and Bishops of England
and Ireland.

The Baronetage alphabetically arranged.

Alphabetical List of Surnames assumed by
members of Noble Families.

Alphabetical List of the Second Titles of
Peers, usually borne by their Eldest
Sons.

Alphabetical Index to the Daughters of
Dukes, Marquises, and Earls, who, having
married Commoners, retain the title
of Lady before their own Christian and
their Husband's Surnames.

Alphabetical Index to the Daughters of
Viscounts and Barons, who, having
married Commoners, are styled Honourable
Mrs. ; and, in case of the husband
being a Baronet or Knight. Hon. Lady.

A List of the Orders of Knighthood.

Mottoes alphabetically arranged and translated.


"This work is the most perfect and elaborate record of the living and recently deceased
members of the Peerage of the Three Kingdoms as it stands at this day. It is
a most useful publication. We are happy to bear testimony to the fact that scrupulous
accuracy is a distinguishing feature of this book." — Times.

"Lodge's Peerage must supersede all other works of the kind, for two reasons: first, it
is on a better plan ; and secondly, it is better executed. We can safely pronounce it to bethe
readiest, the most useful, and exactness of modem works on the subject." — Spectator:

A work of great value. It is the most faithful record we possess of the aristocracy
of the day"— Posh.



EACH IM ONE VOLUME CROWN Svo, 6s.

r>ONOVi?Lisr:

A Modern ENGLISHMAN.

"This is a very admirable work. The reader is from the first carried away by the
gallant unconventionality of its author. 'Donovan' is a very excellent novel; but it is
something more and better. It should do as much good as the best sermon ever written
or delivered extempore. The story is told with a grand simplicity, an unconscious poetry
of eloquence which stirs the very depths of the heart. One of the main excellencies of
this novel is the delicacy of touch with which the author shows her most delightful characters
to be after all human beings, and not angels before their time." — Standard.

' Donovan ' is told with the power of truth, experience, and moral insight. The tone
of the novel is excellent and very high." — Daily News.

"V^E T^V^O.

This book is well written and full of interest. The story abounds with a good many
light touches, and is certainly far from lacking in incident." — Times.

"' We Two ' contains many very exciting passages and a great deal of information.
Miss Lyell is a capable writer and a clear-headed thinker"— ^f/ieftoeM?/i.

A work of deep thought and much power. Serious as it is, it is now and then brightened
by rays of genuine humour. Altogether this story is more and better than a novel."
—Morning Post.

There is artistic realism both in the conception and the delineation of the personages ;
the action and interest are unflagging sustained from first to last, and the book is pervaded
by an atmosphere of elevated, earnest thought." — Scotsman.

TN THE Golden DAYS.

"Miss Lyell has given us a vigorous study of such life and character as are really worth
reading about. The central figure of her story is Algerian Sydney ; and this figure she
invests with a singular dignity and power. He always appears with effect, but no liberties
are taken with the facts of his life. The plot is adapted with great felicity to them.
His part in it, absolutely consistent as it is with historical truth, gives it reality as well as
dignity. Some of the scenes are remarkably vivid. The escape is an admirable narrative,
which almost makes one hold one's breath as one reads"' —Spectator.

' In the Golden Days ' is an excellent novel of a kind we are always particularly glad
to recommend. It has a good foundation of plot and incident, a thoroughly noble and
wholesome motive, a hero who really acts and suffers heroically, and two very nice
heroines. The historical background is very carefully indicated, but is never allowed to
become more than background," — Guardian.

The Dean's daughters are perfectly real characters— the learned Cornelia especially ;
—the little impulsive French heroine, who endures their cold hospitality and at last wins
their affection, is thoroughly charming ; while throughout the book there runs a golden
thread of pure brotherly and sisterly love, which pleasantly reminds us that the making
and marring of marriage is not, after all, the sum total of real me"— Academy.

' Won by Waiting ' is a very pleasing and well-written tale ; full of graphic descriptions
of French and English life, with incidents and characters well sustained. A book
with such pleasant reading, and with such a healthy tone and influence, is a great boon
to the young people in our families"— freeman.

EACH IN ONE VOLUME CROWN 8vo.

HIS LITTLE MOTHER.

By the Author of "John Halifax, Gentleman."

' His Little Mother ' is one of those pathetic stories which the author tells better
than anybody else"— som Bull.

"This book is written with all Mrs. Craik's grace of style, the chief charm of which,
after all, is its Bim^WcitY.''— Glasgow Herald.

MY LORD ^ISri3 MY EA.DY.

By Mrs. Forrester.

"A very capital novel. The great charm about it is that Mrs. Forrester is quite at home
in the society which she describes. It is a book to xea,d:"— Standard.

Mrs. Forrester's style is so fresh and graphic that the reader is kept under its spell
from first to \&st.''^Morning Post.

S O R H Y.

By Violet Fane.

' Sophy ' is the clever and original work of a clever woman. Its merits are of a strikingly
unusual kind. It is charged throughout with the strongest human interest. It is,
in a word, a novel that will make its mark." — World.

j^ HOUSE r>^ETY.

By OuiDA.

' A House Party ' will be read, firstly, because it is Ouida's, and, secondly, because of
the brightness of the conversations and descriptions. It is indeed more like a comedy
than any other of the writer's books"— G'^o^e.

Omni Y^NIT^S.
By Mrs. Forrester.

This book is pleasant and well meant. Here and there are some good touches. Sir
Ralph is a man worth reading Ehout.'"— Academy.

'* This tale is well and cleverly written ; the characters are drawn and sustained with
considerable power, and the conversation is always bright and \ive\j.''— Glasgow Herald.

Betrayal OE EEXJEEISr HOLT.

By Barbara Lake.

This novel shows considerable power of writing. There are some striking scenes and
incidents. "—^^co?5?Han.

"This tale displays elevation of thought and feeling, united to no little grace of
expression"— Pos?.

THE BR^NDRETHS.

By the Right Hon. A. J. B. Beresford Hope, M.P.

The great attraction of this novel is the easy, conversational, knowledgeable tone of
it ; the sketching from the life, and yet not so close to the life as to be malicious, men,
women, periods, and events, to all of which intelligent readers can fit a name. The
political and social sketches will naturally excite the chief interest among readers who
will be attracted by the author's name and experience." Spectator.

PUBLISHED BY HUEST & BLACKETT.

THE WOOING OF CATHERINE. By E. Frances

Pointer, Author of " My Little Lady," &c. 2 vols.
"The figures are drawn with clear, bold strokes, each individual standing
before us with marked personality, while the backgrounds are effective and
striking. 'literary World.

ST. Travels. By Mary Deane, Author of

Quatrefoil," &c. 3 vols.

The authoress throughout writes with moderation and consistency, and her
three ample volumes well repay perusal." — Daily Telegraph.

' St. Travels " is a story replete with variety, and in all developments of her
plot the author skilfully maintains an unabated interest." — Morning Post.

A LILY MAID. By William George Waters.

3 vols.
A story of the keenest interest. Mr. Waters' plot is neat, and his style is
bright and pleasing." — Daily Telegraph.
' A Lily Maid ' is throughout exceedingly pleasant reading"— J/brning' Post.

LIKE LUCIFER. By Denzil Vane. 3 vols.

"There is some pleasant writing in 'Like Lucifer,' and the plot is workmanlike."
— Academy.

"Denzil Jane has a talent for lively, fluent writing, and a power of tracing
character." — Whitehall Review.

LUCIA. By Mrs. AUGUSTUS Craven, Author of

A Sister's Story." Translated by Lady Herbert of Lea. 2 vols.

•' This is a very pretty, touching, and consoling story. The tale is as much above
the ordinary romance as the fresh air of the seaside is better than the stifling atmosphere
of the fashionable quarter of the gayest city." — St. James's Gazette,

' Lucia ' is as good a novel as has been published for a long time." — Academy.

LOVE, THE PILGRIM. By May Crommelin,

Author of " Queene," " A Jewel of a Girl," (fee. 3 vols.
' Love, the Pilgrim ' is a pretty story, which, beginning quietly, develops into
one of very sensational incident indeed." — Graphic.
"A tale of thrilling interest." — Scotsman.

THE KING CAN DO NO WRONG. By Pamela

Snetd, Author of "Jack Urquhart's Daughter." 2 vols.

This novel gives evidence of imagination, insight into character, and power of
delineation." — Athenaeum.

Shows command of exceptional narrative and descriptive power — the story is
told with cleverness and force." — Scotsman

THE COURTING OF MARY SMITH. By F. W.

Robinson, Author of " Grandmother's Money," " No Church," &c.
3 vols.
"One of the finest studies that any of our novelists has produced of late years.
To read such a book is to strengthen the soul with a moral tonic." — Athenaeum.

"The book is full of the truths and experiences of actual life, woven into a
romance by an undoubtedly clever novelist"— J/or«i«^ Post.

THRO' LOVE AND WAR. By Violet Fane,

Author of " Sophy : or the Adventures of a Savage," &c. 3 vols.
"thro' Love and War' has a succinct and intelligible plot, and is written
with a quaint combination of acute perception, veiled sarcasm, and broad fun,
which is certain to ensure for it a wide popularity"— y/ie World.

PUBLISHED BY HURST & BLACKETT.

PASSAGES IN THE LIFE OF A LADY in 1814,

1815, 1816. By Hamilton Aidp^, Author of "Rite," "Penrud-
locke," " Poet and Peer," &c. 3 vols.

VICTIMS. By The Gift, Author of "Pretty Miss

Bellow," " Il Lorimer," &c. 3 vols.

Courtiers. By Anne Beale, Author of "Fay

Arlington," &c. 3 vols.

TILL MY WEDDING DAY. By a French Lady.

2 vols.

There is a good deal of characteristic and life-like description, and the variety
of incident through which the several personages of tho story are carried is remarkable''
— Athenaeum.

THE GREEN HILLS BY THE SEA: A Manx

Story. By Hugh Coleman Davidson. 3 vols.

Some of the characters are real human beings, some of the situations ar
powerfully conceived, and many of the descriptions are admirable." — Academy.

Mr. Davidson's imagination is fantastic, as well as original at times, and he
writes a great deal that is pleasant to read and remember." — Daily Telegraph.

THE BROKEN SEAL. By Dora Russell, Author

of " Footprints in the Snow," &c. 3 vols.
"Miss DoraKussell writes easily and well, and she has the gift of making her
characters describe themselves by their dialogue, which is bright and natural" —
Athenaeum.

MURIEL'S MARRIAGE. ByEsME Stuart, Author

of " A Faire Dalzell," &c. 3 vols.
Much of the interest and charm of the story, and both are considerable, are
due to the delineations, not merely of the two principal personages, but of the
minor characters." — Scotsman.

ONCE AGAIN. By Mrs. Forrester, Author of

Viva," " Mignon," " My Lord and My Lady," &c. (Second Edition)

3 vols.

"A really fascinating story. Bright and often original as is Mrs. Forrester, her
peculiar gifts have never been seen to better advantage than in 'Once Again.'
An undercurrent of tragedy runs through this startling tale, and this, together
with its graphically drawn characters, sets it completely apart from the ordinary
society story." — Morning Post.

A WILFUL YOUNG WOMAN. By A. Price,

Author of "A Rustic Maid," " Who is Sylvia?" &c. 3 vols.
A very readable story. Mrs. Price has drawn her dramatis personae with some
power and vigour." — Academy.
The story is throughout both sound and high-principled." — Literary World.

THE SURVIVORS. By Henry Cresswell, Author

of " A Modern Greek Heroine," " Incognita," &c. 3 vols.
There is cleverness in this book, and occasional brilliancy and wit." — Academy.
"An amusing comedy of modem life; there are some good situations and
striking episodes in the book." — Athenaeum.

A WICKED GIRL. By Mary Cecil Hay, Author

of " Old Myddelton's Money," &c. 3 vols.
"The author of ' Old Myddelton's Money ' always manages to write interesting
stories'— Acacfeniy.

<J'Sa
