OF THE

UN Diversity

Of ILLINOIS

8Z3
B56Z6i
V.I

Be lessons right severe.
There's wit there, ye'll get there,

Ye'll find nae other where.

Burns.

"But out of her griefs and cares, as will happen, I think, when
these trials fall upon a kindly heart and are not too unbearable,
grew up a number of thoughts and excellences which had never
come into existence had not her sorrow and misfortunes engendered
them." Esmond.

Gertrude M. Ireland Blackburn

IN THREE VOLUMES
VOL. I.

WARD AND DOWNEY

12, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON


[All Rights Reserved]

KELLY AND CO., GATE STREET, LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS, W. C. ;

AND MIDDLE MILL, KINGSTON-ON-THAMES.

CONTENTS.

Book I.— MARSHALLED.

CHAP. PAGE

I. — Her Husband . 1

II.— Daisy 14

III. — Light, not Leal .46

IV. — A Shallow Stream 68

V.— Allies 90

VI.— Tables Turned . . . . . 112

VII. — Manifestoes 131

>^ VIII.— Asides 153

IX. — Counter-Irritation . 175

X.— On the Surface . 190

Book II.— CONFLICT.

I. — Paul Wordsworth . 223



II.— How it Began . 246

III. —The Question . . . . .260

Victor Hugo.

J. S. AND TO K. P. S.

§ bis §ketcf>

IN MEMORY OF 1883-1888

Book I.— Marshalled.

CHAPTER I.

HER HUSBAND.

To pound the objects of sentiment into small dust, yet
keep sentiment alive and active, is something like the famous
recipe for making cannon — to first take a round hole and then
inclose it with iron; whatever you do keeping fast hold of
your round hole." — Daniel Deronda.

Eemember ! I have given in to your
wishes long after you had any reasonable
excuse to make. In future, Vera, mine
must be consulted."

Any one who had once seen Sir Ralph
Carstairs in public would have called him
persevering ; in private, obstinate. When

VOL. I. 1

he was not satisfied, some one would have
a bad time till his way was made as he
chose, or till his wishes were fulfilled, for
they were never forgotten.

His young wife only pleaded for respite
with her great pathetic eyes.

Give me a short time longer. I cannot
bear it yet."

"This is childish. I require you; that
is enough. I don't ask impossibilities. I
simply demand that you should be civil
to those who have — well, all men have,
in fact — power to make or mar a career
such as mine. Have I worked and waited
all these years now to be balked by you?
Goodness knows, I made a mistake in
marrying you ! I wanted a woman with
intelligence and beauty ; you seem to take
a pride in disguising that you have either."

As usual — what does as usual not mean?
Vera Carstairs met her husband's reproaches
in silence ; perhaps because so far
as any one can be used to the disagreeable
she was " used to it ; " perhaps because
she, too, had something to say.

But — Carstairs knew that well enough —
the words were untruthful as well as
insulting.

So far he was right, that a certain air
of listlessness, a slight apparent indifference
to any special attractiveness in her plain
mourning frock, and traces of illness and
suffering, had a little taken from her good
looks ; but no severity of style or weariness
in her expression could disguise the
fact that Lady Carstairs was beautiful.

Of course, like many a beautiful woman
she might at first sight be overlooked in

1-2

favour of one who were merely pretty.
Like many a thoughtful soul she did not
readily part with her best to the first
comer. She was personally shy, and few
knew how good and true she was.

Her husband — but let him, as others,
speak for himself. There are no strange
characters in this story, they are ail
people you meet in good houses, and especially
in a set with one foot on the
social, the other on the political, nature of
things. Some of our readers may know
them already — may know Ralph Carstairs
the egotist ; Paul Wordsworth the philanthropic
and philosophic litterateur and
statesman ; his nephew, Grey Meredith,
once the " favourite of the House." Perhaps
they have been entertained by Lady Carstairs
; and Georgie Leyton, I know, took

good care to be noticed and heard everywhere.
As for Ralph's brother, there are
so many similar youths of eighteen that I
cannot wonder if you do not remember
which name he goes by. Poor Charlie ! he
thinks he is original !

However, if you do not yet know them
you can if you like make the acquaintance
of each and all in turn, just as they are,
with all their weaknesses and inconsistencies.
I paint no perfect beings, for
those I never met.

And now let us go back to the shores
of the Italian lake, and hear what says
Ralph Carstairs to his young wife. He, for
one, is not perfect, unless, did we know all,
we chose to call him a " perfect brute."
But that again would scarcely be fair.
Some people thought a good deal of him ;

none perhaps as much as he did of himself;
and, unfortunately, " there are worse
people in the world than Carstairs," as a
friend of his always says.

Worse, maybe ; certainly few more
irritating. Listen to him in his egotistical
voice, the picture of a good-looking, well-fed
M.P. ; a man with cast-iron nerves and
unfailing powers. He does not care what
she feels ; she, with the sweet sad face,
and the graceful fragile form.

Looking down indifferently on the beautiful
countenance framed in its masses of
dark hair, and untouched by its plea,
Carstairs continued :

As a matter of fact, it will suit me
that you don't go back now. I arrange
for you to stay here till after the recess.
You may mope as you please till then;

after that I meet you in Paris, and you
come home with Me and exert yourself to
make My house habitable till we go to
Temple."

Using a curt business-like tone, lighting
a cigar meanwhile, he stood by the large
window of a salon in the centre of the
Cadenabbian hotel, shadowed by the
verandah-balcony.

"I can stay at Como till the middle of
May? You will go back to town without
me ? " she exclaimed, more cheerfully.

I knew one way to please you at
least," he said sardonically. " In return
for this, remember on your return I expect
to be treated as your husband."

Can I ever forget that you are my
husband? Do I?"

I don't know ; how can I tell ? I have

been forbearing enough. . . . That is
past. Of what I said yesterday "

She rose to her feet, colour in her
hitherto pallid face.

"Kalph, not yet. I see only Daisy."

He shrugged his shoulders and turned
away, looking over the lake. He expected,
perhaps, to hear her sob. There was no
sound. Other denizens of the place were
at luncheon ; all was still, and calm sunshine
without glimmered on the placid lake.

What do you require ? " he heard her
say in a calm tone, after the silence had
been prolonged.

Common sense," he rejoined roughly,
turning to face her. " I only ask you for
what ninety-nine women out of a hundred
would give their eyes to do. It has looked
like it lately, but surely you are not a fool ?

My success is now, to a great extent, not
dependent on myself, but on the amount
of social pressure I can apply in the right
direction. When I tell you to spend time
and money on your clothes, to give good
dinners to the men who can amuse you,
to make the most of an uncommonly good
position and a fair share of brains and
decent looks, is that an awful command ? "

She did not answer. He looked at her
curiously, then continued, as if it had been
spoken of before :

I'm off in twenty minutes, I suppose,
by the afternoon steamer ; do you want
anything before I go ? "

"Off?" said the wife in surprise.

I was able to divine your wishes and
thought it well to shorten the agony of
parting," he sneered again. M All is arranged.

Eustace goes with me of course
that courier, Finch, remains with you.
When he was arranging for Charlie and his
tutor I told him that you would stay here,
and that he was not to give up my bedroom
; it would be required tomorrow for
your guest, Miss Leyton, who would stay
as long as you did."

"That she shall not!" Vera exclaimed.
"This is too much."

Why ? "

Do you need to be told why ? It is
like you to treat me as a child — to tell
your servants your arrangements, ignoring
me. But to ask that woman, Georgia
Leyton, and fifteen minutes before you go to
tell me that you mean her to stay with mea
month ! You can go ; she may come ; your
brother Charlie can entertain her : I go too."

With whom ? Where ? I only ask out
of curiosity. I am so glad; I thought
Georgie's companionship would be beneficial,
and the very mention of her name
has acted on you like a tonic."

"Telegraph to her that I shall not stay
here ; I will go back with you sooner."

"I did not know that you hated her so
much as that" said Carstairs epigrammatically,
but in genuine surprise. "It is too
late. You have your wish — you remain
here. As for Georgie, you know you were
a little jealous of her because she and I
always pulled well together. I shall be
out of the way this time."

"Then why not wait to entertain her
till you can do so. Well ! she won't come
to me."

Won't she? She's at Milan. I mean

she will arrive tomorrow ; I had a wire
this morning. Now don't be so ridiculous ;
Georgie will be no trouble to you. She
has hard work to make ends meet
round all the amusement she wants in
life. I can't give her money, and, now my
mother's dead, how can I help my pretty
cousin except through my wife ? "

You choose to say this," she answered
coldly.

"I hear the steamer. I take Finch with
me and leave him at Milan this evening to
meet Georgie tomorrow and bring her
here."

A few more unimportant words passed —
all taking for granted the arrangement
which suddenly gave Vera a month's respite,
but for that month forced upon her
the prospect of living with a woman disliked

by Vera as only a gentle nature can
dislike another woman whose character she
despises, — yet dreads.

The moment for the departure of her
husband came.

"Well, good-bye, Vera," he said. "I'm
off!"

Good-bye," she answered, scarcely
moving. She was far too indignant to
speak any other word.

Thus they parted.

She was only four-and-twenty, and this
was not a quarrel, but the result of an
estrangement of life from life.

DAISY.

It is written as she thought it ; she thought in blanks, as
girls do, and some women. A shadow of the male egoist is in
the chamber of their brains, overawing them." — The Egoist,
G. Meredith.

Saddest of all things — unless those touched
by crime and some of those brought by
Death himself — are such farewells of relief.

A farewell is happy as it is sad.

The matted blind slowly waved backward
and forward over the square-flagged
balcony. Vera, left alone, went on to it,
and pushing it aside leant over the stone
balustrade.

Sir Ralph came out and stood smoking
calmly ; a tall figure with the irrepressible
trick of putting himself always in evidence ;

all the blatant egotism possible to a sufficiently
well-bred man patent in every gesture
— at least to one who had suffered from
it. Her husband was watching his servant
and his fellow-passengers, and never even
by accident looked up to the front balcony
where the shapely head seemed to follow
his movements. Stung by the little extra
slight — though the natural consequence of
estrangement — Vera forgot that he was
there, going away; she thought only of
what he was to her life.

Some people came on to the next balcony.
One girl there whispered to another,
"That's Lady Carstairs, who lost her child
so sadly last autumn. The Carstairs live
near us, you know. I think she is so lovely."

She looks awfully sad now."

Her husband is going back for work,

the courier told Heath. That's what makes
her look unhappy, perhaps'"

From this remark it is evident that Nice
Bentley was very young, and moreover
did not know anything of the Carstairs ;
also that a conventional attitude gains
credit.

But Vera did not see her husband's figure
cross the gangway to the steamer below.

Nor, lover of nature as she was, did her
eyes then take in the beauty of the scene
beyond, perhaps the loveliest view of that
loveliest lake of Como as seen from its own
shore.

The lake lay before her unseeing eyes,
silvery grey beneath an intensely blue sky :
held between the depths were the steep
square ridges of Monte Primo and the
tongue of pine-crowned hill under which

Bellagio glittered in the afternoon light :
above, the sharp-peaked Alps stretched
over the concealed shore of Lecco.

The steamer finally snorted ; the green
water flashed into light which seemed to
dissolve softly in creamy lace-like foam.
The "Union" bore Sir Ralph away without
a backward glance on his part ; he was
making some remark to a man ; they turned
to regard Bellagio.

Vera saw this, and noted the steamer's
name with that strange turn for nonsense
in verbal sequence well known to the unhappy
— the amusement of a restless brain
neglected in obedience to the imperious
claim of the emotions.

"Union" said she thus, " E Union fait
la force? Our union makes our weakness,
mine at least. What does anything matter

VOL. I.

to him? I should be happier if he were
wretched too, I believe, as I am."

The girls on the next balcony saw that
Lady Carstairs suddenly ]eft her post ; but
no one saw her, else perhaps she had not
yielded, as in the darkened room within
she flung herself on the sofa and gave way
to her feelings of despair. Probably for
the first time since her child's death she
longed for any one — any one, no matter
who — whom she could have spoken to, or
even in silence, best of all, been helped by
with touch or caress. And she stretched
out her arms against the sofa — the hard
sofa — as if it were something pitifully pressing
her form to make her feel that she
was not alone in life.

It so happened that for to-day she was
alone in the hotel ; young Carstairs and his

tutor absent, her husband suddenly gone,
and Georgie Leyton arriving twenty-four
hours later.

She was alone ; all the better ; she would,
as soon as she could calm herself, put
away the past, think over the future, and
awake her ambition, if her heart must be
trained to keep; secret its own bitterness.

Put away the past ! Not let the memory
of that little child come between herself
and him who desired an heir next to his
own immediate success ; who now, as he
had said in the days of his love, and since,
with involuntary compliment, wished that
a woman who looked born to the woman's
kingdom should mount her throne.

But a woman like Vera does not care

for a crown till she has seen the subject

over whom she wishes to reign. To win

2—2

her way for the sake of a husband whose
success was nothing to her, that was the
point at which she was to aim. She might
have done so, even willingly, if he had let
little Daisy live.

Once more, before she tried to put it
away for ever — nothing could help her to
bring back the past — she would allow herself
to think of Daisy's death.

Ralph had never cared much for the
little thing ; it was only a girl. So Yea
perhaps loved her child the more, as she
felt that even in those early days of her
marriage and of the first child's life, her
husband was disappointed with them both.
Then she had not realized how little
affection he could give even had he not
been disappointed. During Daisy's life Vera
developed in many ways. Though very

young at the time of her marriage, and of
a simple loving nature, she remained unaffected
by the surroundings natural to the
wife of the busy ambitious politician, who
poses as the independent patriot while
scheming in all possible ways to make to
himself the fetters of party-power. He was
still outside the Cabinet, his party at present
out of office.

He observed, with some pleasure and

wonder, that Vera attracted men of mark,
though, as he said, she had no more idea
of flirting than of flying. It irritated him
that she seemed unconscious of this : it was
waste of power. As a practical man he
hated that : "in these days when bribery
pure and simple — advisedly I use these
epithets — is not considered quite decent,
we must have women's influence. It is the

only thing which you can generally rely
on for a few days together ; and, with all
due deference to the sex, it is only a few
women who do attract men." So Sir Ralph
Carstairs had said; and he looked upon his
wife's beautiful eyes, and restful simple interest
in the hopes of workers, as part of
his political stock-in-trade. He was scarcely
capable of feeling jealousy about her ; he
thought her too safe, and, if not, up to
the present those whom the world would
also count safe men had been her friends.

And Vera had real friends, but she was
not popular. No one is by force of merit ;
popularity is a reward earned by exertion
though exertion may never earn it.

Meanwhile, at home, Vera was not
happy ; how could she be with this husband?
He had been accepted because he

was good-looking, and had seemed passionately
in love with her ; because every one
thought it was " such a good thing for
her ; " and because — as only the poor child
knew, and was afraid to own to herself —
because Grey Winter had gone away and
evidently did not care for her!

Three years of Daisy's life passed ; she
was so quaint and so pretty. Already,
however, it was remarked that if she had
inherited her mother's beauty she also had
some share of her father's obstinacy.

One little anecdote was long remembered
of her.

She used to dine at her mother's luncheon
that last summer, when the Carstairs
had gone to their country house, Temple.

One day she was left to the care of the
old-fashioned housekeeper ; every one was

out, and the old woman was devoted to
the child.

The luncheon provided for the twain
was of a wholesome character and of
simple appearance. Daisy was not at all
greedy, nor used to expect to eat whatever
luxuries she saw, but evidently she
quietly resented the want of state.

Say grace, Miss Daisy, dear," said the
old housekeeper.

Daisy refused silently. Pauses, entreaties
and commands had failed.

Suddenly — like an older person willing,
though sure of being right, to make some
compromise to meet another's unreason —
Daisy turned round to Mrs. Blake :

"I've 'ay grace," she said.

"There's a good child ; not keep poor
Blake waiting any longer, will she ? "

A pause of deliberate consideration.

Then, rapidly and firmly, " Amen — "*


The old servant was scandalized at such
an adjustment of payment to result ; but
Daisy got her simplified dinner for her
shorn grace. " She has a way with her
for all the world like her father," argued
the old servant.

She was a wonderfully knowing child —
no doubt of that ! Her mischief had in
it real childish wit. Once or twice even
Sir Ralph noticed her, but this was not
to be desired, as he provoked her to
naughtiness and then blamed Vera for the
consequences.

Daisy did not care much for her father,
which want of affection was not Vera's

A fact.

fault ; she hoped Daisy might win his
heart, but the child resented his uncertain
treatment of herself, or her instinct penetrated
to the harshness of his character,
as children's spirits can ; and so the father
and child were mutually unsympathetic.

But on Daisy's birthday he had a sudden
impulse of domesticity. He brought home
an expensive and ugly Paris doll, with
various mechanical arrangements, as uncouth
or artificial as the donor's attempts
at parental playfulness. However, to do
him justice, this was a step in the right
direction. Vera was cheered, and Daisy
received this overture graciously ; but the
bairn did not like the toy, and laid it
aside for that which she did like.

That afternoon Carstairs expected the
visit of an important constituent about an

annoying piece of business. By his own
desire the interview was arranged at his
home. However the matter should end,
Carstairs wished his opponent to be impressed
w T with his member's house, and, either
to cover annoyance or to cement a bargain,
an introduction to Lady Carstairs had
often proved desirable.

The man did not arrive. Sir Ralph was
annoyed. Bored at home, yet unwilling to
go out in case the client might come in late,
Carstairs went up to the drawing-room and
found Daisy with her mother, alone.
Irritated already, Sir Ralph bethought him
of the neglected doll, and made another
attempt on behalf of it and himself.
He thought the toy clever, and I am
not sure whether he did not believe
himself a better judge of a doll than

Daisy could possibly be. What Sir

Kalph thought suitable for another must
be suitable.

Presently Daisy slipped off his knee
with one shoulder up ; by this she
signified that if her father was bored she
was also.

Sir Kalph turned on his wife :

44 How extraordinary it is, Vera, that
with all your pretence of devotion to the
child you do not teach her to behave
properly when she is with Me ! "

(The capital letter always should be expressed
in the language of Carstairs : his
Me was superb.)

Daisy was not supposed to understand ;
but she knew quite well a good deal
more than many would think possible. Intellect
and language develop much earlier

with some people's children than with those
of others.

So Daisy had not only felt but (checked
yet admired by her mother) had remarked
that papa was so often cross. "She did not
like him to be at home when she was
with mammy. Would not mammy like him
to go away too ? "

And now Dais r sat on the floor and
solemnly gazed at her parents, while Vera
answered gently, " Daisy is not much used
to notice from you, and for the moment
she scarcely cares for the doll. One can't
expect a child to hide its feelings."

I suppose she leaves that to her mother."

Vera saw that Sir Ralph was in one of
his sullen moods to day. He chiefly reserved
them for his wife. Some people
called him " occasionally a little brusque ; "

but many have an idea that abruptness
implies frankness ; besides, outsiders can
avoid each other till things are smooth
once more. Sir Ralph was sensible enough
to his own interests ; and if an extraordinary
amount of boorishness was working
in him he became domestic. Not only
merriest when away from home, he deliberately
stayed there to be surly at
ease.

Daisy," he said in a minute or two,
come here, you brat."

Daisy came.

Look here ; you're to play with the doll
I brought you."

Don't like back collier ; old white
collier pretty."

If the humorous side of the struggle
struck him — that of a man for his own

childish obstinacy pitting himself against
a toddling and determined child on the
question of white doll or black — it only
more greatly irritated him. Conceit kills
the sense of humour — perhaps he had none ;
and, as a sense of humour is an admirable
preservative of dignity, in the undignified
wrangle in which he practically lowered
himself to the level of his three-year-old
child the politician had no advantage. He
could doubtless conquer the child and take
away " white collier," but could he make
Daisy smile on the blackamoor? Force reprehensible,
sneers incomprehensible — what
could he do but wrangle? The word seems
absurd, but so was the position of the
parent with regard to this strife.

Daisy ran to her mother after a few
minutes' altercation. " I love mammy," she

asserted, a propos of some wonderful process
in her own mind which showed a latent
feminine instinct of defensive arousing of
jealousy as a means of revenge.

Sir Ralph followed and roughly caught
her away.

Vera thought the child would cry ; butin
this conflict of will hers was the dignity.
In baby fashion she was well able
to take care of herself. As Sir Ralph
dragged her across the room she passively
resisted ; her curly head down on the
shoulder towards her mother, and dragging
at the full length of her tiny arm from
him. He released her so suddenly that she
nearly fell ; but Daisy's temper was roused.
I like mammy's collier too," was her undaunted
assertion as she recovered.

This was said with baby insolence.

Seeing the reproduction of character in the
child, looking so lovely in her white frock,
innocent as yet, but already capable of
meeting her father after his own fashion ;
with an awful sudden fear of such development
as the years might bring ; Vera interfered.
It was strange then, but she remembered
it later, for the moment she thought
with swift sympathy that it was her husband's
nature so to be — that it was her
part to modify such transmitted influences
in her child.

So her "Daisy, don't be naughty," fell
simultaneously with Carstairs' cs You little
devil!"

However, in another moment — perhaps
realizing that a child repeats all it learns in
the way of new words, and more cross for
his approach to shame — her husband con-vol.

I. 3

tinned to her, " I'll ask you to interfere

when I need your assistance."

Yera steadily regarded her husband fora

moment ; rather a look of contempt than

of resentment — a young woman's contempt

for the petty domestic tyrant. And the child

already began to understand ! Perhaps it

were better that she should go out of the

room since Daisy appealed to her. Besides,

sneers at herself were being intermixed.

Where are you going ? "
To fetch a book."

Can't you ring for what you want, oris
early education too strong in you ? "
He rang. " Ask for what you require."

Vera quietly passed him, and meeting the
man, who entered looking subserviently interrogative,
she observed :

"Your master wanted you."

Of course this was for the benefit of her
husband. The servant waited silently. "Did
you ring, sir?" he ventured to say at length.

No," answered Sir Ralph.

Vera went ; because she, like many quiet
people, had a warm temper steadily kept
under control on most occasions ; she could
not bear much more. Also, to remain was to
yield. None but herself knew how needful it
was to make some stand against the absolutism
which was being woven round her
trivial liberties of personal life.

She had scarcely reached her own room on
the floor above before the thought occurred
to her that he might ill-treat the child. So
she returned.

The staircase of that house is very handsome,
and on ordinary occasions a cabinet
and a pedestal, with thereon a large vase and

3-2

a quantity of frequently-renewed flowers,
stand near the drawing-room doors.

One door of the drawing-room was now
open. Hearing a cry from Daisy, Vera
hastened on, and the child at her entrance
ran to her as if it had been terrified.

Vera — so angry — tried to lift Daisy. But,
not being strong, Daisy was too heavy for
her, and now it suited Sir Ralph to remember
that this scene was not good for his wife.

"Put her down at once."

What are you doing to my child ? "

"Teaching her obedience."

"Tell me what you wish her to do."

Vera spoke quietly ; she would send Daisy
away whatever happened. She rang the
bell twice to signify that the nurse was
required, as Sir Ralph answered: "She
knows what I want ; leave her to me."

Daisy has not been good ; I shall send
her to the nursery," said Vera, speaking
firmly to the child, but with a look at her
husband which warned him that it was not
for his sake she was quiet; her blood was
up and she was not sorry that the time
had come when, Daisy safe, she would
measure her force against his.

He came to lead the child away. With
another cry Daisy ran from both. A
moment later, a footman, coming upstairs
to announce the presence of the belated
client saw the end of the scene ; so he was
able to say it was all accident.

Daisy ran away.

She'll fall downstairs, Ralph," cried
Vera.

But, as the man said afterwards, " Sir
Ralph got between the child and the stairs,

so Miss Daisy turned back like, and how it
was he could not say; the cause, he should
have said was as sure as the Dark ; but
somehow the whole thing came down as
she fell ann it."

Yes ; it was Daisy herself who pulled the
pedestal over. It had been carelessly replaced,
perhaps, and in her fright she threw
her weight on it ; so the accident occurred.

A crash, as cabinet and pedestal fell ; an
oath from Sir Ralph, as, too late, he turned
and saw the danger ; the man pausing in the
message ; just one cry from little Daisy as
she was struck.

It was only a terrible misfortune. But it
had so occurred that life was no longer
able to stay in the delicate wee body.

For Daisy lived a few hours after concussion
had set in: in her fever she was terrified

; and when the calm came, and Vera
looked up to whisper : " She is smiling like
herself once more," it was because the child
would never fear again.

When nothing more was to be done, Vera
was very ill.

She was too ill to realize a double loss fora
time ; but every one in town during the
autumn session pitied Carstairs for losing
bis child by that horrid accident ; then, that
the little heir lived no more than a few
hours ; and that for so long his wife's life
was despaired of. How unfortunate some
men are!

However, Vera was young and had a good
constitution, though so fragile-looking: she
could not help returning to the empty
world.

It had happened in October ; in February

it was decided that they had better go to
the south to complete her recovery.

Monte Carlo is about the only place I
can stand'' said Sir Ralph.

Vera, consulted, said : " I don't care ; yes,
let it be Monte Carlo — there I shall see no
children," she added, half to herself.

Car stairs enjoyed himself, and delicious air
and bright sunshine almost restored his wife,
who, with another woman, like herself unable
to care for society, used to spend silent hours
in the woods or in the gardens of Monaco far
from the motley throng of pleasure-seekers.

By-and-by they moved to Milan. Vera,
though well in health, dreaded the return ;
she pleaded for respite, but the manner of
that respite one April morning has already
been told.

She was left to put away the past, to

face the future, for this day alone.
Estranged as a wife, bereaved as a mother
that was her past ; and so young, so
fettered, so lonely — what would be her
future? She re-lived the past; she broke
down ; she recovered ; still struggling with
herself, she was conscious of a sweet odour
near her — a presence with her who
thought herself alone.

The intruder — embarrassed yet sympathetic
— was a young girl ; a pretty fair
face with pitying eyes, a slight figure in a
dark dress, the background to a mass of
azaleas, with exquisite colour and delicious
scent lightening and freshening the dreary
salon.

The girl spoke first, in one of those
voices which are full of the music of
speech ; quite different from, but in their

own way as beautiful as, voices fitted for

song.

Please forgive me. Mother — I am
Anice Bentley— sent me to ask for you.
I thought you would like some flowers
from the Charlotte, and so I knocked.
No one answered, so I thought I might
leave them. I found after all } t ou were
here, and you are all alone. Please "

Vera interrupted her by holding out
her hand. The sweet face, the kindly
deed, the evident sympathy must not be
treated as intrusion. Vera saw that the
girl's sensitive shyness was struggling within
her.

How good of you ! No ; stay with me
if you have nothing to do. I am not
quite strong yet, as I daresay Mrs. Bentley
may have told you, so you must forgive

my being foolish. I know all the rest of
your family ; not you, do I ? "

I am so much the youngest, and
though I was presented this spring, just
before the workmen turned us out of our
house, I have not been out to anything."

I thought that I had not seen you."

But I have thought about you ever
since you called on us last June," said
the girl very quickly. " I was going out,
and I saw you ; you were all in white
with some yellow roses ; and — I beg your
pardon "

"For what?" Then she noticed that,
colouring at the betrayal of her heroine-worship
— the " first-love " of such girls is
almost always a woman — Anice had turned
away, and that in so doing her eye had
caught sight of the photograph of Daisy.

Something in the blushing face told
Vera that she had here a friend. Afterwards
she said to Anice :

4i It seems as if I always had known
you."

So then Vera asked on sudden impulse :

"Did you ever see her?"

Every day last year 1 met her in the
park. I always spoke to her."

Suddenly — from which side the initiative
had come neither ever knew — Vera felt a
human clasp of sympathy, a kiss of affection,
and the tear of another touching her
own fevered cheeks.

4 * Thank you, dear," said Vera. " If you
must go, come and see me again ; come
tc-morrow, if you can, in the morning."

So unlike Vera to thus take to a
stranger ; but though so little had been

said, intuition had taught either of the
other. Very sudden was the friendship
of Jonathan and David ! And when
Anice had gone, the rich scent of the
glorious golden flowers remained to gladden
Vera's heart with reminder that after each
winter there are new blossoms on the
earth, and after each season of desolation
some new growth of perhaps unexpected
sympathy.

^—

LIGHT, BUT NOT LEAL.

We oft by lightning read in darkest nights ;
And by your passions I read all your nature
Though you at other times can keep it dark."

Care we.

The party with whom Georgina Leyton was
travelling was dining that evening at a table
in the restaurant of the Hotel Continental,
Milan. It had lost its interest to her since
two younger men had gone on to Venice.
Georgie never wasted her time on women ;
nor was Mrs. Pellew interesting in herself,
and elderly Mr. Pellew was of that staid
type of husband-courier who did not count
as a man.

So when her temporary chaperon observed
: " We shall be sorry to lose you,"

Georgina Leyton scarcely answered, but continued
to gaze out on the square wherein
the omnibus might be expected to rattle ina
few minutes, bringing Sir Ralph Carstairs.
Had Georgie wished to talk, or had there
been any one near whom she would have
liked to pose before as an amusing woman
even at a distance, she would have practised
her wiles albeit only on her elderly fellow-travellers.
But as the diners near were
quite " impossible," Georgie remained passive
; and when the omnibus came in and
did not bring her cousin she was too
dispirited to make any cutting remarks
on live load or dead luggage. Why had he
not come ? Had he gone straight through ?

coo

Dinner over, she followed Mrs. Pellew
indifferently into the passage, where marble
statuettes and casts for sale simper and grin

on the curious folk who stroll round their
domain. Facing the door of the restaurant
a mysterious direction confronts the traveller
: a hand points to nowhere, apparently,
but to a glass case beneath advertisements,
and bids the passer-by know that there is
the English Church! While Mrs. Pellew
solved the problem thereby presented,
Georgie, who cared for none of these
things, disconsolately threw herself into
an American chair, wondering how she
was to get through the evening alone
with the elder Pellets, and " not a decent-looking
'"' man even in sight.

But somehow she had missed seeing the
arrival of Sir Ralph, who had not come
by the omnibus, and whose voice now
raised her dormant energies.

As he came up to her Georgie Leyton

changed from discontented languor to self-possessed
vivacity. Except lie were a quick
observer, previously, any stranger would
have pronounced her uninteresting. Now,
she had a little colour under the skin,
smooth but not fair, suiting the dark hair ;
her eyes became bright and her smile
gave a piquancy which passed for pleasantness
to her face. She was certainly what
is called a good-looking girl, with the added
stamp of that distinction which impresses
itself on one who has had some experience
of being thought attractive.

So you're there, Pussy cat ! " said Sir
Ralph by way of greeting; "looking fit
enough too. You're not afraid of a month
of Vera, more or less diluted by any
amusement you can pick up for yourself?
Eemember, I guarantee you nothing but

VOL. I. 4

what the servants call your ' keep,' not
even a welcome from your hostess."

This speech was blended into Georgie's
greeting of him, and he continued : " Introduce
me to those people and get it over ;
I hope you've shaken them off for tomorrow
morning ? "

Did you arrange it ? "

Oh ! Yera does not know that I stay
here the night, or that you get to Milan
before tomorrow ; I did not trouble her
with superfluous explanations."

Sir Ralph was a different man when, he
was amusing himself, as was Georgie when
amused. They laughed together ; the pleasant
laugh of intimates with a private joke
against a mutual friend, and on excellent
terms — perhaps too excellent — with each
other.

Mrs. Pellew wants to know whom I've
picked up," said Georgie. "I told her you
might be coming and hadn't got here."

"Won't she go to bed, and leave you
with your cousin? Have you dined, Puss?
Come and eat with me."

I can't eat two dinners in an hour ;
but if you're good and have some champagne
I'll take it, and watch you eat on
condition that you open that window ; we
shall have the hotel-restaurant to ourselves
at this hour. Oh, Mrs. Pellew, let me
introduce my cousin, Sir Ralph Carstairs,"
she continued, as that lady drawing nearer
showed symptoms of impatience.

A few conventional words passed ; then
Georgie announced : " I am going to watch
him feed ; he says he isn't shy."

Mrs. Pellew looked a little doubtful ; she

4—2

had only had temporary charge of the
younger lady, but even in that time had
learnt that chaperons were made for Georgie's
neglect. So in a few minutes more the
cousins found themselves in the restaurant
Georgie had lately left in silence. This time
her tongue did not rest. No one else was
there— only the polyglot waiter came in at
intervals, till a-wearied he too departed, and,
seeing a lady and gentleman well occupied
together, even left the most junior of waiters
to sell the hotel cigars if he could.

Inflicting on this personage disappointment
by producing cigarettes, Sir Ralph talked
over his dessert in a contented, good-humoured
fashion.

Now, T don't say, Georgie, that you're
going to enjoy Cadenabbia ; it is rather likely
that you won't," he said with his slower

manner and air of egotism at ease after a
good dinner.

Well," she replied, pulling at a bangle on
her wrist, " on the whole I prefer being your
guest when you are there ! No, thanks ; not
in a public place like this," as he offered her
the cigarettes ; it's awfully tempting, so don't
do it again ! But, you see, after Vera was so
stupid last year, it was, as you said, a capital
thing to go to her alone ; of course, I appreciate
your part of the business ; and it just
suited me."

'swell, it ought to," he rejoined; "I've
had enough worry between the two of

you."

Tell me, did Vera ask me as a sort of
test to see if I'd go to her when you weren't
there, or because she thought she'd do the
civil here to get it done with ? " inquired

Georgie, with curiosity, but quite complacently.


You're always rather brutal, Georgie,"
he said, with a laugh. " I reply in the same
spirit of candour, that till to-day Vera had no
idea you were coming to her, or that she was
to stay in Italy ; otherwise you'd never have
had that sweet little note of let bygones be
bygones that I wrung out of her the other
day. Vera's weak enough to be governed by
an appeal to what she calls her conscience ;
that's how you got that letter, my dear ! She
doesn't do things by halves either, though ;
planning this, I only wanted her to write;
I didn't want her to apologize."

Little she knew of the other letter that
came with hers ; would you like to compare
them now ? I've got it here."

'for goodness' sake, child! don't keep my

letters," exclaimed Sir Ralph with some haste.
I declare I'll not write unless you remember
your promise."

It will be your loss," said Georgie with a
flash in her dark eyes. " Your letters are
amusing certainly at times, but I can live
without them ! "

Yours lately have been dull enough in all
conscience — certainly not worth postage tome.
But, repartee and joking apart, give me
that letter or destroy it yourself at once.
Just think, if you dropped it by chance ! "

Isn't it the correct thing for a young lady
to show her correspondence to her chaperon
? " said Georgie mischievously.

What do you know about the correct
thing, pray ? " replied Carstairs laughing, a
little uneasily however. That particular
letter was candid — too candid for publication

and perhaps Georgie might retain sufficient
elements of young ladyhood to leave her
letters about in a casual fashion.

I have thoughts of trying the correct
thing for a change. I met rather a prig of a
man the other day, who took me for a proper
young lady and discoursed platitudes. Do
you know what he said to me ? "

What the man said to you ? What a
man might say to you is a large order ; I
rather limit the field of speculation and
wonder what any man would not say to
you," he replied airily.

If you have not self-respect enough to
draw the line in the right place," said
Georgie, with a sudden tightening of the
curves round her firm chin, " I'll thank you
not to suppose that others do not — that
others do as you do."

Here she lost herself a little, and appeared
annoyed ; she had betrayed herself by taking
him au grand series.

Don't be ridiculous, Pussy ! Have
another glass of champagne — just a little
more. If I can't say what I like to you,
who should ? "

He forced her to look at him, and with
some lingering unwillingness she smiled a
little. But once in the wrong vein a mangoes
on saying the unpleasant, even when he
means to please, and so Carstairs, only wishing
to be complimentary, got on to the
dubious ground of approval of that of which
perhaps even George Leyton was consciously
ashamed.

Why, we are relations and friends, and it
was just a chance we weren't more after all!
How sensible you were! So many girls

would have never seen that there was no
earthly reason why we should not return to
our old relationships when we found that
other things had fitted in somewhat unexpectedly.
I don't think we should have goton
together if we couldn't have got away
from each other, you know ; so it's all for
the best."

Georgie suddenly moved a little and looked
behind her. " Is that Mr. Pellew coming ?
No. Go on. What were we talking of?
Oh ! I remember," she said suddenly, deliberately
forgetting two or three links of the
chain ; " I was telling you about my prig.
He discoursed for an hour — he was rather

good-looking "

Oh, I see why you listened."
I very often have to listen to men
who don't know their defects in that way,

relations and friends you see, so my eyes
like to rest sometimes. He was good-looking,
in earnest, and didn't know my
flippant nature, so I actually remember
what he said, even though he was rather
a bore ! Can you ever forgive a man
who begins a conversation with the
idea that he is going to improve you at
the end of it? One meets so many of
them now-a-days."

Hopeless task," said Sir Ralph, not
so interested but rather fascinated by
watching Georgie, who made a face at
the irresistible retort, with its following :
Of course, to improve you is impossible,
the perfect — pussy cat ! "

A perfect donkey might be improved
if he'd use his ears sometimes ! " she said.

I understand you listened to that

end? Excuse me, you said you listened,
didn't you ? Isn't that using your ears ? "

Georgie did not pursue the subject — she
had let him lazily score; her revenge was
to annoy. " He said," she continued, " that
the mistakes of life arose from people
never seeing into each other's modes of
thought, and that every one ought to try
to make every one know what every one
else was like "

"Heaven forbid!"

Of course, he did not put it like that.
You've annoyed me to-night, and so I'm
making mistakes ; but anyhow, he said
that whenever one saw two people suffering
from being related without sympathy,
one should try to bring them into
harmony. Now suppose I had a mission
near home? Suppose I said that you and

Vera were splendid subjects to practise
on ? Well — how could I make her know
what you were like better than by showing
her that letter ? " said Georgie with
her half-pleasant smile.

Sir Ralph felt the sting, as intended.
He put on something of the manner which
by the irony of fate he chiefly used to
Vera herself, not to the woman with
whom he was accustomed to discuss his
wife.

I suppose you think you understand
me" he said drily ; " we will let that
pass — probably you are satisfied with your
success."

This was a cowardly stab; they both
knew that. Georgie never flinched. She
had had bad luck since his allusion to
their relations, and, like most women, she

usually appeared to disadvantage in retorting
on him she would have ruled. However,
she looked at him steadily, and reaped as
much victory as may be gained by one
whose armour wards off a thrust, but is
tinted into the bruised flesh beneath the
blow.

You understand me," he continued ;
well, do you understand Vera ? "

What do you mean ? "

Like it or lump it ! simply this," he
went on with unwonted energy of expression
; " you're sharp enough, the devil
knows, for most things, but if you lived
to be a hundred you'd never make out
Vera."

She left a good deal of room for
misunderstanding when she made the row
about our riding last year? She's a soo —

I mean she can't conceal her feelings — so
she puts herself at my mercy over andover
again. Understand her?"

Georgie laughed with two-fold scorn ;
for Vera, and for the man who had
turned upon her for action he encouraged.

"She may put herself at your mercy,"
he said, as roughly as if he had spoken
to Vera herself, " though pray don't deceive
yourself; if she knew how to use
it she has as much ability in her little
finger as you have in all your body !
But if she does seem like twenty fools,
no woman of your sort ever yet understood
a good woman's nature."

How dare you, Ralph ? " said Georgie
Leyton in real and, to some extent, rightful
wrath.

Dare ? " he said with a laugh. " Oh,

come ; at this time of day I'd dare most
things with you, and there isn't much in
that. Would you like to be a good
woman ? Not yo u. Vera is a famous
example — she's a bore and a bungler, but
she does not know what it is to lift a
finger to get an advantage for herself.
That wouldn't suit your book, Pussy."

If you cannot talk with more sense and
more civility I shall go. I am very sorry I
came, and "

Gently," he said, satisfied with what he
had done in the way of correction of his
own disloyalty in another, whom yet he
really cared for as he cared for his cousin
Georgina Leyton ; " now, don't fire up.
We'll talk of something better. I was only
saying this for your good."

For my good ? " she answered bitterly,

with flashing angry eyes. "Did you ever dome
good in your life ? Since eight years
ago, when I was still quite a child "

Excuse me, you never were a child
since I knew you ; you were younger, I
allow. But you say you were a child eight
years ago "

Yes ; in thought, in innocence "

Of a kind," he persisted* taking pleasure
in seeing her wince and colour. " Eight
years ago ! What a memory you have ! "

My memory has less to burden it
than yours."

Well, eight years ago ? " he said, to
see if she would speak.

Eight years ago you began to behave
like a blackguard to me. I count that
from the first moment that we met."

Never had Georgie thrust with more

VOL. I. 5

right or with more dignity, and, though
spoken in anger, this truth went home.
After a pause he could only say with
unsuccessful insolence — unsuccessful because
appearing an attempt to cover a retreat :
You have been uncommonly lenient to a
blackguard then— for eight years ! Hullo ! "
he said, as she rose in anger at last, " I
say, don't go ; I haven't meant anything.
Pussy ! Georgie ! "

But for once — alas ! it was only for once
Georgie retreated in dignity, and he could
scarcely cover his own astonishment, even
to the eyes of the afar-off inquiring young
waiter, by springing up to open the door
as if the retirement of mademoiselle had
been not unexpected though evidently precipitate.
He was vexed with himself, not
that he had given pain or had been unchivalrous

but, that he had driven her
away when she might have amused him till
bedtime. It was not worth while going
out, and he pitied his own dulness.

Chance, however, favoured him with a
companion till then unknown, but with
whom he had a link of which he wotted
nothing.

0^5^

5-2

A SHALLOW STREAM.

"Of very soft society and great showing; indeed, to
speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of
gentry."- —Ha let.

Seen him before or only his type ? " soliloquized
Carstairs idly as another Englishman
swung the door open, and with no
signs of travel about him proceeded to eat
at an hour which none but an ultra-fashionable
of the future could consider as
dinner-able.

More discomposed by Georgie's absence
in the present than by her arraignment of
him in the past, Sir Ralph scanned the
companion of his solitude. " Tall, fair,
good-looking, probably about eight-and-twenty,

well-groomed head set on square
shoulders, pleasant voice, excellent manner ;
now, should I say he was clever? No —
thinks he is ; not a barrister but some sort
of standing like that. Wonder where I've
seen him ? "

The young man ran his fingers over the
table as if playing a tune. " Of course,"
continued Sir Ralph, who had that knack
of remembering faces which those in whom
it is born specially cultivate if they have
to live on the public, " I knew I had met
him ; it's Paul Wordsworth's nephew, Grey
Meredith."

Paul Wordsworth, as every one knows, is
one of England's strong men. To Paul
Wordsworth as yet Carstairs had not made
himself commendable ; to Paul Wordsworth
Carstairs earnestly desired to be invaluable.

Sure of his man, Sir Ealpli consulted
his mental note-book : " People whom I
ought to secure ;" and there, as he smoked
on, he found recorded the entrance of
this young man to the House a year ago
at a by-election, coming soon after he had
inherited some property and changed his
name from something or other on that
account. " Better know him than not," had
been the impression of Carstairs ; " he is
insignificant, but a link to others. Your
independent member by profession has to
be your dependent touter in practice."

Partly for this reason, partly because
Carstairs was an egotist in the minutest
detail of his life, he chose to make an
introduction of the, under such circumstances,
natural casual talk of two men
obviously of the same nation and nurture.

Meredith, of course, was cognizant of the
position of Carstairs, and aware of another
fact, that Carstairs had married and did not
appreciate Vera Ludlow. He showed no
alacrity to respond to the civilities of his
senior in age and position, though in his
turn Meredith might have well put Carstairs
down on a list of " People who can
get me on." But even as a struggling
man he had not paid the usual nineteenth-century
attention to the right people to
know ; nor had exercised the proper
neglect of the people whom he could get
no advantage from. Now well off, he did
no better. He did not like Carstairs — voila
tout.

Sorry to hear of your illness ; suppose
that's what brought you away from home,"
Carstairs said after the preliminary speech,

with his urbane manner of talking to a masculine
equal. It was strange that delighting
to be with women — with some women —
he appeared always to much better advantage
with any or with all men, and knew
himself to have the qualities of success
rather than of sympathy. Therefore men
appreciated his abilities most when they
knew who owned them. And, as now,
in the simple comment there was not the
genuine ring of pleasant feeling, there
was the flattery that Car stairs, who had
so much to think of, should remember
the illness of a new member. By this
time Meredith answered less stiffly.

Not quite the pleasantness thing in the
world to have typhoid in one's second
session, and be utterly disabled for two
months. However, I'm fit enough now.

My only excuses are my doctor's fad and
the convenience of a friend who paired
with me, and I'm bringing my mother out,
too, like a dutiful son ! "

They talked of Italian lakes and of
English politics, and as they stood up to
separate Meredith said what he had wished
to say, as a stranger may remark on any
well-known fact.

I trust Lady Carstairs is stronger ? "

With the casual manner natural when
speaking of his wife, Carstairs answered :

Thanks, yes ; her illness has been
chiefly nervous for a long time. But I
think she will be all right when she gets
back to town."

"Is she with you here?" said Meredith
with a little hesitation. Perhaps he
was not sure whether Carstairs would

resent or wonder at the question from a
stranger.

No," said Carstairs, " I'm a bachelor
for the moment." His wife's movements
did not interest him, and he had no idea
that they could interest Grey Meredith,
any more than he had an idea that eyes
were scrutinizing him to see what the
husband of Yera Ludlow was like ; that
Grey Meredith was surveying him with a
contempt for which certain old memories
of Vera Ludlow were responsible ; or that
Grey Meredith all unconsciously was on his
way to see what her husband had made of
Vera Ludlow. If Grey Meredith had known
it perhaps he would have gone elsewhere.

Carstairs presently went to the reading-room.
He looked at the bettered table
and at the clock, and then wrote a note :

"Dear Pussy, — If you want to coin out
shopping with me I'll be ready tomorrow
at 10.30. Have your things ready, and
I'll take you to the tram at one and see
you off. We needn't come back here.
Send me a line with your wishes in
morning. — E. V. C.

Pes. — As we have so little time, Pussy
must be amiable."

This was directed and sent up to Miss
Leyton.

Certainly after what had passed it did
not say much either for man or woman
that apology and forgiveness should take
this form ; but he had had experience, and
therefore Sir Ralph had not miscalculated
the effect of this note.

Georgie did not stand on her dignity
when her greediness could be gratified, anymore

than on her conscience when her
convenience was concerned.

She had said good-bye to her chaperon,
given directions to the courier, and was
ready before ten o'clock to go out with
her cousin till it was time to start from
the station whence the tram conveyed
passengers to the Como steamer. She
knew the shops in Milan were excellent,
and though her outburst had been genuine,
recalling it in daylight she was only glad
as it worked as a lever to excite Carstairs
to action. She was not disappointed.
They scarcely noticed Leonardo da Vinci
standing in his majestic aspect in the
square, but as they passed through the
great Galleries Victor Emmanuel, talking
and laughing, they picked up a valet de
place, and loaded him with many a

package — gloves, knick-knacks, scents and
an enormous packet of sweets. Opposite,
the cathedral is seen sparklingly white
against the blue sky, but Georgie was not
ready for that. A tiny diamond pin
glittered among its fellows in one of the
windows, from which it was taken to
fasten the lace escaping from its place on
Georgie's neck.

That was all the shopping Carstairs
meant to do for her that day, as Georgie
was aware by instinct, and the new hat
she had hoped for could easily be paid for
out of her savings on the gloves, which for
long enough would cost her nothing. So
making a virtue of necessity she proposed
that they should go to the cathedral.
They ought to see it, "Unless," she added,
you have anything to buy for Vera."

This was to show she intended to jest on
the subject again.

You're a wicked girl, Puss ; you know
you are," he said, delighted with her
roguish look, and taking it, as Georgie
expected, as an extra ingredient in his
pleasure to mark the contrast between his
liberality to his cousin and his neglect of
his wife.

Do we want this man with us ? Could
he be sent to the station with the
things r " she asked.

The matter was arranged. Then they
sauntered in the fresh sunshine across the
Piazza, its busy life dwarfed in contrast
with the pile above, and they entered into
the great hush of the shadowed cathedral,
which awed Georgie and appealed to the
aesthetic feelings of Carstairs.

It was a festival, soon after Easter, and
High Mass was proceeding at the east end;
the discordant music of the careless choristers
toned by the great spaces above and
around; and in the distance the smoke of
incense fluttered in the light in mysterious
stillness. If everywhere, save faraway
round the high altar and in a little
side-chapel, there was constant movement
and curious observation, yet a still sacredness
was over all, and under the influence
of the monument of the faith of centuries the
two worldlings hushed their flippant speech.

As they reached the centre Georgie
whispered :

Vera would like this ; " for once with
no malice in the remembrance.

Yes," he said ; " she stayed here for
one afternoon and wanted to come again."

"More than I should like to do," said
Georgie. " It's very beautiful, of course,
but "

Madame would wish to ascend the
staircase outside the Duomo ? " inquired a
voice — that of a cathedral-guide.

Bather go to the silver chapel."

But the chapel was shut where San
Carlo Borrowed lies enshrined, and
Georgie had a fancy to go outside. Yes,
they would have time ; at least they could
go up to the botanical garden.

And not one step further, Puss, do I
go," asseverated Sir Ralph, when they had
reached the leads from whence is viewed
the richly-carved florence decorations of the
flying buttresses from nave to aisle.

"I should like to go up," she said.
« Will it take long ? "

They might have time," said the
guide.

But Carstairs remonstrated. He was not
going up, and if he went, what chance was
there for a rational being to converse,
cork screwing round a stone pillar for half
an hour, and losing his breath, and his
head ultimately ? There was no view at
that hour and season, and if there were he
thought Georgie might give way. So she
did, and they walked on the leads and
forgot to look at the gigantic statues, or
to marvel anew at the myriad carvings, till,
recollecting the time, they hastened down,
and overtook Grey Meredith at the foot of
the staircase. The men exchanged a word
or two, and lifting his hat to Georgie as
they parted outside the Duomo, Grey
Meredith apologized to Carstairs for his

VOL. I. 6

haste. He was afraid of being late at the
station.

Who is he ? " said Georgie.

From his companion's point of view this
time Carstairs gave a sketch of Meredith's
career so far as he knew it : that Meredith
had unexpectedly inherited wealth, that he
had gone into the House a short time
before, and finally that he was quite worth
marrying.

Never thought of it, or I would have
introduced him. Well, if you meet him
again, don't let him slip through your
fingers, Georgie ; he is by no means a millionaire,
but you might do worse."

"I'll remember," said Georgie demurely.
Perhaps we shall see him in town."

I certainly intend to make him come
to us, if Vera doesn't frighten every one

away," rejoined her cousin. " He told me
he was going to the Lakes ; so if you come
across him, mind that Vera is civil to him.
I wish I had introduced him to you ; no
fear of your being too reserved to a decent-looking
man, eh Puss?"

I am afraid that my original standard
has been dragged down by the weight of
your influence. It would not do to be
always particular about a man's looks,"
she said, with one of her side glances, as
if playfully deprecating his appearance.

They reached the station in good time,
and Georgie was settled into her place,
with food for body and mind. She had
no maid with her, but Eustace was to escort
her to Cadenabbia, and Carstairs had to
leave her in his care before the tram started.

The courier, not wanted, retreated to find

G 2

his place. There were few passengers by
the tram-cars that day ; and when an old
lady and her companion attempted to get
in to her compartment, Georgie's behaviour
so obviously suggested that she did not
want them, that they went on to the next

carriage.

"There's room here, Mrs. Winter," she
heard the companion say to the fretful
elderly lady.

"Glad there is," was the next remark
which came down the open centre of the tram
in a high-pitched tone. " There is an ill-bred
young woman, whom I wouldn't travel
with for any sum of money, in that part
of this extraordinary conveyance. Are you
quite sure this goes to Como ? Where's
my son ? I know he'll be left behind.
Why can't you call him?"

The man came for tickets. Carstairs got
out, still laughing over the old lady and
Georgie. If she had had any one to speak
to, Georgie would have mimicked the
anxious mother after shutting the door
between the compartments. The old lady's
companion and herself met as both were
in the act of attempting to cut off communication
in this way.

Returning to her seat, with just a faint
reflection that the pale-faced, ostentatiously
simply-dressed girl, who had to be at this
lady's call always, was younger than herself,
Georgie was about to dismiss the old
lady from her mind, when up came the
old lady's missing son — Grey Meredith.

Georgie was one of those women who
resent any good-looking man of their own
class being in their neighbourhood without

paying them attention, and very sorry was
the young lady that she had not been
more civil to another traveller. After all,
though rarely, men may not only have
mothers, but may travel with them ; and
frumps " sometimes have good-looking
sons with money, who may prefer that
their mothers should be treated with deference.
However, on the other hand,
such little mistakes never prevent a man
who wants to ignore them from finding
out an attractive woman. If Mr. Grey
Meredith did not find Miss Leyton was
attractive at Cadenabbia that was his loss,
not hers.

Still, it was a bother that this time was
wasted. Surely he might leave his mother
to herself and her companion, and walk
along the tram. He did do so once ; but,

though he recognized Georgie as the companion
of Carstairs, naturally it was not
his place to address her ; nor had she just
then any pretext for arresting him on his
return.

Fate favoured her. The tram divides
into two parts suddenly, and the courier,
who ought to have known better, was left
behind in the Yaresa portion as Georgie
went forward with the Como carriages.
The courier would not be able to get on
further than Como that day. There Georgie
could not stay alone ; and as soon as this
was discovered Meredith, who saw her
difficulty, came to the rescue, when the little
meeting in the morning was as good as an
introduction. They soon arranged about the
details of the journey, and Meredith found
himself installed as Georgie's courier.

Nothing could have been better than the
accident of Eustace remaining in the Varesa
tram. Of course it was natural that Georgie
should be introduced to his mother ; and,
when on the steamer Mrs. Winter preferred
to go below, it was as natural that
Meredith should take care of Georgie on
the deck.

They talked of mutual acquaintances
quickly discovered ; they talked of experiences
of travel and table dlwte ; yet
somehow Georgie did not mention whom
she was going to stay w with at Cadenabbia ;
and one thing rather bored her, that Meredith,
though very civil and attentive, was
perfectly ready to admire the scenery or
scan the passengers. On the whole, though
she knew he must be used to society, her
attention-analytical mind came to the dis-illuminating

conclusion that the intention
to please necessary to a success esprit
came from her side, not from his !

ALLIES.

I am boy to them all three." — Henry V.

As she came to see Vera next morning
Anice Bentley was met with warm and
ready welcome. Vera could scarcely explain
to herself the pleasure which the
presence of this young girl gave her.
They talked for about twenty minutes and
then Vera said, " I wonder if you could be
spared to go for a little walk with me this
afternoon."

Anice eagerly assented, explaining that
she was the " odd one " of the party, who
was rather expected to find her own
amusements.

There is one girl here whom I don't
like, and have often to go out with,
because, you see, mother sees so little of
my sister, and my sister of her husband,
in town, and they have so much to talk
about which they won't talk of before me.
I think it is a little tiresome to be much
the youngest of a busy family. Oh! I can
go quite well. I know they wont want me."

I shall have to be back at four to
meet my cousin, but you'll come in and
have tea w T with us."

You'll want to talk to her alone, won't
you ? " said Anice doubtfully.

Vera smiled a little. She want to talk
to Georgina Leyton alone !

"Not at all. I shall see as much of
Miss Leyton as I want to. I'll ask Charlie
Carstairs and his tutor to come in also.

You don't know my young brother-in-law?
He's rather a nice boy, but horribly idle ;
lie's supposed to be reading here."

Oh ! I know him," said Anice smiling ;
he and a cousin of mine used to compete
for the lowest places in the form ; but he
rows well, and is a very nice boy."

He was her own nge, of course. At this
moment he entered, in white flannels and blue
sash, looking as bonny a specimen of the
athletic English youth as one could meet
with. Behind him his tutor, only some
seven years his senior, but with no trace
of youthful looks ; an emaciated little man,
adding spectacles to his boating costume,
and, because his legs were particularly bad,
wearing tight knickerbockers and striped
stockings, as such men will always do.

They came to see if Vera would go out

on the lake with them, and finding that
Anice would be delighted to go with her,
the four departed with an unfulfilled stipulation
on the part of Vera that she should
be allowed to return in time to meet her
cousin. But they went further than they
intended, and between Georgie Leyton and
Charlie Carstairs no love was lost, so that
Georgie arrived at Cadenabbia and Vera
was not there to receive her.

Georgie waited a few moments and saw
no face she recognized. Not pleased when,
having arranged his mother's things, Grey
Meredith came to her, Georgie said, " I
thought that my cousin would at least
have sent her maid to me, even if she supposed
me to have a courier."

For whom shall I ask ? " said Grey,
busy with her parcels.

Didn't I tell you ? Lady Carstairs."

I thought she had returned to England
with her husband," exclaimed Grey involuntarily.


No, or I shouldn't be here. Thanks,
very much. I am not really helpless ; it
is only that one doesn't like to arrive without
a welcome, you know."

"Even the appearance of that must bea
novelty to you," said Grey readily. " I
am sure it is only an accident."

Georgie's internal conviction that it was
Vera's mode of showing displeasure and a
secret resolution to revenge herself for the
slight were not allowed to appear till she
found herself alone with Vera's maid.

Bennett was a woman whom Sir Ralph
insisted on keeping as his wife's attendant
against her will. Bennett liked and admired

Georgie, and, just keeping on the
safe side of impertinence, covertly showed
that she despised Yera, her present mistress.
She had been with the late Lady
Carstairs, Georgie's aunt, and knew more
than most people about the relations between
the cousins ; she had seen Georgie
when she beard of Sir Ralph's engagement
to Miss Ludlow.

Lady Carstairs left no message for me ?
Has been gone for some hours? On purpose,
I suppose ! " said Georgie, flinging
herself into a chair.

She said no word, good, bad, or indifferent,
about you, Miss Georgie ; she just
went off this morning with Mr. Carstairs
and that tutor of his — much tutoring they
do in a place like this — and a Miss Bentley's
gone with them. Finch took your room

for you yesterday ; Sir Kalph's room it
was."

Georgie looked up interrogatively.

Yes, miss ; Sir Ealpli made a mistake,
as we know right well. She's quite well
enough now for anything — has been this
long time ; but she's kept up the pretence
of nerves and what not. I have no
patience with her — that I haven't ! She
never went out with Sir Ralph all the time
she was at Monty Carlo, and to-day she
goes out streaming with Mr. Carstairs and
a couple of strangers for hours, and never
so much as says, ' Bennett, if I'm not back
in time, see that Miss Leyton has what
she wants.' "

It's abominable," said Georgie. " Get
me some tea, there's a good Bennett. Is it
very quiet here ? "

As Georgie made herself at home, the
boating party arrived. Vera came in first,
followed by Anice and the others. Her
own regret at having been uncourteous to
one to whom she could only give politeness,
made her welcome warmer than it
might otherwise have been, and the day
on the lake had done her much good.
She had tried not to be a wet blanket to
Anice and Charlie, and had ended by
laughing with them.

I am so sorry, Georgie," she said, with
genuine apology ; " you must have thought
it strange that I let you arrive without
even a message of welcome ; but you see
that proved my intention of being here.
Do you know Miss Bentley? I am so sorry
you found no one in."

"It's of no consequence at all," said

VOL. I. 7

Georgie, in a tone that implied that it
was.

"I daresay you'll get over it," broke in
Charlie. "Did Finch bring my things
from Milan?"

If he did, he isn't here ; he can't
arrive till tomorrow."
"How's that?"
Georgie explained.

What a nuisance ! " grumbled the boy.
"I wanted my things."

How did you manage ? " said Vera.
You have been doubly unfortunate, I am
afraid."

Georgie replied in a dry tone that she
had managed very well, but vouchsafed no
further information.

Her manner to Vera was decidedly cold,
and most unmistakably that of conscious

superiority. Had Vera been able to
show resentment thus, it would have saved
her from much aggression a year or two
ago. Not in the least impressed by an
amiability which, noticing, Georgie probably
classed as weakness, she soon extinguished
not only Vera's welcome, but her flicker of
new animation. Georgie always treated
younger girls with infinite disdain. Anice
took a sudden dislike to her at first-sight,
with which she found Charlie Carstairs
fully sympathized. A boy too young, ora
man not attracted by such a woman,
always loathes her, however she avoids
any vulgarity. With all her vulgar
minor vices, with all her vulgar selfishness,
with all her unrefined thoughts,
Georgie Leyton was never apparently
vulgar, though why she was not it would

have been hard to say. But if she were
not vulgar she was frequently rude.

So it happened that after dinner Charlie
Carstairs thought it of no use beginning
to work then, and asked Vera to come outwith
him. She consented, if Georgie was
not too tired. Georgie replied that she
did not wish to go out ; but that need
not prevent Vera from doing so. To
which Vera, nettled by the tone, replied
rather curtly that very likely Georgie
would prefer to rest alone.

You seem to be stronger," said Georgie
with a sneer.

I am, thank you," Vera replied ; and
wrapping her cloak round her went outwith
Charlie. How her young brother-in-law
also hated Georgie Vera now first
understood.

CHARLIE'S OPINION. 101

I say, Vera," said he, " why on earth
did } f ou let the Pussy cat come here ?
She's a perfect beast, and you know she

hates you like the d I mean like

poison. Why on earth do you let her
come to you ? She's no relation of yours ;
you may thank your stars for that."

Why do you dislike her ? " replied
Vera, with a question more easily asked
than she could have answered his demands.

Oh, she's a pig," he said vaguely. " I
say, isn't it jolly? The sort of dreaminess
of the whole thing, you know, with the
nightingales and the fireflies and all the
proper sort of sceneries. I knew you'd
like to get out of the way of all the
people ; and now we'll go down to the lake."

In effect he had taken her up through
the woods behind the hotel, and now led

lier by a narrow little path towards the
darkened waters. The melody of the
nightingales rose from the flickering trees,
and the cool night air was laden with the
scent peculiar to a Cadenabbian springtide
night — a penetrating subtle perfume of
white rose, magnolia, azalea and laurel,
spreading wherever the breeze rose and
fell on the quiet shore. The sturdy, apparently
unsentimental, youth at her side
was quite awake to those stray influences of
beauty and sensitive to the soothing peacefulness
of the scene. He did not fear to
show it to his sister-in-law, but rather felt
his words too rude — as indeed more poetic
utterances than his have been — to express
how that mystical loveliness affected even
his careless nature.

They said very little as they walked.

Are you tired ? " lie asked once.

No, if we are not leaving Georgie alone
too long."

"Bother Georgie! Now look at those
fireflies," he interrupted.

They stopped to watch the little sparks
of pale light above the lake. All was
very still, only in the distance a little
laughter, and nearer, footsteps passing.

"You like it?" said the boy, delighted
to please his fair pale sister, for Charlie,
without knowing it, was a little hungry
for love ; the Carstairs brothers had few or
none belonging to them, except Georgie
Leyton.

"Like it?" said Vera. "Thank you,
Charlie. To-day has been very nice, and I
owe it to your thought twice over. I am
so glad to be here," she continued.

It is jolly*' lie responded, and Vera knew
that this meant full appreciation of the
quiet loveliness they felt. " I wish people
wouldn't come. Let's go on."

I mustn't ; I'm afraid of being tired.
But you go. I can return by myself; you
can get some one more amusing."

A fellow doesn't always want humbug.
Look here, Vera ; I wish you'd remember
I'm older than I was, and if Ralph is
rusty you might tell me. I'm quite willing
to stick up to him. I've told him already
that you are a deal too good for him, and
that he'd have a better time of it if he
was half as civil to his own wife as to that
beast Georgie."

Vera was nonplussed at this unexpected
evidence of observation and execration on
behalf of herself from careless Charlie.

You shouldn't say such things. It is
very good of you to think of me ; but if you
were a little older you would know that
husband and wife must settle their own
little quarrels. Of course, there should be
none, but to you I can't deny them."

I should think not ! " ejaculated Charlie.
I don't call it quarrelling ; I call it bullying,
though."

Who is coming alon* the road ? " said
Vera, to change the subject. " Any one
you know ? "

"It might be. But don't humbug,
Vera. It's awfully serious. If you've got
to live with Ralph you'll have to get the
upper hand more than you've done; and
you'll have to fight for it too. Now, look
here, you can depend on some of us "

Charlie," said Vera, " I know you mean

well, and that you are a boy no longer,"
she hastened to add, " but you don't understand
that there are some things which it is of
no use talking of, and one of them is, how
your brother is to be treated by his wife."

Considering what I've seen of how
his wife is treated by my brother, and
that she has no one to stand up for her

but " He paused ; then facing the

new-comer, as Vera had her back to him,
Charlie exclaimed : " By Jove ! Meredith !
How are you, old chap ? "

Meredith, sauntering along with his
cigarette, had paid no heed to the figures
by the water's edge, and through the
dusk, till he spoke, had not recognized
Charlie Carstairs.

Vera heard the name, but it conveyed
nothing to her, and she turned a little

further round that Charlie might speak, if
he chose, to his friend.

Charlie, however, was determined to introduce
Meredith, but as he attracted
Yera's notice for the purpose she and Grey
recognized each other.

Of course, Charlie saw nothing, but only
that his introduction was unnecessary.

Had I seen your face," Grey explained,
or, indeed, anything in this darkness and
my unobservant mood, of course I should
have asked you if you had forgotten Grey
Winter. I have only been ' Meredith '
for a year ; it sounds as if I had done
something of which I was ashamed that I
have had to change my name ; but I
don't deserve to be cut yet, so far as I
know."

The three paced on together in the stillness,

and, lazily, and indifferently it appeared,
Grey put his arm on Charlie's shoulder
and put the youth on the other side of
himself, as he walked bv Vera. It was
natural that he should wish to be between
them, but so long as Charlie was there
Grey Meredith only talked vague generalities,
from which the boy gathered that
they had not seen each other for a longtime.


Not till the light of the hall fell on the
trio could Grey see Vera's face, and note
how the pretty childish girl had become
a beautiful woman ; not till then could
Vera scan the face of the man whom she
first had loved. She knew instantly, as
women know, that she loved him no more,
could never love him again ; he felt, as
men feel, suddenly an intense attraction.

After they parted, with some talk of the
morrow and an invitation, not pressed, to
come up then, Charlie rapidly, with warm
respect, recounted his knowledge of Meredith,
adding : " Anice Bentley pretends
she isn't, but I'm sure she is, awfully
prone on him ; and you'll see how George
will try to make the running."

You'd get on faster if you devoted
some of your intellect to your books, my
dear boy," said Vera ; " you'll see too much
more than exists — soon, besides not passing

your exam."

Charlie whistled then, and lie made a face
a little later, when, Vera remarked, for
something to say, that they had had a
lovely walk and had met Mr. Meredith
as they returned. For Georgie answered :
"Mr. Meredith was extremely attentive tome

as I came here, and 1 told him that
he might call on me — on us — tomorrow."

"Don't correct yourself, Miss Puss," replied
Charlie. "'Me' shall have her visitors,
me ' shall ; but if you had only happened to
say before the last moment that you were
going to stay with Lady Carstairs, he'd have
told you that he came to Cadenabbia only
to see her whom he had adored for years.
Isn't that true, Vera ? "

He gave her the most open wink, as in
sheer mischief he evolved this false statement,
which came not far from the truth in someways
of which he had not the slightest idea.

You are perfectly insufferable," said
Georgie, only believing that he was laughing
at her.

44 You don't think so, do you, Vera?" he
said, lolling about.

"Yes, Charlie, sometimes," she said
gravely; and, somewhat to his own astonishment,
Charlie felt that he was obliged to be
quiet.

THE TABLES TURNED.

To Cadenabbia, which the Soul of Rest,

World-worn and weary, fashioned with delight,
'Mid bowers and glade beside the water's breast,
And hid, as happy birds conceal their nest,
'Neath hills that shield the secret of her flight.

Serbelloni.

The weather was perfect that season, and
the little party enjoyed it to the full.
Out on the sunshiny lake ; roaming through
the shady woods ; tracing in the cool of
the day the mountain paths, with superb
views of the serene harmonious loveliness
on every hand ; in the soft balmy evenings
wandering where nightingales answered
each other with notes of prolonged pain,
followed by gladder melodies ; — with sometimes
one, sometimes another, as her companion,

Vera regained what she sorely
needed, and had only temporarily lost, her
calm courage and her superb beauty.

Georgie never made one of the little
group unless it happened to comprise Grey
Meredith, and never, save by accident, was
away if he were of the party ; she found
her own friends and joined them — her
place being taken by Anice Bentley, an
arrangement which pleased every one. Day
by day Anice grew into Vera's affections, and
the girl's soul was laid open before her —
even to the secret which, the chaff of
Charlie aside, she thought was sacred to
herself.

That Anice should make Vera her confidante
was not unnatural. But Vera marvelled
that she had in some way returned
the confidence by speaking not of herself

VOL. I. 3

but of that Vera Ludlow who had loved,
as Anice Bentley did now, an ideal Grey
such a Grey Meredith as never existed
in this world.

About a mile from Cadenabbia is a little
square, grass-grown and walled in on the
side overlooking the lake, and on that
opposite closed by a little church, and villa
walls covered with historia and white
roses. On the square children were playing
; the elder pretending to read like the
priest as he had catechised them that
Sunday afternoon, the younger tumbling
on the sward formed by the grass which
hid the stones supposed to pave the public
place of Grant.

Below the wall crickets chirped with great
vigour in the long flower-mingled grass,
bending in the soft wind and shining green

or silver, yellow or brown, as the breeze
was strong enough to affect this or that
portion of the varied vegetation of the field.
And all around an atmosphere of peace and
beauty ; the purple tints strongest in the
afternoon light, and the expanse above, the
clear-cut heights, the verdant shores, the
pale lake ; entering into the vision of the
two young Englishwomen who sat gazing
on the beauty that quiet Sunday. They
would always remember that afternoon. It
was the day on which their friendship
became certain, though companionship and
even intimacy had existed since the first
moment of meeting.

They had been talking of other matters,
and somehow Grey Meredith's name was
mentioned. An impulse then caused Vera
to say plainly :

8—2

You do care for Grey, then ? "
Anice took the question as it was asked
no liberty, but with the right of friendship,
and as knowing that there was confidence
between them ; nor would Vera have
asked the question, the answer being
certain, had she not perceived that the girl
was in need of help — no fear of putting that
into her head which was not there already!
Nevertheless, Anice naturally answered by
silence for a moment, and then a whispered,
"I can't help it; I know it's wrong."

She poked at the intrusive grass peeping
between the stones of the Place with some
embarrassment, and there was silence for a
moment so far as the English were concerned,
while the children laughed at their
own sports and a goat from the neighbouring
house came out to see what was

going on. Received by the children with
too vigorous delight, the animal probably
regretted that she had come forward.

"I don't think it is wrong at all," said
Vera. " But I am very sorry that you
should think of Grey in this way."

"He doesn't know it," said Anice.

I should hope not," replied Vera. " You
must never let him know it, and by-and-by
you'll change your mind."

"I?" said Anice, with surprise.

Yes, you — you also," said Vera with
emphasis. " I don't think it is the least
wrong so long as you keep it to yourself
that you should care for Grey or any other
man ; but I think it is foolish in this case."

Anice was taken aback by these words
from Vera. She had not expected Vera to
be so lacking in sentiment.

Vera continued : " I daresay you think
me very hard, and want none of the old
platitudes from me. Wiser people would
tell you these : a ' bad ' man may abuse
a woman's affection for him, and even a
good ' man can't resist confusing her admiration
with his complacency ; but as for
the grey man — I mean no pun — the average
man, neither white nor black, he's sorry to
know of unsought affection just in proportion
as he's worthy of it. You already
know all that. But, dear, I don't want
you to make for yourself a trouble, if you
haven't made it already."

"I wish I hadn't," said Anice in a low
tone, answering Vera's sweet smile rather
than her somewhat severe words.

"I am afraid you have. I have been
thinking of it ever since I noticed this in

you. No ; don't be afraid. You have done
nothing wrong. I was wondering how I
could say what I should like to, and I
think it will be best to speak straightforwardly.
I can trust you, dear, I am
sure. The reason that made me quicker
to notice that you cared for Grey than I
should have been was this : I used to care
for him as you do now. It seems so
strange to me."

"You used to care for him, Lady Carstairs
? " said Anice.

"Call me Vera, dear, if you will. Don't
make any mistake. I did care for him
when I was your age. I dreamt of him ;
I thought of him ; I cried about him — five
years ago. And now I like him very
much, but that is all. I am thankful that
I did not marry him."

Why did you not ? " asked Anice
simply.

Vera's cheek coloured. " For this one
reason : he did not ask me to marry him.
No, looking back, I see that Grey did not
behave well. He was only three-and-twenty,
and not very wise, and I was very
foolish at nineteen. I was very miserable.
I thought it would have been so much
easier to bear parting from him if he had
said it was hard for him, as it was, that
I know. And I know now that Grey did
care for me then. I thought it at the
time, and I had reason to, Anice ; yet he
did not care for me enough to trust the
future for us both. He should have gone
away sooner if he had meant to go away
at all. Yet, as it turned out, it did no
harm."

All this had been said in a low tone, as
if any one could hear, in little quick abrupt
sentences.

It is strange," said Anice, in a grave
voice.

It is strange," echoed Vera. " Now let
us talk of something else."

"Only this," said Anice with hesitation.
"Does he — do you know if he does — care
for any one else ? Perhaps it would be
easier to — not think if one knew. I can't
see why he should care for me. I am
sure he doesn't and won't care for me —
ever — but "

If Grey should ever take it into his head
to care for you, you'll soon find it out ;
till then — as, indeed, in any case — I should
make up my mind to do without him.
No fear that you will not have enough of

love in your day," said Vera, looking at
the attractive face.

It comes to every one, I suppose, in
the right way. Do you think so ? " asked
Anice a little eagerly. " Do things go
wrong only because people are stupid?
And do you believe in love — I mean as
something "

Anice did not finish her sentences that
day, nor was Vera inclined to take up her
work. Vera was then for the first time
suddenly conscious that no real love had
ever come to her, or had ever passed
from herself.

"Look," she said, as two figures emerged
from behind a wall bounding the path
from Cadenabbia to Grant ; " we are not
to have our walk alone, after all. Here
are Grey and Charlie."

A view halloa from Charlie startled the
natives, and the two mad young Englishmen
bounded across the place, and Charlie
leapt on to the wall, leaning against Vera
back to back, with his legs stretched out,
whilst, a little more decorously, Grey Meredith
sat down beside Anice, and a fire of
small talk began.

"This fellow," grumbled Charlie, "has
no idea at all of a Christian Sabbath. I
was enjoying a peaceful siesta under the
white roses, when up he trots, routs me
about, so that for very life's sake I was
forced to come along with him. Where
do you think he wants to go to ? Up
there ! "

Charlie pointed to a little speck on a
hill beyond.

It's a curious sort of church," explained

Grey ; " but I don't think I care for it
now. It's rather too far, after all. There's
a church here, you know, amply sufficient for
my purposes." He pointed across the road.

Come, I say," expostulated Charlie,
you're going up there, you know. You've
wound me up to it, and I'm a regular
machine ; there'd be an alarming accident
if all that energy you put into me wasn't
expended."

You see, the effort of inspiring you was
so great that it has taken all my energy."

w< Fudge ! Come along, you lazy beggar."

He has no respect for his senior. I
wish you'd teach him better manners, Anice,"
said Grey. " Why don't you ask Miss Bentley
to take you up there, if you must go, and
won't go alone ? I'm not going, that's flat."

Charlie, with his back to the present

company, suddenly twisted his neck round in
some fashion peculiar to himself, made an
astounding face at Grey over Vera's
shoulder, then stretching his legs along
the wall performed the feat of getting up
without bending them, and began to dance
a break-down on the stone. Pretending

o

to stop and rest for support on Vera's
shoulder he jumped as far as he could
on to the place, chivied the children and
the goat, and swung a child up above
his head, to the small boy's fear,
astonishment and delight. Finally, he
brought up before the trio who had been
watching him, and with sudden gravity
stood erect for a second. Drawing his
heels together, and with a bow which in
its sweep brought his head into Grey's
face, Charlie asked :

Would mademoiselle be so very gracious
as to accompany her humble servitor
on a perilous mission to unknown and
unattempted heights ? It is of no use to
ask madame to make the ascent — it is
too sensible, but will not mademoiselle,
who being an angel will doubtless have
wings "

Silly boy ! Would you care to go,
Anice ? I am afraid it is too far for me,
even now, but I will tell the others that
I have sent you to take care of Charlie. "

Come on, if you're coming," said Charlie.
Come on, Meredith ; don't be so idle."

But though Vera told him to go, and
that she had had enough both of walking
and of the society of other people
for the time, and would like to be alone,
Grey passively refused to stir. Perhaps

Anice had hoped that he would go.
In any case she liked the walk, and liked
Charlie Carstairs well enough, and she
would not have shown that she preferred
to remain where Grey was if he stayed ;
so she went with Charlie, and Grey
Meredith and Vera Carstairs were alone
on the little place at Grant.

The children trooped away just at this
time, and save for a peasant woman who
knelt at the iron-barred window of the
church opposite, there was no one but
themselves, and they spared to break the
silence.

Never now keenly conscious of his presence,
though always with some pleasure
in his society, Vera began to dream as
nature-lovers will dream when alone, or
with those whose tastes are sympathetic

Her soul was not formalizing thoughts, but
floating away into a mystical atmosphere
in which was felt and idealized the sunshine
above, the colour around, and the
very stillness — a stillness of all but the
tiny, usually unperceived sounds of small
insect beings, of wind scarcely stirring, of
running water ; these are dreams in which
the soul makes for itself an ante-room
to Heaven in realizing the Beautiful of earth.
Grey Meredith was not in heaven, nor
realizing the Beautiful in the abstract; he
was in torment — the more because he had
the Beautiful at his side :

A being breathing thoughtful breath,
A traveller betwixt life and death . .
And yet a spirit still, and bright,
With something of an angel light."

He watched her, nor appreciated the
compliment of her unconcern at his presence.

He noted each movement of her
graceful figure, and tried to read the
secret of those dreaming eyes, but there
was nothing for him. And yet a few
years before, when she had not known
how rare is love — when, if he might have
had less to give, she had required
less, perchance then Vera Ludlow's eyes
had not concealed their secret from him.
And knowing from others' scandal (and
confirming the story in view of her own
reticence) something about her husband,
Grey knew no reason why she should be
indifferent to him now. What he wanted
he scarcely knew — no wrong, but the
right, for love always seems right to the
lover.

"Vera!" he said softly, as the silence
continued.

VOL. I. 9

She opened wider her dark eyes as if
waking from a happy dream, but with no
answering look to his intense gaze; she
had not quite come back to earth. "Is
it not beautiful here ? " she exclaimed.

Vera ! " he said again, and at the
vibration of that tone Vera Carstairs
awoke to the knowledge that it was his
turn to feel love for her.

@-s

*5J?*-^

MANIFESTOS.

Oh ! a crime will do
As well, I reply, to serve for a text,

As a virtue golden through and through . . .
You of the virtue — (we issue join) —
How strive you Y De tabula.

The Statue and the Bust. — Browning.

Quite quietly, as if she had not been
suddenly startled, though in an instant the
straight path by which they had come to
this point was retraced by memory, Vera
rose from her seat on the square, and
Grey rose also.

His face was working — the slowly-moved,
good-looking face, which masked all expression
so cleverly in society ; his hand,
half stretched out as if to detain her,

trembled ; and Vera felt his excitement.
But, not answering to his mood, it terrified
her — or would have done had it
been any one else but Grey ; with him
it made her sad.

I was beginning to be happy, and
have I done this to him" she thought
quickly. " No ! he shall say nothing — that
is best." And aloud she continued :
Are you going on ? I am thinking of
going back to the hotel. Even now, you
see, I am not fit for more than a certain
amount of walking."

She said this in a careless tone.

And whose fault is it ? " broke in Grey
hotly. " Charlie Carstairs told me last night
a few facts about his brother's treatment of
you that were enough to make any man's
blood boil."

Then," said Vera with dignity, " if
Charlie was so young and so wanting in
respect for me, as to talk of what he fancies
he sees in his brother's conduct to the first-comer,
you encourage him."

I am no first-comer, Vera," answered
Grey as sternly ; " nor do I wish for information
about you from any other being but
yourself. Not a word wanting in respect to
you passed Charlie's lips ; of myself even
you dare not think dishonourably. Don't
you know — speak the truth — don't you
know that I love you."

Facing her — one hand on hers now, as if
to compel her to face him, to stay with
him, to answer him — Grey Meredith waited
her answer. " You know it," he repeated
with sternness as if she had been a culprit
from whom he had to extort a confession.

Vera, you know my love for you ?
Answer."

She tried to know what was best to say.
Vera had never the saving instinct of
coquetry, and she only told the truth at
length : " I begin to be afraid that it is
so, Grey."

Her low musical tone had no effect on
his anger. " You are afraid," he said.
What harm does it do you if I am miserable
? What do } t ou care ? You need not
delude yourself ; I am tired of the pretence
of friendship ; it is pretence — arrant
humbug — on my side."

I am sorry to hear that ; I thought I
had a friend in you," she answered, trying
to smile ; anything to divert the oppressive
force brought to bear on her.

You have ; worse or better" as it pleases

you," he continued ; " I am no friend if
friendship excludes love."

Then be my friend," she said quickly,
if love includes friendship. Listen to me,
Grey. You have said you love me ; is it
true ? "

Is it true ? " he answered contemptuously.
i: As true as that we stand here,
and," he continued bitterly, " as true as
that you care nothing for me. Would you
like me to indulge in a few poetical asseverations
? Shall I prove that the sun
is shining upon us now — is that true ? T
had no intention of raving like a lunatic,
but as I have begun you may hear me
out. I am no more going to annoy you
than I am going to leave you ; if seeing
you with others does not drive me mad I
shall be with you constantly ; you shall

give me all you can and know that my whole
life, all I do, am and think, is yours and
only yours for ever ! That's all, Vera."

He had let go the touch upon her arm,
and they moved onward slowly together
across the little place ; they came to the
door where the publication of intended
marriages flutter against the notices of
duties on corn, the regulation of the prices of
bread ; they passed together down the little
narrow way by the church and through
the spring-garlanded lanes. Neither spoke ;
not from further embarrassment but from
the feeling that something had been said
to which there was no reply ; together they
were silent.

You know now," he said at length — they
were then walking between two hedges full
of spring freshness, clad in delicate verdure

" you know to what you have to trust —
to ray devotion ; it shall never do you
hurt, Vera ; it shall never weary you, but
there it is. Years ago we knew each
other, and though there have been women
for whom I have had a fancy, I swear to
you that you were my first love in time,
as you are first and foremost in my soul.
I was foolish, an utter fool. I tried to
shut my eyes to the result of that
summer holiday, pretending to myself that
I did not care, trying to persuade myself
that you did not care ; well, if you had
aught against me, you are avenged, Vera,
in this. You will not make my punishment
too hard ? "

Grey, don't you think that it would be
better for you not to see me for a time ? "
she suggested.

He laughed bitterly. " Not much use in
that at this time of day. Perhaps if you
had cared also it might have been my duty
to exile myself again. As it is, I should
be none the better and you all the worse
for that. You may see through me now,
but however much }^ou undervalue me, you
will have one on whom you can depend in
your life. Oh ! Vera, why did you not wait
for me?"

How did I know that you wished
it ? " she said quickly. " Let us not
go back to the past ; it is done with.
I shall value your loyal friendship very
highly, Grey ; friends are what I need
most in my life, and then, by-and-by, I
hope that you will find some nice girl for
your wife."

I dislike girls, especially as wives in

posse. Who would you like me to marry?
You had better complete the cure of my
little illusion ; you haven't enough interest
in me even to keep me as an odd retainer,"
he said, switching off the heads of
the green nettles.

"I haven't selfishness enough. You'd
make another woman happy."

Hang it ! who wants unselfishness in
the woman he's fond of ? " rejoined Grey
impatiently, taking her literally as if she
had meant to claim the quality she spoke
of.

I hope that Charlie will not go too
far for Anice Bentley," remarked Vera asa
sign she had had enough. "Isn't it getting
late ? "

Not very," said Grey, taking her hint

that the conversation must change. " Anice

is a pretty little thing and as good as gold.
I've known them all for ages, and used to
go and have school-room tea with Anie.
I'm so glad you like her ; I'm very fond
of her."

Poor Anice ! " thought Vera, " how utterly
hopeless ! That he should care for me
is not so fatal as that avowal that he
is very fond of her. Fancy my arriving at
only being ' very fond ' of Grey, and that's
just what it is."

However, after all, Grey's declaration
seemed to have cleared the air and to have
broken down all barriers of reserve. Having
made the assertion that he was not her
friend he was content so to be, and they
glided into talk which if not general
was at least not tragic, and Grey was
happy and Vera satisfied. Arrived at home

they found every one still out, and Vera
and he were alone in the salon. He lingered
as if he did not wish to part from
her, and she did not bid him go. There
was a pathetic look in his eyes which
touched her heart.

No one came in, and it was perhaps to
show how she really accepted him as a
friend that then, for the first time, Vera
spoke to him of little Daisy, and showed
him the photograph, which after Georgie's'
arrival had been taken to her own room.
Thence she fetched it. Silent as to the
scene which preceded it ; silent as to the
blame justified by her husband's conduct,
the story as she told it was touching
enough, and Grey listened to it with reverence.
Somehow the recital seemed to
solemnize him. He had thought his respect

for her womanhood had already been
perfect ; now something more seemed to
ennoble her, in her motherhood of the little
child that was dead. He even perceived
that with Vera motherhood had been a
passion, and that if the real child had been
beloved, the ideal image always with her
was adored.

He was deeply touched by the pathos
of words and looks, but he resented — for
he was only a man, a very ordinary commonplace
man — her devotion to this pure
white image in her soul, when he was
longing, wrongly it might be, to see her
flush at the discovery of love, rosy, warm
and living, at her very side. But she — thinking
that he now was all engrossed with
her thoughts instead of all engrossed by
thoughts of her — she held out her hand

in sympathy. She wanted thereby to seal
the compact of their friendship, and felt
that she was honouring him in doing this
before her shrine.

He did not misunderstand her, but he
was too weak to struggle with himself, and
as she gave him her hand, and he came
nearer still, suddenly bent forward, and
would have touched her forehead with his
burning lips ; but before he had neared
the white brow below the soft silky dark
hair, Vera started back. Yet she did
not resent it more than momentarily ; his
pleading look apologized for him, before
he said, "I had thought this once, for auld
lang syne, Vera."

She remembered that once he had kissed
her before — a kiss that had for one day
made her happy, and for years miserable.

That lie could think so little of her as to
kiss her thus and then to go away without
the words spoken that she should have
heard first, but then supposed a mere form.
She coloured now to think of herself
then, and, though there was no disrespect
in manner or tone, the vivid remembrance of
the past might have made her take a dislike
to Grey had not Georgie entered to
establish a reaction in his favour.

For the memory had come like a lightning
flash, and Georgie had entered at her
blush, saw Grey a little discomposed — he
usually self-possessed to a fault — saw Vera
close by him with the rare vivid colour in
her face, saw the photograph on the table.
Geonne thought she took in the situation
at a glance, and contrived to be so significant
in saying nothing, that Grey made

an abrupt exit to crown a stupid embarrassment
for which he could find no
excuse to himself a little later. It was one
of the exceptional awkwardness of a man
of the world.

But Georgie had subtly made the most
of it. Then she blundered too. Instead of
being content with her position, which was
as impregnable as indescribable, she pursued
the enemy too far.

As soon as Grey had gone she said
rather insolently, "You were having an
interesting talk when I came in ; but don't
you think it is rather a pity to bore a
young man with family histories ? I don't
know, of course."

Vera had often let speeches pass that

would have deserved rebuke, so that

Georgie did not often even trouble herself
VOL. I. 10

to be cleverly rude ; but Vera was a
little highly-wrought and now spoke her
mind.

Vera's slight tall form stood above
Georgie as the girl lounged in the long
chair on the balcony. They had both
gone out there as Grey left. The soft
calm of the evening sky, where the moon
floated above the Vienna hills, was behind
her, and at the first tones of her voice
Georgina Leyton looked at her and had to
listen.

44 No ; I think you do not know what
any one should do, Georgina. You have
a greater want of knowledge of that sort
than any one I ever met with."

Georgie gazed at Vera, utterly astounded.
Had she believed Vera capable of upbraiding
her, she never would have supposed

Vera to have attacked her savoir
faire ; but Vera had found a weak spot,
and Georgie was so astonished that she
could not interrupt her successfully.

It is quite time that we came to an
understanding. Very foolishly I have allowed
myself to drift into a wrong position,
and have permitted your insolence on
occasions when, even for your sake, I
should not have done so. Do not interrupt
me. I am extremely sorry to speak
now, but it is better to do so."

The words flowed from her lips very
quietly and easily, and Georgie bit her lips,
rose from her lounging attitude, sat down
again on the side of her chair, and
fidgeted with her parasol.

Yes," Georgie said, " you can take
this new departure also in your husband's

10-2

absence; there is a good deal going on
which is novel."

So much the better," rejoined Vera.
I will pardon you for the past, but
for the future remember that I am Ralph's
wife — if you wish me to remember that you
are Ralph's cousin and not merely an
ignorant, irresponsible mischief-maker whom
I should not receive if she called to seeme."


"You think that you could shut me
out ? " said Georgie with brilliant colour
in her cheeks. " Ralph would sooner turn
you away than me."

This was no sooner said than she repented
of it, and she had swallowed down
many more truths rather worse to say,
such as that Ralph saw her ten times
abroad for once at his own house.

Vera took no notice of this, but continued
: " I have written to my husband
and told him that I am now quite strong
enough to undertake the money matters
which I find were entrusted to you."

Georgie started.

"Eustace informed me that Sir Ralph
had told him to go to Miss Leyton for
orders and for money. It was kind of you
to undertake this trouble, and I told the
courier that it was quite right. However,
for the future he can come to me."

Ralph gave you power to draw for
him ? I am afraid even if I give up the
cheque-book to you it would be of no
use, the account is in my name. You
see he wished to save you trouble," said
Georgina.

Vera had had a small sum sent to her

for her private expenses, and the courier
had been told to pay for everything, and
for any purchases ; just as in London, she
might have what bills she liked, but had
rarely five pounds in cash. Vera had supposed
that the courier had received money
direct from Sir Ralph, and that day had
accidentally discovered that Georgie had
control of these accounts and drew the
weekly cheques. Had Sir Ralph intended
this as a deliberate insult ? or had he so
arranged matters that the ostensible hostess
should be in the power of her guest should
any contretemps occur ?

Yes," said Vera bravely ; " I know
that I have been glad to have no trouble
in such matters for some time, but in
this and other ways there will be from
henceforth a change."

Leaving Georgie meditating some reply,
Vera went to the balustrade of the balcony
and leant over it, letting the twilight cool
play on her heated cheeks as the lime-scented
air refreshed her. She was hailed
by Charlie and Anice just below, coming
in after their walk.

"Who's that?" said Georgie, who did
not think it convenient to quarrel with
Vera then.

Charlie and Anice," said Vera. Then,
for she was one of those natures who
always spoil their own strong assertions
by being sorry for their effect on others,
Vera again astonished Georgie by adding :
Charlie is coming up, and we have
done with this subject. But, Georgie, I
have cause to dislike you, yet I do not
know why you have given it to me?

Would you not be happier if you tried tolet
me be your friend? I am sorry for
you, and I would try to help you if you
let me."

Before Georgie could reply Charlie
entered.

ASIDES.

It takes something else besides 'cuteness to make folk
see-that'll be Ibeir interest in the long run. It takes some
conscience and belief in right and wrong — I see that pretty
clear." — Adam Bede. — George Eliot.

Single heavy drops of rain against the
window ; wind in gusts at long intervals ;
dust in spasms; and the lake parti-coloured
beneath the dreary-looking mountains ; all
cold and colourless, and telling of approaching
storm.

Vera Carstairs and Georgie Ley ton were
both writing letters — both writing to the
same man. Vera, slowly and deliberately
on black-edged paper, in neat even letters,
with large capitals, stops in their places,
and sentences formalized by anxiety ;

Georgie, in a scrawl of much character,
letters running about round each other and
into the next words, on red paper with
torn edges, and regardless of what she said
in the certainty of pleasing the receiver; no
stops at all, frequent dashes at uncertain
intervals, plenty of undermining and notes
of exclamation. Neither of these women
did themselves justice in their letters :
Vera, because she was nervous — one can
have a fit of shyness in writing a letter ;
Georgie, because she rarely was able to
get any of her wit and certainly could get
nothing of her will upon paper.

This is part of Vera's letter :

I must thank you for letting me stay
here so long ; it has done me a great deal
of good in more ways than I can name.
I hope now to be strong enough to be of

some use to you, though you must not
expect too much from me. What may
seem a long time to you is in one respect
a very short time to me, though indeed it
is years, I think, since last October. For
the last time — unless you should wish it
I speak of that, because for the first
time I am able to say that for your share
in making that great sorrow (though you
never intended that terrible consequence)
I do forgive you, Ralph. In return, will
you not try to be a little more tender tome
? I know that I am young and inexperienced,
and unfitted for the difficult
part which you say your wife should
play ; but if you tried to teach me what
you wished more gently and more
lovingly, don't you think it would be easier
for us both ? I wanted to die last winter

because it was so hard to live ; but I had
to get well, and it is so terrible to think
that all our lives — for years perhaps — we
should have to live as we have done for
the last two years. Am I foolish in writing
this ? I think not. Ralph ! forgive me
for my share in our estrangement. I will
try to help you. Will you not try to help
your loving wife, Vera Carstairs."

With tears in her eyes, and trembling
all over in her excitement, glad that
Georgie had her back to her, Vera drew
the sealing apparatus towards her, and was
fastening up the letter when Anice Bentley
entered. She came in quietly as she had
been in the habit of doing, but as Vera
looked up she perceived that something
was wrong, though the girl moved and
spoke with perfect composure.

Can I speak to you ? " said Anice.
"It doesn't matter if you are busy."

No ; I have finished. Come into my
room. No, thanks, Georgie ; don't move.
In any case I wanted to show Anice my
shopping of blankets at San Giovanni."

Georgie did not wish to move, so they
left her in the salon, and she finished her
note to Ralph Carstairs in some content ;
then, rising, went to the balcony, and apparently
excited by what she saw, returned
indoors, put on tocque and newmarket,
and braved the gale now whistling
round the house. This had been part of
her letter :

Why on earth should you expect a
letter every day, or, if it comes to that,
every week ? I have absolutely nothing
to sa}-. Are you interested in the moonlight

manoeuvres of some bread-and-butter
wives with half-willing swains, in the
troops of tourists who ebb and flow, leaving
a permanent remainder of frumps luggage
with awful trunks of nailed wood
and antediluvian relics of the carpet bag
period? As for more regular residents like
ourselves, they are perfectly uninteresting,
including Vera's devoted worshipper, Anice
Bentley, whom Vera prefers to me ! But
fancy choosing to idealize a woman! Vera
has, however, developed a whole set of
Arcadian ideas. I envy the result, which
seems to be happiness greater than she has
known for some time, but can't quite
sympathize with the means! I answer
your last letter — e Write : anything interests
me from you ' — by giving you a
dose of Vera. (A storm is coming on, and

I have nothing to do !) Have I ever
written so much about Vera before? (such
a storm, and there's a small boat out on
the lake trying to cross ; I expect we shall
have a sensation before it gets in. I
wonder whether it ever will? What a
horrid idea !) I continue in preference —
toujours Vera ! At this moment her
strongest passion is, I think, for this pretty
but rather absurd child ; yet I was a little
startled to find that evidently she had been
at least a friend of your acquaintance,
Grey Meredith. You always said that if she
had not particularly cared for you she had
cared for no one else, How can any man
know even that in the case of the youngest
woman, and Vera was over nineteen when
you married her ? But I'll let you off
Vera as chief subject, sub-divisions into

these three heads — Anice Bentley, Grey
Meredith, and her sketching from nature,
which is really a combination of the other
two elements. I am going to see those
mariners shipwrecked. How rough the
lake is ! Thanks very much for postage
stamps. After this stupid letter is posted
there will be a balance of £4 19s. d^d.,
which I shall use somehow ! ! You are
good, after all.

"Your affectionate Pussy."

An unliterary epistle, looking better in
the disguise of MS. than in the all-revealing
garb of print ; for print levels all the
little feminine flourishes, and exposes the
disconnected periods to public gaze ; yet
even thus in the given passages illustrating
something of the writer's nature, and casting
a light on the habits of the husband

who received, of the woman who wrote,
such comments on his wife.

The two letters were laid together on
arrival in England, and the last was read
first. The Pussy's scratch at Yera's
friendship for Grey Meredith, with the
further insinuation, scarcely did much
damage by itself; but, like many an
obstinate man unreasonably swayed by the
esteem in which others held his own possessions,
Sir Ealpli Carstairs was influenced
by the contempt expressed in the description
of Vera. Yeas he ever angry at such
freedom? The freedom was only the
natural result of his own disloyalty, and
Georgie's daring the result of her downfall.


Reading this letter first in the handwriting
of the woman whom he fought

vol. i. 11

with and had struggled from, with respect
for her grip, even five years before ; reading
it with vivid memory of her mockery and
with full power to give life to the disjointed
sentences ; reading it with all the
suggestiveness which a letter from such a
woman carries to such a man in spite of
all possible defects of style, information
and taste ; Sir Ralph lingered over the
sheet, disliked it thoroughly, and read it
over again with pleasure. He was more
than usually irritated with her, but
still it was a letter from her, albeit
he had had to bribe her for it with
what they had euphoniously called postage
stamps.

Next — set against his wife by the fact
that she was not Georgie, though that fact
had not been the fault of Georgie, nor in

becoming his wife had Vera been entirely
to blame — Sir Kalph Carstairs opened the
second Italian letter.

He did not expect to be much interested
in it, but the vein in which it was couched
was novel. Something in it struck him,
and if he had been sensitive he would
have felt its pathos.

As it was he read this letter again, and
his indifferent contempt passed into a certain
amount of wonder.

Perhaps, however, the plea only
achieved the honour of being considered,
and of fathering the remark he made
to a friend a little later, a propos of someone
else : " She is sorry that there is an
estrangement, is she? Probably she's in
the sentimental stage of love with another
fellow ; a woman's always soft then, even

11—2

to the other man she's injuring ; at least
she tries to be."

Putting the appeal in this light and
connecting it with the insinuation of
Georgie (not made for the first time,
though for the first time relating to anterior
relations between Vera and Grey),
Sir Ralph Carstairs felt himself justified
in not paying the smallest attention to the
letter of his wife. If those words, written
in such fire, received with such coldness,
had otherwise had power to touch him,
again Georgie Leyton's influence of personality
and of persiflage had counteracted
hers of pathos and loyalty. Very likely
it would have made no difference to Yera
if Georgie had never written in idleness
as much as in malice ; but as it was,
not jealously but self-excusing, Carstairs

from thenceforward believed in his wife's
affection for Grey Meredith.

Meanwhile, having traced those letters
to their destination, let us return to the
writers, on the stormy day on which the
words went from Lake Como.

As soon as Anice had safely shut the
door into Vera's room, and Vera, seeing
that she wished it, had locked them in,
the girl clasped her hands and let her
self-control be set aside.

I had to come to you," faltered Anice.

You won't Oli ! how horrible ! Oh,

Vera, listen ! "

Anice shuddered. The wind swept by
with a howl, and for a second the girl
kept still, with all the colour gone from
her face and her frame trembling to Vera's
touch.

'what is it, dear? Tell me," said Vera
gently ; " I hear nothing but the wind."

Look ! " said Anice, drawing her to
the window of the bedroom, yet keeping
within the room. The half window-frame
was open. The wind passed again and
clapped the personne to. Seeing Vera
attempt to push it back, Anice went
through the opening, fastened it against
the wall, and then, returning, shut the
window. As she had finished :

You mustn't catch cold," said the girl,
in a dull tone. " Oh, help me from going
mad ! Hide me ! " she suddenly added.
Tell me ivhat to do. Look ! " she said
again ; all this in a tone of suppressed
agony.

Vera looked. That Anice was in her
senses and in great trouble Vera had no

doubt, but what had her suppressed grief
to do with the stormy lake and the rising
wind? There was no one on the balcony,
nothing but storm on the darkened
heaving waters. That was all she saw
in the direction to which the girl pointed.
Nothing, yet Anice still repeated, " Look ! "

I see nothing, darling," said Vera
gently. " Tell me what it is."

"Nothing — you see nothing?" said the
girl hoarsely. " Let me look. No. Thank
God! It is there still. Look, Vera.
Dont you see the boat?"

Vera strained her eyes, and she saw at
last, rising and falling, sometimes visible,
sometimes sinking beneath the rolling
waves, even as viewed from their elevation
at the window, a little boat. Danger to
the safety of any boat on that great cold

gusty lake would have been apparent to
the most ignorant, and both had heard
only a day or two before tales told of
lives lost on the then smiling inland
sea in sudden squall or gradually rising
storm. . .

It was the only speck on the angry
surface, the little lake-boat on the giant
sea-like rollers.

"Who is there?" whispered Vera, but
scarcely needed to hear the answer between
the girl's bloodless lips :

"It is Grey Meredith — and two sailors ! "

No more words were needed between
the two women in this. Anice was suddenly
a woman. Vera comprehended. The
girl, who had no right to show more than
ordinary anxiety for the man who knew
not nor would have wished to know her

love for him, had come to Vera in her
double trouble of mind.

Vera understood it all — the agony of
anxiety intensified by the impossibility of
either repressing or expressing it — understood
the instinct which brought Anice to
her: to have fellowship in suffering and to
be shielded from self-betrayal in the safety of
Vera's presence, ere yet her growing terror
should carry her beyond herself. Vera
understood in an instant what has taken
long enough to indicate — all the threads
of torture woven round the delicate girlish
soul : a girl's heart, like the rose first
opening, ever tossed by the wind, held
firmly in its beauty by the cup which had
controlled and shielded its budding. Not
till the rose has known more of storm and
of sunshine do those mantling of reserve

abandon the soft petals and permit the
display of the luscious heart within. The
instinct of reserve, so strong and beautiful
in such a girl, was not swept away by the
storm of passionate anxiety; its consciousness
did not prove that she suffered less
than if she had wholly abandoned herself;
nay, as Vera knew, that rightful self-control
implied great suffering, and won
from her respect for the young soldier
under the first fire on love's battlefield.

So little was then said between them.
Anice could not even bear the touch
of her friend's hand. Vera gave her the
glasses, following with her own eyes
the speck growing slowly larger and
larger, yet ever and anon vanishing for a
second in some gulf of cold and cruel
sea. At such times Anice would quiver

from head to foot, and blood dropped from
her lip once, as she bit it through trying
not to scream.

They could not be saved by others.
No other boat could live if that could
not. If it weathered the storm, well ; if
not

"They are in God's hands, Anice darling,"
murmured Yera, as she thought that
all was over.

They were nearer now. With the glasses
Anice could distinguish the figures in the
little boat, could see how the waves rolled
it along as it lay sideways in the trough
or on the height. Those boats do not
confront the waves ; and the uncertain
gusts of wind added to the danger. It
could not have been greater.

"Let me have the glass, dear," said

Vera, and when reluctantly it had been
given she kept it in spite of the girl's impatience.
Then she put it down. " Dearest,
I don't think you should look any more.
You are brave ; but this is too awful for
you to bear. We can do nothing but
wait, and, perhaps, in His mercy, God
will bring them to the haven where they
would be. ,,

The beautiful old words came so naturally
to Vera's lips. Yet Anice, looking up
at the lovely pale face beside her, feeling
the gentle arms put round her, hew that
Vera had no thought that Grey Meredith
and the sailors could ever reach an earthly
haven, but that the girl was not to be
allowed to watch any more lest she
should only see the struggle of the
strong swimmers " in their agony."

"My poor, poor child!" said Vera; but
Anice felt risfid in her arms.

All is not over ! I know they can
send no one, or I wouldn't have come
here. But isn't it a little calmer? Won't
they be a little sheltered ? And they have
gone so long through the worst. See,
they are not so far off! I must look!
Don't be afraid ; if they get through I
shall be none the worse ; if not "

She had never spoken so much before,
though never had she been so near to
losing that self-control.

Vera forbore to press her. Love must
have its way, and was it not to be able
to indulge in its sorrow that this young
ove had sought her side?

And so, from henceforth, during fifteen
minutes more, the two women watched in

silence. For the first part of the time it
seemed impossible that the boat could ever
keep its broadside above the pursuing
waters ; then the worst was over, but at
any moment the boat might still have been
swamped ; and then, at last, Anice turned
to her friend with a pitiful appeal in her
eyes, and Vera whispered : "I think so ;
they have got into the sheltered water now."
And in a minute or two more : " Yes ;
they are safe."

(s>r<<D

COUNTER IRRITATION.

And life's fine loyalties are turned to jest." — Austin Dobson

Trembling herself with the reaction, Vera
felt Anice, fainting, fall against her. She
called no one, and soon the girl came
to herself, and very quickly the colour
came back.

Be brave now," said Vera firmly, " Grey
Meredith is quite safe. I will send to
your people and say that I want you to
stay with me. I know Georgie is going
to dine downstairs, and then to have a
walk with some of her friends ; so we
shall be alone."

Anice looked up at her, half comprehending

the quiet matter-of-fact tone, half
resenting it. Had Vera herself felt nothing ?

Vera left her time to think this out ;
then, knowing the nerves of the girl must
be unhinged, she went on with kind
cruelty :

Remember, dear, no one must ever
know of our watch here but ourselves ; you
are not one whit nearer to Grey Meredith
because his danger has given you all this
pain."

Again Anice looked up, almost angrily,
a light in her bright young eyes ; then,
covering her face with her hands for a
moment, she answered Vera, in a voice to
which emotion only added sweetness, very
quietly and very touchingly :

"I know it."

Vera turned away for a second. Her

own eyes were willing with tears, not bitter,
but in sweet sympathy this time ; she
respected Anice, and knew that to her she
need say nothing more. All she could do
was to gain time for her to recover before
others saw her. To-morrow the Bentleys
were going back to town, and for the future
Anice must take her chance, as other
women do. She would doubtless often see
Grey Meredith as before, but so long as
she was not put to the test at that
moment, her dignity would doubtless be
sufficient.

Will you please me, Anice ? Best hereon
the sofa a little."

"Yes," said the girl. " Only would you,

if you don't catch cold, just see if be

has landed safely ? "

Vera again comprehended. Only from the
vol. i. 12

balcony it could be seen if the boat had
got to the landing-stage, and Anice did
not want to go out there.

It was calmer now, and the rain had
blown over ; the grey scudding clouds
were shining with light, and the wind,
shifting round, now brought odours of the
white banksias and limes ; the lake here
and there fretted with silver, and the
colour passing again over the hills. The lake
surged so that the splash of the rollers
was heard, sea-like, on the stone wall and
on the steps in front, and at the side
came murmurs of the leaves and distant
songs of birds. People began to go out,
only one or two ; but there were a few
'below the balcony over which Vera leant.
The itinerant merchants near the landing-stage
on the approach of the storm had

folded away their wares and now were
unpacking, and the boatmen chatted without
fear of missing fares. Under the fresh
green avenue beyond the roses, Vera could
not quite see the boat-steps on the little
breakwater ; but as she looked she saw
a scarlet petticoat beneath a black coat
and a scarlet knot in a small hat, beyond
the men.

Recognizing Georgie's dress, in another
minute Vera perceived that Grey Meredith
was there also. She returned to Anice.
Yes, he's all right ; don't move."

Catching up a scarf, she threw it round
her and went again on to the balcony,
Mrs. Bentley was below, and called to know
if Anice was with Lady Carstairs. Yera
said a few words, watching the two who
advanced ; she could not help it.

Grey's face was pale and Lis manner
earnest ; lie was talking to Georgie, but on
reaching the group at the front, lifted his
cap and left them all ; while Georgie stayed
outside, attitudinizing a little in her shapely
costume.

It was just a chance whether Grey had
been nattered or bored at the advance she
had made ; for advance it was. She had
.gone down to the quay, and the first thing
Grey had seen as he landed was Georgie.
She had acknowledged that she had been
aware of his danger — a danger which he
had felt keenly, and which by the way she
had not, for he had been in comparative
safety before she knew of it, and she did
not care at all about him for his own sake ;
she had seemed to hide so much feeling,
and to have acted with such spontaneity

and carelessness of appearances with him ;
she looked very well, in her flush of calculating
gambling, which he thought was
womanly anxiety ; she was a connection of
Vera's ; and — Georgie knew what she was
about — Grey Meredith was flattered.

So Vera saw, divining something at the
time, and having it described with all due
frankness in the evening, as he told them
all first the story of the day ; how he had
ventured when his mother required some
remedy not to be had in Cadenabbia ; the
last steamer had gone from Bellagio ; he
felt bound to return, and when on starting
he and the boatmen had realized the
danger was immediate, not possible, they
could not regain the shore ; they had to
cross.

Grey Meredith spoke very gravely then.

Among his hearers was Anice Bentley, sitting
a little behind him, very busy with
some work for Vera, also Georgie in full
view, Charlie Carstairs and a friend, all
of whom had come up, thinking it too
doubtful to go out late that evening. All
guessed something then in his tone, though
only Yera, later on, heard how fully the
danger had been realized, and how imminent
it had really been. Still at this point
of his narrative even then Grey suddenly
paused : " No, it was not cheerful ; and my
only consolation then was that I had said
nothing to my mother and that no one was
likely to have discovered our whereabouts.
I did find afterwards that one friend of
mine," with a smile and glance at
Georgie, " had seen the last part of our
struggles; however, then we might have

saved ourselves by swimming (at least I
might ; so few of those boatmen can swim).
It is a great thing that no one was
anxious about me."

"I had quite enough anxiety, thank you,"
said Georgie ; " you declare that I only
saw the comparatively safe part, but I can't
say that it was pleasant."

No," rejoined Grey, " without any undue
conceit about myself, even in that ' comparative
safety,' I should not have liked to
see any one I knew, or did not know, for
that matter. Once I wondered if "

Grey paused. He evidently did not
say what he had begun to say, but to
change the subject went on: "I wondered
if you people on this balcony had ever
learnt to use my telescope."

Not they," said Charlie Carstairs, with

Bis boyish langli. "I don't believe a woman
ever can use a telescope."

"Very few," said Grey, " though I don't
mind trying to teach some of them ; most
of them find it easier to see through stonewalls."


That's more than men can do," said
Vera, with a keen remembrance of the
afternoon hours in which she and Anice
had watched behind the walls, before which
Georgie now 'sat, triumphant in her daring,
being the only person who had at the time
sympathized with Grey. " I don't think
that many men can either see through walls
or through characters." Of course the challenge
was taken up, but Anice Bentley
suddenly rose; she could bear the surfaced
talk no longer.
" I must go ; we leave so early in the

morning that it is good-bye to every one,"
she said.

Among the others Grey Meredith came
round to her : " Of course, I'd get up if
there was any chance of your mother-needing
me ; but she wants no one
with your brother and sister-in-law, does
she ? "

No," said Anice ; " thank you very
much. Six is too early for you, and there
is nothing to be done."

I've said good-bye to them all ; they
said I should find you here. It isn't for
long ; we shall meet in town directly, I
hope," he went on in his frank friendly
way. "Good-bye, Anice; pleasant voyage
and lots of success in the season. (One
moment, Miss Leyton !) Love to your sisters
good-bye."

Good-bye, Grey," said Anice, taking his
hand.

"It has been a bad day for the last at
Cadenabbia," he said, holding hers, " but
I got the worst of it."

We would all like to go on saying
good-bye to Anice," said Vera, " but I shall
take her away now."

So the partings were made, and while
Grey Meredith again sat down by Georgie
and improved on the new departure in that
direction, without prejudice to his self-avowed
devotion to Vera, in the passage
Vera and Anice exchanged a few words.

"You did very well," said Vera, among
the rest. " Believe me, whatever happens,
you can only gain by keeping the secret
of our watch."

Yes ; but— but it was a little hard that

he should think," her voice quivered, " that
only Miss Leyton cared."

"Better so," said Vera uncompromisingly,
and changed the subject. Needless
to say she had another score against Miss
Leyton.

Only at the last, as they said good-bye,
Anice faltered: "I will be brave; but, oh,
Vera, how could you have cared for him
once and not always ? "

My dear, I am married," said Vera,
feeling a little hypocritical.

Anice blushed. " I ought not to have
said it," she said simply.

"Don't vex yourself about that," said
Vera brightly.

But when she went back again, after a
few more words of friendship and promise
to have Anice with her as often as possible

during the season, Vera found Grey Meredith
much occupied with Georgie Ley ton.

Yera's provocation with them both was
seen by the sharp-eyed Georgie, and to a
slight degree felt with astonishment by the
somewhat innocent Grey, when a little later
he tried to get real sympathy and win some
sentimental advantage for himself in a brief
and by Georgie presentable ' tete-astute.
Georgie set the coldness down to jealousy,
though a little surprised at Vera being so
human ; and, flattered for the second time
that day, as only a man used to women
can be, by such subtle' displeasure at a
slight showing of devotion to another during
a new allegiance, Grey Meredith ventured
a- little more of devotion to herself. Nevertheless,
Vera was very human, and so on
the' provocation of Georgie's flirtation, believing

that she was acting in the interest
of Anice, she suddenly made up her mind
that at least where Grey Meredith was concerned
she would beat Georgie on her own
ground.

ON THE SURFACE.

"Helps ! ces trois mots de homme —
Hier, aujourd'hui, demain ! " — Lamartine.

After Anice had gone things went wrong.
There was a day or two of bad weather ;
a day or two of bad temper, both on the
part of Georgie and of Grey ; a day or two
of bad spirits for Vera. The peacefulness
of the place was disturbed, and the little
party awoke from their various dreams and
hopes, and thought of " plans " — the most
unidyllic things on earth.

Grey grudged each moment, yet fretted
sometimes for his work, and now every one
was restless, and Georgia Leyton had

become a little too open in her manner
of intending proprietorship ; whilst it made
all the difference to the comfort of his talk
if she were beside Yera, selfish and scrutinizing,
instead of Anice, innocent and
pleasing, on occasions when a third of some
sort had to be there.

Grey and his mother were to go one
way, Charlie and his tutor another, and
Vera and Georgie were to return to
England, met in Paris by Sir Ralph Carstairs.
The rain had lessened that last
evening before the party was further broken
up. It was warm and summertime again,
and behind the hills the moon rose full and
eclipsed by her splendour the stars which had
been bravely struggling through the cloud-drifts.
The night was very glorious, and at
nearly ten o'clock, getting a little tired of

Georgie's unsympathetic silence, Vera once
more went out on the balcony.

How lovely it is ! " she exclaimed.
"Won't you come out on to the balcony,
Georgie ? "

U A great deal too damp, thank you,"
answered Georgie

Looking down, Vera was perceived by
Charlie and Grey Meredith, who called upto
her in a duet :

We want you both to come out on the
lake."

Charlie added : " Look jolly well sharp,
and tell Georgie to be quick."

It's too damp," said Vera doubtfully,
for the great expanse of silvered water was
very tempting to a lake-lover.

She thinks the lake is wet after the
rain," laughed Charlie.

Vera was going to say " No," in spite
of Grey's plea — " Oh, do come ; it's our
last night," — when Georgie came on to
the balcony, all-awakened by the male
voices.

"Miss Ley ton," said Grey, seeing her
form beside Vera, " you won't be hardhearted
? Do beg Lady Carstairs to come
out with us."

You didn't want to go out," asked
Vera of her in a low tone ; but Georgie
never responded to a woman's words whilst
a man was present.

I'm sure Lady Carstairs will come.
We were wishing to go out, but no
one came near us all the evening. It
would serve you right if we wouldn't go
now."

Come on, then," said Charlie impatiently.

VOL. I. 13

You will go ? " inquired Vera, who,
stupidly we own, never got quite used to
Georgie's moods, plus and minus mankind.


Of course," answered that lady, " unless
you are afraid ? " She had the grace
to add this, as they parted to get
cloaks.

Descending through the hall, where only .
one or two men lingered over the papers
or at the door (most people going to bed
early at Cadenabbia), Vera and Georgie
went out, and were welcomed by their two
r iwers.

'Have you got a boat? We paid off
ours to-day," said Charlie.

No difficulty in getting one now, if you
are quick," said Grey.

The men had not gone to bed, and while

the boat was called for by Charlie, Grey
drew attention to the nightingales singing
one against the other, or answering to the
long low plaintive call with trills of joyfulness.


Charlie came back in a moment. " He
says the boats are asleep, so far as I can
make out, and he wants to know which
we would like awakened, two niccolo, or a
great boat? Shall we have two boats?
Let's "

Vera demurred: "Oh! let us be together."


But simultaneously Grey had said,
Take the two light boats, and we'll race
each other, Charlie. Miss Leytoii, would
you come with me first ? "

(This was in accordance with a previous
whisper of Charlie's to Grey : " / won't row

13—2

Georgie, you know." Showing nothing of
annoyance ; after brief surprise at disturbance
of the arrangement as he had conceived it
most proper, Georgie with her cousin, the
chaperon (!) with himself; to this General
Grey responded : " We'll go shares in our
pleasures")

But asking Miss Ley ton to go with him
he pleased Miss Leyton.

A conversation took place between the
two rowers before they each handed their
charges into the boats, of which the ladies
heard Grey's last two words, as if he meant
to be obeyed ; " Mind that." He continued :
Come on, please, Miss Leyton. Lady
Carstairs, I have told Charlie to row
straight across to San Giovanni ; mind he
keeps tryst with us. Of course we shall
be first."

Of course you won't," said Charlie.
In with you, Vera."

Perhaps the conversations, or parts of
the conversations, in the two boats as they
shot out into the silver had better be
arranged in parallel columns. Charlie rowed
violently for a time, then gave up, then
again put on a spurt. Grey rowed slowly
and steadily across,* and when he paused,
paused deliberately. They had the lake
almost to themselves.

Is Lake Como more beautiful in the
twinkling sunlight, or in the rippling moonlight
? Either is good, but never had it
seemed more beautiful than to Vera that
night, when the ebony shadows were cut
by the silvery waves, and . after passing
through the placid" light they gained the
peaceful darkness on the other side.

Boat No. I. Boat No. II.

Voice in the Bow and voice Voice in the Bow and voice

of the Rower marked B. of the Rower marked B.

and R. respectively. and R. respectively.

[Boats keep near each other for a little while, then separate ;
Charlie's oars, Georgie's lines, having 1 the same tendency to
increase distance.]

B. (In a low
tone.) There! Meredith
can have her,
since he's so fond of
her. I've told him
he can land her on
the opposite shore
and leave her there,
or stay with her — I
wont change.

B. What are you
talking about ?

B. Some one
whom I won't row.

E. One can get
along so much better
with the lighter
boats; those to hold
two are four times
as light as those to
hold four, and sometimes
twice as pleasant.


B. I like the
lighter boats, as you
say, sometimes. But
it is rather a trial
if one has an um

Take care. Sounds trustworthy rower.

travel on this water.
But of all detestable
creatures, Georgie
is one. Meredith
thinks she's a jolly
sort of girl. He
don't know what a
jolly sort of girl
is ! Are you warm
enough, Vera?

B. Quite.

R. Look out, don't
let us go near them.
I hate the sound
of her voice even
when I don't know
what she says. She
riles me. Look at

I won't mention
names — sound
travels so far on
the lake ; but one
of the party here
amuses himself at
my expense.

A Don't you
think you're a little
too hard on Charlie ?
He always seems tome
so gentle with
Lady Carstairs ; but
I've noticed that
you and he don't
get on together.

B. I should think
not. He is so rude.

that fishing boat Vera spoils him, but

with the lantern to
attract the fish.

(The boat drifts.)

she likes boys so
much. I think that
I prefer men.

Pi. May I smoke ?

(The boat drifts.)

Boat No. I.

(Charlie begins to sing,
and sings two or three
songs, with a scrap or two
of conversation betweenwhiles
; they get across
the lake ; it is quite dark
there.)

E. I promised
Grey' I'd land here
and meet him ; but
I'm hanged if I'll
change comes ? You'd
j must as soon have me

Boat No. II.

(Grey smokes and mnses,and
forgets to talk. Georgie
is impatient, but will not
show it. After a time
she says : — )

B. I suppose this
is good-bye.

B. Yes. What? I
beg your pardon.
One becomes rather
dreamy. Yes, it is
our last night here.

as him — wouldn't
you, Vera?

B. It is very good
of either of you to
row me. I don't
want to change.

E. I don't, and
Georgie don't, and I
don't believe Meredith
does ; it is only
awkward when the
ladies don't choose
but he's done the
civil to you, and I
don't care if I do
the uncivil to
Georgie — let's stay
as we are.

B. I am content.

CIVIL."



I shall look back to
Cadenabbia with the
very greatest pleasure.


B. It is a charming
place.

7?. With charming
people — like ourselves
! I should like
to thank your party
for allowing me to
join it ; my stay
would have been
very different if you
had not been here.

B. (Hesitatingly.)
Did I — we — make
so much difference ?

E. (Gallantly.)
Why correct yourself?
You have made
a great deal of
difference to all of
us. Yes, it makes
one very sad that
our party should be
broken up — it can't
be the same thing
in town.

B. I often think
one knows people
on such occasions
as never on any
others.

R. And how much
some people gain by
being known !



R. I won't land,
and then we can't
change.

B. As you please,
dear.

R. (With a spurt
to take him away
from the shore, but
which brings him
alongside Grey's
boat coming in the
other direction.) We

(A little desultory talk
follows. Georgie gains very
little ground, though he
answers her in her own vein,
till they near the shore.)

B. Must we land?
It is so much pleasant
on the water.
The others seem to
be returning already.

R. (Looking
round.) Hullo! stop
there.

(Is suddenly vivacious —
cigarette pitched overboard,
spurt put on ; seeing that
Charlie is not looking, steers
across his course.)

aren't going to land.

The two boats just avoid colliding, and
Grey catching the sides together, says :
"How are you? Now, Charlie boy, outwith

you ! we aren't going to Lave step-bairns
to-night."

We are going to stay as we are,"
says Charlie.

Do what I tell you," says Grey ina
low firm tone, and Charlie resists no
longer. They change places.

Au revoir, Miss Ley ton," says Grey.
Vera has not spoken a word, nor has
Georgie. They leave the shore.

Boat I.

Now contains Vera and Grey
silent. Grey rows slowly
and increases distance
between the boats, but
says nothing till they
have reached the silvery
water again.

R. (Stopping.)
I've made an enemy

Boat II.

Now contains Georgie and
Charlie silent in rage ;
Charlie rows desperately
and Georgie steers as
straight as she can for the
last lights in the hotel
opposite.

E. (Insolently.)
Why didn't you try

of Miss Levton for to make yourself

B. What did it
matter what boat

EXCHANGE A ROBBERY. 205

agreeable to Meredith
? he was in a
precious hurry to

get rid of you !

B. (Foolishly.) I
was in no hurry to
have you thrust
upon me.

E. (Chuckling.)
Double score ! This
makes amends for
much ! Oho ! sits the
wind in that quarter,
miss ?

B. Hold your
tongue, sir.

R. With great
pleasure. I'm deli
o-hted with this

you were in ? I arrangement now I

thought you very
rude.

E. Some things
force rudeness on a
man. What did it
matter ? Do you
mean that you would
just as soon have
Charlie ? Miss Ley-ton
has that advantage
over you — she
wouldn't. She told

me so

(Vera does not reply.)

7i. (Looks round
and sees that the
other boat is suffi-know

how pleased

you are

(Georgie draws
her cloak round
her and sulks. She
tries to see the other
boat, which Charlie
perceiving, says : — )

You'd like to
know what they are
saying. Well, now,
I was just thinking
I'd row beside them
to plague Meredith,
but I shan't ! They
shall have some
peace from you. I
quite excuse Mercy

far off, then cl i t li preferring

says :— )

Charlie has more
sense than I expected.
Do you think
I'd give up tamely
my last night with
you here ?

B. Don't spoil it,
Grey ; you are only
making me uncomfortable
when you
talk and look like
that. And I do
wish that you had
stayed with Georgie
No, I really do.

B. If you are fishing
for compliments

Vera ; she's ten times
better looking and a
million times jollier
than you are.

B. I am forced to
be in the same boat
with you, but I am
not listening to a
word you say.

R. Well, don't
strain your ears to
hear the others.

(tries to laugh), that
isn't like you, Vera.
(Suddenly.) I wish
you could know my
uncle, Paul Wordsworth.


B. Why do you
say that now ?

E. I don't know.
It struck me a propos
of compliments.
Did you never meet
him ? At least you
must have heard
his story ?

B. I have seen
him, and we were
to have met him at
dinner last year,

silence, broken by Charlie
trying experiments with the
oars. Georgie becomes really
nervous.)

but I know nothing
more than the newspapers
tell us.

R. How misleading
they are too
about public menin
private life ! But
very few people
know Wordsworth's
story ; I suppose he
is about forty now,
and the thing happened
a long time
ago. He got infatuated
over a very
worthless sort of
woman — worthless
as to being a good
sort, you know,



(During this time Georgie
sulks, and Charlie sings to
himself.)

VOL. I.



position all right,
even above his own.
After getting all she
could out of him
she threw him oven
He's awfully bitter
about women now,
but it drove him into
work. You shall know
him. I know you'd
like him — I'll bring
him round. He's very
grave, you know,
but a tremendously
interesting man, and
just the sort to suit
you for a friend.

B. Why did you
think of him now?

B. Why can't you
keep the boat
straight ?

R. Why should I?
I'll let them have a
bit of peace from
you, at all events.

R. Don't know.
It was a waste of
time when you were
there !

B. What made B. That's this,

you think of him ?

R. I don't know, R. And what is

except this : I want there for me to
you to have plenty like in rowing you?
of friends, but I Spoilt my evening,
don't you want to you have !
have men who'll talk
nonsense to you.

B. One is more
than enough.

R. You're not like
yourself I
won't play anymore
!

14-2

IN OPPOSITION.

(Rows in silence. After a
time : — )

B. Oli, how glorious
this light is!
I am glad that
we came out. It
is the sort of
night to make
one forget that
annoyances ever existed,
or will come

again.

R. Thank you.

B. Why?

R. If annoyances
aren't present and I
am, I am not an
annoyance.

B. I see.

B. You tiresome
boy! How I wish
we had never come
out.

E. Don't say 4 7
see ' in that tone !

(Semi-serious badinage fora
few moments, then concludes
gravely : — )

Will you let me
look at you ?

B. (With surprise.)
I thought you
were doing that, if it
is necessary ; what
do you want ?

it. (Turning the
boat so that the
moonlight falls on
her face — is silent
for a few moments
taking her in.)
There! I've got a
picture of you that



B. Do go straight
home, or I shall
call to the others !

R. (Sings at the
top of his voice
latest comic song :)
6 You do look so
lovely iu a rage! '

you can't take away.
I want you, now if
you can, to give me
something to keep in
memory of to-night
anything that you
wear.

£. (Suddenly.) I
gave you a rose
once and repented
of it ever after.

R. I don't see
why you should . . .
In any case if you
gave me the rose,
which might have
been a life-long
pleasure, and I let
it go, you can give

me something now

which. .which It

will be a life-long
pain to know that I
can only have such a
a trifle — oily, in memoriam
amoris. Give
me that pin you
wear. I will have one
made to replace it.
Give it io me, Vera.

B. Why take it
when it will — if it
will — give you pain ?

II. Give it to me.

B. No, I cannot.

B. (Stiffly.) Well,
don't against your
will T suppose we

ought to push on.
(Vows fast.) Do
you see the others?

B. Yes ; and hear
them. Charlie is
singing, and I believe
Geordie is calling.


R. (Calls.) Hullo!
Stop! If Charlie
has been rude to
Miss Leyton he'll
have to answer for
it. If he doesn't
like her — though
why I can't see —
it is only when I
want you that she
doesn't do ! If he

B. I will call; I
can stand this no
longer, and I'll tell
Mr. Meredith now,
and Ralph later,
how you have behaved
to me tonight.



You'll be sorry
for it.

hated to-night — he E. Not I! I've

should behave like got too much of
a gentleman. Ralph in me for

B. The Carstairs that !
are very determined.

The two boats approach each other.
What's up ? " said Grey.

I told you that Charlie was perfectly
untrustworthy with me, and he is. I've
been tormented out of my life "

We'll change again," said Charlie.

In the middle of the lake ? Certainly
not ; otherwise I should ask Miss Leyton
to come in here. I am sure that Lady
Carstairs would make room, and I would
leave you without any one. I am so sorry
you have been annoyed, Miss Leyton."

Annoyed ? Insulted ! terrified ! "

I was under the impression that Charlie

was a gentleman," said Grey, " otherwise I
should not have proposed the little variation.
Well, let us keep together now. We
shall soon be home. Don't behave like a
boy or a bear, Carstairs."

Without further accident home was
reached, the boats were paid off, and the
parties separated. Charlie was following
the two ladies into the darkened hotel,
when Grey stopped him.

Good-night to you both. There are
candles. Carstairs, I'm not £join£ in till
I have had a smoke. You stay with me."

Then Meredith let loose his wrath. So,
as soon as they got upstairs, did Georgie,
on a more innocent subject ; and the last
evening at Cadenabbia heard Meredith assuring
Carstairs that his conduct should
not be forgotten, and upstairs, Georgie

declaring to Vera that her behaviour with
Mr. Meredith was disgraceful.

Vera said very little to Georgie, who was
wild with passion, not in one of her merely
hasty moods, but in a half hysterical state
of rage. As it at length wore itself out,
Georgie said : " You shall not again come
between me and "

She stopped short, looked at Vera
venomously, and, with clenched teeth, was
silent. She swept out of the room, and
Vera heard the bedroom door locked.

Vera went to her room, thinking very
little of what Georgie said, except once
she wondered how her conduct could be
disgraceful. She might have encouraged
Grey, but she had not — surely.

She looked out for the last night on the
beautiful lake, and then went quietly to

rest, for they would have to leave early
tomorrow.

But Meredith, after he had done with
Charlie, went back again for a boat, and
spent the night on the still dark waters,
he, the only thing restless and troubled on
the calm lake of Como.

Conflict.

It's no in titles nor in rank ;

It's no in wealth like London bank

To purchase peace and rest ;
It's no in making muckle, mair ;
It's no in books ; it's no in lear ;

To make us truly blest.
If happiness hae not her seat

And centre in the breast,
We may be wise, or rich, or great,
But never can be blest.

Nae treasures nor pleasures

Could make us happy long,
The heart ay's the part, ay,
That makes us right or wrong.

Epistle to Davie — Burns.

Chapter I.

PAUL WORDSWORTH.

From his intellect
And from the stillness of abstracted thought
He asked repose." — Excursion.

Contrasting with the clear air and the
calm restfulness of Como is the murky fog
and unceasing rattle of the London traffic.
It is true that Paul Wordsworth's house is
just out of a noisy thoroughfare, but the
little street is on the direct route to many
a fashionable abode, and is loved by aristocratic
coachmen who prefer byways. Not
having to drive, their younger " ladies " do
not ; but what is good enough for the

Eight Honourable Paul Wordsworth to live
in is good enough for other folk to drive
in. In this world one. cannot have amusement
and safety, without a great deal of
trouble. So might run the thoughts of the
variously collared, cuffed and coated tribe
who choose Sharp Street, Piccadilly, as the
course for their precious convoys.

Paul Wordsworth does not much care
whether they pass his house or not. When
he is out of office, as at present, he spends
a good deal of time in his own rooms, sofar
as people can see ; but in reality he
is often miles away, frequently not on this
planet, sometimes (as he once said very
quaintly) " if there be another Universe,
not in this Universe." Paul, of Calvinistic
forbears and north country origin, takes
Life very seriously, and, of modern learning

and philosophic education, is not disposed to
consider as fear or fruitage his personal death.
His nerves are as steady as any man's maybe
who indulges in the expensive luxury of
thought on a rather delicate constitution, but
he supplies his sometime lack of physical
strength by splendid perseverance ; is much
respected and a little liked wherever he
chooses to go. His power has purchased
for him the right to be fastidious, and he
exercises his criticship in society as in
literature with a calm independent air,
which seems to say : " Against me there
is no appeal." Small people know his
solidity, and greater minds his geniality,
half hid in seeming ungraciousness ; just
one of the men who ought continually to
have been forced into gentleness by his
love, instead of being goaded into hate

CD O

VOL. I. 15

once and for all by a doubly false
woman. Yet, with consequent severity,
his chivalrous and philosophic opinion of
womanhood remained true to its standard,
though, as he told himself, his personal
allegiance could never again be given.
Doubtless this was all theory, but men
like Paul Wordsworth do not every day
find women with power to test theories.

It is a long description to give of a
man's nature, but many lived near Paul
Wordsworth himself and for want of the
key could not penetrate beyond the outer
wall of his reserve. A brow open and
broad, arched in the centre — beneath
hair, too long, too thin and too shaggy (a
little touched already with grey), and
above very steady dark eyes and well-formed
features ; a well-proportioned figure

too, never quite at ease unless its owner
was very much in earnest, when its every
gesture followed the eager forcible speech.
These characteristics are known of all men.
Though the age of forty is the childhood
of statesmanship now-a-days, Paul "Wordsworth
had already become a power in
England.

Who is there ? " he asked, as his
servant entered into his study that June
afternoon. But before the reply was
given, Grey Meredith had introduced himself
and came to perch himself on a corner
of the davenport sans ceremonie. It was
evident that Paul Wordsworth had no
terrors for his half-nephew.

"You bad shilling," said Paul Wordsworth,
" you can go away as you came.
I have no time for you to-day. I have

15-2

to write without an idea to put on paper,
and to speak to-night when I can only
do myself justice if I don't."

I told you that you'd suffer from congestion
of the brain soon," responded Grey.
Do you realize how few words you
exchange with any one now-a-days ? What
you ought to do is to go into society
more and But, really, am I interrupting
you ? "

Yes ; of course you are. No ; I have
got a block in my brain. I can't write
a word. I don't know when it has happened
to me before. I cant do it to-day."

So saying, he scanned the MS., written
in a good-sized clear hand with broad yet
angular letters, and drew a line across the
last page.

There, I wrote only those two hundred

words in the last hour, and not one
of them means anything. Take my word
for it, Grey ; make as much effort as you
like beforehand, but never say, do, or write
with an effort, if speech, action, or book is
to be worth its toil. Your thought isn't
ripe unless it can run of itself, if you are
usually a rapid writer."

You'd say the contrary another day,"
said Meredith.

Of course I would," replied Wordsworth
instantly. " Never suppose that
when I say a thing one day I mean to
repeat it the next. I believe in no infallibility,
much less in that of a person
whose good-for-nothingness I have so often
experienced as I have experienced my own.
What have you come for ? " he added.
By this time all had been put away

neatly and Meredith was on the sofa and
Tail Wordsworth sat in an old oak chair,
in which (as malice might say he was
aware) he looked very dignified. He never
lounged. His rooms were filled with
luxuries, and comfortable chairs were
among them for his own perception and
other people's reception. At this moment
he made Grey Meredith, though really
far the stronger and more athletic of the
two, look a feminine and trifling character,
and Grey Meredith's youth and good looks
were eclipsed at once by Paul Wordsworth's
strong intellectually-matured appearance.

It gives me courage to say what I
I came for," said Grey laughing. " If
you are temporarily on my level with a
block in your brain, I want a very, very
great favour from you."

"So?" said Wordsworth. " Go to the
point. No one is backward now-a-days in
asking for anything, except the people one
would specially like to help. You needn't
beat about the bush. Self or friend ? "

Don't know. Both, I should say.
The fact is "

You don't want money "

; And you can't part with your brains,
unfortunately. No ; but I want a loan, —
the loan of yourself for half an hour. I
was telling you of Lady Carstairs. I'm
going to her to-day, and I promised to
bring you. So you'll just come along
with me now — at once, immediately."

Grey looked for a refusal, and felt like
a small boy who had fallen because he
had erringly expected his companion to
pull back when the answer came.

"Very well," said Paul Wordsworth.
Shall we go ? "

Grey sat up and stared.

Didn't you want me after all ? "

The truth is I expected a lot of opposition,
and had prepared a quantity of
arguments wherewith to convince you that
you were wrong."

I'll tell you what they were. 'No. 1 —
Lady Carstairs is a friend of yours.' Of
that I am not sure, and I want to be ; so
first of all I go because Lady Carstairs is
said to be a friend of yours."

Look here," said Grey, " even from you
I won't stand a sneer like that."

My dear fellow, I'm only charring, and
we are alone. I believe that Lady Carstairs
is an angel, and I have a curiosity
to see her, for which you are answerable."

Rubbish ! " answered Grey ; " as if you
have ever bad a curiosity to see any

woman."

Wordsworth looked at the younger mana
little sarcastically, and the fine lips shut
themselves, then opened for faint smile and
forcible speech.

Curiosity and women, especially when
connected, are the guardians of all good
and all evil in the world. Eemember that
you were at first in your letters from Como
voluble about Lady Carstairs, and then
completely silent till last night, when you
attempted to give me a dispassionate and
disinterested account of this friend of yours.
All of which awoke my suspicions. I don't
ask you for any confidence ; I only say,
don't burn your fingers. I hate these flirtations
with a married woman. I am not

going to interfere, but I wished to see what
she was like in case you got into any
bother with her."

Grey up to this had listened to the elder
man's a little too measured utterances with
some astonishment, and now again lost
patience.

Lady Carstairs is far above discussion,
if you please," said Grey, beginning quietly
but ending in anger ; " but I'll trouble you
not to insult me with such insinuations."

I gave you chaff and I gave you
candour "

Neither of which are acceptable on this
subject."

Well done ! " said Paul Wordsworth with
warm approval ; '• you are quite right. I'd
drop this ; but I want you to hear reason
No. 2 why I am glad to go with you

to-day. Carstairs is put on that committee
I told you of with me. It's about the first
time I ever got into personal talk with
him ; he's more or less of an able man, I
should say."

Able brute ! " put in Grey.
I daresay he is. I know nothing about
him ; he never interested me, except that
he intends to be No. 1 if he can. You
say he is a brute."

It has nothing to do with the case,"
said Grey.

No personalities allowed ? I suppose
that husbands are brutes, and brutes are
husbands, sometimes. At all events, a few
days ago I could not do less than say I
would like to be allowed to call on Lady
Carstairs ; so you come a prow*
Is that all ? "

What else do you want ? Look here,
Grey, for goodness' sake don't make a fool
of yourself. I did it once, so I know. I
have always hoped you would escape. It
has gone hard with you this time."

Yes," said Grey, and Paul Wordsworth
was silent.

The next time they spoke — these two
who had always been in confidence, if so
unequal in intellect and position and even
in age — it was of another matter. But by-and-by
Grey jumped up:

Are you coming ? "

Yes."

It is her At Home, so I wouldn't go
too early ; but it is a charity to go. I said
nothing about you. I thought I'd surprise
her."

More surprise than pleasure, certainly.

So it is an At Home you're dragging me
to ? I ask you, Grey ? I did not expect
that of you'

Well, if you'd rather come a little
later "

In for a penny in for a pound, and if
so why stop at the pound? What an
idiotic saying it is ! As if men had no
common-sense ; but there ! they have not.
No, we'll go on to your friend's At Home."

By this time the two men were out in
the street. Grey was unusually constrained.

A penny for your thoughts ! I suppose
Harold Rogers' volumes are responsible
for these pennyweights of proverbs!
What is it?"

/ Grey half stopped, and very slowly the
two paced down the street.

"I have an idea in my head. I'd tell

it to no living son but you ; not even to
her — though it's about her. You see she
is in a very difficult position as Carstairs'
wife in many ways — and, I think, she
might like you, and if Carstairs saw that
you thought a good lot of her he might
treat her better. Of course it is his interest
to be in with you just now. Do
you understand? I'm an awful fool to
have said anything," Grey continued, " I
always am an ass."

Yes, either a fool or a sage you certainly
are, if I do understand you. In
my old age to become the recipient of
a lover's lunacies ! Let us walk up Sharp
Street again, and let me study my new
part. It is somewhat complicated. Now
if you are going to get white and make
faces, I can't really take it in. The consulting

physician must make his diagnosis
before he can approve the course."

The two men had turned. Grey was
angry and pleased at his own confidence in
Wordsworth, and irritated by and interested
in the manner of treatment.

Go on," said he, half laughing against
his will.

"At first I thought I was taken as a
sort of chaperon for you, or as a little
offering of tender flowers. ' Behold,' says
Grey Meredith, ' I have brought to thy
sweet feet in chains that severe recluse
and unsociable hermit, yclept Paul Wordsworth.'
I know that my appearance will
excite some minds, though from no personal
merits, unless it be a merit not to go to
At Homes. Is Lady Carstairs a lion-hunter
? "

Not that I know of," said Grey, with
a genuine smile.

She must have a snobbery of some
sort. Everybody has. Some have the
snobbery of titles, some of clergy,
some of authors, some of mere money :
we all worship power. And I just
managed to comprehend your meaning —
(let us turn again) — by my talk with
Carstairs yesterday. A snob is a man who
gives way without reason, and flatters you
without believing in you, whether you're
a peer, a priest, a prig, or a purse. Bah !
Carstairs is a snob where I am concerned,
and I, quite as ready as he himself really
is to see the weakness of the man he
flatters, simply laugh at him. So he is a
brute to his wife? And you would use
his snobbery and abuse my good nature

by asking me to pay attention to her, to
excite, not his jealousy, but some pride
in her ? Grey, you are really very deep,
but it is not to be done at the price ! "

How on earth did you put all this
together ? " said Grey.

Do you insult me ? " said Wordsworth,
with his pleasant smile. " You are a babe,
my dear boy, a guileless babe, and, given
you and Carstairs, it is not a difficult
matter to divine your weak spots with relation
to an unknown quantity."

"I wonder if you have any idea what
she is like, you guileful sage."

I have not considered the matter. I

suppose a pretty little thing with ' speaking '

eyes, rather given to attitudinizing, and

making every one flatter himself that only he

knows of her secret sorrows, on which in
vol. i. 10

tete-astute she dilates at much length. And
I am to be let in for another confidence."

You will have no such luck," said
Grey laughing. " But here we are."

They stopped at the door of a large
house in Grosvenor Place, and presently
Mr. Wordsworth and Mr. Meredith " were
preceded by their names, and after some
salutations on the staircase from those
overtaken or met, Wordsworth saw the
lady without any hat, whom one supposes
to be the hostess of an At Home. It was
a tall dignified figure in black, only relieved
by innumerable beads ; a lovely
head, he thought, and a pale beautiful
face, with very quiet manners and charming
low voice. Wordsworth was introduced,
and Grey keenly watched him.
There was certainly some interest in the

way he regarded her. Grey, who knew
them both, was sure that each was correcting
a mental judgment already formed,
and as he had done a hazardous thing in
presenting his best friend to his queen — ■
as all men do who introduce those they are
fond of to each other — Grey was very content
as he thought that he read approval
on the face of each. Wordsworth seemed
inclined to linger by the door to try to
converse with the hostess, and Grey was
nothing loth when up came Carstairs himself
and forced Wordsworth into talk.

Almost before he had quite made
up his mind whether he cared to enter
the house again, Wordsworth found himself
asked to dine the next evening.

The guests had more or less crowded
into the rooms ; there was a cessation of

16—2

the stream, and Wordsworth marked Grey
detaining Vera's attention for a moment or
two.

"To-morrow night?" said Wordsworth.
"Wednesday? No special business. I
have no engagement. Thanks, I shall be
very happy." He spoke very slowly and
absently. He had been watching the two,
and saw that Vera was a little impatient.
She joined the others, Grey following.

"I have asked Mr. Wordsworth to dinner,
tomorrow, Vera," said Carstairs.

Of course she should have said something
readily and easily civil at once, such
as would have come naturally even to heron
any other occasion, but her husband
being present and she having been interested
in Paul Wordsworth before she saw
him, she became thoughtful and appeared

a little distraite from the very intensity of
her feeling that this was a critical point.
She was silent, perhaps for half a moment,
and they scrutinized, each other — Paul
Wordsworth and Vera Carstairs — before
she said to him, " I hope that you can
come."

Your hesitation was most unnatural
and ill-bred," said her husband to her a
little later ; but Paul Wordsworth had felt
himself weighed and accepted, so pardoned
the deliberation.

?-Gs

HOW IT BEGAN.

La plupart des gens rte jugeut des liorames que par la
vogue qu'ils ont, ou par leur future." — La Rochefoucauld.

In intervals of the conversation-exciting
music, Paul Wordsworth was greeted by
one and another, and Vera moved about
with her quiet pleasant manner in mitigation
of the dulness of an assemblage where
half the people know each other too welland
nearly half know nobody in the room.
Among the small minority who were enjoying
themselves were Georgie Leyton, keeping
a small circle in fits of laughter,
(especially during a pathetic song), and
Anice Bentley, who had found to her astonishment
that she did like going out

and was always pleased to be in Vera's
house.

Paul Wordsworth spoke to Anice
presently ; he had known her through
Grey, and a few of the curious eyes stuck
in the unintelligent faces of the ugly-nature d
well-dressed women, who have become only
envious spectators of the game," were
turned towards the two. Every one who
was any one knew Paul Wordsworth by
sight ; he was pointed out and whispered
about, and those whom he spoke to — even
the young girl he greeted — came in for a
share of those regards.

Those clever men always make for the
prettiest girls in the room. Who is it
Mr. Wordsworth is talking to ? " said a
well-known lady to Grey. "She is so
pretty."

Miss Bentley," said Grey.

Is it ? Who is she ? Do you know
her ? and you don't go and talk to her in
preference to old dowagers like me ? "
laughed the lady, giving him no time to
answer. " Mr. Wordsworth has better taste.
How prettily she colours ! She looks
charming."

She would be flattered if she knew
your opinion," said Grey. He wanted to
talk to Vera, and though he knew he could
not do so, the party was fretting him. He
lost the complimentary opening.

You know Miss Bentley ? " repeated
the lady.

For years," said Grey. " I know her
very well."

Ah ! that accounts for your not noticing
how pretty she is. Were you ever one of

a blackberry party, Mr. Meredith ? More
amusing than this kind of party, you know.
You think me quite mad? Confess it."

"I did not understand what you meant,"
said Grey, a little bit severely ; for he, who
mused on the one subject day and night,
thought that the lady was referring to a
certain expedition in which he and Vera
had lost their way for half an hour or so.
When a man once gets into a state of
mind in which he hears references to the
subject of his thought in the most innocent
remarks, he is likely to hear nothing
but allusions (as he fancies) to things precious
to himself, but about which in reality
no soul knows or cares.

No," the lady went on, " I don't suppose
that you do understand. But you
see one would be utterly weary if one

didn't amuse oneself with one's own
thoughts on these occasions, and I thought
of that childish lesson about the blackberries
d propos of you young men."

What was it ? " said Grey. " I need
teaching very much."

I am sure of it. Well, as children we
used to take our donkeys and get the
blackberries for jam ; I'm going to the
point directly — which was and is for everyone,
how to get the finest blackberries of
life. Some took sticks and made for the
topmost clusters, but I used to go along
the ditches and low down, where people
didn't think of looking, there were beauties,
hidden and cool, and oh ! so fat, and black
and sweet, and no scratches as their
price."

You speak with feeling ; may I take

you to have some strawberries downstairs
? "

No, you can introduce Mr. Wordsworth
he isn't in the ditch."

But oh ! so fat, and black and sweet,"
said Grey. "Am I, then, only the stick
to reach him by ? "

Yes, in many people's eyes," said the
lady shrewdly ; and at this moment up
came Georgie Leyton, and, as soon as she
conveniently could, made known her desire
to talk to Mr. Wordsworth ; and
many others did the same thing. Grey
wondered what the proverb of the blackberries
meant, and then harked back in
thought to the origin of the subject — that
he had not noticed the charms of the girl
he had known too long. He finished his
introductions and then made his way to

Anice, with not much thought of the application,
which the lady had made at venture.
Anice was delighted by his notice,
and whether it was that others were
now drawing her out, or whether he suddenly
saw her more as they did who
were not pre-occupied, certain it is that he
was by no means to be pitied for his act
of condescension.

Vera came down to tea with Paul Wordsworth
at last, when the crush had much
diminished and only a few lingered on.

Grey noticed their presence by the bright
colour flashing over Anice's face, and the
smile, which was a reflection of Vera's
own ; and, like a child who will be quite
good with others till his nurse is seen
again after absence, Grey began to fidget
in himself.

Vera was looking very tired, almost wan,
and Wordsworth spoke in a tone of
quite friendly authority, made her rest,
and waited on her with a special attention
which surpassed his usual politeness.
He sat down beside her, and they began
to talk, only being interrupted by the
good-byes of the last departures. Grey
fidgeted. Vera was listening to his friend
with an attention she did not pay to him,
and Wordsworth was watching her with
evident pleasure and interest, trying to draw
her out. Grey did not like it. He had
wished that his friends should appreciate
each other ; but now that the first few
minutes they had an opportunity for
speaking should be used and appreciated
was not pleasing. to him.

Are you staying here ? " he said to Anice.

"No; but I stay till Lady Carstairs
goes to dress ; she asked me to. The
others have gone and will send the carriage
back soon. Oh, here they are ! "

He saw her off and went back to the
room to Vera and Wordsworth. They
broke off in their conversation at his approach,
and Vera made room for him at
the other side of herself. But he would
not see the sign of friendliness.

Are you going to stay much later ? " he
said to Wordsworth.

"It is not very late, is it ? " responded
Wordsworth placidly. "Don't wait for me,
if you are in a hurry."

On which Grey sat down beside them
and sulked fur a few minutes. Of course,
he looked as if he were perfectly at ease
and as if the others were including him,

as was natural, in their talk ; but, all the
same, he felt that he was not wanted by
the two whom he had introduced to each
other, and he sulked.

However, Wordsworth did not like the
trio so well as the duet, and he rose to
go in a few minutes, just as Grey saw
Georgie Leyton come into the room, with
her colour a little brilliant, followed by
Carstairs. Anice was talking to Charlie,
who had also entered late, and the whole
of our former dramatis personal, with the
addition of Paul Wordsworth, were now
assembled in the otherwise deserted diningroom.


Swayed by common desire of making
themselves disagreeable, I fear, Georgie
and Grey devoted themselves to each other
with some empressement ; but no one took

any notice of the little game, though they
were both very good players. Grey, like
almost all rather good-looking and rather
run-after young men, had practised the art
of self-defence, and the instinct of coquetry
is as natural to some kinds of men as to
some kinds of women, just as it is unnatural
with others of either sex. Georgie
responded most readily, not slow to take
advantage of more promising circumstances
and to force him into familiarity before Carstairs,
whom she loved ; his wife, whom she
hated ; and the stranger, whom she respected.
In the meanwhile her husband's entrance
had discomposed Vera considerably. She
had become unconscious of his wishes, and
in so forgetting was fulfilling them ; but
when he came she recollected that he
expected her to interest Wordsworth, that

he was listening and looking. She lost
her presence of mind, and made a few
inane remarks in a jerky way quite
different to her usual manner. Carstairs
came to the rescue of the conversation.

So glad to find you here still. We
shall have some talk tomorrow evening.
Suppose we leave those messy cakes and
cream and have a cigar in my room ? Ladies
will have these awful arrangements in the
afternoon."

"My experience to-day has been so
agreeable that I shall repeat the pleasure,
if I may. I have paid you too long a
visit. Lady Carstairs ; but I hope that you
will let me come and finish what we were
saying some other time."

"I shall be very pleased," said Vera

stiffly, because she was nervous.

vol. i. 17

Wordsworth would not stay. Grey
went with him and they walked towards
the House. They heard seven o'clock
strike.

I had no idea it was so late," said
Wordsworth. "Lady Carstairs is an
interesting woman, certainly."

"So you seemed to find her," returned
Grey. " I had no opportunity of speaking
to her at all."

"You were too much occupied with
others. You spent over half an hour with
that pretty little girl, I forget her name,
and when you might have talked to our
hostess you were too much amused by
that dark young lady even to look round
when Lady Carstairs spoke to you."

Grey did not answer directly.

I think it is fearfully bad form to run

after a woman the first time you see her,"
observed Grey.

Wordsworth laughed one of his rare laughs.

My dear fellow, you are too amusing.
You take me to a house, I am there with
you, you keep me there to all intents and
purpose, and you come away in an
abominable temper because after being
hunted, baited, and toadied all the afternoon
I talk for a few minutes with
pleasure to my hostess. Shall I tell you
what we spoke of ? "

I am not in an abominable temper,"
said Grey ; " and, if you chose to talk
from noon to night to Lady Carstairs
about the man in the moon, what the
devil does it matter to me ? "

Are you dining there tomorrow evening?"
asked Wordsworth, taking no notice of

17—2

this particularly good-humoured speech.
If so, we might go together. Shall 1
call for you ? "

"No, I'm not asked," said Grey. "And
if I am not to have a word with any
friend of mine when I go out with you,
I shall not do it in the future."

So saying he beckoned a cab and
jumped in.

Can I take you anywhere ? " he called
out to Wordsworth from within in a
cuttingly civil tone.

No, I thank you," replied Wordsworth,
very formally ; " I shall walk."

Where to, sir ? " came from the roof.

The Bachelors," shouted Grey. But
as he passed Grosvenor Place the cabby
was stopped at the house he had just
come from.

THE QUESTION.

(i The lover who cannot wound has indeed lost anchorage."- -

George Meredith.

Has her ladyship gone to dress yet P "
Grey asked of the butler, already well
used to unconventional comings and goings.

The carriage isn't ordered till eight
o'clock, sir," was the reply ; " I think her
ladyship is in the boudoir."

Vera had been only allowed to decline
some extraneous invitations to dinner and
dances — none that were in any way connected
with the set in which Carstairs
wished his wife to be admired and himself
to be a power. The sole concession
granted her was that she might slid

wear black. Bennett was an excellent maid,
and Vera's beauty allowed her a simple
style of hair dressing, therefore Grey
hoped to find her still writing, as washer
custom just before dinner. He had
armed himself with an excuse for returning,
and telling, the servant he would go up
by himself, he ran upstairs and entered
the now tenantless drawing-room. These
large rooms in the Grosvenor Place houses
have a conservatory at the end, dividing
the double reception room from a small
boudoir. It is extraordinary how much
variety there is in houses similarly constructed
; the very shape of the rooms
seems to be altered at the caprice of the
owner. This drawing-room with its handsome
furniture and costly knick-knacks
never seemed so much a part of Vera as

the little room in which she was really
free to. do as she pleased — at times.

Grey always entered it softly, and today,
after his rush upstairs, he stopped
by the conservatory to steady himself;
a dim consciousness was stealing over him
that he had just made a fool of himself,
as in truth he had. The rich scent of heliotrope
floated past him as he paused, and
an angry voice was coming from within
the room beyond. As soon as he realized
it he had a moment's debate with himself
as to whether he should enter ; and in
the moment, and while he went forward,
deeming interruption could at least dono
harm, he heard a few words from
Carstairs. Needless to say, Grey Meredith
had no wish to listen, and made his presence
known the first moment that was possible.

Wordsworth went away perfectly chilled
and disgusted ; it is not your fault if he
ever enters this house again," Grey heard
Carstairs say. Then Carstairs saw Meredith
enter, and did not welcome him. However,
Grey, internally anathematizing his
luck, and piquing himself on his self-possession,
began :

I came back to get that address of
Lady Anger's ; do you mind giving it tome
now ? "

Vera had been standing by her writing-table,
her back to the light, opposite
Carstairs, leaning against the mantelpiece.
She stooped, picked up her address-book,
and looked out the name in question.

So sorry to give you the trouble. Are
you going to the House to-night?" he
asked of Carstairs.

"We are dining out," Carstairs answered
curtly.

Vera gave him the address written down.

Let me see it," said Carstairs suddenly.

She gave it him with a little drawing
up of her form. He looked at it, and
passed it on to Grey. " Why did you
want it ? " he asked, and pretended to
smile. " Lady Anger is rather too antediluvian
for you."

"Wordsworth asked me to get it ; he
wants to write about her son," said Grey.

"Energetic man, Wordsworth; he told
you he'd spared us an evening tomorrow ?
If you must go I won't keep you. We
shall all be late for dinner."

As soon as Grey had gone, Carstairs
continued :

I spoilt his game for him that time !

And lie ha. I the impudence to ask if I
was going to the House ! That's why I
repeated that I'd asked Wordsworth and
didn't ask him to dinner. You can be
pleasant enough when it suits you, I see,
when I am out of the way! But I'll have
an eye on you, no fear!"

You need not take the trouble," she
said with scorn, and swept past him.

There is a second flight of stairs which
opens out of the conservatory to the rooms
at the back of the house. Up these Vera
went to the room which she had taken
since Daisy's death. She left the other, looking
on to the Green Dark, to Sir Ralph,
even yet unable to bear its associations.
He stayed still in the boudoir, scanning
photographs, books and notes left to be
answered. One photograph with folded

doors stood on her writing-table. He was
looking for a photograph of Grey Meredith
which he thought was certain to be there.
This curtained frame had roses before it,
half concealing it.

He thought he had found it ; he cautiously
opened it, but recognized the
photograph of little Daisy, one which he
did not remember. Vera, returning to
fetch a forgotten letter, stood by him.

Do you like it ? " she said. " It was
done only three days before her death."

"You never showed it to me," he said.

The question and answer had been soft
and natural ; then he suddenly turned back
upon her :

"Why aren't you dressing? Did you think
that Meredith was still skulking about ? "

I cannot bear this," she said. " Ralph,

listen to me ! Do you wish to drive me
mad — or "

She staggered against the chimneypiece.

I cannot understand you," he said.
Don't begin to cry ; you'll make yourself
a fright for to-night."

I shall not cry, and I can't go tonight
; you must go without me."

That you may stay and see Grey
Meredith ! "

No, that I may stay and recover my
strength, if you wish me to live — if you
do. I have been exhausting myself all day,
trying to please you in the way you
wish. I wrote and worked for you all the
morning, I entertained for you all the afternoon,
and now your untruths and insults
am I fit to go out to-night? I am not
going." i

"Has Meredith nothing to do with it?"
he persisted. " You have never told mea
lie yet — that I have found out. What
you say I will believe. What is Meredith
to you?"

"I do not care if you believe me or
not ; that is what you have driven me
to," she said, trembling from head to foot,
two bright spots of colour in her white
cheeks, and her voice husky. " But if you
like I can tell you this, that except that
Grey is gentle to me and thoughtful forme
when from you I have neither gentleness
nor thoughtfulness — I do not care
whether I ever see him again! I am
growing desperate. God knows it is not
my fault! Grey Meredith has no power
over me, save the influence of a friend ;
but if ever man have, if ever temptation

be too strong for me, it would be your
fault!"

She paused. Then in a quieter tone she
added : " Make what excuse you like ; go
if you are going. I cannot. In any case
to-day was too much for me ; you have
made it impossible. Simply I cannot," she
repeated. "Leave me."

He looked at her, laid his finger on her
pulse ; then he said curtly : " Very well ;
go to bed, and as the children are told,
sleep for more sense.' "

As he went he heard her lock the door
after him.

END OF VOL. I.

:Ally AND CO., GATE STREET, LINCOLN'S Ix. FIELDS, W.C.

A>D MIDDLE MILL, KJKGSTOK-02 - thames.

OF THE

University

or Ill Nol

SZ3

Bsezei

v-z

i !L

i SEE
BAC

D(

/^>

<s=U

IN OPPOSITION.

Be lessons right severe.
There's wit there, ye'll get there,

Ye'll find nae other where.

BURN'.«

"But out of her griefs and cares, as will happen, 1 think, when
these trials fall upon a kindly heart and are not too unbearable,
grew up a number of thoughts and excellences which had never
come into existence had not her sorrow and misfortunes engendered
them." — Esmond,

BY

Gertrude M. leland Blackburn

IN THREE VOLUMES
VOL. II.

WARD AND DOWNEY

12, York STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON



[sall Rights Rcserrecl']

KELLY AXD CO., GATH STREET, LINCOLN'S INN FlELl^S, W,C.;

AND MIDDLE MILL, KINGSTON-ON-TIIAMES.

Content TS

Book II.— CONFLICT.

CHAP. PAGE

IV. — "The Prettiest Little Parlour " . . . 1

V. — The Turn of the Tide 23

VI. — Two AND Two MAKE FoUR . . . .45

VII.— A Trio of M.p's 63

VIII.— Slander 88

Book III.— CONSEQUENCES.

I. — Not Serena, but Vera . . . . 115

II.— "That's All" 138

III.— A Girl's Miseries 160

IV. — An Edition de Luxe . 181

V. -" Why WAS He Angry ? " . . . 212
VI. —Business . . . . . .236

Victor Hugo.

J. S. AND TO K. P. S.

IN ME^tOEY 0¥ 1883-1888

It's no in wealth like London bank ;

To purchase peace and rest ;
It's no in making muckle, mair ;
It's no in books ; it's no in long :

To make ixs truly blest.
If happiness hae not her seat

And centre in the breast,
We may be wise, or rich, or great,
Hit never can be blest.

Nae treasures nor pleasures

Could make us happy long.
The heart ay's the part, ay,
That makes us right or wrong.
Epistle to Dark — Burn"'

Book II. — Conflict — continued.

CHAPTER IV.

THE PRETTIEST LITTLE PARLOUR.

All their life was spent not in laws, statutes or rules, but
according to their own free will and pleasure. . In all
their rule and strictest tie of their order there was but this
one clause to be observed : fay ce que vouldras. — Readings
from Rabelais. — Besant.

As Grey Meredith went slowly downstairs
lie heard a voice familiar to him, and
when he turned the corner saw Georgie
Leyton. Surprise was mutual, and both
with one consent began to excuse themselves.
The truth was, that as Grey had
returned to see Yera, so Georgie, instead

VOL. II. 18

of going, lead slipped into Carstairs' busi-
ness-room on pretence of writing a letter.
But the double plan had been frustrated,
because the husband and wife had been together
in Yera's boudoir. So Georgie, who
had, of course, been too much at home in
Grosvenor Place for anything to seem at
all peculiar, had lingered to the last moment,
and had only turned away when
hopes of Carstairs' descent in due time had
disappeared.

*• Send that letter for m3, Simpson," she
was saying. " Get me a hansom. You
there, Mr. Meredith?"

Yes"' said Grey. " May I be of any
service to you ? "

"•' Aren't you dining out ? We shall all
be late. Happily, no one but my old
Doggie is waiting for me to-night. If you

were doing nothing, I would take you to
see her — my old governess, called Doggie,
because she is my watch-dog. Will you
come ? "

Do you mean now 1 "

"If you like."

I am dining at the club by myself, at
any time I like. There's a confession to
make. I ought to go to the House, you
know. But there are some days on which
one doesn't do the things one ought."

Well, I hope it won't be the thing you
ought not to do to come and have whatever
we can get from Doggie. Come and
dire with us. You needn't dress ; or, if
you like, you can, only be quick. You
promised to call on me, but I believe
you're afraid of going to a bachelor-girl's
rooms."

18—2

Am I really to come ? " said Grey, as
she went down the steps. " I should like to."

Then come. Seriously, I know there
will be enough for you to eat, and you
can go away whenever you like, and till
then you can talk to Doggie ! "

"What awful inducements!" said Grey,
helping her into her hansom.

Mind you come, in not more than
fifteen minutes," were her last words as she
sank into her place, and left Grey —
astonished and amused, and pledged to follow
her home as speedily as might be.
It would take him all his time to get to
Queen Street, dress, and on to Miss Ley-ton's
rooms in an elastic fifteen minutes.

Georgie leant back, well satisfied, till she
came to her own rooms in Park Street.
She found there a curious little elderly

woman, who met her with welcome, which
she carelessly repulsed.

I haven't a moment of time ; you've
arranged dinner?" she said, looking at the
table already prepared in the next room.
"That's right. It isn't Ralph who is
coming, though ; it's some one else ; all the
more reason to be particular. Come and
help me to dress, there's a good creature,
and I'll tell you all about it."

The pair disappeared into Georgie's room
beyond, and whilst they are away it maybe
sufficient to remark of Miss Spender
.that she had been a half-educated girl of
fifteen, whom, some five-and-forty years
before, the late Lady Carstairs had taken
to be generally useful, first as copyist
and secretary to herself, then as Ralph's
nursery governess ; and then again as a

sort of companion she clung on to Temple
till lie and Georgie lost their home
on the death of Lady Carstairs. When
Georgie found that she could get most
out of life by adopting independence, with
good grace she proposed to Miss Spender
that they should have rooms in town :
Miss Spender should have the rooms rent-free,
and, when Georgie was at home, share
her board, and her small annuity would
keep her in dress and extras. The arrangement
was satisfactory to both. Miss Spender
had an object in life, and a settled
home ; Georgie had a cheap housekeeper,
and the name of a chaperon, with
whom, on emergencies, it was not impossible
to be seen ; for the elderly lady
had aged very neatly. Timid and fidgety,
she admired Georgie's pluck and carelessness,

and would have been much astonished
if you had questioned unadvisedly her dear
young friend's generosity in having the
most unassuming of companions, most patient
of maids, and most genuine of flatterers,
in consideration of the small bedroom,
the use of a room when not required,
and her food at certain seasons of
the year. Georgie, however, did treat her
well in one way. She never said one
really unkind word to the little woman
all the time they were together, and, even if
one thinks that she had not much excuse,
one may remember that inexcusable
words are rather common in life. Let
Georgie, then, have in full this merit —
that she made Miss Spender happy.

Grey arrived in the shortest possible
space of time, as in duty bound, and found

no one in the little sitting-room. He looked
round and saw how prettily and tastefully
it was arranged; it being Georgie's home,
all was good of its kind. There was a
little dining-room at the back ; the doors
were open by some mistake ; but in the
other room Georgie had accumulated the
spoils and the possessions of her life.

He was not left more than a minute or
two alone ; little Miss Spender came in.

"Mr. Meredith, I believe ? " she said, in
her frightened little tone. " Miss Levton
will be here directly. I am Miss Spender ;
you may have heard her speak of me ?
No ? " she said again, as Grey had bowed
and taken no initiative of speech, not
quite knowing what the little figure was.
"It is just like her; my dear Georgie
never speaks of her own good actions. I

thought that she might have told you that
she has provided a home for me. I can't
tell you of her kindness ; but speak of an
angel," continued Miss Spender, with a little
laugh — " here she is ! I was just telling
Mr. Meredith that you had given me this
home to live in, my love ; it saves awkwardness.
When I was at Temple, in the late
Lady Carstairs' time, I always said to any
visitor : ' I am her ladyship's companion ; '
didn't I, my dear? "

You always did what was proper, I
have no doubt. Doggie, my dear ; more
than I do. You'll forgive my not making
a stranger of you, and wearing my old
tea-gown. I was so tired ; I can't help
not being fit to be seen."
- Thus challenged. Grey was compelled to
look at the tall shapely figure with close-fitting

gown of crimson silk, the loose
front graceful with white lace (real lace,
as Grey knew ; men are no longer generally
ignorant of such matters). She had
just had it made ; it was becoming and
very handsome. She wore at her waist
three crimson roses, fastened by a silver
pin, and in her dark hair a silver arrow.
Grey had never seen her look so well.

"Miss Leyton," he said, "you'll forgive
my not making a stranger of you, as you
say ; that frock of yours is no more old
than it is unfit to be seen ! You see, I
am too much for you."

He could not help looking at her. He
had thought her pretty always, for he had
never seen her otherwise than animated ;
but to-night the rich colour, the graceful
robe, gave her something of splendour.

You are too cunning ; yes, it is my
new tea-go'svn ; that is exquisite lace,
almost the only thing I had of my own.
I wanted to wear it for my own satisfaction
to-night. You really like it? and
me in ? That is better still."

She turned slowly round before him, and
he, nothing loth, scanned the form and
then fingered the lace on the front.

Yes, it is charming," he said. " It is
a great success."

She was very handsome, and so full of
colour and life. Dinner was announced,
served and concluded.

"I suppose that you have never seen
a bachelor-girl's rooms before ? "

"You used that expression to-day," he
said, as the servant finally left the room.
"A bachelor-girl?"

Yes, doesn't it describe me ? Here
I am in my own rooms, free and independent,
going out as I please, though of
course I've still to bother about getting
a chaperon when Doggie is not quite the
thing. And I am rather particular about
who comes here, when a man needn't be ;
otherwise, you know, it is just like being
a man in diggings — except that so many
men have much more luxurious rooms."

I like the idea of the bachelor-girl," h e
said ; " and I quite appreciate my privileges
in being thought good enough for
an invitation."

"How silly you are!" she said. Grey
bowed. They exchanged a friendly glance
she with a smile which gradually
brightened, as if it had been wrung from
her ; then she said, with some sadness in

lier tone : " Yes, one has to make the
best of things, and laugh sometimes when
one would rather cry." She looked down.
"I call myself a bachelor-girl, but I don't
laugh when I wish that I had married
happily ; yet I couldn't have married
any one without being fond of him." She
spoke in low tones as of enforced confession.
Grey always was a little slow,
and she quickly prevented speech by following
this murmur up. "Won't you
smoke ? Of course you will."

Here ? Oh ! no. Supposing that anyone
came in ? I know that you don't
object to smoke."

Ralph always smokes when he comes.
He used to dine here a good deal
during Yera's illness, you know ; that's
how I knew they could cook for you."

"If I smoke, you must smoke too'*
said Grey.

It would make me ill," objected
Georgie.

Grey laughed. "It isn't the smallest
use fibbing to me ; you do it badly, I
am glad to see. You know that I know
that you smoke — in private."

Very well then, come into the other
room," she rejoined, laughing, " and we'll
have coffee and a strictly private smoke.
No, dear Doggie, I only made that remark
as applied to tale-telling out of
school."

She passed her arm through that of
Miss Spender and thus went into the
little drawings-room, where a small fire was
burning, made of wood.

The evenings are chilly," she 'shuddered,

and stooping, took a splinter from before
the fire, and with the other hand a
silver cigarette case from the table, of
which the spring flew open to her pressure.
" There," she said ; " try those."

Grey took one, saying, " Something
special ? "

She nodded assent, as she took one
herself, and lit it with the brand, which
she had held.

It was growing dusk.
You look like the fire-spirit," he said.
It is a favourite amusement of mine
to whirl it round and make circles of
fire ; fearfully childish."

One could only do that kind of tLirg
on the sly in childhood ; hence the fascination
; one can best enjoy the things which
one is afraid of sufferings for."

Yes," said Georgie ; " I believe that
Doggie still thinks that I'll set myself on
fire."

The brand was nearly out, as she
illustrated her remark, by quickly waving
it about, forming another pretty picture ;
her robe folded round her by a dexterous
half-turn, while her train lay outspread
by her feet.

Now take that chair, you'll find it
comfortable," she said. *' Doggie, if you're
dying to knit, you may do so. You
know that I am called Pussy, sometimes ;
but it isn't in reference to our 
life, is it ? " ■

■ The short evening sped away. Grey
found himself cleverly drawn out, and was
very comfortable when half-past ten struck.
Then suddenly Georgie said : *' You must

go ; I may be going out, and if so, I'll
have to dress."

I had no intention of abusing your hospitality
so long," said Grey, startled to see it
was an hour later than he thought ; " I
ought to have been at the House at ten. I
suppose that you'd draw the line at coming
to the rooms of a boy-hsichelov some evening?
You would come if I made up a vent
nice party for you, and you'll forgive my
shortcomings in the way of hospitality ? "

We'll see," said Georgie.

"I'll try and get the Como party together,
and put on Paul Wordsworth in
place of Charlie, and get another nice
fellow or two. And, Miss Spender, you'll
come too ? "

Well, go," said Georgie laughing ; " I

must have half an hour to dress."

VOL. n. 19

But when he had gone she sat down
by the fire and meditated.

Miss Spender at length said mildly :
"I think he seems Yere fond of you, my
dear."

I don't care whether he is or he isn't'*
said Georgie, and then, " Did you make
your cap yourself, Doggie ? It's quite
sweet."

Eeally, my love ? " responded the little
lady. "I know you like me to look tidy
when your cousin is coming."

"Oh! he won't be here to-night. It
was great luck meeting Grey Meredith
when we had the little dinner all ready."

The door opened and Sir Ralph Carstairs
walked in.

I came to tell you that Vera can't
go to-night to the Polish ball, but if you're

ready I can drive you to Mrs. Freeman's.
Do you want to go ? I can't go either."

No, I wasn't going. You see I am
not ready."

There's half an hour, if you like ; I
don't care how you spend it, but more I
haven't got."

Use it in staying here. You're not
tired, are you. Doggie ? We have had
Grey Meredith all the evening."

She stood with one foot on the fender
and looked at him, a little defiantly.

How was that ? "

"I asked him to come."

Miss Spender left the room for the first
time that evening.

'•I suppose so. Do you mean there is

anything in it ? "

I don't know, and I don't care."

19 2

*• Well, I think it would be a good thing
on the whole ; really, I do, George'*

Most of the points are on your side.
I am tired of all this. I tell you frankly
that I don't care two straws for Grey
Meredith, but I shall marry him if I can."

A good thing, too. By all means
marry him."

It will not be the first chance I have
had."

Glad to see you're wiser than you
were then. Has this been going on
long?"

"I don't know that it is going on at all."

Do you think he likes you ? "

I daresay that I can make him think
so."

I thought you insinuated that he
cared for Vera."

She cared for lira. I daresay she
dois so still."

"You daresay? How dare you say a
thing you don't know ? "

Why are you so snappish to-night.
You have no right to control my words'*

I never said that I had. Vera swears
to me that she doesn't care a rap for
Meredith, and you "

"Did she say so? I wonder why."

Simply because, acting on your insinuations,
to-day I taxed her with it, hence
all this hullo bul loo. I really think that
Vera and I might get on a precious sight
better if you didn't get into our way
every moment."

'• I'll take good care to keep clear of it
for the future. Your meanness is contemptible."


"I meant no meanness."

Then why do you say what you don't
mean ? ''

I'm tired of this," he said. " You
must have expended your limited stock of
sweet temper on your former visitor."

He was extremely pleasant," she rejoined
as Miss Spender returned.

Then by all means invite him to
return and remain," he sneered. "I mean
it," he added after a pause.

"I wish I knew what you did mean
she said, half to herself.

"What does that matter to you?" he
replied as he rose to go.

THE TURN OF THE TIDE.

She was a woman of a steady mind,
Tender and deep in her excess of love,
Not speaking much, pleased rather with the joy
Of her own thoughts. ^^-^E.rcursion.

Would you like to have Meredith to
dinner ? " Carstairs asked his wife, quite
amiably, at breakfast next day.

She was a little surprised. Meredith had
dined with them formally and informally
as well as being frequent in attendance ;
but she had not been asked as a matter
of consultation whether he or any other
guest should be invited. Was this a trap?

Just as you please ; who is coming
to-niofht ? "

I have asked no one except Wordsworth,
and I think we had better have
two or three others."

It is rather late for that, unless you
find any ojie disengaged."

Shall we leave it then at four ? I
asked Georgie to dine ; of course she does
not count as any one. You can ask Meredith
if you like."

I think it would be better not," she
said quietly ; " it would not have mattered
unless you had showed him beforehand that
you did not want him to-night."

Perhaps so," he responded, not at all
ungraciously.

In due time he came to the last of his
letters. " From Charlie — more money
wanted," he volunteered, holding the letter
out to her. "He thinks that he ought to

live like a prince. He is fearfully extravagant."


So many are the same," she said.

Does that make it any better ? You
take this letter and answer it for me."

"What shall I say?"

*that I shall give him nothing more
this quarter, and nothing but his allowance
in the next. You may send him a £5 note
as a present from yourself ; here it is."

"Thank you very much; I shall tell
him it is yours, of course. I think that
you are quite right to be firm ; but this
seems rather a miserable sort of letter."

Of course it's miserable ! You know
what I say ; he may steal if he likes, but
not one halfpenny more does he get from me."

This was not said at all nastily. Ralph
was evidently quite in a good humour

Vera felt emboldened to make her own
request ; the storm of yesterday seemed to
have cleared the air.

Ralph," she said, "I wonder if you
would be angry if I asked for money ? "

You ; and for what ? " he inquired.
Have you been gambling, or making a
book ? " He laughed, quite pleased at the
thought of Vera thus distinguishing herself.
Do you want much ? I can give you
ten pounds if you like."

It was Vera's turn for astonishment.
She had never owned so much in cash in
her life.

"No, I did not mean that."
• *' Don't refuse a good offer."

"Well, then, I won't," she answered.
*^ Thank you."

That won't do," he said, getting up

with the paper in his hand. "No, if you
want a regular allowance, as you have
said before, I wont give it to you. I
have never complained of your bills, and

you're quite welcome to increase them ;

but no woman wants money in her own

home when she has only to ask for any

mortal thing she wants."

Indeed, I should like it," she rejoined.

"There are many little things for others

as well as for myself that "

"Precisely. Your bills come in and I'll

attend to them. You've got nothing to do

with others. But I'll see that you have

more in your purse if you wish. Now

say thank you prettily."

Thank you very much for these," she

said, taking the two bank notes.

" Would it be considered too improper if

you were to give me a kiss ? " he inquired,
almost as if he were sneering at her.

Lie felt his two hands grasp her
shoulders from behind and his face against
hers. She, all astonished, turned a little towards
him, and he kissed her full on the
lips, as he had not done since before
Daisy's death. The colour came all over
her face, and, ebbing away, remained in two
bright spots in her cheeks, so smooth and
soft and delicate, the blue veins showing
through the transparent skin on the temples.
He passed his hand over her hair, so fine
and silky. She was half fascinated, half
angry, and raised her dark eyes to him to
know what this access of regard might
mean. So far as she could see he was
quite in earnest.

He usually dispatched his breakfast and

went off to his writing-table ; to-day he
lingered. He generally took no real notice
of her ; this morning he was scanning every
feature with what, it appeared, was a
strong revival of the admiration which had
made him marry her for her beauty.

Have you no idea how much better-looking
you are than the ordinary run
of women ? " he said almost involuntarily.

She winced. The look of pain came over
her again.

"I'm not joking," he continued, "nor
jeering either. I've seen it in everything ;
man or woman, it's all the same. Some
have the real thing, and others pretend
they have, and those get the admiration
Men have a need to admire something,
and if you can only persuade them that
you have what they require they'll be de-sir

Kalph came again on his way out to
ask if lie had remembered to look out some
white frocks. This was so evidently his
wish that she went to find one.

She asked Bennett for one she chose
from her stores. The woman said that
it was not ready. " I wish to wear it tonight,"
Yera insisted, indicating the slight
alterations.

If I had known that your ladyship
wished to go out of mourning so soon it
would have been done before," Bennett
answered with her disagreeable civil manner,
perfectly aware that lie was hurting
the young mistress.

"Ah!" thought Vera to herself, ''I will
make an effort for power over Ralph if
for nothing else than to gain freedom in
my own room."

She went up to dress early, that is, rather
earlier than usual, and inquired for her
frock. It was not ready ; it had not been
touched, though there had been nothing
else to do that da3^

"Did you not understand what I said
this morning ? " said Vera quietly. She was
in her dressing-gown, and her dark hair
flowed all round her.

Bennett was silent.

Were you unwell to-day ? " persisted
Lady Carstairs. " Have you any excuse
to make for this — by no means the first —
disregard of my positive orders ? "

"I did not think that your ladyship[)
required the gown at once," answered
Bennett, a little frightened by Yera's rare
anger, visible in attitude and look.

"I told you that it was to be ready;

VOL. II. 20

Sir Ralph came again on this way out to
ask if she had remembered to look out some
white frocks. This was so evidently his
wish that she went to find one.

She asked Bennett for one she chose
from her stores. The woman said that
it was not ready. " I wish to wear it tonight,"
Yera insisted, indicating the slight
alterations.

If I had known that your ladyship
wished to go out of mourning so soon it
would have been done before," Bennett
answered with her disagreeable civil manner,
perfectly aware that she was hurting
the young mistress.

"Ah!" thought Vera to herself, ''I will
make an effort for power over Ralph if
for nothing else than to gain freedom in
my own room."

She went up to dress early, that is, rather
earlier than usual, and inquired for her
frock. It was not ready ; it had not been
touched, thou^li there had been nothing
else to do that day.

"Did you not understand what I said
this morning ? " said Vera quietly. She was
in her dressing-gown, and her dark hair
flowed all round her.

Bennett was silent.

Were you unwell to-day ? " persisted
Lady Carstairs. " Have you any excuse
to make for this — by no means the first —
disregard of my positive orders ? "

I did not think that your ladyship)
required the gown at once," answered
Bennett, a little frightened by Yera's rare
anger, visible in attitude and look.

I told you that it was to be ready ;

VOL. II. 20

and understand, once for all, that I mean
to be obeyed in future. Get it now. I
have ten minutes to spare, and you can
make it wearable ; it must be done properly
afterwards."

Bennett obeyed with the worst possible
grace, even going so far as to slam the
door after her as she went out, and coming
in again with the dress, threw it down,
with impertinence in every gesture.

Vera had often pretended not to see
such fits of ill temper, feeling sure that she
had no remedy in dismissal, for Sir Ralph
would not allow Bennett to be sent away.
But, now recovered. Vera had gained immensely
in mental strength from her suffering
of the past, and she was determined to
stand no more from Bennett.

I should be extremely sorry to send

you away without being able to speak
favourably of your services to me," said
Vera, and Bennett stared. " Of course Sir
Ralph and I have pardoned a good many
shortcomings in consideration of your
having lived with Lady Carstairs ; but I
am tired of this kind of behaviour from
you, and I do not consider that you are
in any way a good maid to me."

Yera's heart was beating, but she appeared
calm. Bennett was pretending to
unpick lace at the side of the corsage.

•'I am sorry that your ladyship considers
me a bad maid," replied Bennett,
with a half-mimicry of Yera's tone and
manner. " If Sir Ralph wishes me to leave
I can do so. I would prefer a lady who
had always been accustomed to have a
maid of her own."

20-2

As Bennett said this her temper got the
better of her, or her scissors slipped, and
a great sit was made across the silk
corsage, ruining the gown for immediate
wear and necessitating an entirely new
front. Whether she had done it purposely
or not Vera could not tell, but the speech
preceding the cut had been enough for her.

I will speak to Sir Ealpli about your
leaving me as soon as possible."

I shall stay no longer than it suits me,
your ladyship may be sure of that."

"Hold your tongue!" said Vera.
Understand you leave me this day
month."

Bennett's face of astonishment and wild
rage would have been worth seeing: if it
had not been for the fact that it recalled
to Lady Carstairs that she had no power

to send lier away. Suppose Ralph refused
to let Bennett go ?

"And mig^lit Hi lias what is the reason
of your ladyship's parting with me ? "

"Yes; I will tell you. During the three
years you have been here you have presumed
on your place in many ways, of
which you are quite aware. To-day you
added to wilful disregard of my orders
extreme insolence of an unpardonable kind.
I say nothing of the fact that — probably
intentionally — sou have now cut to pieces
the gown which Sir Ralph wished me to
wear to-night. That long cut is not a slip
of the scissors, but, if an accident at all,
was deliberately made worse."

"Sir Ralph wished your ladyship to
wear the gown ? " said the woman, the
corners of her lips down.

Vera did not answer. At this moment
came a knock at the door.

"See who that is."

The woman went to the door, and Vera
heard Sir Ralph's voice.

"Ralph," she called, "is it you? I
want you."

He came into the room, and looking at
the white drapery lying on the sofa, said :
"That's right. And what did you wants"

Only to tell you that I have been
obliged to dismiss Bennett ; I am certain
that before you hear my reasons you will
conclude them to be sufficient."

She was in her loose crimson robe, her
hair partly unfastened ; she looked him
full in the face, and he returned the
look. She had played for doubles or
quits. To call him in on the spot was

to insure a crowning victory or a crushing
defeat.

He showed his white teeth, but the
direct challenge always pleased him, and
she won her first victory. Let the reader
remember that for two years of despair
she had never attempted to obtain her
own way, and patient Griselda is sometimes
a wrong doer by default.

"What you are certain of," said he,
after a pause, " must be accurate enough
for action, in all conscience."

He surveyed the maid, who had not
withdrawn as she ought to have done
on his entrance. " You have heard her
ladyship's words ; she will no longer require
your services."

In delight Vera actually kissed lier husband.
What a relief it was ; a double relief!

"You will be late for dinner," he continued,
tliougli far from displeased with
lier. Grey Meredith's adoration had been
of this slight service to her, that it had
given her some idea of a power which
she had not even attempted to employ
for its legitimate purpose.

Oh ! no," she said, " only T am very
sorry for one thing, I can't wear white
to-night — the dress isn't ready. I'll try to
make myself look as nice as I can."

"What's the matter with it? Tt looks
all right. You might have arranged it
before now ; 3'ou had all day to see
about it."

Vera said nothing. A thought struck
him.

Did her ladyship tell you that she
wished to wear this dress this morning ? "

Bennett dared not answer.

Can't you speak ? "

"Never mind it now, Ealpli," said Vera.
"If you will leave me I will finish
dressing ; we have no time."

Why can't you wear it ? " he persisted,
obstinate as ever, and as determined
in detail " It used to look all
right. Put it on as it is."

"I really can't, Ralph," she said. " The
truth is that the scissors slipped as
Bennett was trvinj:^ to unpick the lace,
and it will not do till it is arranged.
Do go."

He was still persistent.

Did you intend to wear it to-night ?
Was it an accident that it was cut?"

He had relapsed into his suspicious mood.

Vera knew he had an idea — one of those

ideas which made her feel contempt for
him, and that he must think little of
her — that this was an evasion of her own.

Not realizing how Vera, having gained
her point, was not going into any more
detail than independent wives need give
as to the merits of a personal attendant,
Bennett thought he was referring to her,
and like many another, by voluntary defence
betrayed herself.

"If Sir Ralph means to insinuate that 1
have destroyed your ladyship's gown he
had better say so, as your ladyship has
done already."

*' Don't speak in that tone to Lady Carstairs,"
and again Vera felt that gratitude
which is only obtained by those who call it
forth by doing their duty in one deed out
of very many.

Why did you try to screen her if she
cut your dress to pieces ? ''

Because I hope now that it was not
meant ; it was accidental But I do not
acquit her of going too far, by intention,
in other ways. Go and fetch my black
dress with the lace."

Bennett left the room with reluctance,
and Lady Carstairs continued : " Ralph, T
thank you from the bottom of my heart
for allowing me my way in this."

There were ten chances to one I did
not. You say that I never trust you.
You know how I wish to keep Bennett,
and 1 take your bare word that she ought
to go. Don't be late."

That was all, and though it might
seem exaggerated gratitude and a simple
ordinary occurrence, to Vera it gave both

power and confidence. Lie lead no sympathy
for Bennett, who had so abused her
trust and to whom she owed much
petty wretchedness. In spite of the black
frock condemned by her husband he was
content with her appearance as a few
minutes liter she entered the room where
he and Wordsworth awaited her.

Close behind her came Georgie, whom
she had just missed meeting at the door.
Vera turned round to greet her, and the
two faces and figures were seen contrasted
against the shadowy background of
the room in its evening light, just as
the two men were cut out in blackness
against the window. Two good-looking
women, two powerful men — a quartet of
unusual social interest.

TWO AND TWO MAKE roar.

The beautiful ! the noble blood !
I shrink as they pass by, —
Such power for evil or for good
Is flashing from each eye ;
They are indeed the stewards of Heaven,
High-headed and strong-handed :
From those, to whom so much is given,
How much may be demanded ? "

Lay of the Humble.

The dinner went olT well. Wordsworth
was evidently pleased ; lie talked chiefly
across the table to Sir Ralph, for so the
parti carre had been arranged. He appealed
to Vera occasionally but took no notice
at all of Georgie, which at length dawned on
even his un-ladies-man-like perception just as
the servants left the room. He made some
observation to Georgie, obviously for the

purpose of making one. As it fell rather
flat, and he was conscious of a great lack
of the usual small talk, he tried again
With a more personal remark, made also
with a faint idea of testing Lady Carstairs.

Grey Meredith has been with me all
the afternoon, Miss Layton'' he said ;
making a point of addressing her, because
he knew too much about Grey's feelings
for Lady Carstairs, as he thought.

Eeally ? "

It is not altogether a rare occurrence
that he should enter my room. Don't you
think that he is a very sociable sort of
fellow, Lady Carstairs ? He was afraid
that I had been offended by a bit of temper
he showed yesterday, so he came to
make it up, and made it up so effectually
that I tlionaht he meant to stay for ever !

His apology was delicious ! Have you ever
seen him make an apology? It is as
funny as his anger, and both were needless
with me. However, what I was "going
to say was this : he had evidently enjoyed
himself immensely in your rooms last night ;
he said that you had given him an excellent
little dinner, and a good deal besides,
he said, which it isn't fair to repeat. Miss
Leyton."

Why not ? " said Carstairs. " Georgie
is colouring to find her good by stealth
already famous, but I am sure only
pleasant things were said."

Well," said Wordsworth, " if I ever do
repeat things, it is the good people say
of each other, hoping for nothing again ;
that is quite possible, it forms such a small
proportion of human speech."

The ladies stayed downstairs longer than
usual, at the unanimous wish of every one ;
but as they were alone together for a few
moments Vera broke the silence by saying:
So you had Mr. Meredith to dine last
night ? "

Didn't he tell you so ? " said Georgie,
carelessly fanning herself. " I thought that
you were interested in all he did."

I merely made the remark," said Vera,
much nettled. " But perhaps it is a little
curious, as you were both here so late,
that nothing was said about it."

Then you didn't see him to-day ? " said
Georgie, lounging back, with a slight
yawn behind the feathers. " I don't think
that he was bored at all last night. Miss
Spender seemed to amuse him. I don't
believe that you have been once to my

rooms this year. Wliy don't you come ?
I'll ask Mr. Meredith to meet you at tea
some day," she said, emphasizing the Mr.
as if to mimic Vera's employment of it
previously. " What's that passing ? " she
exclaimed, going to the window as she
heard the men coming up-stairs, thus securing
that they should be separated. Vera
was still near the flower-filled fireplace ;
Wordsworth came to her naturally, and
Carstairs joined Georgie.

By-and by, with a piece of Turkish embroidery
caught up and thrown gracefully
round her, Georgie stepped on to the balcony ;
Carstairs followed, and they sat out there,
whilst the other two found themselves alone.
For some time they did not notice, and, save
for the relief of free speech, they scarcely
recollected again that tlie}^ were tête-à-tête.

VOL. II. 21

Yet, as otherwise they would not have
done, they subtly slid into talk on abstract
subjects such as passes but between sympathetic
souls. And her calm beauty and his
sober strength were respectively exciting to
the two, tired of the restless littleness of
more conventional society.

Carstairs could not have hit on a better
plan to attract Wordsworth than to have
made him " at home " at once. A large
dinner would have bored him, perhaps,
but, all comfort having been provided, Paul
was thoroughly contented by this quiet
half hour in the evening light with a
woman who had interested him from
the first.

How charming she was with her simple
direct manner, and how fragile, with all
her beauty, she appeared to him !

And he interested and absorbed her. He
was so strong, and so restful, somehow,
and there seemed the compassion of great
strength about him ; which a woman loves
as she hates its counterfeit— the insulting
pity and patronage of a commonplace intellect
on the wrong track. Such an ordinary
one talks of himself on the first
provocation, or unprovoked. Most men talk
thus when they are interested, and a few
are interesting when they thus talk. Men
of Paul Wordsworth's calibre obey the
same instinct. But they are not called
egoists ; because they talk of themselves so
seldom, not finding provocative — to every
flower its own bee ; nor bores ; because
their personalities, the eyes, the gestures,
the physique, brighten the rare if then
complete revelation. Any self-revelation

21-2

made by such men is partly more false
and partly more true than the more easily-stirred
confidences of others : more false,
for they know how, and what, to conceal ;
more true, as they more readily perceive
and avoid the fallacies of introspection.

It was not all at once that Vera gained
Paul Wordsworth's confidence, though she
had at once his sympathy. But that night
as they sat together as strangers they were
testing each other with examination, to
which the easily-flowing talk rather acted
as accompaniment than as aid.

As one on first arrival will see all the
points of interest in a place, and on a
longer stay will but add affection and association
to his perception, so friendships
are begun in the outline-complete knowledge
of character which any observant

stranger may have from once seeing a
man or woman. This clear design is afterwards
obscured by the colours, put on in
progress to the perfect picture of later days.

Paul and Vera thought of each other
that night, but later on they never
thought at all, they only felt their mutual
content, nor doubted their own honour.
Yet in his casual phrases Paul spoke a more
intimate word.

They had been talking for some time
when a pause occurred. Vera looked up.
Do you care to go out ? The others are
on the balcony."

Not unless you wish to go. I am
ready to do what you please, as I hope
you will find me always, if good enough
to learn to know me better. Do you wish
to go out ? "

Not at all ; I was afraid that it was
rather stupid for you."

I pay no compliments, Lady Carstairs."

There is none, certainly, in supposing
that I wish for them," she rejoined
quietly.

As I had the worst of that, I shall
have to say plainly that I could not be
happier than I am at this moment — in
society."

There was something quaint in his manner
which utterly distinguished the speech
from the impertinence of a younger or
less able man ; otherwise without the ending
it was too much to say to a woman so
slightly known, and with it, too little of
gratitude to the hostess.

Do you dislike society ? "

"Yes," he said frankly, "I do."

The way in which he said it made them
both smile.

Seriously, Lady Carstairs, it is not
because I hate my fellow men. I love them
all in theory, and a great many interest
me in practice. But as, through no merit
of my own, I have not to run after people,
and as people think no less of me if I am
not seen at every turn, why should I
waste my time in washing the sands of
society for the few grains of gold hearts
which I can find ? Why not count over
and enjoy the pure gold already recovered
from the earth ? '*

"You mean literature, or friendship."

Both. You are quick to take my
meaning. I can have, I suppose, pretty
free converse with any now living who
have made their mark. Probably, nay,

rather possibly in these days of the press,
we don't know who are the great men of
the age or the great writers ; yet such as
they are, one — I — can perhaps have access
to them and see them in all their personal
defects. I prefer literature to literary
men, and to literary women."
But these are not in society."
More is the pity that some are, and,
for others, not for themselves, more is the
pity that some aren't. A good man— let
alone a genius — is out of place among
those who can but stimulate his defects.
You remember De Musset's words on the
subject ? I must send you a little paper
a critique of mine — on that sketch by
his brother ; it will, perhaps, be better
for yon than the original. Don't think
me doubly impertinent," he paused to say;

I was only thinking where you would
get the idea quickest."

"I have read some of your writings,"
she answered. " And I remember the
passage I think sou mean. You quoted
and commented on it. De Musset is tired
of society, and asks if he needs must
continue to live in it for the sake of
experience."

"You read that paper of mine? But
how do you know it was mine ? " he said,
a little quickly. "It has not been reprinted."


Grey brought it to me," she replied
simply. " He has cut out a great quantity
of your writings, and I liked that paper
particularly. Of course I have read
Disraeli on the same subject, but his book
is a delightful collection of anecdotes. Your

thoughts about genius in that essay on
De Musset's Biographie pleased me especially
because they were so pithy. Of course
they were brilliant, but beyond that they
were so extremely sensible. . I beg
your pardon."

Pray go on." But he saw that, having
checked herself, she could not proceed. So
he harked back a little : '"As we were
saying, society does not exist to help forward
its hidden leaders ; they exist to help
forward society. Therefore — if there be
any other means of keeping oneself in
touch with humanity (which, by the way,
society proper is not in touch with) — if my
sympathies can be kept flowing (and they
are usually checked by contact with the
crowd in a drawing-room), why then, I
say, let me go free. I am not a

young man : I am not seeking a ^vife,
or mooning after the wife of another
man. I am not trying to kill time. No one
can give me more comfort than I find at
home, and I have not the conceit to think
that I give any pleasure to mortal soul
in a drawing-room. Isn't this an instance
of it? I don't even know how to secure
my own ? "

What do you mean ? "

"That I have been only listening to my
own voice for so long. Do you care forgoing
out ? "

I ? " said Vera. " I can scarcely tell.
Sometimes I think so — if I had been happy'*

She stopped, and sought to change the
graver impression, but at the moment
Georgie entered the room again with Sir
Ralph from the balcony.

I am afraid that you have caught a
chill," said Vera, as Georgie shivered a little.

It is dangerous work for ladies in
evening dresses being on the balcony,"
said Wordsworth.

"What have you been talking of? You
both looked so absorbed we would not
disturb you. Is it very indiscreet to ask ? "
inquired Georgie, taking the chair he rose
and offered.

Not indiscreet to ask, but difficult to
answer. Our subject was society or
sociability. You know, Carstairs, that
speech for which I was never forgiven
after a visit to a certain country-house ? "

No ; what was it ? "

I forget. Something that I should
have to go and study the ideas of a low
pot-house before I could possibly be vulgar

enough for aristocratic society. But may
I ask, as you set the fashion, Miss Leyton,
what your conversation was about ? "

Mr. Grey Meredith," announced, and
unconsciously answered, the butler.

Vera did not know then that Grey Meredith,
coming out from a dinner which be had
left early, had walked past the house, had
been called to from the balcony, and had
been pressed to come up for a few minutes
by Carstairs, inspired by Georgie.

She heard his name. Ten thousand
Grey Meredith could not Lave made her
colour, but the instinctive knowledge that
three pair of eyes and three classes of
criticism were searching her, caused her to
flush and hesitate. And Grey was nervous
too. He did not like to meet Georgie and
Vera together.

lie was full of engagements. He came
up for a few moments. But the evening
ended for that party by Wordsworth
asking Vera to look at his work some day,
and by Grey clinching his invitation to
Georgie and Miss Spender.

A TRIO OF M.p's.

*' One that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in love.
I have heard him read many lectures against it."

As You Like It.

The House was thinly decorated with
sprawling members ; its physical atmosphere
was close and its moral tone seemed to be
affected by the enervating August night.
From the Front Opposition Bench Paul
Wordsworth turned round and spoke to Carstairs
immediately behind him. An inattentive
attention gave place to surprise and
to interest, and Carstairs began to listen
to the speaker opposite. Wordsworth began
to write, showed something to another
ex-minister, then passed this on to Carstairs.

Another whispered colloquy. Then
Wordsworth beckoned to Grey Meredith,
standing at the gangway, looking
wretchedly ill. Grey came, disappeared,
and returned with a volume. The upshot
was that Carstairs, not Wordsworth, caught
the Speaker's eye ; that Carstairs, who
spoke very well that night, was significantly
pointed out as likely to be on the
front bench ere honos that men wondered
what Wordsworth was about that he did
not rise to reply ; and that whilst Carstairs
was speaking Wordsworth slowly
walked down the House, looking rather stern
and grave, and after a few moments made
his way to the Ladies' Gallery Grey overtook
him, and together they reached the
top. A few country cousins — only five
or six in all — Lady Carstairs and Anice

Bentley were, the occupants of the gallery.
Seeing this the two men entered.

It is very hot for you here ; come
out on to the terrace," said Wordsworth
to Vera.

Anice has very seldom been to the
House, and no one is here," said Vera.
We thought that we would come on for
an hour or two. Ealpli did not say that
he was going to speak'*

Quite a sudden thought. The subject
won't interest Miss Bentley. Do come out."

Grey had also sat down behind Vera,
but had been talking to Anice. Each word
uttered was public to the quartet. It was
arranged that they should leave the gallery
to the country cousins, all of whom
appeared scandalized at the intrusion of
members, who talked in low tones to those

VOL. II. 22

ladies whose pretty coverings scarcely concealed
the pretty evening dresses beneath.

Wordsworth claimed Vera as of right ;
Vera had no thought for Grey. So they
went downstairs and out on to the terrace
in the soft night air ; it was fresh and
cool ; there was starlight in the shadow,
but the lapping of the dark water threw
waves of reflection of artificial light against
the grimy stones.

Would you like to sit out here or
to walk about ? " said Grey to Anice.

I don't care."

Then you should care. Hold up that
skirt of yours, it is trailing on the gravel,"
he answered in his cousinly fashion, " Come
on ! Let us go to the end."

Anice looked nervously back at Vera.

'they don't want us," said Grey with

a hard dry tone. And in effect it seemed
so.

There was nothing in voice, movement or
attitude to betray how they stood to each
other, but Grey Meredith, with an erewhile
lover's penetration, had divined the
truth : Vera Carstairs and Paul Wordsworth
had no need of others now — they
were deeply in love with each other.

Vera Carstairs and Paul Wordsworth had
need of others now, to remind them, to
make them conscious ere it was too late
that they were on a dangerous path, a far
more dangerous path than any which could
be trodden by souls less finely moulded
and less sensitively formed. For those who
walk on the heights there is an abysmal
fall from their narrow and difficult path
along the edge of the precipice, when a

22—2

stumble of the same kind on the highroad
might only cover the garments with
dust and strain the careless foot. There is
a tragic element in the commonplace, but
the commonplace element in the tragic
cannot blind us to the fact that tragedy
is not commonplace failure — it is a fall
from a possible perfect. Yes, a possible
perfect ! For we can conceive of the perfect
; we can portray to ourselves complete
fulness of happiness ; we can image to
our thought the success of sinlessness : the
pain of tragedy — of the ancient spectacle,
of the modern love story quietly acted by
many a man and woman — is this, that again
the best human nature has failed to attain
success or joy : our life is sadder for the
failure of the strong.

And so, by the lapping waters of Westminster,

while as yet those two have not
realized their danger, we feel the shadow
slipping round them, the blinding fog of
sophistry rising whilst they — together 
not that they are straying from
their path.

Grey had more defied ideas than any
of them — savage thoughts and half-cherished
suspicions ; therefore said he gruffly to Anice :

"They do not want us."

They walked to the end, and returning
looked over the water with its surging lights
below the steady illuminations of the opposite
bank. It reminded them of other days.

But," muttered Grey, answering thought

by thought, " always sound here, and

No ; it is not safe for you to lean over here.
We are not at Como now. Come away."

They were silent. Anice had divined

one day what Grey's feelings for Vera lead
been ; but Vera had said nothing more,
and Grey knew nothing at all about Anice
in this respect. She would not understand,
he supposed, if he talked now, and he
wanted to talk about Vera.

The others were not talking of love ;
the word had not been mentioned, nor the
thought defined : they were only happy
together, and in intimate talk, such as
passes between those who sympathize with
and who trust each other.

Take another turn, then we will go
back to them. How do you think Lady
Carstairs is looking ? "

Much better, in spite of the hot
weather. Don't you think so ? "

"I suppose she is," said Grey gloomily.

I daresay that you have seen her so

often that you notice no change ; but I
have only come back to town since
Monday on my way north."

Yes ; why did you run away from town
in the middle of the season ? "

One of my married sisters wanted me.
But I see a very great change in Vera
since I left, little more than a month ago.
She moves so differently ; she has colour
and animation, and takes interest in things
for herself. Of course she always was dear
and sweet about other people's pleasures,
and she seems to read hungrily, not
dreamily. Oh, she is better. I am so
glad. You don't notice the change much ;
you have seen her so often."

If that were all I should notice the
change," said Grey. "I have scarcely seen
Lady Carstairs since you left."

Anice looked at him incredulously.

Oh, it is quite true," said Grey. Lady
Carstairs seems pleased with her new toy ;
but what can you expect from a womanlike
that ? " He was so full of bitterness
that he forgot his loyalty ; besides, weak
men are never perfectly loyal to women —
with women.

Anice fired up, as he had never known
that she could to him, and in a second
Grey had fallen from his pedestal — the
ideal Grey had vanished, the ideal never
formed but by the very first love-thoughts
of a girl who will afterwards love another
with all his faults visible to her discernment,
and in spite of them. Faultless Grey
was gone ; faulty Grey met her scorn. He
could see her face by the gaslight.

How dare you speak in that tone of

Vera?" said the girl. "what can you
expect from a woman like that ? ' do you
say ? A new toy I Take me back to her.
I do not care to stay with you."

Well," said Grey, not attempting to
move, though she would have gone on,
do you suppose that every one is
perfect ? "

I have begun to find that some people
are more imperfect than I could have
believed," rejoined Anice.

You are not so nice as you used to
be, Anice."

"^or you. Grey. You have been quite
different ever since that horrid Miss Leyton
got hold of you ; I wont call her
Geordie ! "

"It is rather amusing, your being
jealous ! "

"I? jealous?" with feminine self-defence.
"Do you suppose that I could be — have
anything to be — jealous of Miss Leyton?"

It is charitable of you to take so much
interest in me, then. I don't know what
you mean, Anice, and I advise you not
to meddle with things which don't concern
you."

'• I am quite willing to have nothing
more to do with you ; only another time
please don't insinuate things about my
friend, and one whom you used to pretend
that you cared about too."

This time Grey had to follow her, as
Anice, tingling with anger and with shame
at her own outspokenness, walked slowly
back to the others, sitting in the shadow
of St. Stephen's. As they came up they
heard Paul say :

No, that is nonsense ! I would rather

have your encouragement and your counsel

than that of any one I ever knew. Have

you ordered tea or coffee, Grey ? " he continued,

perceiving the others.

"We ought to be going if there is no
chance of my husband's return with us.
He has just sent a note to say that the
carriage is not to wait for him. Are you
ready to come, Anice ? " /

"I am quite ready," said Anice, as the
division bell rang within the House.

Wordsworth exclaimed : " Will the wicked
never cease from troubling ? You know it
is this wretched system of wasting time on
unnecessary divisions which takes all the
soul out of a man, when he does not
happen to wish to spin out a debate himself"


■ " If they voted by any other method —
show of hands ? " inquired Anice.

The House is too small," said Wordsworth.
" I am afraid that, till after this
division, whatever it may be, we shan't be
able to discuss the question of Parliamentary
Procedure; we should be thankful for
practical suggestions. Miss Bentley. Shall
we find you here or in the ladies' gallery
in twenty minutes' time, Lady Carstairs ? "

Could we wait here ? Will you tell
my husband ? " said Vera.

"Do you want to stay, Vera?" said
Anice, as soon as the men had left them.

No, dear ; but I thought that you would
like to go back again. Would you rather
go home ? "

If you don't mind."

"I shall be very glad. The policeman

knows me, and we can leave a message
for the men, though I don't think that's
necessary ; we didn't promise to wait for
them."

"Are they worth waiting for?" inquired
Anice. "Do you know, Vera, I am
beginning to hate men."

A fearful sentiment," observed Vera.
Which i» our way ? We will leave their
haunts as soon as possible."

The handsome and burly bobby with
much graciousness aided their unprotected
movements, and they were soon in the
carriage, both silent, but Vera was looking
content, and Anice was far from pleased.

I suppose that I ought to leave you
at home," Vera said, after they had already
reached Grosvenor Place. " Will you come
in for a few minutes ? "

"It is too late. But I can go Lome
alone."

I'd like to come, my dear child. Have
you a headache ? "

No." Then, after a short time, Anice
realized how curtly she had answered. "I
didn't mean to be cross, Vera."

I didn't know that you were."

Yes, I am, very."

Is anything wrong ? "

Nothing really. I may as well tell
you though. Vera, as you know how silly I
am. Do you remember what you said of
Grey? Well, I am beginning to see that
it is true, and I don't want to. Town is
emptier, isn't it ? " she continued, a propos
des hottest. "How pretty Piccadilly is a little
earlier, with all the lists moins aloof it !
Now there are very few."

It is not every one who wants to stay
in town now. When do your people go
down P " inquired Vera, not pressing the
subject of Grey.

*soon, I think. Mamma is very busy
still with her societies and things, and
likes to get things organized for the winter
before she goes away for the summer.
Here we are. Good-night, Vera ; thank
you for taking me."

Good-night, dear. Come and see me
tomorrow. Home ! " she said, as the door
closed on Miss Bentley and the footman
waited for orders.

I shan't go to Mrs. de Lang's crush ;
it is too much trouble. I shall have time
to read through those letters of Paul's
before Ralph comes home."

Half-an-hour later she was in her own

room, a shaded lamp by her side, in a
loose dressing-gown, seated in an easy chair.
She had returned to the room over Grosvenor
Place, and the wind came, from the
trees of the palace garden opposite, through
the open window. She undid the packet
carefully. Between it and an inner wrapper
was a half sheet of paper, in Paul's
clear square writing, pencilled, and perhaps
slightly hasty :

"These are my letters of that date of
which we spoke. They were sent back tome.
I kept them, but have never seen
them since then. You will keep them
safely, I know, and as you care to see
them, will recognize how great is my trust
in you, how very willing I am that you
should know the worst of me ! It is
strange that we consider nothing more

sacred than the revelation of our weaknesses
; that we cannot show a sense of
the worthiness of another more than by
wishing that our unworthiness were known.
When you have read these letters to
Caroline Valley I may venture to do so
and see in what I now am the better for
this past self. Keep them locked up,
though they are only initiated, I believe,
here and there. The packet is marked to
be burnt at my death ; I am glad that
you should see it first.

"P. wr

Heading the inner inscription, Vera
broke the seals after she had taken in
the little note with, interest. There where
about a score of letters carefully folded,
and a few little notes. The date was
some fifteen years earlier. " Returned by

VOL. n. 2ti

C. v. to P. W., and kept as wholesome
warning."

This lay on the top as the packet was
spread on her lap.

Before reading further, she began to
muse on the extraordinary confidence which
men show to women, on Paul Wordsworth's
perfect trust in her so rapidly and fully
acquired, and on the strange thoughts engendered
by the circumstance of his voluntarily
revealing to her what for so long he
had cherished as a bitter memory or as a
painful secret. To hold in her hands this
monument of the passionate past of Paul
Wordsworth ! Paul Wordsworth ! a name
which men feared, hated, or honoured, but
which was never thought of in connection
with the suffering of sentimental need.

Vera was flushed and excited. She put

her elbows on lier knees and held lier
throbbing head between her hands. She got
up and moved her papers to the sofa at
the foot of the bed, and placing them
beside her, she lay down and began to read.

Bennett was still in her service for a few
days longer ; dismissed for the night, however,
she would not return. Till Sir Ralph
came home, which might be very late,
she would not be interrupted at all.

The effect of reading at night on certain
temperaments is, of course, very much
greater than on others ; but if ever written
words have weight it is when perused by
the intelligent or the sensitive as all is
still around, and the mind, quickened by
the quiet, has all its faculties receptive and
all its capacities awake. An hour at night
is worth three at any other time — dangerous

23—2

heresy for the many, doctrine of comfort
and of helpfulness for the few ! Fatigued
by the spoken platitudes, wearied by the
jar of social traffic, the mind gladly seeks
repose with itself and with its real intimates
in talk of wdiat the world gibes at.
Then, when it is silenced, speak the singers
and the seers to whom our souls are akin.
It is then in the solemnity of the hush, in
the eager pulsation of sympathetic delight
in what is best, that we feel that we " are
greater than we know."

These writings where only MS. love
letters, and though they were the love-letters
of a remarkable man, they where
exactly as the love-letters of others, save
for the power of expression, save for the
doubt which easy command of literary
style seems, wrongly in most cases, .to cast

on the spontaneity of statements. People
forget that with writers, as with women,
if they are ever graceful they are always
graceful. So, with the love-letters of Paul
Wordsworth, fifteen years before ; the handwriting
more variable than now. The
letters were, as a rule, in form very models
of style, and in substance the same
outpouring of a man's soul which can be
expressed as forcibly, if not as freely, by
one who knows not how to turn a sentence.
But to Vera these revelations of a
true and loyal passion were more striking
from their beautiful and simple wording,
though in their framing the writer had
never thought of aught but telling this
woman how he loved her.

Vera had read the first, and before she
took up the next, lying on the inner side

oF the sofa at her left hand, she heard a
step in the passage — her husband's ! She
bundled them together hastily and pushed
them into a drawer before he entered her
room instead of going through his dressing-room.


I saw the light outside," he said, " so
I suppose you have only just got back
from Mrs. de Lang's."

"I didn't go there."

Then why did you leave the House ?
As you were there and saw me on my legs
you might have stayed. How often am
I to say to you that I like to know how
things tell?"

I wish that I had stayed. We went
out on the terrace, I did not know that
you were going to make an important
speech."

Nor I," lie rejoined, with complacency
restored, rubbing his eyebrows. " They
took the division immediately afterwards.
I don't think they'll ignore Me again on
either side. 1 gave it 'em."

"Then you had a success? I am so
glad."

Very good of you, I am sure." Then
with a change of manner : " Did Meredith
take you on the terrace ? You had only
Miss Bentley with you ? "

"Yes," said Vera, colouring under his
scrutiny, " and Mr. Wordsworth."

Oh, that's all right, if you had Wordsworth
with you."

Slander.

'* There is one shock at want of truth or goodness possible
even to the untrue and evil — when they imagine that their
falsehood may be true." — Mss.

Georgina Leyton had also stayed longer
than usual in town that year. Grey had
found himself less and less asked to the
Carstairs. Sir Ealpli never was quite sure
of Vera ; he believed her when she spoke,
but the moment she was silent the original
bent sprang back. Vera was ready
to please her husband in all indifferent
matters, and scarcely realized Grey's frequent
absences. Besides, she had been
vexed with him for little concealments,
where there was no need for deception.

with regard to Georgie Ley ton. Without
the smallest intention to spy upon his movements,
it so happened that from Sir Ralph,
from Anice, or from Georgie herself, she
had heard of his attention to Georgie,
and caught him once or twice in the act
of trying to make herself believe that he
had been doing something very different
when he had been with Georgie. He still
professed great devotion to herself. She
it may seem strange, but is true— had
not thought half so much of his declaration
at Como, until she had seen
Paul Wordsworth. With regard to him
women are not able to reap the advantages
of personal innocence and of
personal experience at once — she had no
ideas yet of the state of matters between
them further than this : surely there was

no one like Paul Wordsworth —so strong,
and to her so gentle ; so reserved, yet so
intimately confiding to her ; with such
high aims and splendid powers, yet needing
— and it seemed to him too that he
needed — her helpful sympathy. Vera,
therefore, . but thought it rio^ht that she
should see less of Grey, and then, through
her thought of another, did not realize
how painlessly and thoroughly she was
fulfilling her intention of breaking his
devotion to her. Besides, each of them was
only one man among many who came to
the house.

This threw Grey more into Georgie's
society. Vera had been loyal to Georgie,
and had not warned Grey against her.
Indeed most women would have thought
as she did once : " If men are

taken in like that, they are worthy of
being taken in." So first it had been as
one of the party of Como, then as a
pleasant talker, that Grey had liked her.
He found her always agreeable and always
amusing, when he turned in to see Miss
Spender and herself. An unattached man
is easily bored, and it became a sort of
undefined object of Grey's social life to
meet Georgie. In his own eyes his devotion
to Vera covered this. For Georgie
and himself it was a mutual convenience,
if one had to go out, to know that someone
was there with whom one was sure
of not being bored. His attention was
constant, but he flattered himself not conspicuous.
H many were coming and going
to Grosvenor Place so also personally
Georgie had too many acquaintances and

was too striking a woman for him to
secure her for long at any entertainment
against her will or without his effort. Soit
arrived, though of course he believed
that he was pining for Vera, he arranged
his little social plans for Georgie, and
was annoyed if they were not successful.
And of course Miss Leyton was to be
met where Lady Carstairs did not

go-little

by little Georgie got in the thin
edge, but not till it was fixed securely
and imperceptibly did she intend to give
the decisive blow.

I have brought you some flowers ;
nothing much," said Grey, arriving with
one of his best society smiles very early
in the afternoon after the last night's
division. "Are you going out?"

Lady Carstairs said that lie would
drive me if I turned up before four," said
Georgie, who wore an embroidered muslin
in graceful fashion, with a hat of fantastic
summer form which none but herself of vivid
colouring and piquant glance could have
supported. She looked, as the dressmakers
would says, " most stylish," and the word,
artificial though it may be, suits Georgie
Ley ton admirably. She possessed style, and
where all are more or less well-dressed
style is itself distinction. She liked oj^en
admiration, and Grey was not at all ceremonious
with her now, though as a matter
of thought-out policy she always maintained
some spurious dignity with that
somewhat unsatisfactory young man.

There ! " she said ; " I'll wear some of
your roses to-day. Aren't you flattered ? "

They ought to be ; they really aren't
good enough for you'

Have you seen Vera to-day ? "

Saw her last night ; she was at the
House''

I thmk that she has treated you rather
badly lately. We were all so much together
at Cadenabbia. I don't like that sort
of thing: — 'At Cadenabbia I may know
you again ' — do you ? "

She went on, passing quickly over the
thin ice, for she had begun to draw Grey
out on this subject.

He did not appear to notice anything,
nor did he really. He was a good deal
less clever and rather more good-looking
than he supposed. At this moment Georgie
certainly had a little pride in her viceroyalty
; she could scarcely be said to rule

him yet ; she knew that there was another
sovereign still, but the governor on the
spot has some power. He was undeniably
what she wanted ; tall, good-looking, as
Carstairs said, " well-groomed ; " just the
sort of man to have about one in public —
weak enough to be governed by a skilful
hand, yet strong enough to hold his place
among men, and not too ready to be caught
by women. You see, Georgie knew well
how much trouble even she had had to
get him so far without alarming him.

I scarcely ever see Lady Carstairs now,"
he answered, half in personage ; "you only
are faithful to me."

Well, serious" speaking and quite
between ourselves, I think that Vera is
rather fickle. I don't mean that fickleness
enters into this question at all, but she

takes fancies for people and drops them
rather cruelly sometimes."

Eeally ? " said Grey, who bore this more
patiently than he had done a former
attempt at depreciation. " I should have
thought that Lady Carstairs was not
fickle."

Of course, you knew her from a child ;
you should know best. I have only seen
her since her marriage, and, of course, too,
this is not what I should say to every one."

"It is not necessary to say that to mea
friend of both of you, I hope," said
Grey.

Well, what did you come for ? " asked
Georgie, suddenly changing the subject ere
he had time to know that his words misflit
be taken significantly. " I must go in a
moment."

They settled some plans as if it were a
matter of course. Grey left after a few
conventional words with Miss Spender, after
which that little person observed :

'* My love, you know best, but don't you
think people will talk if Mr. Meredith comes
so often here ? "

You are not in the country, my dear,"
returned Georgie ; " but you're right,
Doggie ; Mr. Meredith must make up his
mind soon."

Meanwhile Paul Wordsworth had been
with the Carstairs for luncheon, after which
he had remained with Carstairs for a longtime
talking of the political situation.

I shall go and see your wife for a few
minutes," said Wordsworth as he rose to
leave, their business being completed.

You'll excuse my coming up with your"

VOL. II. 24

Wordsworth did so very readily, and
found Vera ringing the bell at the departure
of visitors who had come early
to catch her in."

A constraint suddenly came on them both
when alone. Neither of them had a word
to say, and they had got beyond the stage
of conversation for the sake of not being
silent. It was a rare thing for Paul to be
embarrassed, and, trying not to hear the
answer, he asked himself wdiat it meant.
For her, was the embarrassment of fittingly
commenting on the packet received. He
put the question after a few meaningless
phrases had passed between them.

"Did you read the letters? Aren't they
fearful rubbish ? "

I had very little time last night.
Ralph came in earlier than usual, and of

course that prevented my reading them
then, and to-day I have scarcely had any
free time."

Do not read them ; it was foolish and
impertinent to give them to you. Give
them back to me."

If you wish it," she answered slowly,
a little disappointed at the withdrawn confidence.


You would like to read them ? "

"I said so yesterday."

'then do so by all means. Keep them
so long as you like, if you will keep them
safely, please."

They are safe now in the writing-table
drawer, the centre one. I read some
the first two letters."

Of course it wasn't the beginning of
our acquaintance quite, though the last

24 2

letter marks the end ; but every word
which I wrote to her is there. I should
like you to see them, after all ; but be
sure to take your time. Carstairs asked
me just now if I should care to go to
Temple in the autumn. I told him,
the contrary to not caring, I should like
nothing better ; but I did not know
whether I could ; also, I have really bored
you too much lately."

I should like you to come," said Vera,
on impulse.

"Would you really?" he rejoined with
great eagerness.

At this moment Georgie Ley ton came
in.

'' How are you, Mr. Wordsworth ? Vera,
may I run up to your room F I have
torn out a plait."

I'll ring for Bennett ; she can come
into the boudoir."

"Oh, if Bennett is there still, I'll run
upstairs."

She (lid so, and rang the bell in Vera's
bedroom .

Bennett came.

I thought you'd gone, Bennett."

Going to morrow. Miss Georgie."

Got another place ? You see where
it's torn," she said, holding out the skirt.

Is Lady Carstairs coming up, Miss
Georgie ? "

No ; Mr. Wordsworth is down there.
He seems to be here very often."

"Have you got a maid yet, Miss
Georgie ? "

Can't afford it this year."

*' I'll tell you what it is, Miss Georgie ;

you'll be wanting some one for your
autumn visits, and I can't bear going to
strangers. You give me what you can, and
take me till Christmas at least. Wages
isn't so much an object to me just now."

I should be going to Temple ; that
would be awkward," said Georgie, not disliking
the idea of getting Bennett cheap.

Me and Lady Carstairs is to part
friends after all, and if I go to Temple
with you. Miss Georgie, neither of us maybe
quite welcome, but they'll have to put
up with us."

Very well then, Bennett. I can't give
you much; but we'll try the experiment.
You need not say anything to 'Lady
Carstairs, you know."

Lady Carstairs and me is not likely to
exchange many superfusional words. Miss

Georgie, though we are to part friends.
I picked up a little note in her ladyship's
room to-day, when I moved the sofa,
which I shall keep till some day Tier
ladyship does not want to see it."
"What do you mean, Bennett"*
"I knows what 1 knows, Miss Georgie.
Will the plait do ? "

"You must be mistaken, Bennett."
No, miss ; 1 am not mistaken. Let me
put up your hair at the back, miss ; it's
hall lout."

Georgie sat down, thinking that she
should hear more, but not a word did
Bennett say, and Georgie would not ask
as the maid replaced the escaping tress.

Miss Georgie," she said, " aren't you
never going to marry ? You look very
well as you are, but you'd be the handsomest

woman in London if you were
married ; there's the clothes and the position,
which you'd know how to carry.
A very different Lady Carstairs you'd have
been ; but there are others in the work
besides Sir Ralph, and you'll excuse me,
Miss Georgie, but who's to say it to you ?
but they do talk downstairs — not as I
listen ! — that Sir Ralph and you is too
good friends."

How dare they say so ? " said Georgie
in poignantly.

That's what I say, miss ; but they'll

have something else to talk of soon. Lady

Carstairs is very quiet, and thinks no one.

knows."

"Is there anything to know?"

'• That's as it may turn out. I can

keep my own counsel."

Bennett," said Georgie, very earnestly,
*' are you saying this from spite, or is
there really anything which would displease
Sir Ralph?"

There is no love lost between me and
Lady Carstairs, and I am not saying that
to gain his freedom would displease Sir
Ralph; do you think it would, miss?"

Bennett ! don't say another word. This
must be false ! Lady Carstairs took my
place, but she knows how to keep her own."

'' False, Miss Georgie ? I am not likely
to tell you false. I picked up a letter,
here by the sofa ; it was a love-letter, no
beginning except just ' my darling,' and
it was signed "

How was it signed ? A name — quick ! '»

It was signed in such a way as to
show that the author was devoted to her

ladyship, and with a full name. No, Miss
Georgia, that's my secret for the present.
It was not Mr. Meredith. Here is her
ladyship. I think your hair will do now."

I thought that you were never coming,
Georgie. I should have been up before
but "

"You could not leave Mr. Wordsworth."

Oh ! he did not stay a moment after
you left, but some other people came in.
I hope that Bennett got you all you
wanted."

My hair came down."

How unlike you, Georgie ! You are
always so neat, even without a maid.
Fasten my veil, please, Bennett ; that
will do."

Bennett left the room and Vera completed
her own toilette.

"You don't seem to need much help;
you are very energetic now."

I am wonderfully well, really. I canst
Lear Bennett about me ; I am so thankful
that she is going. You liked her, did you
not ? "

Oh ! yes ; Bennett and I have been
quite friends for years," said Georgie, not
continuing that she had engaged Bennett.

'' You aren't looking well, Georgie," said
Vera kindly. " Your hand is trembling ;
can I get you anything ? "

I am quite well, thank you. At least
I think I am. But the room ! No, I
wonder what this is ? Vera ! Water ! Oh ! "

Georgie was fainting ; never having done
so, she did not understand the premonitory
symptoms. The mental shock of a few
minutes back had been too much for her.

Suddenly a new prospect had opened before
her. She recovered to find Vera bending
over lier, and saw the sweet delicate
face before she could move or slow further
signs of consciousness.

You're better now — lie still. You're
on the floor iu my bedroom," said Vera,
in a voice which sounded a very long way
off.

Then the painfulness of returning consciousness
increased, and in another minute
or two Georgie was fully awake.

How very foolish," she said ; " I suppose
that I have fainted."

"It is so hot. We won't go out. There;
lie down on the sofa and let me go on
fanning you with eau-de-cologne."

Georgie, like all strong people, was
easily frightened at a slight ailment, and

was passive for a few minutes whilst Vera
waited on her.

It is impossible ! " Georgie exclaimed
aloud.

What is impossible ? " asked Vera,
thinking she had spoken to herself. But
Georgie got up from the sofa, saying :

Nothing. What have you done with
my flowers ? " she continued in her usual
tone.

There they are, quite safe."

Mr. Meredith brought them to me,
and I promised to wear them. Come, let
us go out. Is my hat all right ? "

Georgie was very quickly her old spiteful
self in the carriage that day, and Vera
lost her charitable concern, thankful that
the session was almost over and that they
were so soon going to Temple, so that

it would be lier last drive with that young
lady that season.

Still, she had a prelude of what was
coming when in Bennett's last moment
the maid said very respectfully, "I am
sorry, my lady, that I have not suited
your ladyship."

Have you another place ? " asked
Lady Carstairs, " or do you think of taking
a holiday ? "

I am returning to Miss Leyton, my lady''
"Miss Leyton?"
Yes, my lady''
"I did not know that."
If Miss Leyton forgot to mention it,
my lady, perhaps I shall not be taking
too great a liberty in asking whether your
ladyship would mind my accompanying
Miss Leyton to Temple?"

Vera was nonplussed.

T should much have preferred that we
started afresh, Bennett ; but of course
should Miss Leyton pay us a visit her
servant would be on the footing of any
other maid"'

"Yes," hissed the woman to herself on
leaving the room, " Miss Leyton s servant I
and your ladyship's humble servant, and
Mr. Wordsworth's humble servant too ! "

-^-f-

i(^{

Consequences,

I trust in nature for the stable laws
Of beauty and utility. Spring shall plant
And autumn garner to the end of time :
I trust in God— the right shall be the right
And other than the wrong, while He endures;
I trust in my own soul, that can perceive
The outward and the inward, nature's good,
And God's : so, seeing these men and myself,
Having a right to speak thus do I speak.

A Soit's Tragedy. — Browning.

VOL. II. 25

CHAPTER I.

NOT SERENA, BUT VERA.

But yet a cold shudder would quickly drive bim away from
her, and lead him to Bertalda, the daughter of man : all this,
the writer well knows, could be distinctly drawn out, perchance
should be, but it makes him too sorrowful." — Undine.

Fouquet.

Temple is a beautiful place, and beautiful
places, if charming among spring verdure,,
look even better when the first frosts have
scarcely touched the yellowing leaves, when
the air is still balmy, and yet a haze
which is half clear and wholly luminous
hangs round the castellated hall. I think
if Georgie cared for anything it was for,

Temple — even apart from its master. It had
been 'for so long her home. Albeit at one
time she had been bored by it, on the
whole she had been very happy there ;
and no one degenerates so utterly as not
to care for the place where happiness was
once obtained which left no remorse behind,
or, at a later stage, which implied
no perilous and even shameful planning.

Georgie lead not yet arrived at Temple,
but Anice Bentley was there, among other
guests. It is true that we notice few
members of the circle who, more or less
intimately, knew the Carstairs. Carstairs
was a fairly popular man among men, and
Vera had a well-stocked address-book of
both political and personal acquaintances ;
nor were the Carstairs without links to
their poorer neighbours — he to constituents,

and she to clients. Their circle was a large
one, comprising many a well-known name.
But, whether in town or in counlr\% the
most ardent admirer of the wife or the
most eager talker to the husband would
find that in society they were surrounded,
and that when Sir Ralph worked, and when
Lady Carstairs was weary, it was no use
pursuing the chase. Very few were the
intimates admitted to the business room or
the boudoir, but elsewhere there were
always shifting figures filling up the spaces,
and forcing, as they always do, the real
life-histories to be written only with invisible
sympathetic ink on the margin of
the social anecdotes visibly printed that all
the world may read.

So Anice was saying to Vera, as they
sat out on the lawn watching for the arrival

of the louse-party for the week, "I
am so glad that we had yesterday quiet,
for 1 suppose that now I shall not see you
Very much."

■ " I will do my best to see you, dear,

but of course the people one Hies least

are those that one has to see most of —

they are always the strangers who want

entertaining."

I don't think they ought to want much
here."

They expect it. It is very hard to
keep a house cheerful in these days, when
people are not content without doing extraordinary
and most childish things. I
Can't bear the mornings with these women!
What treason I am talking! Tell me more
about yourself."

"I have nothing to tell," said Anice.

Do you know anything about Grey ? "

"No ; do you?"

"No."

And Miss Leyton ? "

I believe that she is coming to us
soon. She has Bennett with her, you know."

I hated Bennett always."

So do I. But I had no reason for
forbidding her the house ; you know that
she humbly apologized for her impertinence
to me. Indeed, I was half afraid that I
couldn't get rid of her."

You have some one you like now ? "

I am not sure. Charlie writes to mein
a rather depressed state of mind, but
tells me he has something private to say
to me. I am afraid that it is some scrape."

"I know he has lost money. He told
me so."

"I cannot help him, and Ralph won't ;
and I think Ralph is right Why can't
boys behave themselves ? Girls are so much
less trouble ! " ^

"They have just to go without things
if they want them," said Anice.

And boys will have things at whatever
cost."

Do sou think that women don't acton
impulse ? " said Anice. " Surely they
do." :

Certainly," said Vera ; "and I don't think
that the best women are one whit more
self-sacrificing than the best men. I wish
that people would leave off comparing the
two. There are different kinds of human
beings — those who think of themselves and
those who think of others — but I cannot
believe that being a man or a woman

.really makes much difference to ways of
looking at things."

Are you sure ? " said Anice.

Vera laughed. "No, dear; don't puzzle
your head in reconciling my crude guesses
with your limited experience! Of course,
education and circumstances are very different,
and there always are great differences;
but as Mr. Wordsworth said somewhere
or other : ' The world wants nothing of
its workers but work fitly performed. Fate
turns out an average number of working
souls each year and bids them shift for
themselves to find bodies ; so they get in
where they can, like the hermit crabs —
careless of the physique or the sex, so
that they may have a jned-a-terre to skelter
them'"

"You don't think it is only /a/^. Vera .^ ''

Xo, ill one sense. Yet I know, I see,
anal, would it were not so, I feel that no
soul can pass from its path ; it can only
be starved from within or shattered from
without so that its goal is never reached.
And its way may lie very near happiness,
yet, like the passer-by who treads the
gravel, hot and dusty, because the bordering
grass is forbid Idea, it may not seek solace
so close to it. It must go on ; how hard
that the cool ease is very near!"

Anice was silent. Vera's tone was strange.

IIow well you remember what Mr.
Wordsworth said ! "

I remember prose easily. I liked, the
passage about the hermit crab."

Is the new edition of his books ready?"

'' I do not know. I have not heard
from him since I had a note before we

left London. I have some papers of his
which, in the note, he asked me to keep
safely for him. All our friends seem bad
correspondents, though I don't know that
I expect to hear from him."

"I saw in the Athenaeum that the new
edition of his books would be published
early in October: do you not think he will
send you a set ? "

I don't see why he should," said Vera,
not quite consciously untruthful, for she was
perplexed by his silence, and the obvious
.way in which he had separated his business
with Carstairs from his pleasant intercourse
with herself, ever since the day on which
they had been interrupted before she read
the letters. Now she had read them,
while they pained her they interested her,
and he had never even asked her to write

lier opinion if he could not see lier. Quite
right ; quite natural ; anything else would
have been impertinent ; but it was strange
that he had so impulsively sought her out
for six weeks, then for as long ignored
her. Her pride was a little hurt. She did
not know that he was now afraid — a little
afraid — of himself.

"Did you hear anything about Grey —
about Miss Leyton ? " asked Anice again.
They were talking in desultory fashion that
afternoon, as they waited under the rustling
trees at Temple.

"No. Why? Have youP"

Nothing but gossip. It can't be true.
Still, I wish that you had heard from
him."

"Miss Leyton? Georgie? I should utterly
despise him if it were so," rejoined

Vera. " It would be entirely her doing.
And yet, what nonsense I am talking! Grey
is quite free to marry whom he likes, and
Georgie would be a very suitable wife fora
man in his position."

"I was afraid so," said Anice, answering
the contempt-covering platitude. " I
wouldn't mind if only she were nicer. I
never think she is nice."

There are the carriages," exclaimed
Vera, and in a moment or two was lost in
the self-possessed and graceful hostess. Lie
had developed since the past year in this
also.

That evening her husband came up late
from the smoking-room.

She was still at the writing-table in her
room, having pleasure sometimes in writing
and reading late, especially when the day

had been very full of small talk and exertion
without mental stimulation.

She took out her book and looked briefly
over the events of the year. Her memory
supplied what certainly was not written
down, as that she and her husband had had
no scenes lately, and in many ways had become
more conventional. Vera was striving
to do her duty — all the more because she
had indefinable ideas (though many women
of their set would have found food for an
afternoon's jest in the notion) that she
could not harmlessly indulge in friendships
perfectly natural to a really happy wife.
Men less to be trusted than Grey or Wordsworth
only waited for encouragement to
supply attentions not given by her husband
; and, for herself, there was a haunting
sense of insecurity awakened by the

one man whom she felt — or had felt — that
she could trust. So, since the first beginning
of her acquaintance with Wordsworth,
coinciding with a wish to take what washer
own place in her own house, she had
forced herself to be with her husband, to.
carry out his wishes and to see that hers
were noticed.

Carstairs would never be a food man,
but he was capable of being made a better
husband, and of late there had been a revival
of his pride in her.

May, June, July, August, September !
Five months since the sudden parting at
Cadenabbia: Anice Bentley had come out
and had expanded in all ways, her love for
Grey had departed, reaching its height on
the day of the storm; Grey Meredith had
renewed his passion for Vera, it also had

profusely flowered and presently faded ; the
jealousy of Carstairs had subsided and his
brutality had lain dormant for some weeks;
Georgie and Bennett had not troubled her ;
and in part of that time Vera had been the
friend of Paul Wordsworth.

Surely, surely, something must have happened!
His last — almost his only — note
showed that he meant to claim his papers ;
she had them safely in the writing-table of
her bedroom at Temple. It was a rather
gloomy room of old oak fittings and panelling,
and the great four-poster, wondrously
carved, was between her and the
further door by which her husband entered.
Through its arches he saw her in a loose
white robe, trimmed with swansdown, and
with wide sleeves lined with crimson, sitting
writing by the light of the red-shaded

candles. The background was dim and
mysterious, and the dark pillars framed a
picture such as we shoukl naturally have
thought a Romney would have loved to
paint as companion to his Serena. But,
more's the pity, with honourable exceptions,
our painters cannot work under the
mental conditions needful for success —
the studio is more perfect but the study
less prolonged. And if a type of countenance
reappears through the centuries,
each type as it touches any century takes
from its age a colouring never to be again
repeated in the history of the world. Nor
Romney nor Gainsborough nor any other
had Vera Carstairs for a subject, though
they painted women as lovely, as loyal,
as intellectual and as well-bred (for poverty
mars not gentle blood). So only the con-vol.

II. 26

temporary artist might have caught the
quickened intelligence, the greater capacity
for self-knowledge, for wider and more
far-reaching charity, in the nineteenth-century
woman. Facts chisel features. Vera
Oarstairs is not a Serena; she is a sensitive
woman in modern society ; no " heroine,"
no " wit," no " blue," no " religious ; "
tliouo-h, with all her weaknesses and defects,
capable of success in all these
qualities. But also her picture would not
be complete without the painter mirrored
something of the serenity of the depths
left undisturbed, as with Serena, and something
too of the sharp, habitual, sensitive
perception which is the characteristic of the
nineteenth-century face.

I thought you would have been
asleep. It is no use tiring yourself, with

people ill the house," he said, not un-amiably.
" Stop as you are I " He stood
and surveyed her from the other side.

Vera remembered how Grey had once
looked at her.

That'll do," he continued, and came
round. " I shall have a picture painted
of you. You have been looking better
than ever you did in your life this summer.
You should always wear white,
with a little colour about you if you like.
Do you know how late it is ? What have
you there ?

"That? Nothing. My diary."
With, sentimental outpourings ? "
"Notes of engagements, when I remembered
to put them down."

Take a sheet of paper and write down
a few tliinofs for me while I remember

them. Are you too tired ? " lie asked, as
the old clock outside struck two.
"No."

He gave her a few trivial directions,
indicated one or two guests to be asked
during the recess, and at length asked if
she had invited Meredith. 'tell him to
come on the 2nd."

That is two days before Georgie comes."
Is it ? I thought that she came on
the 2nd. However, let it pass ; ask him
for the 2nd."

Is it necessary to ask him at all ? "
Certainly ; Paul Wordsworth's favourite
secretary. I have written to Wordsworth
to know when he can come to us ; we
shall have to get a good party together.
Set your wits to work. lie isn't, like
most of those literary fellows, satisfied with

amusing people ; he can't bear them ; yet
he don't like stoclginess a little d."

Are you sure he is coming ? " asked
Vera, trembling a little, she knew not why.

"Why shouldn't he come? I thought
you got on with him well enough. It's
all very well to think of him as a foremost
man, and as an excellent writer, as
the sort of fellow the whole nation calls
by his christian name ; but it's a woman's
idea — your sort's idea, I mean — to think
that he hasn't human feelings. After all,
lie has superfluous brains, like riches, he
can't use in politics. Of course I'm immeasurably!
his inferior in intellect — I'm
not such a fool as not to know that —
but if you have enough brains for your
work, what does the public care for the
rest ? In shallows it doesn't do to draw

too much water, and Wordsworth's conscience
and intellect overload him at times.
So, take us both, where he stands now
there is no reason why I shouldn't stand
in a year or two, with a deal more
popularity to idiot ; don't you see ? "

Do you think," said Vera earnestly,
"that you could stand where he stands?
You do it for yourself so entirely ; he
tries to do his work for the nation because
he loves his fellow-men."

No sooner had she spoken out of the
fulness of her heart than she repented.
But Carstairs' brutality often proceeded
from the fact that he had no finer feelings
of his own, and he did not resent
this in the least. He sat down beside
her good-humouredly enough.

Yes ; I believe that Wordsworth has

some idea of patriotism, as it used to be
understood, glamour and glory, even at
this age, and with this experience ; but I
don't profess to understand the pose for
posterity spirit."

Oil ! I do," exclaimed Vera, her face
kindling. " It is not posing for posterity
it is only thinking how you can help to
take away some of the causes of suffering ;
the world can't help remembering a few
of those who do them good ; one would
like to be among the remembered, but, if
not, there are good men among the forgotten."
. ,j

Spoken like Wordsworth himself. In
the meanwhile, tomorrow you will write
a little line to the great Paul and ask
him to name his own time for comines tous."



It will be sufficient if you write."
"If I had thought so I should not
have told you to write. Have you any
objection? Don't you want him here?"
lie scrutinized her keenly.
I don't know," she faltered. " Wouldn't
it be more rest to you if we had a few
other people, not political ? "

'don't talk rubbish! As if I can rest
in this state ! I tell you that, so far as
one man can aid another, Wordsworth can
help me, and he seems willing enough todo
it. I'd give a thousand down for him
to stay three nights here merely to set

people ta"'-king "

'' Oh ! it is only three nights ? "
I didn't s:iy so. If he comes at all
he'll stay on, I suppose. He was full of
it one dav. Get him in the house — the

world knows he's here ; that's one thug,
but ridiculously small after all : get him
to stay on with us, and if we don't, become
Siamese twins my name is not Ralph
Ley ton Carstairs."

Th' young men nowadays there poor squashy things
• — the' looke well aloof, but the' don't wear, the' won't
wear. — Amos Barton. — George Eliot.

Grey arrived at Temple a few days later.
He was not in this usual spirits — that was
evident, and seemed to avoid Yera's eye ;
something was on his mind.

The house was not full, but others were
there and had to be entertained ; it was
not till just before luncheon next day that
she saw him alone. She had gone into
the garden to give an order, and returning
by an old-fashioned walk came upon
Grey by himself, digging patterns in the
moss-grown walk, and carefully burying

fallen petals of the pink roses on the wall
above him. He was enofrossecl in making
these little graves of moss and gravel.
As she came round the corner his face
vas from her, and he saw nothing till she
heard him say to himself :

"Confound it all!"

"What is the matter, Grey?"

He started, jumped up, put on his best
society manner, and made a few ordinary
remarks.

The day was slightly autumnal, with
bright, steady sunshine, and a wind with
warning of winter in its touch — a smell
of earth, of summer fulness on the wane,
an atmosphere of saddening prophecy.

Hostess and guest, two casually meeting
and carelessly talking — and behind one, at
least, the summer of his life, before him

uneasy consciousness of mistake ; the other,
all absorbed in her own story, out of
charity wondering at his sudden unsociability
and gloom !

At length, as they returned to the house
across the lawn, she stopped. Neither of
them quite knew what phrase of politeness
had been coined by the newly-developed Grey.

He laughed 'nervously at the pause.

Have you time to turn back with
me? I do want to speak to you," he
said with changed tone.

It is nearly luncheon time. I'll have
a walk with you after tea, and show you
the place. That is if I can."

Do. You must make the opportunity,
please."

"How do you like what you have seen
of Temple ? "

'rit is a fine house — very. Yes, you had

some excuse'*

Grey ! "

I'm in a vile temper. Everything is
going wrong with me."

You'll be better after luncheon."

"Don't know that I .shall be better
after tea," he said as they came up to the
others, whom they had already seen during
the last few remarks.

Grey was an unsatisfactory guest that
day. A type of man who is usually most
useful and most easily disposed of in a
country house, to-day he had objections to
everything, made in a slightly ironic and
wholly ludicrous way, it is true, but, as all
declared at length, simply meaning that he
was inclined to do nothing.

'' That was it," he affirmed, with a

languid air which Vera knew to be artificial
; " the whole crux of modern life was
that nobody could do nothing. It used to
make life bearable in his younger days —
sixty years ago — that people who hadn't
to work didn't work. He was going back
to that."

A little chaff of course followed, but nobody
was surprised when the question was
put to him point-blank that he really chose
to stay at home, wanted no one to play
tennis with him, and, in fact, intended "not
to be seen till dinner-time if his absence,
as no doubt it would be, were considered
agreeable to the company."

But if his absence were agreeable Yera's
was not. After tea, at which Grey did
not appear. Vera left her guests to themselves
; it is a time in which the hostess

may allow herself to rest a little in order
to recover her spirits for the ordeal of
dinner — ordeal if the party persists in being
dull. The evenings were already chilly
at five, and by half-past six one wanted
fires and was not sorry to see lights.
Grey, not appearing for his walk, she did
not think much of, being occupied ^vilh
writing and plans which as she had not
managed to do in the morning. But,
pressed for time, she got through the
necessary work in half an hour, and was
thinking that she ought to return to the
hall in case men or women lingered to be
talked to, when the door opened slowly
and Meredith entered.

May I come in ? "

Yes."

I knevy^ you were alone."

"What have you been dohig all day?"

They are shooting tomorrow. I was

afraid that I couldn't get a word with

you,"'* was the not quite coherent reply.

I must speak to you."

If you ]had come earlier, we might
have gone out with the others ; I daresay
you could have got in all you wished to
say."

They were all prowling about the garden,
and there are hedges and things ! I
had much sooner trust to stone walls than
to those walks. IIow can one tell who's
listening ? "

Dear me ! " said Vera, " it can't be so
important as all that, can it ? " She spoke
very lightly, for she had no wish for Grey's
confidences now — and it did not seem as
if she were likely to get any.

He sat down and was moodily silent ;
his face was fretful, and he pulled his
moustache.

You have not been in this room before."

No, it is very pretty ; like everything
else of yours."

None of that, please ! "

I suppose not."

Gentle Meredith " had become more or
less a pet of the House of Commons from
various qualities ; careful dressing and charming
manners slightly contributing to his
success ; but his pleasant ease now deserted
him, and his high collars afforded him no
support. Perhaps he looked best in town,
like most men dio are of the more refined
social types, but he was sufficiently
athletic to appear to advantage in Lis
rough suit. Not a word could he get out.

VOL. II. 27

Yera had more to do than to watch his
embarrassment ; she rose to go.

Oh ! do wait a moment ! " . exclaimed
Grey. " You haven't spoken so many
words to me since I have been in the
house ! Every one is all right. . . Look
here ! I'm offing to be married. There !
that's all."

It was the very gloomiest face with
which this announcement was made, and
Vera, possessing some sense of humour,
could not help herself from smiling. She
turned away to conceal the treacherous
corners of her mouth, and he thouo-]it that
she was offended. He did not' guess that
she had lately been ashamed of ever taking
him seriously.

Don't be angry with me ! I could not
help it ; I never intended it ! *'

I am not in the least angry ; what on
earth do you mean ? Nothing could have
pleased me better than to hear of your
marriage to some nice woman. I wish you
every happiness. Tell me all about it,"
she said, very much relieved, and a little
amused. Now she understood that Grey,
even if he dared not suppose that she
would care, had certainly some cause for
embarrassment when he had to eat his
own words on the subject of his marriage
in the most practical fashion.

He did not respond to her invitation.

Mayn't I even know who it is that you
are marrying ? "

She knew now how many women Grey had
run after. She noticed he had used the
verb to be married instead of to marry ;
was it an accidental slip ?

27-2

Can't you guess ? "

It is so awkward sometimes ! One
hears your name in connection with so
many people ! "

"That's a He!" said Grey. "I beg your
pardon "

"I think you may indeed."

I never run after people. It's very
hard that a man is at the mercy of all
these women."

Do you think that a man ever is who
knows his own mind ? "

Do you know what snubbing things
you say ? For a quiet woman who is not
regularly spiteful, you make the very
hardest hits. Well, you're right. I've just
drifted into this. I have no fault to find
with her, but I never intended anything
more than amusing us both."

"Is that the way you look on it ? You
make me despise you thoroughly ; you call
yourself a man, and dare to speak of your
marriage like that ? What right have you
to propose to a woman and then come and
tell another that yon never intended it —
but that you have no fault to find ? I
think it is cowardly'

I wish that you were a man," said
Grey between his closed lips, as he started
to his feet and faced her as she stood.
How dare you say such things ? You
forget that it is a woman who is cowardly
when she abuses' her impunity."

They were both in deadly earnest now,
not as before when Grey used language
which, impossibly strong from man to
woman — gentleman to gentlewoman — might
be taken as half jest.

I abuse no impunity, but I take the
privilege of friendship," Vera answered with
dignity. " How can I like to see you so
degrade yourself?"

Am I the first man who marries one
woman preferring another ? "

Is the poor man who was hanged this
morning the first murderer ? Surely if
wrong were justified by precedent we all
are innocent ! "

Thank you ! " said Grey. " Does it
make no difference if you are the woman
preferred ? "

Yes. If what you say were true it would
make me more angry that you could
think so badly, so despicably, of me as to
suppose that I might care to hear it!
Your former professions were bad compliment
enough ; but believing that you were

in earnest I treated them too kindly.
Why could you not come to me now and
say frankly : ' Vera, I am going to marry
So and-so ? ' "

Don't you know who it is ? "

How should I know ? "

Nonsense ! " said gentle Meredith. " You
know it's Georgina Ley ton ! Well, then," he
continued, not seeing into her mind, nor
yet feeling the revulsion occasioned by
the certainty of that of which gossip had
forewarned her, but of which she had
been really incredulous — " Well, then !
Vera, I am going to marry Georgina
Leyton : congratulate me on what I neither
deserved nor expected! Is that what I
should have said at first to please you ? "

To please me ? Do sneers ever please
me?" Then with some inconsistency: "I

have no doubt that you are worthy of her :
you are too humble ! I hope that you
will be very happy together. When is
the wedding to be ? "

I believe before Christmas. We were
engaged a week ago," he replied, trying
to imitate her return to conventionalism.

Do you know she is coming here tomorrow
? "

"Yes. Carstairs told me so when he
asked me."

"Did he know?"

Yes. So I believe. I didn't understand
quite why, as Georgie's of age ;
but when I asked her not to announce it
for a week, or till I had come here —
till, in fact, we were here together, you
see — she said she had to tell him, he
had been her guardian."

Oh ! " said Vera.

"I tlioiiglit, perhaps, he'd have given
you a hint, and anyhow that you'd
have guessed. You never gave me an
opening at all either yesterday or to-day!"

Grey was quite ready to talk once
more, but Vera had not cooled down.

"I should not have thought that your
announcement needed so much ceremony,"
she said, preparing to leave the room.

What are you to do when you're in
such a position as mine ? "

No doubt it is enviable."

'' I can't get out of it ; she won't be
jealous, even of you ! "

"You didn't tell her anything about
me?" exclaimed Vera.

'*I did, though. But she wouldn't be
choked off — I mean, she didn't seem to

mind. But I told list one thing, that if
you objected "

"I object?"

"And at least if I did not care about
being in the same house with both of you
I would not stay ! "

"Kindly remember not to class us together,"
answered. Vera, with her stiff
manner. " To me you owe the courtesy
due to your hostess, or to your host's
wife, as you came at his invitation for
the special purpose of seeing his cousin,
if you please ; sour promised wife will
require more of you : you will please us
both by never mentioning her name with
mine in any connection whatever. If you
wish to remain here you can do so. I
fear that I must leave you."

She found that it was nearly dressing

time, and every one had disappeared from
the hall except two men who were playing
billiards in the further corner. She
spoke to them, and then passing through,
went to her own room. Not far from that
was the passage leading to Anice Bentley's
room. The girl was there on a long
visit. Vera suddenly thought that she
would find her.

You have all you want, dear ? " said
Vera.

Yes, thank you," answered Anice.
But, Vera, come in for a moment. Have
you heard about Grey ? "

Yera did not quite know what Anice
meant. "What is it?"

His enf]fai?ement ? "

"Yes. He told me about it just now.
How did you hear ? "

I have a cousin who has been staying
in the same house with them : ' Can't you
see how it has been done ? ' she says. I
can ! Oh ! isn't Miss Leyton horrid ? Poor
Grey ! At least, I don't know why I
should call him poor : he is so silly ! "

My dear Anice ! " said Vera, who had
not quite expected this.

It isn't pride, if you " mean that, Vera,"
said Anice, frankly meeting her look. " I
have been seeing how silly I was for a
long time. It wouldn't have been so silly
if Grey had been better worth caring for,
but he is so weak ! Of course till one was
out, and saw others, and heard what people
say, one was no judge. I am ashamed
of myself! But I don't believe other
people know him as we do."

Oh, no," said Vera, " he is very

popular ; every one likes him. Mr. Wordsworth
said that none of the younger
members are so much run after as is Grey."

"Isn't it a pity?"

So he seems " Vera stopped herself;

he seems," she could not turn it off.

"Lily's letter is here; it came by the
evening post. Grey was so funny all day,
and I saw liii g6 to your boudoir, so I
supposed he wanted to tell you," said
Anice, too full of her own ideas to
notice much. " I couldn't have believed
that any man could be so silly. I knoiv
he can't care for her, and I don't believe
she cares for him."

We don't know that," answered Vera
severely, and a little bit untruthfully.

You remember at Cadenabbia? I didn't
understand then, but I do now when I

look back to it. And," continued Anice,
with the artlessness of an eager young
girl, " I think what made me despise him
was when he was angry with you, that
night we were at Westminster, for talking
to Mr. Wordsworth : he said that you had
a new toy ; wasn't it insulting ? I was so
furious with him."

Vera was taken by-surprise, but said
nothing.

That was another thing I didn't see,
but I saw afterwards that he was fond
of you. I thought it was impossible that
he would care for a married woman. One
doesn't know at first."

Take care, Anice. You shouldn't say
such things."

No ; it doesn't make things right that
they happen, but at first one doesn't

know that they do, you know. How
much older one gets all of a sudden sometimes
! "

You have changed, dear, very much
in these six months. You are not to
chancre into "

A Georgie ! I won't. There ! what a
horrid Pharisee one is ! No, what vexes
me is the sort of way that she settled todo
this and she has done it ; it isn't as if
he thought it wrong to like you and gave
it up bravely; it is just that he's as weak
as water."

The dressing gong sounded through
the house.

Just half an hour ! I must go ! " said
Vera, and Anice rejoined :

I am so glad you [came ; I wanted to
tell some one how silly Grey had been ! "

Cette enfant avait la timidity sainte,

Des longs cils door volant les chastes regards bleus,

Et des gestes heroine effaces et frileux. — Cojtpee.

If Anice thought that Grey had been silly,
if Vera thought that he were weak, to
him, save by the fact of making no
allusion whatever to his engagement next
day announced in the Morning Post, they
did not betray themselves. Nor had he
any real idea of the ground of their objection
to Georgie, but was rather complimented
than otherwise that they did
not appear quite to like it.

He had been nettled — perhaps shamed —
by Vera's rebuke of at least the way in

which he had told her ; it is a sore trial
to a man to be considered unmanly by
the woman whom he has cared for. At
first he thought that he would go at once.
But Geor^i^ie was cominf:^. He was fretful
and dissatisfied. Of course he really did
not know that the self-excusing way in
which he spoke of his engagement being
unexpected had a great deal of truth in
it ; he could not tell what a puppet he
had been. A favourite socially, any number
of notes and letters were forwarded to him
in the course of the next few days — masculine
chaff, feminine gush, jokes, congratulations,
and good wishes from many
an acquaintance and friend, accompanied
by all kinds of circulars bidding him know
where every possible need of doting fiance
or fondest husband might most cheaply

VOL. IL 28

and artistically be satisfied. The house-party
in social fashion made him a
friendly butt. He did not dislike it at all.

Of Georgie, too, he was sufficiently proud,
and quite pleased with any permitted
favours. They were not a demonstrative
pair of lovers. Georgie was not a whit
softened by her engagement. Looking remarkably
handsome, never had she been
more self-possessed, more amusing for men,
or less really amiable to Vera and Anice.
One thing only was altered : she was invariably
publicly polite to Vera, and
almost invariably " nasty " to Anice.

She held Grey aloof from both, but
any attempt of his to speak to Anice was
openly interrupted. The truth was Georgie
believed nothing of her own insinuations
against Vera with respect to Grey, and

she knew low proud Vera was. No word
of Yera's would be spoken to turn Grey
against Georgie. But Anice, w]io had not
successfully concealed her liking from Georgie,
was 3^oung, impulsive, in many ways unconventional.
She disliked Georgie as Georgie
felt, and Grey was fond of Anice — he said
so frankly.

All that week Georgie lost no opportunity
of making Anice ridiculous in public ;
Georgie's little stings, which the younger
girl in youthful sensitiveness took as shameful
slight, simply got upon Anice's nerves.
The girl dreaded Georgie's presence, fancied
that every one saw what a fool she was.
Anice's more serious retorts seemed clumsy
and almost ill-bred rejoinders to the little exaggerations
and apparently innocent double-entendre
which from brilliant Georgie shone

23 2

as brilliant wit. Georgie could hit hard
if need were, but she did not hit Anice
hard. For Anice it was only as if she were
unable to move and some one continually
came from behind her back and tickled her
face with stinging nettles. Georgie did not
attack Anice quite so much before Vera,
but she teased her chiefly before Grey, who
was so much amused by the cleverness of
Georgie that he did not think of the misery
caused to Anice : his knowing Anice so welland
having known her from a child, increased
his enjoyment, yet made him perfectly
unable to understand that the teasing was
torment, or that Anice had any excuse for
firing up at Georgie's chaff."

Grey found Anice alone one day in the
hall. There had been a scene that mornings.
After furnishing sport for some time, and

having been successfully meshed by the
reticularius of chaff, against which her
youthful sword had failed to win her freedom,
Anice had left the room very brusquely,
and Georgie had said to Grey before two
or three of the others, " What a pity it is
when a girl cannot take chaff quietly."

The others had agreed, and Grew, who
really liked Anice, in all good faith had
determine J to talk to her on the subject.

So he began judicially, with an elder
brother's air, sitting down beside her in
the cushioned oriel window.

My dear child "

Her attitude confirmed his idea of her
temper having been lately soured. She rose
and interrupted him:

I think the others are coming ; it is five
o'clock."

Wants five minutes yet. You needn't
be so impatient. Sit down, or I shall think
you are angry with me. Have I done anything
to offend sou ? "

'why should you think so?"

I shouldn't have thought so if sou hadn't
avoided me ever since I have been in the
house. That's right. I know you know how
fond I am of you ; you'll let me say a word
to you for your own good."

I don't think that you need trouble
yourself."

"There it is, my dear child! you're so
touchy now-a-days that you can't stand a
thing — whether it is chaff from a comparative
stranger or a caution from a friend !
How awfully sorry I should be, don't you
know, to see you become one of those
regular little shrews ! Not that there is

quite that danger yet, but do learn to take
things more lightly ! "

Grey thought that Anice was ashamed of
herself as she did not answer.

He continued, " I daresay Georgie was a
little trying this morning "

I don't want to hear any more," answered
Anice curtly.

"You needn't be angry. You know it
is only because I like sou I speak. I did
want you and Georgie to get on better
together."

It is not necessary."

But it is, my dear child. All your
family have been friends of mine for ages,
and you and I always were friends too ;
don't you remember the old school-room
teas and all the fun we used to have ?
Your people were always good to me, even

when I was as poor as a church mouse.
Do you thmk I forget kindnesses ? Nonsense,
Anice, you must like my wife for ray sake ;
and it isn't as if she were an entire stranger
either. I have had heaps of congratulations
from all sorts of people, you know, and you,

silly little thing! "

"Please do not speak to me like that."
Well, you have never said anything more
than a stranger might do; some little prim
speech before all the world ; why are ycu
so cold?"

A door opened near them — an oak
panelled door which had been standing
a little ajar. The oriel window was close
beside it. Georgie had come through the
dining-room within, and between the square
formed by the inner and outer doors and
the thickness of the walls — a great feature

in Temple — Georgie had stood to listen to
them, not jealous, but amused. Grey lead
his back to the door, which also screened
them from sight of Georgie, and Georgie
from sight of them. She heard and enjoyed
almost everything thatched been said.

But when Grey put this question, knowing-how
easily he was led, partly because she
really wished to humiliate Anice — having
played long enough, pussy-like, to kill the
little mouse^partly from mischief, Georgie
stepped out with her bright laugh.
"I've been listening! I confess it. Only
a word or two," she said, gaily. "But I
thought it fair to stop you, my dear.
Should I have heard no good of myself?
I am afraid so."

Grey gave up his seat to her.

"That isn't fair, Georgie. Why, if you'd

only heard all you'd have heard me saying
that I wished you two to be friends,"
he said, leaning back against the wall.
I am sure that you never mean half you
say to this child, and she frets over it
in a silly fashion. She's awfully young,
sou know, as I've been telling her in a
grandfather way."

I am afraid your time has been wasted,"
said Anice. " If Lady Carstairs comes tell
her I shall be outside, please."

Why can't you stay with us ? We have
nothing to say to each other — have we
Georgie? — half so important as settling
this quarrel," he persisted with masculine
denseness, that is to say, with a calm,
dogged persistency in blundering which
takes special shape in some men.

My dear Grey," Georgie laughed, " Anice

thinks I'm fearfully wicked and atrociously
unkind because I prefer not to be gloomy,
and till lie is older and wiser there is
no chance for us two to kiss and befriends
— unless you'll do it for me! Anice
would not object to the proxy, and I'm
not jealous!"

How dare you ? " beojan Anice, her
cheeks flaming, while Grey frowned at
Georgie ; he instantly, she after a moment,
saw that it was best to pass it off as a
jest. But not having Georgie's power of
gliding over the dangerous spot Anice walked
away in silence.

Georgie, now fully launched on the track
of bad taste and mischief, got up, caught
Anice, and brought her back.

Let me go ! What do you keep me
for ? Gre}^, make her let me go ! " said

Anice, as Georgie held her firm in a grip
from which she could only have freed herself
(if then, for Georgie was far the
stronger) by a struggle more fitting to
children in the nursery than to Miss Ley-ton
and Miss Bentley in the hall of Temple.

"No, I shan't let you go," said Georgie,
placing her in the further corner beside
which Grey was standing.

"Now, Grey, don't let her go. There
she is ! in the corner, for being a naughty
child and slamming the door in a temper
this mornings 1 You see that she doesn't
escape."

All right," said Grey laughing, and
thinking it o^ood for Anice to be teased a
little. " We won't let you out till you
promise never to do it again! It's no
good, Georgie ; she won't play ! Let her

go ! She can't take a joke," he continued,
drawing the conclusion from the face of
Anice.

"Oh, no I" said Georgie, "she hasn't
heard the joke yet ! I think it had better
be a private joke between ourselves now I
come to think of it, as I meant it to
be. You go to the other side of the
billiard table, and turn your back to us ;
if we want — if Anice wants — you to share
the joke, then you can. I'm awfully good
to you, my dear, letting you decide whether
Grey is to know it," she continued, to Anice.

Anice remained silent and pale.

"Now, here it is!" said Georgie, drawing
a parti coloured ribbon from her pocket
which had evidently been round a sailor hat.

Anice knew in a second what had happened.
Grey had brought his hat to her

one day at Como to have a new ribbon
put on to it. The old one had been kept
by Anice at first as a great treasure,
though lately she had meant to throw it
away. Somehow Georgie had got hold of
it, and having seen the origin she guessed
the rest. Georgie had had it for some
days, and intended to tease Anice with it.
Anice, of course, did not realize that only
self-betrayal could make the ribbon significant
to another ; even if it were Grey's
ribbon — and equally it might have belonged
to any man of his college eight —
it might have been kept just because it
had not been thrown away.

No being but a very young girl could
imagine the agony which this trifle awoke
in poor Anice. She became sick and dizzy
with such a shock as might be experienced

by rei unhardened criminal on seeing
this first forged cheque in the hands of
the police.

Poor child ! Slice felt at the mercy of
that mocking, bright-eyed older girl,
and Grey there, standing as if he were
playing a game of proverbs, but in full
hearing ! He was sure to look round for
the mere sake of fun — Georgie's fun was
always costly to others.

Give it me I " she said angrily, snatched
it suddenly and crumpled it up in her two
hands. '' what a horrid girl you are ! "

Disengaging herself by a dexterous twist
which caused Georgie to slip on the polished
floor, Anice, bearing off the ribbon, bolted
through the dining-room and up to her own
room.

Georgie made the most of her slip.

cleverly turning it into a fall from which
she could not recover without Grey's help.

Did you ever know such a little
termagant?" inquired Georgie, as her
composure was restored.

"Do you not tease her a little too
much ? I used to think Anice the gentlest
girl in the world. What happened? I
thought you were having some joke
against me, you know. I only heard you
say, "Here it is,' and she called you a
horrid girl in a tone of intense conviction.
I turned round and see her flying and you
on the floor. What was it ? "

Nothing. She's a little fool. I wonder
that I took the trouble to tease her."

Tell me what you said now — why
can't she take a joke from you ? What
was it?"

** Well, if you must have it, it seems
that Anice has always been in love with
you "

Don't joke like that, Georgie ; of
course the child is fond of me. What's
the good of putting rubbish into her
head ? "

Putting it into her head ! My dear
and very innocent young man ! I noticed
it the very day I first saw her with you.
I found that ribbon you took off your
hat at Gadenabbia in a book of hers, and
she fired up as you heard ; that's all. It
was a stupid joke enough."

If you really thought there was anything
in it — which I don't believe, "
rejoined Grey knitting his brow, "you
had no business to say a word to

her — certainly not to me ; and if it
VOL. II. :>y

was a joke, it was uncommonly bad form.
Let Anice alone for the future, please ;
I should think it ought to be no effort
to you to abstain from such vulgarities."

Dear me ! " exclaimed Georgie. " What
nonsense you talk ! Gravity doesn't suit
you."

It is a pity. I am in earnest. You
let Anice alone. Of course I am bound
to stand by you in public ; but you know
perfectly well how many things you say
and do which I think are unworthy of you.
How very little it would take to make
you perfect," he continued, bending over her.

"Are you in earnest now .? " she said,
smiling again at the adroit conclusion.
"Well, I'll let that silly little girl alone,
if that is a step to perfection in your
eyes."

"Thank you," answered Grey, smiling
back at her. He was fascinated by her
always, even when she grated on his
finer instincts. He liked being with her,
though perfectly genuine in telling Vera
how little he had intended to be bound.
In some cases, however, where woman
disposes, man proposes.

That isn't much to do. I was tired
of teasing her. I knew exactly how to
make her miserable though."

Perhaps this speech restored Grey's self-possession,
and reminded him that Georgie
was usually called Puss?/.

That will please me' he said. And
for the rest, couldn't you take pattern a
little more by V — Lady Carstairs ? "

Never I '' said Georgie with sudden
energy. " Never ! Thank heaven / am no

29-2

hypocrite ! My faults are all to be seen.
I am not all goodness outside and in
reality the reverse."

You don't mean that Lady Carstairs
is," said Grey laughing, for her words
might be understood in two ways. "No!
I don't think that you could call her a
hypocrite."

He did not take her seriously, and
seeing this, she availed herself of the way
of escape. " Nor can I. You'll have to
take me as I am ! Lady Carstairs — Vera —
is one person and I am another ; but perhaps
some day you'll see whether you
would wish me to try to become like
your pattern. If you are coming out —

let us go."

"S^r^

AN EDITION DE LUXE.

Merely you said, "Why should woman suffer?
Aye, why should she ? " By heaven ! I'd coin my very
soul, and drop my blood for drachmas." These things are, and
he who feels how incompetent the most skyey knight-errantry
is to heal this bruised fairness is like a sensitive
leaf on the hot hand of thought." — Keats' Letters.

Carstairs lead announced this intention of
becoming a Siamese twin of the great
Paul. This, however, was only as yet a
matter for his own cogitation and for
confiding in Vera. It is not easy for the
second-class politician to pass as the equal
of the first class statesman ; that requires
indefatigable energy, mastership of the art
of pose, and of a great many tricks
which are a good deal more showy than
the same statesman's attitudes ! Now Carstairs

had scarcely eiiougli of these to
deceive or to interest the newspaper
readers who measure a man's power by the
amount of smart copy provided from his
utterances. Carstairs was scarcely sufficient
charlatan for popular taste. On the other
hand — with many excellent working qualities,
stubbornness, hard-headdress, powers
of resistance ; in fact with all the sterner
requirements of an official ; as, with certain
capital qualifications of a speaker, good
voice, good manner, good presence, knack
of imposing himself; with many personal
advantages which in private life were
defects, — Carstairs by no means was in
touch with Wordsworth, and by no means
could attain more than beings considered
an able man by those behind the scenes.
Perhaps he knew it. But if he were

sufficiently powerful, politically and socially,
to pose as equal with Wordsworth — what
then ?

It had been rather a busy recess, and
Ministers in and out of office were running
the country, for attack and defence,
for charge and counter charge, retaining and
attaining position. Carstairs was just of
sufficient importance to be in demand, and
at this time he came in for a good share
of press attention. Meetings constantly took
him away from home, frequently leaving
Vera with a houseful of guests on her
hands — and for over a month Paul Wordsworth
was among them.

Paul was not much trouble to any
hostess. He went off once or twice to
meetings, but, of course, he was of sufficient
importance not to have to speak

unless lie chose : that is to say except it
were necessary. Personally, he never went
to any house where he could not work,
nor cared to pay short visits. So having
made up his mind to come to, he stayed
at, Temple, where there is a library rich
in all that the heart of literary man or
statesman could desire. Wordsworth had
deeply at heart a comprehensive scheme
of amelioration ; that had to be worked ■
out in academic form — the practical
details long since accumulating ; each day
brought the endless appeals and the
great and little, the practicable and the
impracticable, demands, from busy and
from idle people. Carstairs had a couple
of secretarial clerks always at work, even
at Temple, whom Wordsworth was asked
to consider as his own on emergency

nor was Grey Meredith, when on the spot,
able to see his chief slave without
joining him, even in holiday time.

Wordsworth therefore kept himself and
others occupied, and, being a worker to
his finger-tips, thoroughly enjoyed working
amidst the external leisure and the perfect
comfort of his country life. At the same
time, the fact of his abstraction and concentration
for part of his day made him
delight in restfulness and amusement when
he had finished, and occasionally he gave
himself an entire holiday, being fully aware
of the great value of idle hours for busy men.

It is not to be supposed, therefore, that
his conversation at such seasons was of a
brilliant type ; on the contrary, it was full
of triviality, of silences, even sometimes of
bad jokes and feeble puns ; he Alas much

less sparkling in society than any other
man there ; he was also distinguished from
all others by an almost childish curiosity
to know and to understand — no subject
came amiss to him, and he catechized
groom or gardener, billiard-player or
]beauty, on the mysteries of their professions
with an earnestness and an interest
only redeemed from pedantry and boredom,
as it certainly was, by the charm of his
manner and the simplicity of his desire to
learn.

There was never a word or look or tone
which in those days told Vera how much
she had become to him. He knew it all at
length, but he was strong, very strong, and
he told himself that he was safe in knowing
that he loved again; not now the worthless
woman so easily reached by himself and as

easily reached by others, but the woman
worthy and unattainable whom he must
never try to reach. It was quite safe, he
thought, when, with a sharp pain, this
dawned on him ; safe because he knew it
was all impossible, and he could not flatter
himself that he was more than a friend
to her. He knew now why he had let her
see those letters ; he knew now why he
had tried to localize his intimacy with the
Carstairs ; he knew why on the pressure of
the husband he had yielded ; and he knew
why he had come to live and work for
the time at Temple.

He found himself thinking of a hundred
little trifles for increasing her truer happiness,
for softening off the edges of everyday
small worries : such men can do this
well when they choose.

He got through an immense amount of
work ; but his idle hours were his delight.
He was saved from the evils of popularity
by that in his nature and position which
male men shy of intruding and rendered
him hopeless to the women whom he
would not encourage. He was too mucha
man of the world to make his attentions
to Vera exclusive, but he liked to show
that they were unique.

Lady Carstairs," he said, after luncheon
one day, " will you come with me to
the library ? I have something to show
you."

Xo one else admitted ? " laughed Carstairs,
who was just within hearing.

" We'll admit you to your own library,
and not turn out Grey if he likes," said
Wordsworth. " But I can't have any one

else ; it would make me feel shy, being unaccustomed
to public speaking as you
know."

Herein are mysteries ! How do you
like the new sensation of feeling shy ? "
inquired some one, and almost the whole
party entered the library with some curiosity.
As a rule it was sacred to wordsworth
during his visit — not that any
regulation had been made, but that before
four o'clock business was always going
on : the clerks in and out, and Grey,
or sometimes Carstairs himself, writing for
Wordsworth.

Little quips and chaff were floating by
from one to another, as the party followed,
but Wordsworth, though of course sea
ing in jest, would have preferred to have
been taken in earnest.

'• You have quite established yourself
here ? " said a lady.

Yes ; they are very good to me,"
Wordsworth answered ; but he said nothing
about the object of his invitation.

And what are we to see ? " inquired
Georgie.

The library at Temple is well worth a
visit, as the guide-books say," Wordsworth
replied.

But we all thought that you had something
to show."

You weren't invited to the show,"
answered Carstairs. " Isn't that it, Wordsworth
? "

"You have said it, not I," rejoined
Wordsworth. " How sorry I shall be to
leave this room ! I suppose," he continued
smiling, " that you won't let the place tome

; it would be beyond my purse, too, I'm
afraid. It is simply delightful being at
Temple."

Carstairs regretted the absence of reporters
; but there was a lady present who
earned her five-shillings, and in her social
letters which were leaded for the columns
of six provincial newspapers of large circulation
there would appear little descriptions
of a week in a country house with Paul
Wordsworth. However, as that great man
did not seem inclined to contribute towards
their entertainment, the party settled on
couches and chairs and proceeded with the
chaff of the hour.

It were easy to sketch those groups— the
women (two with characters for vivacity to
maintain, another supposed to be a semi-invalid),
besides Georgie and Vera ; the five

or six men, besides Grey, Carstairs and
Wordsworth : all more or less good-looking
and able to give and take, to pose and
group, to listen and whisper, to arrange
and to suggest ; a scene in which every one
contrived to be or look of importance and
possible interest during the few days or
hours of spurious intimacy ; four or five
little knots of beings half occupied with
themselves and satellites, half attentive to
that constellation whose movement we trace
throughout. The languorous woman, George's
friend, under cover of pose and placidity,
was a keen observer ; but she never
appeared quite awake when men were
there, which had precisely the same effect
of stimulating the attention of those superior
beings as had the vivacity of the in
all senses wide-awake 3'Oung woman.

And at the end of the book-lined room
stood Vera, her husband, and Paul Wordsworth,
with Grey and Georgie a little
apart, as if they were playing a comedy
for the benefit of the others. So in
truth they were, but it was a play with
neither speech nor action, were such
a thing possible : only the grouping was
dramatic.

Even that did not last long, for also this
group subsided. It would not do for
stage-dialogues to be as irrelevant to the
action as are the scattered phrases of intimate
friends in public.

Georgie, of course, brought back conversation
to its real subject.

Books everywhere ! What a waste of
time a library means, doesn't it ? Why,
you haven't been getting more new books ? "

VOL. II. 30

she exclaimed, as lie looked at a little
stand near one of the writing tables.

Take care," said Grey.

"Why? Whose books are they?"

Grey laughed.

"Am I to point the ringer of scorn at
you, Chief?"

No," said Wordsworth ; " they are net
mine."

"Oh!" whistled Grey.

"Mind your manners, young man! Carstairs,
they're yours — yours and the lady's,
that is to sa3^^'oping as 'ow you'll both
accept them with my dutiful respects.
It was too bad to force me to present
them in public. I told you that you would
make me blush. They are nicely got up,
aren't they ? " he continued, as the little
stand was wheeled by Gre^^ in front of

Vera, and . the others came round to
look.

Wordsworth had then written about eight
books ; four are of a very high order. These
formed the first and advance set of the
uniform stereotyped edition which, of course,
every one knows. They had been placed ina
stand of old oak to correspond with the
library fittings, and each volume, bound in
russia, had been tooled in truly luxurious
fashion.

How charming ! " murmured the chorus,
who did not in the least appreciate the gift.

Carstairs grasped Wordsworth's hand.

My dear chief ! you don't mean this for
us ? "

Vera was silent.

"You like them?" said Wordsworth,
turning to her.

30—2

'' Indeed, I do'* she answered.

That's right. It seemed great conceit
to get up my own works like that, but I
thought that on my offering this first copy
to you for this splendid library I might at
least impart a little extrinsic value "

Hear, hear ! " murmured Grey.

"Young man, mind your own business!"
said Wordsworth. "I am glad you like
them, Carstairs. Stow will every one have
the kindness to change the subject ? I
never supposed it could interest others.
How are the charades going to be arranged
for tomorrow? Can I be of any use?" he
said, rather desperately.

More talk, but Wordsworth soon left the
room, when Carstairs was able to recur to
the subject of the books, and to receive
the comments on the honour, for such,

by those who knew Wordsworth, it was
accounted.

"The chief has written every letter about
it with his own hand ; he was just like a
child over it, and interrupted his best piece
of work this morning when it arrived,"
said Grey. " No one else was to touch it,
if you please."

Such a fuss to make about it ! " murmured
the languorous lady to Georgie.
Dear me ! how conceited these writers are
over their stodgy things. I wouldn't read
one for a hundred pounds a line, would
you ? And no doubt the dear chief thinks
he has given his friends the most choice
present man can make!"

My cousin takes it at its valuation, you
think ? ' asks Georgie.

Sir Ealpli, at the world's valuation ;

Lady Carstairs, at rather more than the
donor's, my dear."

So innuendoes passed as the subject was
dropped again, for by this time Georgie did
not scruple to point the little laugh at
Yera ; her hearers, however, persisted intaking
it as pure chaff. Between Paul
Wordsworth and Lady Carstairs there did
not seem to be much foundation for scandal.

But, " quiet people, you know " said

Georgie with a laugh not quite merry.

Just before the first e^ono^ that nis^ht Yera
came alone into the dimly-lighted library.
She believed Paul to be quite safe in his
own room, and every one but herself gone
to dress. Paul Wordsworth was the only
guest she would not have sought to find.

Poor little Anice — though even to Yera
she would give no reason — had decided to

leave the day after her dispute with Georgie ;
after that, others had come and gone, and
just then Vera had no woman in the house
whom she really liked. This, amid the
changes of other guests, had made her all
the more appreciate that amongst the more
permanent members of the circle was Paul
Wordsworth.

The reading-lamps glimmered, and the
fallen fire glowed on the perpendicular lines
of dark carving, the dusky bindings, tie substantial
furniture and the few busts. Paul
Wordsworth's mft stood against one of the
further windows, where the heavy embossed
curtains completed the sense of mystery
and shadow in the room. The library had
several niches formed by sets of shelves
placed as screens at rio^ht ruffles to the
wall — in this respect like that of Ilawar-

den ; these had been later additions made
in the same style as that of more ancient
panelling. The room, therefore, appeared
quite empty, whilst Wordsworth was there
between three walls of volumes.

She came softly in and went to the other
side of the room, selecting from a lower
shelf the work she required. She had
taken one of the smaller lamps, and, as she
stooped for the book, the light she held
above her head fell on her hair crowning
her as with an aureole. Whilst it
prevented her from seeing, this light clearly
revealed every feature to Paul from the
other side of the library. As she put
down the lamp she came across the room
and, half way, she noticed that she was not
alone.

She started, as nervous people will, and

then said quietly, " I was going to look
again at our present."

"It vexed me that every one trooped in,
or that as they did so discovery of this
was made," he said, as together they went
to the stand. " I felt such a fool. It
looked as if I thought so much of my own
works. Yet I only wanted the very first
set to come here, and I thought then that
perhaps you would care sometimes to look
at them."

It will be a very great pleasure," she
said in her sweet way, with something of
the grace and nothing of the incongruity
of an old-fashioned child. "It is the gift
of all others we would have cared for."

You really mean it ? You like my

writings ? Would do so if you knew

nothing of me? Knowing me, you might

pity me ; be sorry that so much life-blood
was poured out in vain ; but, if you had
not known me, would you really believe
that literature is the better, that life is
the better, that I, who needed not to toil,
have worked, and that I have tried to
teach? Is my life — which men call so
successful — really nothing but failure ?
Answer me truly. Do not be afraid to
tell me what you think."

The knots in his brow were prominent,
those brilliant eyes shone in the half-light,
the keen face seemed all aglow, and the
voice, trained to turn a period, rose and
fell in the genuine revelation of the
worker's soul.

I cannot tell," she said, answering
truth with truth. " It is not one's outer
life by which one can judge ; but, for

the rest, I think that you must have
helped many more than you can ever know
of."

"A statesman and a writer cannot
know, it is true ; one must be content
with the fact that failures are not for
very long allowed to fill foremost positions :
yet it is of a more enduring influence I
speak. What is it to lead the crowd fora
moment ? Nothing ; and, if it were, that
would be beyond my power. No : my
only hope and consolation is that, having
got the right to speak at a point where
hundreds assemble to hear the new thing,
in the thousand there may be one whom
I can influence ; and of a dozen of these
perhaps one whom I can teach, because,
able to teach himself. Its thought is stimulated
by my phrase, even though a phrase

• — a poor token which in place of the
true gold here and there in our state of
spiritual siege may purchase the necessaries
of life for the starving. Well ! I have
put my best self into these," he said,
laying his hand on the volumes : " surely,
as I tell others, I may believe that no
genuine work is wasted. And yet of myself
I often think it is."

Would it please you at all — I am no
one, yet it might please you — to know
that it always makes me feel better to
read your writings ? I am sure it would
have been the same if I had not known

you."

She hesitated as she spoke.
Thank you," he answered gravely.
They both seemed to use words so little
as they stood there together.

I wonder whether I might add to my
conceit of to-day by giving you what I
hoped you might perhaps like ; it is of
no value, and yet perhaps it has a value
of its own."

Speaking in a low and hurried voice,
as if he — Paul Wordsworth — were nervous,
he took from his chain a key and, opening
a despatch box on the davenport appropriated
to himself, produced and gave to
her a thin octavo in vellum. Across the
right hand corner, in gold letters on the
white skin, was a facsimile of his signature
: Paul Wordsworth, with the month
and year. Within was an exquisitely-printed
volume entitled " Credavi et Credo."

There is no other copy, except a set
of proofs I keep for myself ; it is only a
selection of what I like best, and believe

most sincerely, in what has been said
through me. Do you care to have this
essence of egotism or of egoism ? It will
not bore you ? "

"The only copy?" repeated Vera. 'Tor
me? It is too good. I won't take it."

And why not ? I did it for you.
Look at all I have signed in that stand,
that's for the world ; mayn't I choose
those pages — so few — for myself ? "

For yourself, yes. It is "

''- Give me the pleasure of your receiving
this. No one else will ever have the like,
worthless or not as it may be. See ! I
have chosen the passages you have told
me you marked. When you read these,
wish — pray if you like — that I may
practise what I preach ; nor be myself
faithless to my faith."

They were very near together as he
pointed to some of his thoughts, chosen
carefully from their context, and reprinted
with more care than for a public edition
in the one beautiful little copy for herself.

There are many works that the bibliophile
desires to have ; but Paul Wordsworth's
unique copy will not pass into
the market during this century. Perhaps
by-and-by it will lose its sentimental
history ; yet then, because of its romance
and rarity, publicly catalogued it will
fetch its weight in gold.

Without their love stories few would
care for literary men ; without romance,
how were their relics preserved !

Paul Wordsworth realized the scene perfectly,
and he caught sight of some of
his own words on the rough hand-pressed

paper as lie looked down on Vera reading
them with her soft eyes.

I like that," she answered.

He read the thought in question.

"I'd like to be able to act upon it," he
answered. " I wish you'd tell me how to
autograph — what to put in — your public
copy ; this thing is only for yourself, you
know"

He took the first volume of the complete
works from its stand, and moved
away from her. She knew nothing of
the effort.

The gong resounded through the house
as he seated himself at the davenport, pen
in hand.

Will you write in mine when the
other is autographs ? "

First, if you like. May I put ' To

Her for whom this little book was made
by Paul Wordsworth ? ' It is the best,
because the simplest, thing I can say ; of
course I could frame any phrase to order,
but that's just why I'd rather not. And
for the other — Who's there ? Carstairs I
You're the very man I want," he said,
turnings round. " I don't know what to
put into your book : To my host and

hostess of Temple , or To Ralph and

to Vera Carstairs ? Which ? Or is there
any other form ? "

Names where friends are concerned.
Vera '11 allow it, I'm sure."

Very well," said Wordsworth, as Carstairs
looked at the other book, " ' Ralph
and Vera Carstairs, from their friend Paul
Wordsworth, in memory of their kindness ? '
No, I'll feel that — I won't write it."

VOL. II. 31

Her husband said to Vera that night :
*' I congratulate you od your conquest ! "

What do you mean ? "

Don't be alarmed. Tm not ! And
don't tell me that you think it is in the
ordinary course of things that Wordsworth
should make this his home, or that a
busy man, and one who never wastes a
penny, should make a book like that of
yours ! Think of what it cost in money,
besides the far greater compliment of
thought and originality."

0, why do you spoil my pleasure in
it ? " she exclaimed, and suddenly burst
into tears.

He was perplexed, but what he thought
was not easy to guess, and Vera never
knew whether from that hour might be
dated the turn of the tide, for he persisted

: " Rubbish ! spoil your pleasure ?
I don't say that Wordsworth's in love
with you, — and if he were, for the time,
a woman might have more to spoil her
pleasure than being chaffed by her husband
about captivating an anchorite like Sage
Paul."

31-2

WHY WAS HE ANGRY ?

But enough of this ; we will not pierce our hearts with a
thousand separate stings, but be satisfied with the mere knowledge
that all came to pass on this occasion as I have said.
Poor Undine was very mournful ; the others not well satisfied
; Bertalda especially assumed an imperious
manner." — Undine.

Of all the small tidings in wliicli we fancy-that
we can "improve upon Providence,"
there are few which we would more like
to reform than that peculiar little habit
of Fate by which she likes to undertake
so many similar plots at once. The proverbial
lore of all nations shows that it is
recognized that worry is a creature of gregarious
nature — never known to live for
an hour in single blessedness, and capable
of producing an infinite number of descendants

in an infinitesimally short lime.
Meditation on the difference between the
geometrical increase of pain and the merely
arithmetical multiplication of pleasure from
units of the same value, furnishes us with
a sum of the whole duty of Man — to plant
out, at starting, as many happiness-units
as possible, that the pain-centres, so gifted
with productive powers, may not occupy
all the ground of life. The aim of the
philanthropist is to make the result of the
greater number treated as units equivalent
to the result of the small number considered
as squares.

One is obliged to go out of one's way
in these days to make the evident appear
difficult — otherwise, with no obscurity, how
should the congregation find anything to
respect? In plain English we mean that.

like every one else, when once irritated,
Sir Ralph Carstairs found nothing but
matters for irritation in the great and
small events of the next fortnight. Paul
Wordsworth went away quite suddenly at
last, and Carstairs could not make out
whether he had overheard part of a scene
of the type several times reported between
husband and wife : of course Carstairs
knew that if Wordsworth had heard those
bullying words it was simply because Carstairs
had passed with his wife in front of
the yew hedge below which Wordsworth
had been for some time seated. He might
have heard, unavoidably. Carstairs did not
know, and never could find out,

As a matter of fact Wordsworth had
heard only a sentence or two, but enough
to make his blood boil, enough to make

him withdraw his personal feeling for Carstairs,
enough to make him understand
what, since he had seen husband and wife
together, he had considered as scandal and
exaggeration. He had been deceived a
little by Yera's loyalty, and by the more
ceremonious treatment latterly adopted by
Carstairs and his wife in public, as also
in private he lead been more gentle to
her.

Bound in honour to say nothing of what
he had so accidentally overheard in the
yew labyrinth, Wordsworth thought the
more of it, and the more he thought, the
less he liked it.

Beginning with the usual regrets and
compliments, on parting he only said to
her : " I shall never forget this pleasant
visit, and I want you to promise me that

in any difficulty you will ask me to help

you."

Then, finding that what he wanted to
say was not to be said in ceremonious
words, he finished with more show of
feeling :

I am a good deal older than you are,
and a man of your husband's standing ; I
should like to hear you promise this : let
me be a friend in need. You will be sure
that I understand, perhaps know, more
than you think. There, we'll say no more.
Don't think me impertinent. Only in any
worry know that you can depend on me
absolutely ; send for me when you will,
you know that I would make all possible
sacrifice and come to you ; and that it
would be the greatest pleasure to help
you. Nothing for you would be too small

or too great. Promise you will trust me —
should need arise."

He said all this very quickly.

"I will trust you — should need arise."
she answered.

Nothing more was said ; nor did they
attempt to laugh off their earnestness. But
Vera repeated to herself the words, " a
good deal older than you are," and suddenly
realized how very young she was
and how very old she felt at iive-and-
twenty.

That was for Carstairs a secret little
worry — that he was conscious of just failing
to make the right personal impression
on Wordsworth. However, aggravating as
it was to fail by so little, this was, after
all, no matter ; Wordsworth had become
as intimate with him as one man of the

world ever is with another. Wordsworth
must now know that *it was his interest —
as it is really the interest of all leaders to
help forward able men — to make much of
one whose abilities, work and wealth had
been so impressively and studied made
known to him in the pleasantness fashion.

And yet Carstairs felt that the instantaneous
revelation of his unchivalrous
nature had been a grave mistake — a piece
of bad luck, such as just then often occurred.
The aggravatingness of a series of
small contretemps is never properly estimated
: to outsiders they seem nothing,
while on the patient they have an accumulative
effect. So, a farm suddenly thrown
on his hands, a horse spiking itself, a deed
mislaid, a guest of importance excusing
himself, a rather unsatisfactory audit, a

week's dull house-parly, misfortune to some
prize stock, some nasty speeches from
Georgie, some duns about Charlie, who
had, of course, failed to pass his exam, in
July, all these rubbed Sir Ralph the wrong
way. It so happened that, though Opposition
can never get into such hot water as
does Government, the party was not then
quite happy in attack ; also, though in itself
a compliment, the press had begun to single
Carstairs out for abuse. Although a man
tells himself that this is the best thing that
can possibly happen to him and does not
mind in the least the full severity of opposition,
he is always unduly and disproportionately
irritated by the side-issues and
minor personal hits in the encounter. Altogether,
as Charlie Carstairs observed on
arrival, about the third week in October,

Ralph was like a bear with a sore head*
He really had been quite amicable for
three months, and Vera was as much disappointed
as distressed to find that there
now was no pleasing him.

Charlie was not improved by the last six
months, especially by the last spell of idleness
; he perhaps deserved his brother's
crossness, and Georgie, who just then found
Ralph most uncertain, may well be left to
take care of herself. Vera treated Gre}^
v/ith neither more nor less coldness than
any casual visitor to Temple ; but his position,
though it might have been made
awkward for him by her, was serene and
secure compared with that of Georgie.
Georgie was looking far from well, as
Charlie told her promptly before Grey,
and —

"I say," said he to Grey, when Georgie
had walked off in disgust, " you've caught
a Tartar, do you know ? "

Grey looked his indignation, then suddenly
tried to assume it was a joke and
smiled.

Or did the Tartar catch you ?
Now, my dear fellow, I know Miss
Georgie from the beginning "

If you don't like to shut up on your
own account you'll have to on mine,"
answered Grej^ getting up. " If join can
only behave as a boy — an ill-mannered boy
too — I'll treat you as one."

Try it on," laughed Charlie, who was
most irritating at that stage.

If you don't take care, I will," responded
Grey. "A jolly good thrashing is
the only thing that would do you good;

you're an insolent puppy, and if I thrashed
you I think I should have a public subscription
raised for me ! You're just the
most objectionable kind of youth man can
meet with — you swaggering, idle, good-for-nothing
animals who cheek your elders
and chatter about women in a way which
only shows your ignorance of the common
decencies of life ! '*

*just think of that now! Lor!"
I'll try not to. You can't even answer
a fellow when he pitches into you except
in street slang and gestures. Thank
heaven ! with all my failings I never went
through this. Yet it seems the favourite
thing now. Ten years ago I'd have felt
myself disgraced for life if I'd laid myself
open to the things I've said to you. You
can laugh it off as you like."

"It would make a cat laugh to think
of your thrashing me."

"I'd do it in a couple of seconds if
you were either a little younger or older,
and if unfortunately I wasn't your brother's
guest."

Pray don't mind," returned Charlie
politely.

*' You'd be sorry, if I did," answered
Grey shortly ; for, with all his graces and
veneer. Grey had had many adventures in
his wandering ante-Parliament days, and
though he looked a fine gentleman — in a
crowd always pointed out as " the swell "
physical weakness was not his failing.
He knew that, spite of Charlie's swagger
and squareness, he could thrash the youth,
so the angered man in Meredith did not
overpower the gentleman.

Some one would be sorry if you tried
it on," returned Charlie again.

So I think," answered Meredith, and
left Charlie to his own devices, much to
the boy's disappointment, for out of sheer
mischief he was " dying for a row."
Charlie did not in the least care that he
had thrown away a man who had been
and would be a good friend to him.
Have boys of his type any feeling at all?
Alas ! in these days such beings are everywhere
; it is unfortunately easy to secure
specimens for study, and, unashamed of
their deficiencies, they will deliberately aid
5'OU in your vivisection by acknowledging
their defects, proud not to be pretenders
to better things.

After all, Charlie was only a younger,
idler and dependent Carstairs, and Ralph

an equally selfish, but in some ways a
more self-respecting, Charlie !

Was his devotion to Vera assumed or
did her goodness to him awake something
of chivalry to her ? Surely there must be
something of finer instinct in the son of
gentle ancestors. Yet — who can tell?

Vera treated him with kindness, and at
least in her presence he restrained his
tongue a little. But then it was to his
interest to keep on good terms with
her.

Very weakly — the weakest thing she
ever did perhaps — she promised " not to
tell Ralph " when Charlie took her on that
condition into his confidence.

However — on sounding Ralph with reference
to something else — she found that
the condition was useless, as Ralph did

VOL. II. 32

not intend to listen to anything about his
brother.

''He knows that he will have £6,000
of his own when he comes of age. If he
were steady I'd do something for him ; if
he isn't he'll have to pay his debts and
live on the remainder : he'll find it will
go a long way."

Charlie only grumbled at the inequality of
things which gave Kalph £20,000 a year
and himself £6,000 for life ; he had no intention
of doing better even when Ralph
expressed his intention in that event to
make him a good allowance and give him
a fair start.

What till you do ? " said Yera in
despair, as he declared his intention of
doing nothing : he had had enough of a
grind; perhaps might coach for the Float

five and twenty — no, not Oxford ; should
be plucked for small, &c., &c.

"I shall marry an likes," he asserted.

Heiresses have more foresight and a
wider choice than they used to have," replied
Vera, " and I don't think they're likely to
choose the very worst specimen of a selfish
man they could find in town."

Oh ! " said Charlie, not taking offence —
these youths never do ; " then, men must
degenerate after they're married — by Jove !
And I guess you couldn't have done much
worse than Ealpli."

I was not an heiress. And Ralph is
very different to you," said Vera, taking
from him a paper knife he was breaking.

"What's that?" said car stairs, who entered.

Charlie counting his prospects of matrimony,"
answered Vera.

52 -2

Prospects of gaol ! That's where he'll
end."

All the same, Ralph ; fettered not free,"
retorted Charlie. These youths who do
nothing but talk are ready enough with
their tongues.

Get out with you now ; I want to
speak to Vera."

"So do I," said Charlie. But he had
to go.

Then Carstairs went up to the window
below which his wife was seated. The
many coloured single dahlias were looking
askance at the scene, for the sun had
turned most of them to the west, and the
boudoir window was full south. The blaze
of colour, low down on the shiny glass,
and the autumnal woods beyond were the
background of Yera's chair in which she

sat in her dark dress, looking at her
husband in wonder as his expression
changed. She ought to have been used
to his temper, but she never was.

Is anything wrong, Ralph ? " she asked
as he glared at her.

"Wrong? Oh! no," he said with sarcasm.

Then he caught her hand roughly and
draorored her to her feet.

DO

Just at this time Charlie came round to
the other window. It was shut. So he
heard nothing, but, with no scruples about
witnessing " a row," he stayed there unremarked.
The east window of course was at
right angles to the south, and Vera was
too terrified to see anything but her husband's
face, though Charlie tried to make
signs to her behind Ralph's back.

lie had not perceived the means by

which she had been dragged up to face
Ralph, but he saw that she was frightened.
After past experiences Charlie did not feel
inclined to interfere. Besides lie never
supposed a " row " meant more than a
row in words."

But he saw all the pantomime of the
short scene : —

"You'd better speak. It's your only
chance."

Vera looked astonishment, and Sir Ralph
tightened his hold to torture on her wrist,
this Charlie could not see, as Ralph's
body hid their hands.

"What about? I don't understand you."

A shrug of Ralph's shoulders. His head
bent nearer Vera. She tried to recoil. '.

Don't say that. I'll refresh your
memory a little."

But, Ealpli, I don't know what you

mean."

You lie ! Where did you go to that
night you left the House when I wa
speaking ? " .

Which night ? Why ? "

Yera's face was crimson. [" Wonder
what Ralph's saying ; I believe she looks
ashamed of herself. I say ! it is a big
row this time. If it gets worse I'll run
round," thought Charlie.]

"Which night? Why? The night in
August when you came down to the House."

We went on the Terrace and then I
went home."

'' Straight home ? "

"I don't remember. I think so. Yes."

I thought you went round by the
Bentleys."

"Yes: I remember. I had forgotten."

Shows how truthful you are."

"My dear Ralph! Why should I remember
at a moment's notice ? "

Don't try that on ; you'll try me too far."

She struggled to get free. Charlie left
this vantage post.

Are you mad ? "

No ; shall be soon."

Tell me what you mean, Ralph : I
honestly do not know any single thing
which I have done to displease you
willingly."

I give you till post time to think it
over ; if you are wise, you'll confess before
then."

What has post-time to do with it ?
Ralph, are you quite well?"

Quite. I wait for this evening's post.

Then I go to town. I know more than
you think."

"What? I dont know what you mean,"
she reiterated, as he pushed her angrily
from him, so that she fell against a sharp-edged
cabinet, just as Charlie entered.

Ralph strode out and left them together.
The pain of the collision was a little bewildering,
as had been the whole dialogue
to one who had not the key which
Georgie might have possessed.

The situation roused even Charlie to
compassion.

"What's up?"

I don't know ; nothing much," said
Vera. The blow had brought muscular
tears, and she could not keep her eye
open, so that could not be passed off as
nothings.

I saw him throw you over, so you
needn't humbug about that, you know,"
blurted out Charlie. " What I mean is,
what's up? What did he do it for?"

*' I haven't the faintest idea. He is
angry. I dare say we shall hear what it
is some time."

"You're larking."

I really don't know."

"No humbug?"

*' No : he's angry about something which
happened one night in August, but he's
sure to find that I've nothing to do with
it."

That won't whiten your eye. I say,
"Vera, it will be an awful black eye if you
do nothing for it. A woman's skin's good
for nothing. You'd better bathe it."

Meanwhile, as Sir Ralph, wishing to talk

to Vera, had turned Charlie out, so he
now turned out Grey, whom he found with
Georgie, quarrelling if the truth were
known. Georgie also had had a fit of
temper, and, on being asked whether she
wouldn't name the day for the marriage,
had replied that " She didn't care if it
never took place."

BUSINESS.

She found me roots of relish sweet,
And honey wild, and manna dew ;
And sure in language strange she said —
I love thee true.' "

La Belle Dame Sans Merci.

Grey departed unwillingly, but others came
in to whom Carstairs was obliged to use
more ceremony. Half an hour or so was
wasted before he said, tout court, " I wish
to speak to my cousin, if you'll excuse us."
They went into his business-room, whence
at 5 o'clock the clerks departed. It was
a bare plainly-furnished den, nor had
decorations save a prhit or two, and for
furniture two desks, a writing-table, on
which a lamp had just been placed, small

book-cases with works of reference, and
pigeon-holes, with multiplicity of blue and
grey papers protruding. A little, thin,
nervous man was just leaving the room.

Your speech is ready for Thursday, Sir
Ralph," said the man, meaning thereby
that, after Sir Ralph had indicated in rough
fashion what he wished to have looked up,
it had all been arranged for him, as the
kitchen-maid prepares the materials for the
cook.

"All right. There's a shooting-party in
the morning ; probably this time tomorrow,
or a little earlier, I'll go over it
with you. You can go on with everything
as usual."

"Might I show you these, Sir Ralph P"

Sit down there a moment or two,
Georgie."

The two men rapidly collated a few-papers,
orders were given, one or two
points raised, Sir Ealpli speaking in a
peremptory manner, very different from
Paul Wordsworth's treatment of his secretaries
; both equally curt in speech and
decisive in action, but one never remembering,
the other never forgetting, that he
spoke to hard-working human beings.
However, that did not jar upon Georgie.
She was only bored by having to wait,
yet she too was very, very nervous, not
sorry for the delay ; she was half triumphant,
half frightened.

Rising to go the man asked :

Shall I bring in the letters as usual,
Sir Ralph, at half-past five?"

Of course. All letters come here. Why
the devil do you want to change to-day ? "

The little man disappeared, and at
length Georgie had the honour of the
whole attention of her cousin. The firelight
perhaps, as against the lamp, was
strong enough to give a glow to her dark
skin. She was in a black frock, with her
favourite red vest and little red shoes,
with open-work black stockings ; for background
only the rigid book-shelves, and
the dull green walls, with dark wainscot,
a Turkey rug beneath her feet. Carstairs
stroked down his trim beard as he drew
in a chair to the other side of the fire,
and beoran to smoke a cisrar.

Not very comfortable for you, but that
is no matter just now; that was my intention
in bringing you here, in fact. Do
you realize what you are doing ? It means
businesses''

He looked at her sternly, and his voice
was husky.

"You have a cold," she said.

That's the only thing I haven't got.
Do you know what you're doing ? "

Silence.

Well, ni put it in another way. Are
you sure that you are speaking the truth ?
Do you believe your own charge against
my wife ? "

I have told you all now. The proof
will be in your hand to-night."

Yes, proof, if it is as you say, that
Wordsworth wrote to her more warmly
than he should in right ; no proof that
she encouraged him."

He has paid you a long visit. What
is his object in doing so? And, after that
letter in August, Vera must have overlooked

it as It is impossible. She

could only have had him here "

"Yet your other theory is in favour of
her having more duplicity — a duplicity
which seems absolutely foreign to her
nature. She may have forgiven him, and
I remember that she was reluctant enough
to have him here."

Is that letter a fact or not ? "

A fact, I suppose ; since you promise
me the original in Wordsworth's writing
by this post. Tell me the details that I
may see whether there is some mistake.
I don't want your deductions or apologies.
Answer me as if you were on oath."

"Is that a proper way to speak tome?"


"I can't pick my words or tones. Are
you sure that, from your old jealousy of

VOL. IL S3

"Yes: I reiiL3mb8r. I had forgotten."

Shows hoar truthful you are."

My dear Ralph ! Why should I remember
at a moment's notice ? "

Don't try that on ; you'll try me too far."

She struggled to get free. Charlie left
]his vantage post.

Are you mad ? "

No ; shall be soon."

Tell me what you mean, Ralph : I
honestly do not know any single thing
which I have done to displease you
willingly."

I give you till post-time to think it
over ; if you are wise, you'll confess before
then."

What has post-time to do with it ?
Ralph, are you quite well ? "

Quite. I wait for this evening's post.

Then I go to town. I know more than
you think."

"What? I dont know what you mean,"
she reiterated, as he pushed her angrily
from him, so that she fell against a sharp-edged
cabinet, just as Charlie entered.

Ralph strode out and left them together.
The pain of the collision was a little bewildering,
as had been the whole dialogue
to one who had not the key which
Georgie might have possessed.

The situation roused even Charlie to
compassion.

"What's up?"

I don't know ; nothing much," said
Vera. The blow had brought muscular
tears, and she could not keep her eye
open, so that could not be passed off as
nothing.

Not in SO many words. You know
well the power which sometimes you have
over me. I only say that, however much
the two seem to be opposed, that moment
you destroy my trust in my wife, that
moment your power in me will go. You
will be associated with the most disagreeable
and publicly dishonourable episode in
my life. As I said before, I say now.
You have played with fire, and remember
it will not be possible to keep it invisible.
England will blaze with the scandal ; my
wife — Paul Wordsworth."

Scandals don't always spread."
You are a nice woman ! Well, set
aside all else, you may get your way, and
separate me from my wife ; but my life
in England is over. Every link which
binds me to the past will be severed.

You had better not break your engagement
— even if you are right, and if you

are wrong

You spoke differently this morning,"
she answered grimly as a handsome
young woman could speak.

"I have now considered the matter.
That is all I have to say. Prove your
case, and when you have proved it the
only satisfaction you shall get is that you
will have humiliated your rival. I shall
have done with both of you."

Oh ! " hissed Georgie. " If I were a
man!"

The door opened ungently, and Charlie
entered.

"You there. Look here, Ralph. I
won't stand Vera being treated like that.
I give you fair warning if you do it again

I'll — I'll do something. For no cause at
all."

"For no cause'*

None that concerns her. I don't know
what excuse you make to yourself for
throwing her about like that ; but I told
her I'd give you a piece of my mind."

Did she tell you why I spoke to her ?
She fell, of course, against the furniture."

One would think she and you were
costermongers," said Charlie. "That's the
stock excuse when a wife has a black
eye, that she fell against the furniture.
But, if you like to be a costermonger,
what she fell against the furniture for,
you may know, for she doesn't."

As if she'd tell you ! " said Georgie.

What concerns you to put your nose
into it?" retorted Charlie. "IVe been

looking for Ralph for nearly an hour, or
else I'd not have given you the satisfaction
of hearing this ! Now I've warned
you, Ralph. You will have to settle with
me next time," he continued, and retreated
with a very passable (if, to those
who knew Charlie, a somewhat ludicrous)
assumption of dignity.

"What's this?" said Georgie. "Have
you been speaking to Vera ? "

"Why not?"

I thought you said you'd only watch."

As if I could wait ! However, if she's
innocent — and, upon my soul, I think she
may be — at least I cant think her guilty "

Georgie shrugged her shoulders.

Look here ! everything's to go on as
usual ! Heaven grant that you're a
liar!"

He got up and walked about the room.
Georgie rose too.

They met and faced each other before
the fire. She spoke in a low quiet tone.

Call me a liar ! I will only forgive
you if you remember the truth that
nothing — either fact — yes, fact — or inference
— rests upon my assertion. It was
you who took me into your confidence,
and I have done nothing more than procure
that letter for you ; which otherwise
you might have had difficulty in obtaining
at any price."

"I did not want your proof. I preferred
to treat the once anonymous
slanderer with contempt."

"Was it not better to put it to the
test?"

The door opened. With a footman

bringing in the bags came the secretary
with his key.

"Shall I open the bags, Sir Kalph ? "

Certainly."

As usual the secretary opened the bags,
and with the quickness of skilled eyes and
fingers separated the correspondence ; first
into two heaps — that for Sir Ralph and
that for the house, then this latter first
into divisions for the servants and for the
house party ; and was about to hand those
to the footman, who waited to carry them
to the hall table, when Georgie interposed.

None for me, Mr. Jones ? '*

He gave her her bundle. By chance
next to it was Yera's heap, and at the topa
letter initialed in the corner Pew. She
saw this as the footman took all away.

Leave the rest for five minutes, Mr.

Jones," said Carstairs, as the little secretary
began to turn over the remainder to
separate Carstairs' private letters from the
other correspondence of his chief.

The little man disappeared with jerky
movements, as if he had been touched by a
spring.

Now," said Carstairs, " where is it ? "
She had, with trembling fingers, selected
the letter in Bennett's writing from her heap.

Dear Miss Georgie — Madam,

I send you the note in return
for the money and the signed promise from
Sir Ralph.

Your faithful servant,

Mercy Bennett.

Pes. — Please tell me if it arrives safe. I
would not have given it to no one but you."

Sealed up with wax, impressed by a
thimble, was the " Letter found in L. C.'s
room, 14th Aug."

It is mine," said Carstairs, and taking
it from her, put it in his pocket. " Now
go. Tell Jones to come as you pass."

Why don't you go and see what the
letter is from Wordsworth ? "

Has she one ? "

"Yes." '

Leave me now," was all he said, but
she, who knew him well, was not deceived
by the calmness. He called her back at the
door. " Georgie ! not a word! Everything
as usual. If you warn, Vera by a look I
never speak to you again — and no loss
either," he muttered to himself, for she had
done more to disgust him in this than in
anything. He could not help seeing what

she counted on. And the more she made
him believe in the probability that he had
lost Vera, the more he hated Georgie. He
had, as she said, placed her in this
position, as at once the arbiter of and the
probable gainer by the strife, but because
she occupied it she had offended him. He
had no idea how much he had learnt to
care for his wife till then.*

While Georgie found herself beset by
Grey, Mr. Jones showed Carstairs the correspondence
of the day. He set the little
man to work ; some of the business was
pressing, difficult and immediate ; the post
was sent out at nine, and decided steps
had to be taken in an important matter ;
then, and not till then, he broke the seal,
and saw, undoubtedly in Paul Wordsworth's
own writing, the words which condemned

the woman to whom they were addressed,
if she, being the wife of another, had not
repulsed them.

He groaned. The little clerk turned
round. " I was talking to myself, " Carstairs
answered. " I will dictate to you
now ; give me a moment or two."

It was as well that the business in question
affected him seriously, if it had to be
done at all. Perhaps otherwise he could
not have got through with it, but a
good couple of hours elapsed before,
on the dressing gong sounding, Carstairs
stopped.

"Troublesome work, Mr. Jones," he remarked.


"Troublesome, indeed. Sir Ralph. It
should be done to-night — and I "

''If you can go on I shall stay and finish

it. Are you able for it? Can you work
till nine ? "

Certainly, Sir Ealpli," said the man,
astonished at the question.

"Being the bell then."

So when the party assembled, Vera had
to inform the next important guest that
her husband had received some work which
had to be finished before post-time. It
was a large party ; one of the best coverts
had to be shot in the morning, but everyone
knew that just then Carstairs, even in
the country, was by no means master of
his own time.

When the ladies left the drawing-room a
message came to her, and Vera went into
the library, leaving Georgie to entertain
the ladies.

Paul Wordsworth got up to meet her,

and between them the arrangements were
made that he would wait and have supper
with her husband, who had sent to order
it for himself at a quarter past nine.

The slave of the post-bag, as usual,"
said Paul. " You got my note ? "

Just before dinner. But I haven't told
Ralph you were coming. It was so curious ;
I missed that note I suppose, or it must
have got with some one's letters, for I did
not find it with the rest. By that time
Ralph had sent the message saying that
he wasn't to be disturbed. I must ^o back
to the others. You and Ralph will join us
afterwards. Ah ! here he is ! "

Ralph, Mr. Wordsworth sent a line
to say he was coming at nine to-night,
but I only knew it after you were
busy''

You see, I take you at your word,"
said Wordsworth ; " you promised me a
welcome any day or hour."

Vera returned to her guests.

And now Paul Wordsworth and Ralph
Carstairs were face to face.

END OF VOL. n.

At all Libraries in Town and Country.

ROBERT HOLT'S ILLUSION. Bj M. Linskill. 6s,

MIRACLE GOLD. By Richard Dowling. 3 vols.

LADY STELLA A:N'D Her LOVER. By Henry
Solly. 3 vols.

A WOMAI^'s FACE. By Florence Warden. 3 vols.

IDLE TALES. Bv Mrs. Riddell. 6s.

FOR FREEDOM. By Tight Hopkins. 2 vols.

MISER FAREBROTHER. By B. L. Farjeon. 3 vols.

A VOICE IX THE WILDERNESS. By Caroline

FOTHERGILL. 3 vols.

MARVEL. By the Author of " Molly Sawn."

AN ADVENTURESS. By the Author of '' For Love
and Honour." 2 vols.

MOLLY'S STORY. 3 vols.

UNCLE BOB'S NIECE. By Leslie Keith. 3 vols.

THE NUN'S CURSE. By Mrs. Riddell. 3 vols.

A PRINCE OF THE BLOOD. By James Pain.
3 vols.

ONE MAID'S MISCHIEF. By G. Manville Penn.
3 vols.

BIOGRAPHY AND HISTORY.

THE MEMOIRS OF AX ARABIAN PRINCESS.

An Autobiography. Crown 8vo. 6s.

ADAMS, W. H. D.
THE HEALING ART: a History of Medicine

and Medical Celebrities from the Earliest Times to the
Present Day. 2 vols. Demy 8vo. 25s.

ARNOLD. REV. F.
ROBERTSON OF BRIGHTON: with some Notes of

His Times and His Contemporaries. Post 8vo. 9s.

BEAUFORT, JR. LEDOS BE.
THE ABBE LISZT: the Story of His Life. Crown
8vo. With Three Portraits. 6s.

BROGLIE, DUG DE.
THE PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS OF THE

DUC DE J3K0GLIE. Edited by K. L. de Beaufort. 2 vols.
Demy 8vo. With a Portrait on Steel. sos.

DAUNT, W. J. O'NEILL.
Eighty-five YEARS OF IRISH HISTORY

(1800-1885) 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 21s.
*^* A New Edition, with additional matter, in one vol., price 6s.,
is now ready.

FITZGERALD, PERCY.
THE LIFE AND TIMES OF JOHN WILKES.
2 vols. 21s.

ELLIOTT, FRANCES.
OLD COURT LIFE IN FRANCE. Royal Svo.

With Twenty whole-page engravings. 7s. 6d.

FROST, THOMAS.
RECOLLECTIONS OF A COUNTRY Journalist.
New Edition. 6s.

HOG AN, J. F. ^' SIR CHAS. Cavan DUFFY.
THE IRISH IN AUSTRALIA. Third and Cheaper
Edition. Boards, 2s. 6d. Cloth, 3s. 6d.

KROFOTXINF, FRINGE.
IN RUSSIAN AND FRENCH PRISONS. Large

post 8vo. With a Plan of the Fortress of St. Peter and St.
Paul. 7s. 6d.

3I0LL0Y, J. FITZGERALD.
COURT LIFE BELOW STAIRS ; or, London under

the Four Georges. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 12s.
FAMOUS PLAYS, from Congreve's '' Love for Love,"

to Lytton's " Lady of Lyons." Large Post 8vo. 10s, 6d.
ROYALTY RESTORED : or, London under Charles IL

A New and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

LEGGE, ALFRED 0.
THE UNPOPULAR KING : The Life and Times of
Richard III. 2 vols. Demy svo. With Sixteen Illustrations.
sos.

O'CONNOR, T. F.
GLADSTONE'S HOUSE OF COMMONS. Demy

8vo. 12s, 6d.
THE PARNELL MOVEMENT. 26th thousand,

Paper cover, Is, Cloth, 2s.

O'SHEA, JOHN AUGUSTUS.
AN IRONBOUND CITY : Five Months of Peril and
Privation in Besieged Paris. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 21s.

LEAVES FROM THE LIFE OF A SPECIAL

CORRESPONDENT. 2 vols. Crown svo, 21s.
ROMANTIC SPAIN : a Record of Personal Experiences.
2 vols. Crown 8vo. 21s.

Rade, FELIX.
SHELLEY : THE MAN AND THE POET. 2 vols.
21s.

ROOSEVELT, BLANCHE.
VERDI, MILAN, AND ^' OTHELLO." With Eighteen
Illustrations, Imp, 16mo, Gilt top, 7s, 6d,

SAND, GEORGE.
THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF GEORGE SAND:

With a Biographical Sketch by E, L, de Beaufort. 3 vols.
Demy 8vo, 36s.

SMITH, GEORGE BARNETT.
VICTOR HUGO : His Life and Work. Crown 8vo.
With an Engraved Portrait of Hugo. 6s.

« STEPNIAKr
RUSSIA UNDER THE Tears. Crown 8vo. 6s.

STRAUSS, G. L. M.
THE EMPEROR WILLIAM : The Story of a Great
King and a Good Man. Crown 8vo. 6s.

WALL, A. H.
FIFTY YEARS OF A GOOD QUEEN'S REIGN.

Imp. 16mo. With Six portraits. 3s. 6d. Gilt edges. 4s. 6d.

Wool, MADAM JANKA.
FRANCOIS LISZT : Recollections of a Compatriot.
Crown 8vo. 6s.

EDUCATION.

REED, S. P.
THE CANDIDATE'S LATIN GRAMMAR. Crown

8vc. 3s. 6s.

ESSAYS.

ARNOLD, REV. F.
Three-cornered ESSAYS. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

BUCHANAN, ROBERT.
A LOOK ROUND LITERATURE. Crown 8vo. 6s.

DOWLING, RICHARD.

IGNORANT ESSAYS. Second Edition. Foolscap
8vo. Bevelled boards. 5s.

DUNPHIE, CHARLES J.
THE CHAMELEON. Crown 8vo. 6s.

MOULTON, LOUISE CHANDLER.
OURSELVES AND OUR NEIGHBOURS: Short

Chats on Social Topics. Foolscap 8vo. 3s. 6d.

WALKER, THOMAS.
THE ORIGINAL. Crown Svo. 3s. 6d. -

FICTION.

AUTHOR OF 'for LOVE AND HONOUR:'
AN ADVENTURESS. 2 vols. 21s.

AUTHOR OF '' MEHALAH.''
LITTLE Turenne. Is.

AUTHOR OF " MOLLY Bairns''

MARVEL. 3 vols. Sis. Gd.

A MENTAL STRUGGLE. 6s.

A MAIDEN ALL FORLORN. 2s.

LADY Walworth's DIAMONDS. Is.

HER WEEK'S AMUSEMENT. 2s.

A MODERN CIRCE. Three vols. 31s. 6d.

AIDE, HAMILTON.
PASSAGES FROM THE LIFE OF A LADY. 3s. 6d.

ALLEN, F. M.

THROUGH GREEN GLASSES. 6s.

Appleton, G. W.

A TERRIBLE LEGACY. 6s.
JACK ALLYN'S FRIENDS. 3s. 6d.
FROZEN HEARTS. 3s. 6d.

BARRETT, FRANK.

LIEUTENANT BARNABAS. 3s. 6d.
HIS HELPMATE. 6s.
HONEST DAVIE. 2s.
JOHN FORD. Two vols. 12s.
FOUND GUILTY. Three vols. 31s. 6d.
THE GREAT HESPER. Is.
FOLLY MORRISON. 2s.

Belgrade, DALRYMPLE J.

LUCK AT THE DIAMOND FIELDS. 6s.

Bentham-ED WARDS, M.

THE FLOWER OF DOOM. 2s.

DIDDLE-COPE, THE MARQUIS.
MAD. 6s.

Blackburn, G. M. IRELAND.

IN OPPOSITION. 3 vols. [In May.

blinkhoolie:'

A TORY LORDLING. Three vols. 31s. 6d.

CAMERON, MRS. H. Loveth.
A LIFE'S MISTAKE. 3s. 6d.

CARS TONE, S.
LOVE, THE CONQUEROR. Three vols. 31s. 6d.

COLLINS, MABEL.
THE PRETTIEST WOMAN IN WARSAW. 2s.
LORD VANECOURT's DAUGHTER. Three vols. 31s. 6d.

CROKER, B. M.

DIANA BARRINGTON. 3 vols. \Jn tie Press.

A BIRD OF PASSAGE. 6s.

PROPER PRIDE. 2s.

PRE LTY MISS NEVILLE. 2s.

Neville, J. D.
CANON LUCIFER. 2s.

BOWLING, RICHARD.

MIRACLE GOLD. 3 vols. 31s. 6.1.

THE SKELETON KEY. Is.

UNDER ST. PAUL'S. 2s.

THE DUKE'S SWEETHEART. 2s.

TEMPEST DRIVEN. 6s.

FATAL BONDS. Three vols. 31s. 6d.

DOWNEY, EDMUND.

A HOUSE OF TEARS. Is.

IN ONE TOWN. 3s. 6f].

ANCHOR WATCH YARNS. 3s. 6d.

FARJEON, B. L.
MISER FAREBROTHER. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
A SECRET INHERITANCE. Three vols. 31s. 6d.
THE TRAGEDY OF FEATHERSTONE. 2s.
THE SACRED Suggest. (5s.
GREAT PORTER SQUARE. 2s.
IN A SILVER SEA. 2s.
THE HOUSE OF WHITE SHADOWS. 2s.
GRIF. 2s.
MOLKA. Is.

Penn, G. MANVILLE.

ONE MAID'S MISCHIEF. Three vols. sis. 6d.
THIS MAN'S WIFE. Three vols. 31s. 6d.
MASTER OF THE CEREMONIES, 6s.
IN JEOPARDY. 6s.
DOUBLE CUNNING. 2s.
THE BAG OF DIAMONDS. Is.
THE DARK HOUSE. Is.
EVE AT THE WHEEL. Is.
THE CHAPLAIN'S CRAZE. Is.

THE STORY OF ANTHONY GRACE. With Numerous Illustrations
by GoEUON Browne. 6s.

FEN BALL, PERCY.

SEX TO THE LAST. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
SPIDERS AND FLIES. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

Fol, madame.
THE LAST STAKE. 2s.

FORRESTER, MRS.

AN IMPECU:NI0US lady. Is.
VIVA. 2s.

FOTHERGILL, CAROLINE.
A VOICE IN THE WILDERNESS. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
AN ENTHUSIAST. 3 vols. Sis. 6d.

GIBNEY, SOMERVILLE.

JOHN London : a Story of the Days of Roger Bacon. With

Illustrations by M. Fitzgerald. 6s.
THE NEW RIVER : a Romance of the Days of Hugh Myddel-

ton. 3s. 6d.

GIFT, The.

LIL LORIMER. 6s.

GLYNN, J.

THE FOX AND THE GOOSE : a Story of the Curragh of
Kildare. 3s, 6d.

GRANT, JAMES.
LOVE'S LABOUR WON. 3 vols.

HARRISON, MRS. BURTON.
FOLK AND FAIRY TALES. 6s.

HARTE, Bred.
SNOWBOUND AT EAGLE'S. 2s.

HILLARY, MAX.
A DEADLY ERRAND. Is.

HOPKINS, Tight.

FOR FREEDOM. 2 vols. 21s.

HUGO, VICTOR.

THE OUTLAW OF ICELAND. 2s. 6d.

THE ALIENS.

KEEN AN, HENRY F.

KEITH, LESLIE.

THE CHILCOTES. 6s.

UNCLE BOB'S NIECE. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

KING, RICHARD ASHE {'' Basin).
A SHADOWED LIFE. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
COQUETTE'S CONQUEST. 2s.

LESTER, H. FRANCIS.
UNDER TWO Fig-trees. 3s. 6d.

MAC KAY, CHARLES.
THE TWIN SOUL; OR, THE STRANGE ADVENTURES
OF MR. RAMESES. 2 vols. 21s.

MAC QUO ID, KATHARINE S.
MRS. Rumble's SECRET. Crown 8vo.
AT THE RED GLOVE. 6s.
LOUISA. 2s. •
SIR JAMES APPLEBY. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

31 ANN, MRS. F Firman.
COWARD AND COQUETTE. 3s. 6d.

MARTIN, MRS. HERBERT.

FROM THE SILENT PAST. 2 vols. 21s.
AMOR Vinci. 2 vols. 21s.

MERRY FIELD, FRANK.

MOLLY'S STORY : a Family History. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

MOLLOY, J. FITZGERALD.

A MODERN MAGICIAN. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

THAT VILLAIN ROMEO. 2s.

WHAT HAST THOU DONE? 23. [In the Press.

MURRA Y, D. CHRISTIE.

A NOVELIST'S NOTE BOOK. 6s.

O'BRIEN, FITZJAMES.

THE DIAMOND LENS. With a Biographical Sketch of the
Author of William. Winter. 3s. 6d.

OLIPHANT, MRS.
OLIVER'S BRIDE. Is.

PAN TON, J. E.

A TANGLED CHAIN. 2 vols. 21s.
LESS THAN KIN. 3s. 6d.

PAXTON, M. W.

WHERE TEMPESTS BLOW. 3s. 6d.
MISS ELVESTER's GIRLS. 3s. 6d.

Pain, JAMES.
A PRINCE OF THE BLOOD. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

PHILIPS, F. C.

AS IN A Looking-glass. 2s.
THE DEAN AND HIS DAUGHTER. 2s.
JACK AND THREE JILLS. 2s.
A LUCKY YOUNG WOMAN. 2s.
SOCIAL VICISSITUDES. 2s.

Liddell, MRS. J. H,

IDLE TALES. 6s.

MISS GASCOIGNE. 2s.

THE NUN'S CURSE. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

rite:'

THE LADYE NANCYE. 2s.
GRETCHEN. 6s.

ROOSEVELT, BLANCHE.
THE COPPER Queen. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

RUNG [MAN, JAMES.

THE CHEQUERS : Bench THE NATURAL HISTORY OF
A PUBLIC HOUSE. Crown 8vo. 2s.

SMITH, MRS. J. GREGORY.
ATLA : a Story of the Lost Island. 3s. 6d.

SOLLY, HENRY.
LADY STELLA AND HER LOVER. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

THOMAS, ANNIE.

A REIGNING FAVOURITE. 3s. 6d.

Tristan, W. Outran.

A STRANGE AFFAIR. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
COMEDIES FROM A COUNTRY SIDE. 3s. 6d.

Tatler, SARAH.

LOGIE TOWN. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

WARDEN, FLORENCE.
A WOMAN'S FACE. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

SCHEHERAZADE : A LONDON NIGHT'S Entertainment.
3 vols. 31s. 6d.
A PRINCE OF DARKNESS. Is.

WEBBER, BYRON.
IN LUCK'S WAY. 3s. 6d.

WE ST ALL, WILLIAM.

TWO PINCHES OF SNUFF. 3s. 6d.

HER TWO MILLIONS. 3 vols. 31s. Gd.

THE OLD FACTORY. 2s.

RED RYVINGTON. 2s.

RALPH NORBRECK's TRUST. 2s.

FOLK LORE.

HARRISON, MRS. BURTON.
FOLK AND FAIRY TALES. Crown 8vo. With 24

whole-page engravings, by Walter Crane. 6s.

STUART-grannie, J.

GREEK FOLK SONGS. With an Essay on "The Science of
Folklore." New Edition.

WILDE, LADY ('' SPERANZA'').
ANCIENT LEGENDS, MYSTIC CHARMS AND

SUPERSTITIONS OF IRELAND. With a Chapter on the
Ancient Races of Ireland by Sir William Wilde. 6s.

MILITARY.

DOUGLAS, WILLIAM.
DUELLING Dayes IN THE ARMY. Imp. 16mo.

7s. 6d.

KOETTSCHAU, LIEUT. COL.
THE COMING FRANCO-GERMAN WAR. Translated
by John Hill. Large post 8vo. 7s. 6d.

POETRY.

ADAMS, W. DAVENPORT.
SONGS FROM THE NOVELISTS. Foolscap 4to.
Printed in Brown Ink on hand-made Paper. 7s. 6d.

HAMILTON, EDWIN.
THE MODERATE MAN, AND OTHER Humorous
POEMS. With numerous illustrations by Harry
Furniss. [//i the Press.

MURRAY, D. CHRISTIE.
A BUNCH OF WILD FLOWERS. sin the Press.

THEOLOGY.

ARNOLD, REV. F.
ROBERTSON OF BRIGHTON. Post 8vo. 9s.

COLLINS, MABEL.
THROUGH THE GATES OF GOLD. A Fragment

of Thought. Foolscap 8yo. White Cloth. Gilt Top. 4s. 6d.

CURTIS, GEORGE Tickler.
CREATION OR EVOLUTION? Demy Svo. 10s. fid.

WELDON, REV. G. W.
TILLOTSON's SERMONS. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

TRAVEL.

BATES, E. KATHARINE.
A YEAR IN THE GREAT REPUBLIC. 2 vols.

Crown 8vo. 21s.

CONN, WILLIAM.
JAPANESE LIFE, LOVE, AND LEGEND. From

the French of Maurice Dubard, Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

DODD, ANNA BOWMAN.
CATHEDRAL DAYS ; A TOUR THROUGH

SOUTHERN ENGLAND. Crown 8vo. With Numerous
Illustrations. 6s.

HARDY, IZA DUFFUS. ~~^

ORANGES AND ALLIGATORS : Sketches of South

Florida Life. Crown 8vo. 5s.

Keene, JOHN F.
THREE YEARS OF A WANDERER'S LIFE.

New Edition. 3s. 6d.
SIX MONTHS ON THE HEJAZ. Crown 8vo. 6f.

MISCELLANEOUS.

FROM KITCHEN TO GARRET. A New Work on
Household Management. By Mrs. Panton. With Illustrations.
Crown 8vo. 6s.

GRACE AND FOLLY : DANCERS AND DANCING.

Illustrated Wrapper. By Edward Scott. Is.

ECCLESIASTICAL ENGLISH. By George Washington

Moon. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

LIVING PARIS : A Guide to the Manners, Monuments,
aud Institutions of the People. Foolscap 8vo. With
Maps and Plans. 6s.

TRAVELS IN THE INTERIOR ; OR, THE

Wonderful ADVENTURES OF LUKE AND BELINDA.

Edited by a London Physician. Illustrated by Harry

Furnish. Large Crown 8vo. Gilt top. 6s.

*^* An attempt to teach the anatomy and physiology of the human

body in a novel and entertaining man ner. ^

COMMON SENSE IN THE NURSERY. B^

Marion HARiiAND. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

DISHES AND DRINKS; OR, PHILOSOPHY IN

THE KITCHEN. By G. L. M. Strauss. New and Cheaper
Edition. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

WIT AND WISDOM OF THE LATE EMPEROR

WILLIAM. Is.

ILLUSTRATED BOOKS SUITABLE FOR

PRESENTS OR PRIZES.

THE MODERATE MAN, AND OTHER Humorous
Verses. By Edwin Hamilton. With twelve
original whole-page illustrations by Harry Furniss. Foolscap
quarto.

THROUGH GREEN GLASSES. By F. M. Allen.

Illustrations by M. Fitzgerald. Cloth gilt. Cs.

THE STORY OF ANTHONY GRx\CE. By G. Manville

Fenn. Illustrations by Gordon Browne. Cloth gilt,
bevelled boards. 6s.

VERDI, MILAN AND " OTHELLO." Bj Blanche

EoosEVELT. With Eighteen whole-page illustrations. Cloth
gilt. 7s. 6s.

AT THE RED GLOVE. By Katharine S.Macquoid.
Illustrations by C. 8. Reiniiart. Cloth gilt. 6s.

TRAVELS IN THE INTERIOR; OR, THE Wonderful
ADVENTURES OF LUKE AND BELINDA.

Illustrations by Harry Furniss. Cloth gilt, bevelled boards.
6s.

JOHN 0' LONDON : a Story of the Days of Roger
Bacon. By Somerville Gibney. Illustrations by M. Fitzgerald.
Cloth gilt, bevelled boards. 6s.

FOLK AND FAIRY TALES. By Mrs. Burton

Harrison. With twenty-four original whole-page illustrations
by Walter Crane. 2nd Edition. Crown 8vo. In handsomely
designed cover, gilt edges. 6s.

CATHEDRAL DAYS : a Tour through Southern
England. By Anna Bowman Dodd. With Illustrations from
Sketches and Photographs. 6s.

OLD COURT LIFE IN FRANCE. By Mrs. Frances
Elliott. With twenty-one original whole-page Illustrations
Royal 8vo. 7s. 6d.

FIFTY YEARS OF A GOOD QUEEN'S REIGN.

By A. H. Wall. With six Portraits. Imp. Imo. Cloth,
3s. 6d. ; bevelled boards, gilt edges. 4s. 6d,

SIX SHILLING NOVELS.

GRETCHEN. By Rite.

MAD. By the Marquis Biddle-Cope.

LUCK AT THE DIAMOND FIELDS. By D. J. Belgrade.

JOHN 0' LONDON. By Somerville Gibney.

THE STORY OF ANTHONY GRACE. By G. Manville Fenn.

THROUGH GREEN GLASSES. By F. M. Allen.

AT THE RED GLOVE. By K. S. Macquoid.

A BIRD OF PASSAGE. By B. M. Croaker.

HIS HELPMATE. By Frank Barrett.

A TERRIBLE LEGACY. By G. W. Appleton.

THE MASTER OF THE CEREMONIES. By G. Manilla

Fenn.
IN JEOPARDY. By G. Manville Fenn.
THE ALIENS. By'HENRv F. Keenan.
AS IN A Looking-glass. By F. C. Philips.
A LUCKY YOUNG WOMAN. By F. C. Philips.
TEMPEST DRIVEN. By Richard Dowling.
A MENTAL STRUGGLE. By the Author of " Molly Sawn."
LIL LORIMER. By The. Gift.
THE SACRED NUGGET. By B. L. Farjeon.
THE CHILCOTES. By Leslie Keith.

THREE-AND-SIXPENNY NOVELS.

PASSAGES FROM THE LIFE OF A LADY. By Hamilton Aide.

IN LUCK'S WAY. By Byron Webber.

MISS ELVESTER's GIRLS. By M. W. Paxton.

WHERE TEMPESTS BLOW. By M. W. Paxton.

THE DIAMOND LENS. By Fitzjames O'Brien.

THE FOX AND THE GOOSE : A Story of the Curragh of Kildare.

FROZEN HEARTS. By G. W. Appleton.

JACK ALLYN'S FRIENDS. By G. W. Appleton.

LIEUTENANT BARNABAS. By Frank Barrett.

TWO PINCHES OF SNUFF. By William Stall.

THE CONFESSIONS OF A COWARD AND COQUETTE.

By the Author of "The Parish of Hilly."
A LIFE'S MISTAKE. By Mrs. Lovett Cameron.
IN ONE TOWN. By E. Downey.
ANCHOR WATCH YARNS. By E. Downey.
ATLA. By Mrs. J. Gregory Smith.
LESS THAN KIN. By J. E. Panton.
A REIGNING FAVOURITE. By Annie Thomas.
THE NEW RIVER. By Somerville Gibney.
UNDER TWO FIG TREES. By H. Francis Lester.
COMEDIES FROM A COUNTRY SIDE. By W. Outran

Tristan.

Two-shilling NOVELS.

DOUBLE CUNNING. Bv G. Manville Fenn.
THE TRAGEDY OF FEATHERSTONE. By B. L,

Farjeon.

THE DINGY HOUSE AT KENSINGTON.

THE OLD FACTORY. By William Stall.

RED RYVINGTON. By William Stall.

RALPH NORBRECK's TRUST. By Wm. Stall.

THE CHEQUERS. By James Runciman.

CANON LUCIFER. By J. D. Neville.

THAT VILLAIN ROMEO. By Fitzgerald Molly.

LOUISA. By K. S. Macquoid.

THE LADYE NANCYE. By ''Rita."

MERE Shaking. By J. F. Keene.

A LUCKY YOUNG WOMAN. By F. C. Philips.

THE DEAN & HIS DAUGHTER. By F. C. Philips.

JACK AND Three JILLS. By F. C. Philips.

AS IN A Looking-glass. By F. C. Philips.

SOCIAL VICISSITUDES. By F. C. Philips.

PROPER PRIDE. By B. M. Choker.

PRETTY MISS NEVILLE. By B. M. CROKER.

MISS GASCOIGNE. By Mrs. Riddell.

THE PRETTIEST WOMAN IN WARSAW. By

Mabel Collins,
A MAIDEN ALL FORLORN. By the Author of

Molly Sawn,"
HER WEEK'S AMUSEMENT. By the Author of

Molly Sawn."
A COQUETTE'S CONQUEST. By "Basil."
IN A SILVER SEA. By B. L. Farjeon.
GREAT PORTER SQUARE. By B. L. Farjeon.
THE HOUSE OF WHITE SHADOWS. By B. L.

Farjeon.
GRIF. By. B. L. Farjeon.
THE LAST STAKE. By Madame Poli.
SNOWBOUND AT EAGLE'S. By Beet Harte.
THE FLOWER OF DOOM. By M. Bentham-Edwards.
VIVA. By Mrs. Forrester.
FOLLY MORRISON. By Frank Barrett.
THE MYSTERY OF Willard. By R. Dowling.
THE WEIRD SISTERS. By R. Dowling.
HONEST DAVIE. By Frank Barrett.
UNDER ST. PAUL'S. By R. Dowling.
THE DUKE'S SWEETHEART. By R. Dowling.

SHILLING NOVELS.

AN IMPECUNIOUS LADY. By Mrs. Forrester.
THE GREAT HESPER. By Frank Barrett.
A BAG OF DIAMONDS. By G. M. Fenn.
THE DARK HOUSE. By G. M. Fenn. 3rd Edition.
EVE AT THE WHEEL. By G. M. Fenn.
THE CHAPLAIN'S CRAZE. By G. M. Fenn.
LITTLE Twopenny. By the Author of " Mehalah."
A HOUSE OF TEARS. By E. Downey. 12th Edition.
LADY VAL WORTH'S DIAMONDS. By the Author

of "Phyllis." Third Edition.
A PRINCE OF DARKNESS. By the Author of

The House on the Marsh." Fifth Edition.
THE SKELETON KEY. By R. Dowling.
MOLKA. By B. L. Faujeon.
OLIVER'S BRIDE. By Mks. Oliphant.

*^* A series of " Half-crown Novels " is now being published
hy Messrs. Ward & Downey, comprising works by
the following Authors : — The Author of " Molly Sawn,"
Frank Barrett, Miss Bbtham-Edwards, Mrs. Lovett
Cameron, Mabel Collins, Mrs. Croaker, J. D. Neville,
Richard Dowling, B. L. Farjeon, G. M. Fenn, Mrs. Forrester,
Bret Harte, Richard Ashe King, Mrs. Macquoid,
Fitzgerald Molly, F. C. Philips, Mrs. Riddell, "Rite,"
Annie Thomas, William Westall, *Sic. Each Novel will
he tastefully hound in cloth gilt, and will contain a
frontispiece by some well-known Artist.

*^* Messrs. Ward & Downey's Illustrated Catalogue
contains Portraits of the Author of " Mehalah" the Author
of '' Molly Bawn" G. JV. Appleton, Frank Barrett, Mrs.
Lovett Cameron, Mabel Collins, Mrs. B. M. Croaker, Richard
Dowling, J. 1). Delille, Charles Dual, B. L. Farjeon, George
Manville Fenn, Somerville Gibney, James Grant, Victor Hugo,
Bret Harte, Richard Ashe King {"Basil"), Mrs. Macquoid,
Fitzgerald Molly, O'Neill Daunt, John Augustus CShea, Mrs.
Panton, James Payn, F. C. Philips, Blanche Roosevelt, George
Sand, Florence Warden, William Westall, and Harry Furniss.

Ward & Downey, Publishers, 12, York Street, Covent Garden.

OF THE
UN I Verity
or Ill Noise

az

B56Z61
V.3

IN OPPOSITION,

Be lessons right severe.
There's wit there, ye'll get there,

Ye'll find nae other where.

BURXi

"But out of her griefs and cares, as will happen, I think, when
these trials fall upon a kindly heart and are not too unbearable,
grew up a number of thoughts and excellences which had never
come into existence had not her sorrow and misfortunes engendered
them." — Esmond.

BY

Gertrude M. IRELAND Blackburn

IN THREE VOLUMES
VOL. III.

WARD AND DOWNEY

12, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON


[sall Rights Reserved]

KELLY AND CO., GATE STREET, LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS, W.C.

AND MIDDLE-mill, KINGSTOX-ON-TIIAMES.

CONTENTS.

Book III.— CONSEQUENCES.

Victor Hugo.

J. S. ANP TO K. IP. S.

IN MEMORY 01'" 1883- Jess

4 Soul's Tragedy. BR0W-Ni.N<i

Book III. — Consequences— continued.

CHAPTER Vn.

THE FRUIT OF HIS LABOURS.

There was an hour
When, in the firelight steadily aglow,
Joined slackly, we beheld the chasm grow
Among the clicking coals. Our library-bower
That eve was left to us."

George Meredith.

The two men turned, half consciously to

watch the graceful white figure with its

trailing draperies as it went down the long

library. It smiled as it left them together.

Wordsworth had started to follow her, but

Carstairs seemed to detain him, and the

door remained open w^lien she had passed
VOL. iir. 3^

out. Carstairs strode afterwards to shut
it heavily.

He returned, ponderously and ponderingly.

Wordsworth stood, back to fire, with his
great figure upright and his large head a
little forward. His face wore a look of
alertness, and his eyes were lit with the
brightness of the thinker's as yet communicated
previsions. To Carstairs he
spoke in those decided full tones so well
known, but with an easy friendly manner
which in public, unfortunately, is not
always a second nature with Paul Wordsworth.


I hear that you knew nothing of my
coming. It is partly on business, but of
that — if you allow me — I would rather
speak after eating. I have had a terribly
hard day. You have the house full?"

Carstairs curtly mentioned the names of
his guests. A Httle extra ungraciousness
did not show upon him, and Paul was too
preoccupied to remark that his comrade
was abnormally sulky.

"Perhaps we might as well dress at
once ? "

Yes, they will be out of the diningroom
by that time, unless you like to
catch them up as you are."

Not unless you wish it. I am at your
disposal."

What you please," rejoined Carstairs
dully.

Believing what he did, he ought probably
then to have told Wordsworth that Temple
was no place for him, but, seeing Paul
suddenly, the instincts of subservience and
the force of association held their own.

34-2

Carstairs could not make up this mind what
to do. Short of sharp measures, he must,
for the present, take Wordsworth at his
own valuation. Wordsworth seemed in excellent
spirits, scarcely tempered by the
sense of bodily fatigue which so often had
balked his enjoyment and his activity. For
over-tired men, therefore, at their tete-astute
supper they where sufficiently talkative or
at least not remarkably silent. Afterwards,
to put off the evil day, when Wordsworth
asked to return to the library, Carstairs
suojorested the drawings-room.

CO O

I must see you alone to-night ; but you
look more tis-ed out than I am," said
Wordsworth to Carstairs.

I'm all right," answered Carstairs. " Then
we won't go into the drawing-room ? "

Oil ! yes. Only I must see you later.

la fact I would rather put it off and
change the current of thought for a short
time."

"I'm sure I would," said Carstairs with
eagerness, which Paul could not understand,
knowing that Carstairs had as yet
no idea of what he had to say. Carstairs
also had been startled by Paul's lightness
of tone — for, of course, they were at
cross purposes ; and yet, as often happens
to the preoccupied, each found that the
other's unconnected phrases seemed most
relevant to his own thoughts.

Carstairs watched Wordsworth with his
wife ; the presence of Paul seemed to give
her animation and confidence as well as
pleasure. Georgie had her eyes on everyone.
But neither Paul nor Vera knew of
the impending sword.

"Breakfast for the shooters will be at
8.30," said Vera, midst the flutter of
departing ladies a little later in the
evening.

You're coming out, Georgie ? " asked
Grey.

'• Of course," rejoined Carstairs, impatiently,
for her. She shrugged her
shoulders, but would not meet his eye.

I have good news for your husband,
I think," said Wordsworth to Vera under
cover of the general farewells.

You must make yourself at home as
usual," proclaimed Carta's 'generally. " I
have some work to do."

"Why! you have been at it all day,
old fellow!"

I can't help that. Good-night — if we
don't see you again."

Wordsworth went straight to his favourite
high chair when he got to the Library.

"Now we can talk," said he cheerily.
He was refreshed once more, in thorough
good humour, and now was beginning to
remark the glumness of Carstairs ; another
attack of temper, Paul supposed, in
which he could by no possibility be concerned,
and for which, as regarded others,
Paul fancied that he could successfully
prescribe. He had good news for
Carstairs — his friend, like himself In Opposition.


Meanwhile, forgetting that had it been
as he was led to suspect, the culprit
would aim at and would have practised
deception, Carstairs was astonished
at the conduct of the chief.

Less egoist, Carstairs would have had

an easier task ; but he thought of himself
and his prospects. Partly from incredulity,
partly from egotism, Carstairs
shrank from the strife. Wordsworth's
intimacy had been the heart's desire of
the office-seeker ; and men can become
cold to the claims of honour when interest
instructs them not to make an enemy.

As Paul proceeded to give the reason
for his arrival, the situation became more
and more involved.

The leader had come a few miles out of
his way, and had proposed to sleep at
Temple instead of going to town, that he
might personally convey important news to
a personal friend and future colleague.
Carstairs saw the fruit of his labours — ripe
and golden — just before him.

Wordsworth told him a secret known

only to the leaders on either side, surmised
by many, and ignored by the crowd. The
decision of the Government was to dissolve
at once — instead of waiting till the spring,
as had been confidently asserted by everybody.
It expected defeat, more or less, but
certain external events were believed to
offer a more favourable chance than might
again occur to prolong the life of those
at present in office. Wise or unwise, Her
Majesty's Ministers intended to spring a
dissolution on the country.

On the other hand, the Opposition would
not be taken at a disadvantage. Doubtless
and so far the Government was justified
in its own wisdom — the Opposition would
have preferred to wait till the next year.
But — and here Paul Wordsworth's eyes
simply shone with excitement over the

coming struggle — so far as any prophet
could vision or calculations touch the probabilities,
there was little uncertainty in the
issue. Ministers were in a minority in the
country. The prospects of the Opposition
were brilliant. A majority was almost a
thing of course. The party would sweep
the country, and Carstairs might rely on
the offer of a suitable office — a seat in the
Cabinet.

Yes, Carstairs saw all he had schemed
for was in full view ; Paul Wordsworth,
.in f idlest confidence, sparing these important
hours to inform Carstairs of party
manoeuvres and of personal prospects.
Something was the meed of his own abilities
and his untiring endeavours ; but few
get less pleasant recognitions of these than
the men just outside the Cabinet— at least

in one party — and this somewhat abnormal
stimulus came from the personality of the
man with whom he must quarrel.

Must quarrel ? Could Carstairs quarrel
with this man now? One step more, and
Carstairs would be independent of Wordsworth
; dare he quarrel with him yet ?

Carstairs saw all — all it involved. He
scanned again those able intelligent features,
and, as with steady gravity but with
strong zeal, these prospects were placed
before him, Carstairs tried to shut out all
the rest. He would behave as the man of
the world. He would ignore what had
been told him that afternoon.

So at last, when Paul Wordsworth
ceased to speak — speaking as such clear-minded
men speak, even to a single intellectual
listener, in phrases and words which

have as much form as force — when the
rolling sentences died away when it was
for Carstairs to reply, when the grateful
though dignified acquiescence should have
been given — then there was silence. A
great log of wood fell prone on to the
hearth, jarring and blazing as it lay
smoking. Carstairs stooped to pick it up,
but he did not answer his chief.

HONOUR OR HONOURS ?

We say that each soul knows its own victories as it
knows it own bitterness. This is not altogether true.
Influence follows character, as effect the exertion of force,
sometimes at once and visibly, sometimes when the
cause is so far removed as to be scarcely traceable." — Mss.

The silence prolonged itself. Wordsworth
relapsed into meditation. He did not take
his responsibilities lightly, and he was not
inclined to quarrel with one who did, — if
that deliberative method of receiving news
kept Carstairs silent.

It was with intense surprise that Wordsworth
heard the answer which at length
was given in a husky voice.

You had better not count on me,"
said Carstairs, trying to keep his tone

matter of fact. " I think of not presenting
myself for re-election."

My dear fellow ! What nonsense ! I
wish that all seats were as safe as yours,
and, if it where otherwise, an arrangement
would always be made for you. We count
on your help. And from what you have
said — not once but often, as plainly as a
man ever says anything on these occasions,
I fancy, I know, that a portfolio has
special attractions for you. What do you
mean ? What do you want to do ? "

I don't know : yacht : study colonies ;
stay out of it all for a few years."

You might as well stay out of it forever,
then," retorted Wordsworth. " Why ?
It can't be honey with you. Rubbish !
you are joking. I beg your pardon, but
you see one's sense of humour is not so

acute as it might be after the last two
days of skirmishing. You are not
serious ? "

Carstairs' face was immovable now. He
put his chin up, and murmured between
his teeth :

Yes."

Wordsworth was perplexed and astonished
— a little impatient. He was not
blind to the fact that the abilities of
Carstairs were of a higher order than his
character. Carstairs might possibly think
himself of great value, and be standing
out as the player of his personal game —
partly to assert his dignity, partly because
he saw some chance of profit to himself.

I do not think that you are treating
me well," said Wordsworth, willing to test
the theory, but still friendly. " I can

conceive of your thinking me wanting in
ceremony, perhaps. Of course all that
sort of thing is formally to be gone
through afterwards. If this visit is at all
official, I am here only to ascertain your
views. But, surely, if I come to you, if I
speak out frankly to you as friend to
friend, you can reply to me as fully and
frankly ? "

I have told you fully and frankly,"
sneered Carstairs — obviously sneering — " I
remain outside the Cabinet ; probably not
in Parliament."

'' I will not press you," answered Wordsworth
more stiffly, but still attributing
the matter to some temporary ill-temper,
and willing to go half-way to meet the
recusant on return. " But I do think that
personally you owe me some explanation.

I have rather committed myself on your

behalf to X . Speak frankly. What is

wrong ? or " — after a pause — " if even you
and I must deal in this manner after all
that has passed between us, what is your
price?"

" What is wrong ? What is my price ? "
repeated Carstairs. He suddenly burst into
intense anger, and his face was like that
of a demon. " Your confession is my price
—that's all."

Wordsworth passed his hand over his
brow and looked at Carstairs with amazement,
yet with relief; for Wordsworth
thought that any tangible ground for a
quarrel did not exist, and the supposition
would be easily removed, when progress
might be made.

"I am afraid that I do not follow you,

VOL. III. 35

Carstairs. I certainly, to my knowledge,
have never done you anything but good.
Confession of what ? And why ? What
has any confession of mine or of any other
human being got to do with your becoming
a Cabinet minister?"

I do not expect you to criminate yourself,"
retorted Carstairs. " Only when you
leave Temple tomorrow I shall be glad if
you will not return. Our lives will not
have much to do with each other henceforth
; I will take precious good care of
that."

V/hat do you say ? " exclaimed Wordsworth,
utterly astounded.

I say that you have ruined my career.
I sacrifice all that to me is worth living
for. You will have your own way. The
very trifling inconvenience of having committed

course to X may be counterbalanced
by the fact that the word inconvenience
is scarcely strong enough to
characterize what I have to suffer throuo-]i
your abuse of my hospitality."

It was a long sentence. Carstairs was
now on his feet, swaying with anger, but
also with something of the tone, manner,
and gesture of the public platform. It
might seem scarcely a genuine speech, yet
it marked the high-water line of the
morality of Carstairs. To a man of his
stamp it was a sort of heroism to resolve
even if he afterwards regretted it — that
he would give up everything if it were
yet possible to save his wife for himself.
Wordsworth, I think, was stunned by the
mental thunderbolt. He caught at the

words, "abuse of hospitality" — here was

r5-2

something tangible. He, too, became ablaze
with passion, but only his eyes changed,
his voice was deeper, and his speech slower,
clearer, more precise.

I am only patient now because it is
possible that you may have made some
awful mistake. Speak out, man; you have
said so much that you shall say it all.
What have I done, said, or thought against
you ? Thank your stars, man, you speak
to one with a clear conscience and a good
temper ! You say I have abused your
hospitality. How ? "
You need not ask."
"I do ask. What is more, I say, univ

patience has its limits, Carstairs "

"Mine has. Yes, I will tell you — or
show you — what will be sufficient, I think,
you sc "

Stop ! " said Wordsworth. " Eemember
we are not boys, and, if you have made a
mistake, you will be sorry to make it
irreparable between us ! You had better
not call me a scoundrel just yet. You
Have said quite enough as it is."

Carstairs felt the immense spiritual
strength which repulsed his rage. Wordsworth
was not cold-blooded — his face, the
pulses of the temple and hand showed that
but he was calm, perfectly, but dominating
calm. Never before had Carstairs
not only met his match but his ruler.
As Wordsworth looked down on him,
steadily at him, penetratingly through him,
Carstairs knew himself to be in the wrong
He lost his nerve and struggled for his
breath, but he was not a man of very fine
and rapid thought ; so he simply realized

that he was worsted in the first encounter.
Demoralized, he delivered the next attack
at the invitation of Wordsworth.

Wordsworth now took the offensive by
saying : " Does that paper contain your
charge against me ? "

"Your charge against yourself. It is
your writing," said Carstairs, almost wishing
to be wrong", as he handed the letter
picked up by Bennett when it was left in
Yera's room in the summer.

Eagerly Wordsworth took the paper,
rapidly revolving what it might contain to
give offence to the colleague on whom he
had counted.

Do you mean to say that you have
only a few words of my writing against
nie ? " began Wordsworth ; then he saw his
own letter to Caroline Gallery. Carstairs,

watching feverishly, saw a strange look
dawn on the face of the reader.

Did you write that to my wife ? " said
Carstairs.

The Sphinx countenance well known to
the Commons had replaced every other
expression after one moment of astonishment.
Wordsworth had not seen the note
for fifteen years, so he said :

This is a forgery."

I thought so," said Carstairs eagerly.
Forgive "

Stop — where did you get it ? "

"It was picked up, so it was said, last
August. Those who fabricated it will "

Stop, please," Wordsworth said again.
I said it was a forgery. It is not. I did
not recognize it for the moment . , But do
you think it was addressed to your wife ? ''

To whom, then ? "

Again there was a terrible silence. But
this time Carstairs waited.

Wordsworth walked to the other side of
the library and returned. Then he spoke
with his face hard set, and this voice
-steadied, giving no answer to the question,
but proceeding :

Do you mean to say that it is this
this discovery, let us say — which has a
sufficient effect on you to alter your life ?
Do you know what you give up ? "

"What is that to you?" said Carstairs,
feeling an advantage in the implication of
wrong. But he was not master of the
situation.

Before it is too late," rejoined Wordsworth,
still deliberately, "let me point out
to you that, you do not only break with

me, but, also, with all those to whom
through me you are pledged; you give up
your future, without power of explaining
your reasons ; unless — unless you mean to
carry your abilities to the other camp ? "

Never ! " ejaculated Carstairs, not knowing
why he listened. " Power, yes ; but
power in my own party. I am no renegade."

Then," said Paul, looking at him steadily,
power with us you shall have, so far as I
can secure it for you ; your abilities will
keep the place once made for you ; you
need never speak to me save officially ; you
have wealth enough to accept a peerage if
that would make thin^^^s easier. It is nothing
strange that political allies should be mortal
enemies ; many a man cuts his sponsor.
Xo one knows that this is in your possession ?
Not "

No, she doesn't," said Carstairs suddenly,
taking Wordsworth up at his first hesitation.
But "

"Then," broke in Wordsworth, "let our
loss of intimacy be put on some other
cause."

"No*' interrupted Carstairs with a sort
of roar. " You shall be silent ! The man
who makes such terms — offers them or takes
them — is a scoundrel ! "

And so I think," answered Wordsworth,
relaxing the Sphinx-like countenance and
showing himself to be stirred to the very
depths. "Forgive me, Carstairs. The only
method by which I could restore my own
self-respect was by testing the quality of
yours."

I do not understand you."

To use your own words, ' man to man,

frankly and fully,' aye, and solemnly, I give
you my ijiost sacred pledge that this letter
has passed through the hands of Lady
Carstairs ; it was not addressed to her nor
to any one whom you have ever known to
exist."

I am bound to believe you, Wordsworth ;
but why "

Why was it in her hands ? Because I
look upon your wife — and shall most
certainly hope to do so always — as my
greatest friend. This letter was addressed
to a woman who had a great influence over
my younger life. In a fit of egotism I
placed the series of letters compulsorily
restored by that woman in your wife's
hands, fifteen-year-old letters I had not
looked at. This, which I did not recognize,
has apparently been lost, after the true stage

fashion it appears. If any structure of insults
to your hospitality has been built upon
it, that baseless structure must go with the
explanation. The chimera is killed ! You
are satisfied ? If so, I am."

"Why did you make a fool of ma just
now ? "

"Because you were ready to call me a
scoundrel previously. What more ? I am
not going to humiliate myself or you further.
It would be an insult to repeat that assurance,
that I forgive you for doubting
me till I had spoken; after that . . . .
Doubles or quits?" he interrupted himself.
Never, surely, had Wordsworth left two
sentences unfinished and ended an appeal
with a colloquialism ? But it was so then.
"Doubles or quits?" he said, and he held
out his hand with a sad grave smile

Quits," answered Carstairs, briefly taking
the proffered hand. " Done."

Done, be it, in all senses," answered
Paul.

'• Have a B.-and-S. ? " asked Carstairs.

"I will. I have to go off by the 6.45
train tomorrow morning."

Will you be back again at night ? or
when ? " said Carstairs, handing him the
mixture.

"Before you are asked to join the. new
Cabinet," retorted Wordsworth, though
while he smiled he wiped his brow as after
some physical exertion.

When they parted that night Wordsworth
thought that he had been bitterly humiliated,
but that Carstairs had come out of it very
well. Carstairs was not an analyst of his
own feelings, but the danger had sobered

him, the reaction bewildered him, and all
he knew was that Wordsworth had behaved
as excellently in his silences and in his
comprehension when the scene was over as,
on the whole, he had done when he bore up
;against an unintelligible accusation at an
unexpected moment. But the matter could
• not so rest.

If it had so rested I do not think Paul
Wordsworth would ever again have entered
Temple. Yet another was more concerned
than he in the result of that scene.

TO THE COVERT.

The poets speak habitually of love as if it were a passion
which could be safely indulged, whereas the whole experience
of modern existence goes to show that it is of all passions the
most perilous except in those rare cases where it can be followed
by marriage." — Hamilton.

Georgie Leyton was restless all that iiiglit.
When ill the murky October dawn she heard
the rattle of wheels, and from behind her
blind saw that Paul Wordsworth was driving'
off, she experienced some satisfaction mingled
with tremor.

Trimly dressed and strongly shod, she was
early ready for the early breakfast ; nothing
but her dainty little hat wanting to the
attire of the sportswoman, a " get-up " not
only suitable to the occasion, but preeminently

becoming to herself. Grey was
always late for breakfast, at whatever hour
it were. But all the other men except
Sir Ralph, with two or three of the ladies,
had assembled before she walked in. She
had waited to appear till there was no
chance of a tete-tete with Vera.

Georgie looked extremely well that mornings,
and had an advantage common to
lively, well-tinted, dark women in doing so
when fairer complexions were pallid and
sensitive spirits were at par. The tide of
life then flows languidly amongst most of
the weaker and a few of the stronger sex.
But Georgie was fresh and bright and cheery.
No one could have guessed for what stakes
she had played, and that she was still in
suspense as to the result.

There is a kind of nature which clearly

foresees its course without realizing the
consequences of that course ; to the one
it is keenly alive, and plans and plots with
almost absolute prevision ; for the others
it has little forethought. It sees that it
will get its own way, but it does not,
perhaps — we would fain hope it does not —
count the cost to others. Are there not
three grades of pain-givers — the careless,
the carelessly cruel, and the cruel with
power and will to inflict all possible suffering
on those who stand in their way ?
Perhaps Georgie belonged only to the
second grade as — still young but yearning
for evil if only by evil she might win her
reward — she watched Vera with a grimness
which was partly cold-blooded and
partly passionate.

Beyond Vera's place hung on the wall

VOL. lU. 36

a portrait of Ralph's mother, whom her
son resembled and who had educated his
cousin. That Lady Carstairs had been the
best friend, the worst enemy, of the sharp-witted
hoyden whom the elder's tongue
and training had corrupted into the witty
Avoman of the world whilst yet in her
teens ! Georgie looked at that handsome
figure and stately face, to which her own
had some faint resemblance ; it seemed
strange to see before it the slight, pure
loveliness of the present Lady Carstairs.

Vera saw her looking. " Do you want
anything, Georgie ? "

No ; that picture tells well in the light
to-day. Where is Mr. Wordsworth ? "

Gone, I believe. He only came on
business'*

One of the strangers to our narrative,

a sportswoman also, took up the conversation.
" Do you hear all those wonderful
Cabinet secrets, Lady Carstairs? How very
interesting it must be ! Quite like freemasonry,
you know, Miss Leyton."

Not much is told to outsiders ! But
I always think that wherever there are
secrets men are wheedled out of them."

*' I will not break a lance with you,
Miss Leyton, for here comes your special
defender," rejoined some man.

Grey entered, serenely if sleepily, and
after him came Carstairs. There were two
vacant places ; the host's usual palace.
beside which sat Georgie, and one at the
left hand of Vera. Carstairs went to that
beside his wife, whilst Grey greeted
Geordie.

Stay where you are, Grey ; Miss Leyton

36-2

needs a defender against Colonel Leigh, I

know," said Carstairs carelessly.

Husband and wife together ! " exclaimed
Colonel Leigh in jest.

I forgot to ask how's your eye, Vera ? "
called out Charlie mischievously.

I hurt it yesterday," explained Vera,
as every one looked up with the faint
sympathy of breakfasters. " It is a little
discoloured."

"A little green, I suppose," added the
irrepressible.

Wordsworth sent you all sorts of tender
messages, Vera," said Carstairs abruptly,
looking to her, speaking at Georgie. " He
was sorry that he had to get up to town
by nine o'clock."

I hope that you both weren't up all
night," said Vera, at which Georgie pricked

up her ears on the qui viae for any hint
of the situation.

'• I did sit up," said Carstairs, " till he
went at six. He did not. The great
Paul's visits are not matters of pure
pleasure, but I think you will hear tomorrow
the reason of his abrupt arrival
and departure. Anyhow, he left me with
enough to do even after he had, as I
suppose, slumbered the sleep of the
just."

Vera and Georgie both detected something
artificial in the air of bonhomie with
which Carstairs spoke ; but they differed
in their reading of the riddle.

Such dissipations are not too good for
covert-shooters," said Grey. " I am beginning
to think the game of politics is not
worth the candle. A precious long one

yon must have burnt last uiglit, Carstairs,
if it lasted till 6 a.m."

I am afraid it will interfere Tvith my
arrangements to-day. I'll come with you
all this morning, and then 111 ask you to
excuse me. Send our luncheon to the
Black Copse gate, Vera. It will be a
lovely day. Perhaps the rest of the party
would come out with you to meet us, and
the ladies who have been out all the
morning would then go back if they were
tired?"

Carstairs kept on talking to his wife ;
never said a word to Georgie ; never met
her eye at breakfast ; never came near her
when the party had assembled at the front
door. The bright sunshine, now finding its
way through the mists, fell upon a charming
English group on the gravel before the

stately house brilliantly wreathed in Virginian
creeper — the waiting men, the clogs
subduing their impatience, the rough suits
harmonizing with the autumnal tints on the
glowing trees.

The weather had been exquisite that
season, and the leaves had turned all
colours without falling ; even now, on the
eve of November, the coverts were far too
thick.

Carstairs never came near Georgie,
though she was the centre of attraction,
so far as women can be attractive on these
occasions to men intent on other game.
Perhaps it was that he had to arrange
the party. Carstairs was a martinet in
trifles, and every detail must be as he
wished it.

Still at other times Georgie knew it lead

been subtly different — she had failed, and
if she had failed, what next ?

On reaching the nearer gate of the Black
Copse the procession stopped and again
fell into a waiting group. The arrangements
were made. All the notice Ralph
took of her was to say, as he said to
others about Lady Emily Subito and
Mrs. Leigh, " I suppose Grey takes charge
of you ? "

She looked at him. It was almost a
pitiful look, but no one else saw it, and he
went on with his arrangements as if he
had not met her eye :

"All of you please to remember that
this covert is dangerous. I have never
had ladies here before. All guns must
keep strictly to their own lines. Mind
tins, Charlie, or you'll shoot the beaters or

one of US. There are places in this wood
where you cannot possibly see. If you are
careless I will not allow you to shoot hereat
all."

Charlie was intensely mortified at this
address before every one. "As if I didn't
know!"

I don't care what you know, I care
what you do ! " answered Ralph in his most
peremptory tone. " The pitch of the
ground and the thickness of the wood are
most deceptive. We had a bad accident
here twenty years ago. Leigh, in my
father's time."

"You cannot be too careful on this occasion,"
answered Leigh. " The ladies must,
of course, keep close to the guns they are
with."

"The lightest penalty is a peppering, the

heaviest is death," said Carstairs tO Mrs.
Leigh. "All right, Smith."

Then the little party moved slowly down
the wet grassy lane, the sun falling in
patches through the high hedge on the
right. To the left was the wood, smelling
of the autumn : dank and dreary in the
shade ; the green all flecked with the
orange and brown of decay ; radiant dewdrops
sparkling everywhere, especially on
the spider-caught hazel bushes with the
last rusty nuts, or on the glossy haws and
their curling yellowed leaves. In a knot,
with whisper here and there as one and
another was left behind at his post,
stealthily progressed the little party, up
and down the slopes at the edge of the
hill, till at length only Charlie, Grey and
Geordie were left with Carstairs.

'• May I come with you, Ralph ? " asked
Georgie.

He raised his gun to his shoulder ; a
rabbit fell. Shots were heard from other
portions of the wood.

No ; I may not remain. Stay with
Meredith. Charlie, come on. I'll give you
a place where you will not add tailless
game to the bag."

Occupied with his own interests. Grey
had not heard what passed, nor had noted
the useless anger of Georgie and of Charlie
at their respective slights. Grey's beat was
along a half cleared path, and, truth to
tell, he only occasionally thought of George.
When the metallic-coloured bird made
a dash through the thinner trees towards
the sun, or even when the little white
tail of a rabbit frisked for a moment on

the sward, — it is to be feared that Grey
forgot all about the lady with him as he
blazed away with keen delight and much
success. He merely thought of her as
something to be avoided if he turned to
fire over her shoulder.

She was left to meditate in peace, if
peace is not a most inapplicable word for
her state of mind. Intense and burning
curiosity filled her being. Perhaps she
shrank from picturing her own wishes in detail.
Yet had anything been said ? What ?
To whom ?

Carstairs never came near them, of course.
Slowly they worked through the wood, and
at length emerged on a portion of a field
to which the lines ran, where all were to
meet. But it took over an hour to get
there, and all that time Georgie was in a

state of wild mental and bodily fidgets.
How lie hated Grey — self-gratulant with
his gun for company and his game for
object ! She could have taken his gun
from him and knocked him down with it
with great pleasure, as, in the open, he
rubbed his hands and ejaculated, "Capital;
there's nothing jollier in life than working
a wood like this! I suppose we must
wait for orders."

In effect, one after another likewise
emerged, and in the cart was hung the
spoil. Every one seemed in high spirits,
except Colonel Leigh, who, being a bad
shot (given to previous swagger and accompanying
self-excusing), now having his
wife with him, blamed her presence for
his misses. The poor little woman appealed
to Carstairs.

Come with us," said Grey, with kindness
not as gallantly expressed as it should
have been, perhaps ; " I really don't much
mind having two ladies."

"Settle it as you please," said Carstairs.
By experience I know that outsiders fare
ill for interference in matrimonial disputes.
No one thanks them."

Georgia would have liked to say seriously
what Colonel Leigh, a comparative
stranger, said in jest: "A leaf out of your
own book, Carstairs, eh ? "

"My wife is too good to quarrel with,"
answered Carstairs in a matter-of fact tone.

Listen to that, Herbert," said Mrs. Leigh,
approvingly.

By this time they were ready for another
start. " Same order," proclaimed Carstairs.


Except that I will come with you,
Mr. Meredith," added Mrs. Leigh.

Georgie said nothing, but, when once
more they were reduced to live, she went
forward with Charlie, who did not notice
that she was just behind him, and left
Mrs. Leigh with Grey.

Carstairs lifted his eyebrows on finding
her there, but said nothing. Posting Charlie,
he was about to proceed when she
boldly asserted, " I must speak to you
before you begin to shoot."

She could stand it no longer. She must
know where she was.

He walked on with her, but that was
all the help she got. She felt that Lis
heart was steeled towards her, and she
could not bear it.

WHAT SHE SAID FOR HERSELF.

Forbear ! No tongue can mend such pleadings.

Browning.

The first part of Georgie's punishment had
begun.

She felt his dislike as only a woman
who loves can feel dislike of herself. He
had turned against her. She tried to look
boldly interrogative. So did he, as if he
had no idea what she wanted at that inconvenient
moment.

"Have you anything to say?" he asked
coldly, as he saw her essaying to speak.

I gave you that letter yesterday," she
faltered.

Ah ! so you did, but you made a mistake.

You can tell Grey, if you like" — lie
paused, and she started ; he enjoyed her
terror — " tell Grey that there will be a
general election at once ; every one will
know it this afternoon. That was why
Wordsworth came. It is important news."

To you ? "

'' To you, I think. It may affect the
present arrangements for your marriage,
and," he added slowly and emphatically
some of your best friends would be glad
when you had a proper home of your own."

They exchanged looks. The tremor had
passed from her limbs, the pallor from her
face, and he saw that she was roused.

This is the end, then," she said slowly ;
*' I am very glad."

Yes, it is the end of your mischief-making.
Just listen to me, Georgie, and

VOL. III. 37

if you don't remember what I say it will bethe
worse for you. Bennett's tongue is
silenced. Wordsworth took with him to
town a letter to my lawyers. For you "

I am on a level with Bennett ? "

You made yourself her tool. Wordsworth
does not know to whom — I owed
you so much — but I had his permission to
give this fact : the letter was one addressed
to a woman with whom some years ago he
was on the verge of marriage. Had it
been an appeal to my wife it would have
proved your assertion. But he showed it
to her in confidence — she lost it — Bennett
found it. You, wishing to believe evil, saw
evil. That is all.'

You believe that story ? "

"I believe it."

"It must be your interest to do so."

Think what you please ! Your opinion
does not affect me. Of us for the future
you will see very little ; to . others you will
see that you must be silent for your own
sake. You dare not make han open enemy
of me."

She did not speak.

"You need not go on my account from
Temple. I shall not be there much, nor
shall I interfere with you. In public I
shall treat you as the cousin whom my
mother brought up from a child j and my
wife knows nothing of your schemes, nor
indeed of anything but my under-rating of
her worth."

My schemes ? Her worth ? "
"I came out to shoot, not to argue."
How brutal a man can be ! " she exclaimed.
" But you shall hear my side !

37—2

I am thankful it is at an end ! The sacrifice
has been on my side, not on yours.
What did you risk ? You, who threw me
over, when you knew you had made me
care for you — threw me over for, till then,
a stranger to you ! You, who after your
marriage sought me out again ; you, who
took advantage of your experience, jour
manhood, yes, and of my affection for you,
to estrange me from others for your sake ;
who made me reckless of everything else if
I could please you ! And I did please you :
I made you feel that you had lost by your
marriage to another ! Is it not true ? "

He was silent.

"You shall hear me. Self-respect? It
is not your fault I have any left — that I
can, before others at least, hold my head
high enough still. . . . No, you shall hear the

plain truth as to ourselves ; you, who have
taught me to amuse you by speaking plainly
of others ! ".

Recrimination can do no good now,"
he answered sullenly.

I know that. I do not quite understand
you as a devoted husband of that woman."
She laughed bitterly. " I do not understand
how I shall behave as the devoted wife of
Grey Meredith. Let that pass. Oh, Ralph ! ''
she cried, with a sudden change of tone,
think of it ! These nine years in which I
have cared for you, and you know it, and
whatever restraint there was in it all coming
from my side, not from yours ! And now," she
exclaimed, with eyes brilliant and cheeks
aflame, " by the mere renouncing of me you
think to 'live happy ever after.' You will
not do it. I have neither Wordsworth's

learning nor Yera's religion — your own
mother took care of that — but I know that
in this world there is something which pays
every one back."

She walked on. The reproaches of such
women, when angered and anguished, naturally
fall into the dramatic manner, the
rhythmic measure and the poetic thought.
Whatever Georgie had been to others, to
him she had been faithful, even in her fev.'-
self-restraints, and, as Carstairs had bent
the previous evening before the force of
character in the stern man, so in the
noontide he was subdued by the force
of emotion in the woman whose life in
many ways he and his had tried to
spoil.

Georgie," he said more gently, and
stopped — for what was there to say ? . . .

Unheeding the flight of time, they had
waited and slowly walked near the bottom
of the Black Copse, where, from a clearing,
a grass path leads over a stone arch from steep
bank to bank above the stream — almost a
river in force and depth — which runs fifteen
feet below. There it runs, among the
maroon-coloured leaves and glossy berries
of the elder, among trailing branches of
bramble, and among the rugged, rusty grass ;
a clump of thick foliage, holly trees and
brambles knit together, where younger wood
lead tried to intrude, forming a wall at one
side of the path for a few yards. The two
were effectually screened from sight ; their
'sears were accustomed to the shots; they were
both absorbed in the painful scene — the
power of which over both of them was
-scarcely indicated by their words, however

glowing ; . . . careless Charlie was coming up,
and no one warned Sir Ealpli. The keepers
had seen that, for some strange reason, he
was not shooting. The beaters had finished
with that part of the wood, nor would anyone,
had they feared the issue, have cared
to interfere with Sir Ralph. And so they
did not know ; and nearer and nearer came
Charlie, shooting whenever he saw a movement
in the brake. . . .

Georgie ! " said Sir Ralph, quite gently
for him, and he drew nearer to her, " Georgie,
we will turn over a new leaf. It was my
fault, but "

Behind the covert of the holly trees came
Charlie ; a bird got up ; right and left he
shot, fast as gun can be fired. . . .

In the darkness which fell with the
sting and a gush of warm blood over his

face, Sir Ealpli heard a shriek, a groan,
a fall — a splash — at his side.

The keeper, returning too late, said his
shout — his scream — followed the shots
instantly ; but to Car stairs — trying to
clear his eyes that he might see, with
the vision of the moment before so impressed
upon him that he still thought he
saw — it seemed hours before he called, an
eternity before he was aided.

Georgie," he cried then, " Georgie, are
you hurt too ? "

There was no answer. Georgie would
never answer. Whilst Charlie rushed up
and fell back, horror struck, the keeper's
whistle had summoned two men. They
were scrambling down the bank to pickup
the dead body, fallen over the arch
and floating on the stream.

Georgie ! " repeated Carstairs in agony
for her, and groping where she had stood
as he thought. They caught him at the
edge.

Get me water, fools, whoever you are,"
he exclaimed. "Let me wash away this
blood and see what has happened."

They got him some water : the vision of
Georgie as she was about to speak faded
into the darkness ; he thought that the
brown autumnal leaves were flitting about,
colours melted into chaos ; agony overpowered
him ; and whilst they brought up
the body of Miss Ley ton from below,
Sir Ralph knew nothing of what passed,
till he awoke to a hum of voices — -a
fierce pain — and still the awful darkness.
And through it all he heard that Georgie
was killed!

TWO EMPTY HANDS.

"There's some redemption in the doom of death,

That cuts us from new sins."

Ireland.

Vera was just preparing to leave Temple
to come with luncheon to the head of the
Black Copse when the terrible news
arrived. Waiting for the rest of the party,
she was standing in the sunshine in front
of the house, when she saw Charlie flying
across the field, leaping the wire fence,
rushing over the lawn and almost falling
on her as he stopped, breathless and agitated,
before the door.

He could not speak ; he pulled at her
long coat, and tried to utter his tidings,

but this teeth chattered as if it were cold,
though his forehead was beaded and his
eyes were wild with horror. This was
Charlie — careless, complacent Charlie ;
what was wrong ?

Charlie ! " exclaimed Vera, alarmed at
what she knew not. Simpson, the butler,
came to speak to Vera, and now put in
his word. "Is anything wrong, sir?"

Charlie did not answer. Others came
out : " Are you ill, Mr. Carstairs ? "

Come inside, Vera," he groaned.

Vera took him by the arm, and they
went into the drawing-room ; Charlie staggered
along. " Don't come with us," he
cried again.

For ever Vera would remember how
the room looked; for ever remember a tall
vase of yellow sunflowers mixed with

CHARLIE. 61

sprays of deep red leaves on a certain
little table, behind which was a gold embroidered
screen of cream silk, on which
then she noticed a great stain, though, or
because, the physical sickness of fright
was upon her.

"Is it Ralph?" she faltered.

Georgie," he groaned. " I said I'd
come to you. I did it," he buried his face
in his hands. "They'll bring her directly."

Georgie ? Tell me, Charlie; what is it?
An accident ? Is she hurt — shot ? "

"Yes. Killed. I did it," he said,
flinging out the monosyllables as she bent
down to hear.

Georgie ? Killed ? By you ? It can't be
true."

"Yes, it is. That's not all, Ralph's hurt
too. They've gone for doctors. I think

lie's blinded. Oh ! don't leave me," lie
cried in agony, and tried to clutch lier
deadly cold hand.

I will come back to you," she said in
incredulous, chilly horror, as she left him.
A beater had arrived, confirming the news,
and giving requests for preparations, but
the man knew or would tell no more to
Lady Carstairs. Sir Ralph and Miss Ley-ton
had been together, and she had been
killed, and he was hurt somehow — his
eyes, they did say, but no one knew until
the doctors had come.

Vera came back to Charlie after giving
a few directions. She was quite quiet —
stunned and almost incredulous.

Take me to Ralph," she said to
Charlie. " But first tell me all you know.
I must hear."

Begging her " to abuse him like a pickpocket,"
to do anything, not to stand and
look at him, Charlie recounted all he
knew till he came to the part where,
horror struck, he rushed forward to find
Ralph, his face covered with blood,
groping for Georgie who had fallen dead.

Vera fainted and had just recovered
consciousness when Simpson came in to
say that Sir Ralph was arriving.

They ]had fortunately met the family
doctor on the high road ; his servant had
taken necessary notes and telegrams ; all
had been put in train as far as possible ;
and now Mrs. Leigh, Grey and the doctor
came with Sir Ralph to Vera. He
walked into the hall — they led him — a
bandage concealed his face. A few quick
words told what was to be done till

further assistance arrived. And, meanwhile,

the doctor went back to superintend the

other party.

*****

Who does not know the strange suspension
of h'fe and activity after a catastrophe
? In such moments we realize our
mortality. All the issues of the struggles
are suddenly rendered insignificant by the
changed venue — the conditions of existence
are nothing when existence itself is threatened.


Restoration of the deprived faculty, relief
of the suffering, retention of those
slipping away from life — these seem to bethe
end of life.

The house party melted away from
Temple, so it seemed. There were sudden
partings, hasty departures, unsaid good-byes

— for the host was in danger and the
hostess in grief ; then there fell a great
stillness on the house, the servants moved
more noiselessly than ever, the sick room
seemed instantly established, and the strain
at once began : all seemed as if nothing
had ever been otherwise. And yet only
that morning Ralph had been in full health
except indeed for various symptoms of
overwork — and Georgie was glowing with
vigour ! It was perfectly impossible to
realize that in a moment — painlessly, irremediable
— the vivid flash of intelligence had
been extinguished. Georgie was dead.

The shock had on Vera a strange effect,
of psychological interest. Through those
first hours after she knew the worst she
was in supreme and acute exaltation of
spirit — that state of tension in which the

VOL. III. 38

spiritual aspects of life appear the only
facts of existence — a state in which, though
moving about more efficiently and acting
more decidedly than usual, such natures
aspire to look on things which are invisible.
Pangs of suffering seem to apply
motive power to those souls.

Through no ill feeling towards Georgie
was it that Vera did not yet think much
of her as a person lost from their lives.
The body " was a thing to be cared
for — Vera gave orders for that when it
was come to Temple — but it took some
little time for her to realize that it had
been of Georgie.

It was to be made ready for the inquest
'' purely formal, but necessary'

Presently Yera went to see that her
orders had been carried out. It was in

no malice that, even as she neared the
door, she thought that poor Georgie, like
Pope's Narcissus, would have exclaimed:
One would not sure look hideous when
one's dead."

The little spark in her own mind — the
only reaction-against the strain— of course
pained her by its flippancy, but when
she reached the door she was unable to
enter. The old servant from within,
Esther, came out and found her standing
there, white and shivering.

Vera was too intensely conscious of
spiritual life to have that physical fear of
the newly dead which overcomes many a
woman, even more intellectual and experienced.
But she was overpowered by a
sudden rush of feeling towards what had
been living, and the distress about her

38-2

husband, wliicli was very keen and real,
was for a moment suspended to give free
play to this emotion.

So when Esther would have stopped her,
deferentially. Lady Carstairs answered : " I
could not leave Sir Ralph before, but I
must go in now."

Shall I come in with you, my lady ? "
Vera shook her head, passed into the
room, and shut the door upon herself and
the dead.

Six hours since this had happened to
Georgie. Was it Georgie ?

The face was covered — the shot had
disfigured the face in piercing to the brain,
for she had received the full charge from
Charlie's second barrel. The face was
covered, but the two hands were " folded
on the breast ; " there was nothing but

whiteness to be seen, and just those two
still hands on the dull sheets.

Vera was standiucj looking at it, solemnly,
and wonderingly too, when there
was a soft tap at the door, and Esther
came back — some tiny thing in her hands.

Esther was an old servant indeed, a
woman of some sixty years of age, a " bit
of a character " as she liked to call herself;
a woman with a hard exterior, action
and speech, and an inwardly kind thought.
She was, with all her brusqueness, one of
those motherly-dispositioned unmarried women
whom other women often choose for
comforters, but she spoke with the downrightness
of her class, which knows no glosses
in such cases, nor accounts one lime better
than another for the telling of a painful
truth. No gossip was Esther in any serious

matter, but " what her ladyship had to
hear her ladyship must hear, and, for
what, why not then as well as any time
besides ? "

• In her old-fashioned cap and apron —
the second housemaid, not Esther, was for
show — Esther came near and woke her
lady from a solemn reverie.

In her black frock at the foot of the
white couch Vera was standing, her hands
half over her face.

It will be street as you wuU it,
my lady," said Esther, as Vera moved
from her attitude of prayerful thought.
I went by the doctor's orders. Pair bit
thing! there's na coot ho' she'll have
died ; 'tis a pity, seen' as she comes o'
gentry, that she canna bide without their
fash.' But that's neither here nor there,'

my lady'* as Vera, disturbed,' moved
dreamily towards the door. " I doubt I wuU
have to ask your ladyship, afore she stiffens,
if her rings should have come off.
I brought them to your ladyship."

Oh ! Esther, take them away. I can't
think of these things now. I must go
back to Sir Ealpli. Keep them safely for

—us."

But there's only herself to ask, my
lady. Miss Georgie's been at home here
all her life. I've kenned a wheen mair
than she'll have kenned a kenned — pair
teddy! Bygones is bygones, my lady,
and am I no' t' patten back Sir Ralph's
ring on her finger ? "

Vera was bewildered.

"I don't know what you mean, Esther." '^

"Truth, I had no call to trouble you/-

but, barring your rights, my lady, we
Should put back that ring on her finger,
or maybe, with her killed that gait and
a', she '11 no rest — Gude save us."

It was strange, that lingering superstition,
but Vera did not remark it
then. , . ,

"Diana fash yourself, my lady'* said
the old woman with the best of intentions.
*rit's all over now. But, ye ken. Miss
Georgie had a mind to be Lady Carstairs
herself."

It was the old story, but never so distinctly
told to Vera as now, in the
presence of those two dead hands on the
white stillness.

"You must not say such things, Esther.
Miss Georgie was like the daughter of the
house — and she lies there."

Then your ladyship will let me pit
back her ring. If T had minded it at the

time "

"What ring, Esther?"

This my lady. Miss Georgie got it
from" {i.e., had it given her by) "the
master just before his mother's death. It
was when he was making the most fuss of
her, ye ken. I have just been like one
of the family, and Miss Georgie said this
to me one day after Lady Carstairs died :
It won't be so long, Esther, before I'm
back again.' Those were the very words,
my lady, and we took it that it was all
settled, and then we heard in a few
months that Sir Ralph was a-marrying a
Miss Ludlow, ]knnett and me never were
friends at the best of times, but we were
together then, and she told me how hard

Miss Georgie took it. You was no way

to blame, my lady,, but "

"Esther," interrupted Vera, "I should
not have listened so long. And yet I am
glad to know. But do not speak of
it."

Esther was offended.

"It was but right you should ken how
it was, my lady, for Miss Georgie's sake ;
but I'm no "talker, my lady."

"I am sure you are not, Esther; but
leave me for a few minutes alone. Give
me that ring. Yes, yes, I understand."

Again Vera was left alone with the
dead.

There was the ruby ring ; inside was
graven the intertwined initials of her husband
and Georgie, with a date of a day.
a few months before her own marriage.;

No one thought of Grey's engagement
ring. Esther had only brought back this.

When Esther returned to the room,
after Vera had left, that symbol was on one
of the white hands.

Take it, Georgie," Vera had exclaimed
; " take it ! keep it in your death
as you kept it in your life. God ! I
knew what misery he has inflicted on
me. I did not know that she had a
right to expect that I should be miserable.
But you would forgive me, Georgie — you
know I did not know."

Vera had then forgotten so much in
Georgie's character. Vera only realized
that she had taken Georgie's place, and
indeed the girl had been cruelly treated
by Ralph Carstairs.

Vera had sunk down by the bed with a

moan of anguish ; the reaction had begun,
she could not turn away from those two
white hands protruded from the folds. To
her dying day Yera would never forget
them — all by themselves.
- " There, Georgie," she said aloud, without
raising her head ; " there's your ring !
But you need not have tried to make me
more miserable than I was in my marriage."


The door was softly opening as she
slipped the ring on to the still flexible
finger ; thus speaking, beudhig over her
strange task of sentiment, almost feeling
with Esther that she was appeasing the
dead, Vera did not hear the hesitating step
of Paul Wordsworth. He saw at once
that she was almost hysterical, and spoke
in a quiet, firm tone.

They said you were here. It is not
good for you to stay longer. Come ! you
are wanted."

She looked up at him as if she scarcely
comprehended — with wild eyes and brilliant
cheeks.

PHILOSOPHER OR PHYSICIAN?

How each has a story in a dispute, and a right one, too,
and both are right or wrong as you will." — Thackeray.

Seeing her state without quite understanding
it, taking her hand reverentially
to make her come away, when out in the
corridor Paul Wordsworth began to speak
to her, as to a child, in short sentences
and in steadied tones.

"I have come to be with you till tomorrow.
I came back as soon as I could
when Grey's telegram arrived. I have
seen Carstairs."

"I thought he was resting. They said
I was to go. I did not leave him till
then."

I know. You have had some terrible
hours. I saw the doctor first."

"I must go back. I can't leave him in
that state."

Just after she spoke another meaning
was apparent to her, and she continued, to
him irrelevantly, but he saw she was not
herself. " No, I can't ; I can't. Please go,
Mr. Wordsworth. You shouldn't come tous
when you are so busy. Oh ! I must goto
him."

Isle panted for breath with two or three
little tearless sobs, and sank down on a
couch at the end of the corridor "Please
leave me to myself," she reiterated.

Seeing she was in earnest he walked a little
further down, not looking at her, but he
heard her rise suddenly and then fall
back again, crying.

He returned, and almost lost this self-command.
He could not bear to see her
thus; but he did not betray himself.
Only the tone, the touch, the eyes,
were almost a revelation of what he felt
which then she never thought of. She
was only struggling for self-command —not
thinking of Paul — except that his presence
was not instinctively oppressive to her —
il was every circumstance of her life which
pressed on her heart and memory.

"I am better — quite well. There! I am
going."

Just then the doctor passed, saw, and
questioned on, the state of strain.

You have a long time before you.
Lady Carstairs. Sir Ralph is going on
favourably, I trust, but it is a serious
accident in his present state of health.

You have eaten nothing since your early
breakfast. Sir Ralph does not want you
now. I am going to ring for your
maid and give her some orders about
you."

When this was arranged, the doctor returned
and continued a conversation interrupted
on the first arrival of Wordsworth.
Dr. Smith had been at college with Wordsworth,
they had lately renewed their friendship,
and as far as the present situation
of affairs was concerned they spoke with
perfect frankness and mutual confidence.

I was going to give you my opinion,"
said Dr. Smith, following Paul into the
Carved Parlour. " It is of course subject
to modifications. I have no doubt that lie
will be blind. The shot passed behind both
eyes in a peculiar manner — / only re-vol.

UI. 39

member one similar case — and the sight is
absolutely destroyed. But "

That is bad enough ; surely there is
nothing more ? "

I fear so. He has been in a bad state
of health for some time."

"I never heard of it. He always seemed
to me particularly strong — and, you may
have heard, we are on the eve of a fight."

"He probably would have broken down.
But the point is how to keep him quiet
to-night. By the way, he does not know
that he is blind ; nor does Lady Carstairs
know his state — yet. They have had
shocks enough for one day."

"I came here to see if I could be of
use, but I fear that my presence is connected
with exciting subjects, and, if I am
of no use, I mu.'^t go from here to-ni^^ht."

If you can stay, do so," said the doctor,
pursing up his lips, and standing with his
shaggy, long brown and grey beard askew
on his chest. He seemed half the height
of Paul, but as he looked up he appeared to
be measuring the statesman physically and
morally. After a pause the doctor's beard
was straightened, and his eyes met Paul's
with grave trust.

'• There is no lack of surgical skill in the
case of people like the Carstairs ; but it
sometimes happens that such are far more
isolated in their sorrows than the unknown
and even the penniless. The news will be
telegraphed through the world ; but who is
there who can control Sir Ralph or console
Lady Carstairs ? It isn't help, it is personal
sympathy that she wants. She is

very young, and not strong ; she has no

S9 -2

relations, nor has he, and the person we
want does not exist for them. Mr. Meredith
is useless and too young ; Mr. Carstairs
is raving on his own account. As
for those flighty women who left here
to-day they are idiots. By the way, it
would not be bad to have Miss Bentley
here. I know Lady Carstairs can stand her
when she is ill."

Yes," said Wordsworth, " I will see if
that cannot be arranged. What else can
we do for them ? "

Whilst the doctor was talking he had
made up his mind. They were partly
talking still Vera should come back, partly
for the sake of serving their friends.

You, and only you, can help us tonight,"
said the doctor suddenly'.

''If 1 can, I will slay."

"Yes, you will do — if 3-011 understand.
13ut not a word to Lady Carstairs." -^

"I will obey all your orders— anything
to help them. But you speak and have
spoken as if it were more serious than I
anticipated."

It may be. Sir Ralph must and should
keep quiet to-night, but he will not and
cannot. I want you to be with him if I
can in no way get him to sleep. When
he questions you, if he questions you,
speak of his accident as if you apprehended
only a temporary loss of sight, engage his
attention in any possible way "

But, pardon me, is not exciting his
brain to be avoided ? "

If we can get him rest we will, if not
we must distract him from his present
current of thought ; to-day, political interest

seems insignificant, and at this
moment if he knew he were blind I doubt
if he would care."

The ej'Cs of the two men met. "Under
other circumstances," continued the doctor,
"I should feel it a breach of confidence,
but I do not speak from any confidence,
but from observation, to tell you this. I
have known the whole family "from my
boyhood. Lady Carstairs I have only seen
since her marriage ; she is a charming
woman; but I have had good reason to
believe that Sir Kalph's affections were previously
engaged. To-night he is agonized,
not only with pain, but with remorse."

But," said Wordsworth, " forgive me.
This is not ray business, and, though after
you have thought it right to speak on the
subject it is difficult to say it "

I am aware of that. But, if in speaking
to you, in trusting you ; whom I have
known to be trustworthy for five and
twenty years now, Wordsworth ; if in
making you the confidant of my surmises,
I can prepare help for what may occur, I
am doing no wrong. No one else can do
the work you may have to do to-night."

Yes. I anticipate no action at all from
any soporific we dare to give to Carstairs.
No doctor nor parson could control him.
There is some chance in the influence of
one whom he respects ; in your presence
he will exercise some self-restraint. And,
if Lady Carstairs is there — from what he ,
has said just now — I feel sure irreparable
mischief would be done to both of them.
To avoid blundering it is essential that you .

should comprehend the situation. He cannot
hear her to he with him now. I think I
hear her coming. Will you put yourself
under my orders, follow my hints, and
let us get over to-night ? To - morrow.

comes down. But both surgery and

medicine in this case need moral help.
Will you help?"

1 will obey you implicitly."

I shall return to my husband now,"
said Vera entering. " I have taken off my
heavy dress and followed all your directions."


My dear lady, you have not yet obeyed
my orders. I am going back to Sir Ralph,
and Mr. Wordsworth is going to take you
downstairs to see poor Mr. Carstairs and
get something to eat. And then I want to
speak to you before you go into the sickroom.

Trust me, Lady Carstairs. I know

what I am doing, and we are acting for

the best".

♦ ♦ * * *

The doctor was right. There were grave
moral and dangerous medical aspects of the
surgical case. Apparently he was wrong
about Yera's presence. Sir Ralph had
exclaimed in the afternoon with relief when
he knew that she had left the room, but
he imperiously demanded that she should
return before the doctor had had opportunity
of explaining to her, as he intended
to put it, conventionally, that in certain
cases of excitement the presence of the
most dearly loved may be hurtful to the,
in that, eccentric patient. So the sickroom
was not forbidden to her, though for
her sake, whose case was not that of the

beloved and loving wife, this would have
been no bad thing.

As the evening wore on it was evident
that, apparently nerveless man as he had
been. Sir Ralph was suffering from an acute
nervous attack. Denied by nature — if not
by manhood — the relief of tears; denied by
surgical accident the relief of solitude or
of exercise ; denied any consolation from
without by the circumstances of the case,
Sir Ralph was in agony of mind such as,
perhaps, he had never experienced in all
his previous life. He had been stunned and
sullen during the day, now he awoke to
full feeling and to making others feel his
mood. Perhaps it irritated him all the
more that he had prided himself on his
Stoic indifference to pain (such men are
indifferent to pain — when others suffer, at

least), and now his only resource was to
attribute his suffering to that pain, or
rather to let it be so attributed by those
who chose. Needless to say he did not
even make that apology to himself.

You know what is the mood of a spoilt
suffering child? Add to the petulance ol
the child the passionate, overbearing egotism
of the man, the power of the fully-developed
nature vented in evil-tongued
words and ceaseless contradictory commands
you know then what was Carstairs that
night.

By midnight he consented to take a
soporific under the doctor's orders, but
before that time he steadily refused it. It
has been said that we owe much of our
self-respect to our sight. Whether he
could have controlled himself had he perceived

Paul, 1 do not know; he did
not, though lie knew that Paul was
there.

It was bitter humiliation to Vera that
Paul should stay, and should see and hear
how Carstairs treated her — rather worse
than his valet, which at that time was saying
a good deal. But once Vera said to
Paul in an undertone, "Do go to rest now.
It is very good of you to try to share our
suffering "

"But," interrupted Carstairs, " I'll thank

you not to meddle. Who'd miss yoxi, if
you went ? "

He had previously refused to let her

go-come,

come," said the doctor returning,

Sir Ralph is brusque, but you must excuse
that when he is in pain, Lady Carstairs.

Suppose you take his advice and go for
the present to rest yourself. I'll call you
if anything is required."

Vera caught Paul's glance at her husband,
but when Paul looked at her there
was simply a sign that she should follow
the doctor's suggestion.

"I want the room quiet, and then Pll
see if I can't make you more comfortable,
Sir Ralph," answered the doctor to another
growl.

Wordsworth, you stay a bit with me, as
soon as all these idiots have gone. Quiet ?
Hear, hear ! " the sufferer exclaimed.

So, whilst the doctor completed his orders
for the night, having seen Vera after she
left the room, Wordsworth was left alone
with Carstairs.

Carstairs seemed to regain his courtesy a

little, and began to eagerly question Wordsworth
on the coming election, and the composition
of the Cabinet in case of success.
The eagerness did not last, and his attention
seemed to wander.

I am afraid that you are suffering
terribly, Carstairs," Wordsworth ventured
to say, for, though shocked at the revelation
of character, he most deeply pitied
Carstairs in his present plight.

"I am suffering, Heaven knows," broke
from the lips of Carstairs. Then he tried
to take a drier tone. "It is a bore for
you and us, this happening. My seat is
safe, I should think ; one never knows.
We shan't lose that, but I shan't be able
to assist other people. IIow long do
you suppose it'll be before my eyes get
right ? "

Don't worry yourself to-night about
that," answered Paul evasively. " Keep
quiet — it will be all the better for you."

Keep quiet ! Where's Charlie ? " he said
abruptly.

I don't know. Poor boy, he is terribly
upset. Do you want to see him? " asked
Paul, and then he recollected that Carstairs
would never see any one again.

I see him ? I'd kill him if he came
my way to-night."

He used other words of vituperation, and
then the doctor returned. For a time there
was comparative quiet, and, as has been
said, Carstairs then welcomed the suggestion
of artificial sleep.

Meanwhile Vera went to Charlie, and after
staying with him for an hour, returned softly
to the dressings-room of the sick-chamber.

where she was met by the doctor, and
told to go to rest, as Sir Ralph seemed
quieter.

So he was for a time.

But he did not sleep at all. It seemed
a long unending night. Quite silently,
about two o'clock in the morning, Vera
slipped into the room as arranged, and
Paul Wordsworth quietly went out. The
doctor had said that for her own satisfaction
she could come, but told her if
possible not to make her presence known.
So at first Carstairs did not know that
his wife was there.

He moaned and groaned, and tossed
from side to side, and muttered to himself.
About four o'clock he started up in
bed, looking ghastly with his bandaged
head in the half light.

Who's there ? " he said with a fearful
shudder.

The doctor rose from his chair, and with
one hand motioned to Vera to be silent.
Asleep," he formulated with his lips.

And so they watched him struggling
with the vision— whatever it was — which
floated before his brain. The struofs^le did
not last two minutes by the clock, and
it ended in a hoarse sound, " Georgie,
Georgie ! " lie fell back exhausted and
trembling, and suddenly awoke.

Who's there ? " he said again indifferent
tones. lie was conscious now.
The doctor signed to the wife, and she
came quietly and laid her hand on his,
following the doctor's signs.
I— Vera ! " she faltered,
lie lay still for a moment or two

VOL. III. 40

holding her hand, and then he flung it
from him : " I remember it all now. Go
away, Vera. Is the doctor here ? "

Yes."

Where have they put Miss Leyton's
body ? " asked Carstairs quietly, for the
first time mentioning her.

In the old school-room," answered Vera.

I will go there now. I must. It is
my only hope. All this night, and just
now, I have seen her — I must see her
dead. Have I not a little sight ? Just

once."

I cannot let you lift the bandages,
Sir Ralph. Wait till daylight comes and
then "

If my eyes are bandaged, why wait
for the daylight ? With help or without
I will go."

Will it harm him ? " said Vera.

The doctor shrugged his shoulders.

What does it matter to you if it did,
or to me either ? "

Wait a moment, Ralph."

She drew the doctor into the dressing-room.


Would it hurt him— his sight ? "

The doctor looked at her. " My dear
lady," he whispered, " nothing can save
his sight, and for the rest we must leave
him to nature."

I will take you there, Ralph," she said
on her return, trying to take in what
the doctor had said.

She was again in a state of spiritual
exaltation, and the events seemed to passas
in a dream.

Not you," said Carstairs, but as he

40-2

felt lier by this side lie accepted lier
aid.

The three traversed the passage till they
came to the door. The familiar places
looked weird and ghostly as the lamps
burnt low, but weirdest and strangest of
all was it to Vera to be leading him
through the dusk as the words rang in
her ears — '* Nothing can save his sight."

When considerate people speak contrary
to their considered resolve it often seems
as if they had done so under special
guidance, for it made all the difference to
Yera's conduct when she knew that he
would be always blind. If she had meant
to leave him when he was well, she never
would — never could — do so now !

'• Leave us together," she said to the
doctor as thc}^ unlocked the door.

There was an entrance from the bedroom,
and in that room Esther had determined
to watch that night with her Bible
and a bunch of half-withered rowan berries
preserved for some occult reason of her
own from the August splendours. But
Esther did not reveal herself — she was
asleep, after all, in the arm-chair when
they came in, and as she awoke she was
afraid to discover herself.

So Sir Ralph and Lady Carstairs thought
themselves alone as the doctor withdrew,
observing that he would be within call
in the passage. Very likely he guessed
something of the complex emotion of the
scene.

She is there," said Vera in a strangely
steady voice. " You know the old schoolroom
and how it looks. She is on the

couch ; it is put where the table usually
is ; all white ; there are a few flowers
there, and only her hands are seen ; the
room is nearly dark, there are two
candles."

She thought he must want to know.

Where is the door ? " he asked.

■' Here, behind us."

He began to grope his way to the
couch, but would have stumbled over it
had not Vera caught his hand.

I understand. Ralph, let me help
you ! " she pleaded.

She caught his hand.

Where is she ? " he said passively.

Here."

"Put my hand on hers."

It was done. The strong man shuddered
as he touched the two white hands with

this burning palm. He gently — very gently
felt them, and he came to the ring.

What's this ? "

The ring you gave her," Vera whispered.
" I put it there."

There was silence.

Did you do it to mock me — to mock
her ? " he said angrily, but in a low tone,
and Yera could not answer, No ; she had
never thought of this suggestion, and if
she had thought of her husband's knowing
it at all it was with some faint
belief that even he must recognize her
magnanimity.

'-' What did 3 ou do it for ? " he said.
Speak."

They both took for granted that the
symbol was known.

I did it to show I forgave her for

all the unhappiness she caused me," Yera
answered at last on this pressure.

You forgave her ? She caused you
unhappiness ? Did you cause her none ? "

Ralph, I was — I am— your wife."

I know that," he said in his old
sneering tone. " So did she. Why did
you come between us ? "

Oh, Ralph ! " cried Yera, " did I know
anything about her when I married you ? "

And what do you know now ? That
I know how I behaved to her? That
she, not you, was the woman [ loved.
You fool ! that is all you can know. And
there is nothing more to know. For her
sake, not for yours, I tell you that. Yes,
you are my wife."

"Hush! oh, do not speak like this in the
presence of the dead," said Yera, to whom

the words were terrible ; those words wliicli
aLo for the moment seemed to desecrate
the dead, whom she could see — not he !

Ralph, you came here to see her.
Will you listen to me ? Do not make it
harder for us now. You will need me or
I could not stay with you."

Need you ? Never. Don't touch me ! ''

Vera knelt beside the bed, just out of
reach of his hand. He stood and thought ;
she knelt and prayed.

God help us I he is blind ! " she repeated
over and over again. There was
nothing new to her in sorrow or in scorn,
and as she thought of him, more as a
suffering man than as her abusive husband,
it was easier — a little easier, perhaps —
for her to forget herself. ^' God help us
he is blind."

CHARLIE.

lis went like one that hath been stunned,
And is of sense forlorn,
A sadder and a wiser man

He rose the morrow morn." — Coleridge.

The day of Georgie's funeral was one of
gloom within and without. The jury three
days before had respectfully and hastily
enough viewed the body, and had returned
a verdict of death by misadventure. On
the suggestion being made that Anice
Bentley should come, Vera had said " it
was a pity to bring any one else into such
a house," but had not resisted Charlie's
offer to write and ask Anice if she would
come. Anice came, and apparently it was
more for Charlie's benefit than for that of

Vera, whose time and thoughts wei'e so
occupied by the turn of her husband's
illness — for illness it had become — that she
knew nothing of Charlie's experiences. He
seemed, indeed, sullen and stupid, lying in
the library with a novel which he did not
read, breaking out into sudden fits of
anger at trifles, yet not resisting when
Ralph sent to say that his brother was
not to leave Temple.

Anice found him thus. He was her own
age, but she had always looked upon him
as much younger. Both of them, however,
under especially youthful manners had concealed
a good deal of thought supposed to
belong to a more advanced period of life.
Charlie took this trouble very hardly, and
indeed it was no light one — out of carelessness
and wilfulness to blind a brother

and to kill his cousin. It was, as lie
phrased it, "awful bad luck," but shooting
accidents often arrive at the exceptionally
painful. He had, except to Vera on the
fatal evening, said no word of contrition or
apology : what was there to say ? He had
given his evidence in the same sullen way.
He did not seem to care at all what was
thought. He never asked after Ealpli,
but listened eagerly to what was said about
his brother.

On the first afternoon that the blinds
had been drawn up, Anice came into the
library by the further door. Behind one
of the screens of books, Charge was Ij'ing
on a couch. She had entered ver' softly,
and she heard him sob. Lie did not know
what to do, but with a groan he moved,
and after a moment or two she went to

him. Tears were on his dark eyelashes,
but he spoke gruffly at first.

What are you doing ? "

Going out. Come with me," she answered.
"We shall just have time before
tea."

Time before tea. I daresay ! The
routine is awful. Everything foes on must
the same, and a lot of servants gossiping
and gaping everywhere. I'll tell you what
it is, Anice, I'll go off to the backwoods
as soon as I'm free — I don't care where.
My life's done for."

She moved to the window, and he followed.
She didn't know what to say.

Earning again," he said. " It always
rains now."

Not always. There's a rainbow."

I daresay. ' There was an awful rainbow

once in heaven ! ' We had to get up
Keats for that exam. : I failed in that, in
everything, except in hurting people. Oh!
I know all about it. Don't bother, Nancj^ !
I'm a brute — that's all ! I'm like this day
the worst thing out."

Even that is getting brighter," said
Anice. " I wish I knew what to say to
you, Charlie. I feel such a lot of things
I can't say. It must be terrible for you."

It is that'' said Charlie. " Are you
ofoinof out if it is fine ? Wait a moment."

He came back with cap and an umbrella.
This is bif^o^er than yours," he declared,
opening the window.

Oh ! how lovely ! " Anice exclaimed.

The air was mild, the ground steaming
with the heavy rain, which still dropped
once in a while. The two were on the

terrace. Opposite the rainbow, in the
west on the slaty background of the sky,
there appeared a marvellous trembling
glow, which grew more and more golden
behind the trees to which they turned ;
these blacker and blacker each moment.
Going towards the shrubbery and passing
on the tree-shaded path, a dull heavy
sound, continuous, alternated with the tiny
sharp drip-drop nearer at hand. But they
hastened on to get a better view of that
fair beauty ; at least Anice did, and Charlie
followed her. The little iron gate creaked
sharply, and the drops rattled fast on the
umbrella. They came to the opening on
the lake and stood by its edge. It was
autumn, and the leaves had but a semblance
of life, though on the lake there
was, owing to the autumnal mildness, a new

growth of vegetation ; in this corner the
water was covered by an emerald green
weed — dully bright — and round it the dank
coarse grass and withered reeds. But the
skv seemed to be trembling and vibration
in its glory. A great curtain of slate had
rolled up, and its hue was of mat-gold, a
rich, dead hue — gold, but not that gold
sparkling as it mingled with the silver
over the soft pale, pale green just above
the misty uplands. It was a rare effect of
loveliness. And the light moved and
played in one great mass — there was no
sun, but all had become sunset-sunlight —
a soft bloom over everything, yet a bloom
with metallic brilliancy of colour !

The full round clouds turned brown and
orange, then a brilliant tawny red ; the
glow crept up the sky ; 3x4. at their feet

Anice always heard the little drops falling
one by one into the dully bright lake of
emerald green.

Perhaps this effect lasted ten minutes.
But before that they began to move and
to speak.

What are you thinking of, Anice ? " he
said, struck by the girl's face, transfigured
as the light fell on her countenance, with
its sweet seriousness.

I was thinking of you," she answered
directly. " I don't think that you have a
right to go away."

Why not ? I have not a right to stay
here, if you mean that. I don't know
which will be harder — to be blamed or to
be pitied. Besides, I can't stay and know
that Ralph is pitching into Vera double
for what she can't help."

VOL. III. 41

But that's it. I don't see how you are
to leave Yera alone to bear it. Do you
know how bad it is ? I think they are
afraid of telling you, but Vera thought
you ought to know."

He's not dying too ? " exclaimed Charlie
in horror.

No, no, no ! not now. But his sight
will never come back."

They never told me ; why didn't they ?
Does Yera know ? " he said thickly.

Yes, on the first day she knew. It is
terrible for both of them."

Does he know ? "

Yera thinks he suspects it. I only
heard yesterday."

Then what do you think 1 ought todo
? You thought of something ? "

I don't know, Charlie. But it seems tome

that you oughtn't to leave Yera to do
everything herself. It isn't as if — well, you
know he has always been a little rough ;
she never says anything, but one can see.
For you, his only brother, to go wandering
off — giving her extra worry about you, too,
for she is so fond of you, you know — for
you to go away selfishly ! It would be
selfish ! Of course it is not my business,"
said the girl.

She has friends. Why, there's Grey
and Wordsworth, besides the rest."

You are a boy ! " she said with girlish
scorn. "Those aren't her brothers. It is
your place, in any case, to do what you
can. Make yourself of some use in the
world. There will be heaps of things that
Sir Ralph will want by-and-by."

As if he'd let me do them ! "

41-2

If lie is helpless he must let things be
done by some one, and he'd learn to trust
you, perhaps," she said doubtfully.

"Nobody ever trusts me," said Charlie
involuntarily ; " but I haven't been worth
it."

You will be worth it," she answered
with full sympathy.

I don't mind trying if you'll believe in
me ! " he said suddenly, with a great sigh
of relief. " I say ! the rain is coming on
again, in a waterspout or two. You'd
better cut in as hard as you can ! " he
exclaimed.

Thus the more or less tragic conversation
ended in a run similar to those enjoyed
when Charlie and Anice's brother,
and Anice herself, ten years before had
spent a convalescent holiday together.

Charlie had come for a few days, and remained
with his fellow-patients in town
and country for a few weeks. They had
always been good comrades. From that
day at Temple, whose morning had seen
the funeral of Georgie Leyton, Anice
Bentley entered into Charge's life in quite
an unwonted fashion, of which she herself
had no idea, though on her part from that
date even in thought she ceased to patronize
him.

^ t^ 0^J^

NOT GOOD ENOUGH.

There wasn't no meaning in our clasp —
Half this, half that, all shilly-shally."

Bigelow Papers.

What is worse than a gloomy day in the
country ? Without doubt to many minds
and to all so far as the physical atmosphere
is concerned — a foggy day in town.
Yet, muffled as are the sounds of traffic,
suggestive as are the sights of misery, depressing
even unto the personally well-off
as is the yellow murkiness, for those born
to be gregarious animals there were these
three charms in London that doleful day
in January : " people," politics and pressure
not of country attainment.

It was distinctly exciting to some people,
that damp, drizzly, doleful day. By the
end of January, in the year following the
accidents at Temple, it was well known
that ministers would resign on the opening
of Parliament, in which they would be iii
a hopeless minority. Needless, therefore, to
say that their most probable replaces had
then a pretty good notion as to Who should
go to What. Needless also to state that
the newspapers knew more of Cabinet
doings and undoings and of the Opposition
programme, not only than had as yet
transpired but, than was known to have
occurred by any of those whose names
were so freely bandied about.

Every man who was anything or nothing,
who had friends or enemies, or both,
who possessed brains or any probable substitute

in the way of birth or bluster, who
had claims, or none, to party allegiance,
was, more or less voluntarily, waiting upon
events. The elections had occurred in
November. Since then the Opposition had
known what was before it ; it had been
dressing its ranks ; causing here and there
a disinterested (?) triumphant Incapable to
resign a safe seat in order to bring into
the House an excluded politician who, of
more merit, had suffered defeat where the
Government had its supporters ; perhaps, in
overlooking its party pledges, as usual, to
see which of them made to what interest
might demand attention last ; perhaps trying
to foresee how much blame might be
put on the side which would go out if
the side which came in saw no chances of
fulfilling those impossible promises made so

gaily to impractical people ; certainly it
was occupied in genuine preparation,
official and personal, for the work of the
coming year under the new Cabinet.

Grey Meredith, M.P., had known as little
of struorople as miofht fall to man in his

CO D

short political life, and now he was on
the winning side. His was a safe seat :
swayed partially by the victories elsewhere,
illogically certain to produce more victories
; partially by the romance of his
broken betrothal, irrelevantly as that got
about and was improved upon by masculine
constituents and feminine influence ;
the electors gave him the easiest possible
victory.

He looked very well in manly mourning
; handsome and melancholy, he put
forth very gracefully the most general

commonplaces. Perhaps too easy winning
made the prize light, and if he had had
greater struggles he would have appreciated
the position attained ; but Grey's
head had been turned and was still turning.


Always extremely susceptible to woman's
favour — for it is needless to say that what
he told Vera was only true with modifications
which at the time he really forgot
always gaining, and giving himself over
for the time to, woman friends, the last
year's experience had opened his eyes.
He thoroughly appreciated what his unexpected
wealth had brought him; he
began to acknowledge to himself that his
real goal in exertions had been personal ;
the new luxurious life opening before one
pre-eminently fitted to be a pet of society

now made him look with uncomprehending,
and so far as comprehending, pitying vision
on the enthusiasms of Paul Wordsworth. He
began to have a feeling of passive rebellion
against the work which he had been
glad to share, and his share of actual
work had been light indeed.

In this mood he waited in Wordsworth's
rooms. Their owner entered once more in
full energy. Paul Wordsworth loved a
fight, and loved work ; for its power he
was keen for place, and all was going well
with the party. Though Paul Wordsworth
was really a first-class litterateur and a
second-class politician, for that very reason
he seemed to care for the sicklier offspring
of his brain, more interested apparently in
his sometimes ineffective local speeches
than in his nationally stimulating books.

Perhaps there was always the idea that if
he could exert the same force in politics as
in literature he would do more good. In
any case his keen interest in politics and
his genuine delight in party triumphs was
a remarkable characteristic of the man.

"I do not mind saying that I am tired
out," said Paul, as, after the short greeting,
a constraint seemed to fall upon the
two men. " However, it is worth it.
Every one has been seen now. Z.'s little
game is over, and the first move of X.
will be the safe old king's pawn. For the
bigger pieces we rarely have had stronger
men."

I presume you are the rook — straightforward
heavy thing it is ! I can't fancy
you as prime minister — a piece which
moves in any direction you know."

Grey then thought to himself it was a
pity to waste a rejoinder on Paul, especially
in an impromptu, unfinished state. Paul
smiled slightly, but he had not asked Grey
to come, on purpose to talk things over,
only to exchange phrases. Both these
men were, however, phrase-makers — the
neat form natural in the most impulsive
of moments.

You know what I want to say," began
Paul, as he drew his chair to the fire.
Do you or do you not wish to be my
secretary ? "

How do you mean ? "

Paul, who hated to give private rebukes,
though careless about public hits, braced
himself, and made quite a little speech to
the lounging Grey.

Your working or your not working

has hitherto been of Httle moment to me.
You have not done badly anything I really
wished you to do ; that was all I required.
You received a good political introduction ;
you were less tied than any man who ever
pretended to be a secretary at all ; I never
refused you liberty at any time of the year
or indeed any time of the day. Whatever
pressure fell ,on us, you did not share it,
and no one knew that you did not. In
fact, so far, it has been an arrangement of
mutual convenience ; you certainly have
been an ornament to my rooms at times,
and perhaps occasionally my rooms have
been of some use to you."

You are very severe, chief ! "
answered Grey, assuming lightness, though
he was stung by the light lash. " But I
think I did what you wished up to a few

weeks ago. I acknowledge that I have
not been fit for much lately. One cannot
but be affected by such shocks as — I
experienced."

It is not your sorrows, but your consolations,
which I object to," said Paul,
whose patience had been sorely tried of
late by Grey's making capital of a trouble
which in reality he had felt so little that
he could talk it over with the first comer.
Paul knew, accidentally that Grey was not
pining in loneliness, but enjoying himself
and his romance about his blighted hopes
in various feminine companies — when he
could do no work."

I don't understand you," answered
Grey.

Well, we won't quarrel about that,"
said Paul, with a softening: of the voice fora

moment. Paul was really fond of Grey,
even though he now had learnt his limitations.
" Apart from our relationship,
Grey, apart from all other considerations,
bluntly put, the question is this : Besides
other officials, I want, so to speak, a
reliable servant ; do you want a master ?
Whoever shares my life in office must
be perfectly reliable and absolutely unselfish
; the other qualifications you have
so nearly that you would do for me. I
would rather have you. Grey, to help
with social matters than any man I know.
I would not put another in your place
without asking you if you would help mein
all I have for you to do. Will you
be my right hand, Grey ? If not," he continued,
as Grey did not answer, " if not,
break off now ; let us simply be relations

and friends, I will never say one word
of my disappointed hopes for you ; you
know what I offer you."

Grey was silent. He muttered at last,
*' I don't know what to say. Of course I
expected to be with you, but "

Paul looked steadily at the handsome

but weak face— weak as compared with

his own. " You would like to be released ;

you are not of statesman's stuff Say it

out ! I don't blame you. God knows, the

life is heart-breaking if you've got a heart

to break ! I don't know how any one

endures it who can be free. . . . Work with

me ; so far as one man can promise

another opportunity to show what he is

made of, you shall have it ; the rest is

only to be gained by yourself. We toil

after an ideal, in our better moments ; if
VOL. III. 4-J

you can't see that clearly enough, or
can't make the deception strong enough,
give it up ! " He was walking up and
down the room now.

You see, what you want is so ideal,
all one's devotion, which is a tax, arid so
very practical ; all one's time, even dinner
time very often ! so that — Well ! I'm not
fit for even your ornamental secretaryship
as you put it ! I'd better give it up, for
you'd never forgive me if I failed sou at
a pinch."

No," answered Wordsworth simply, but
gravely, " I never should." Then he said
no more, but stood looking into the fire.

Grey got up from the lounge. " Don't
think I'm ungrateful, you know, chief."

I never thought about that at all,"
he answered in the same quiet ways

But I did," answered Grey, laying his
hand affectionately on Wordsworth's arm.
You've been awfully good to me, old
fellow, these two years, and I am a brute
to throw you over. But it is really in
your own interest."

Oh ! I know that," rejoined Paul.

Chief," said Grey, with one of his most
winning smiles, " you are rather awful
when you are eloquent, but when you
answer shortly like that — words fail
me!"

I am vexed," said Paul. " However,
it always was a mistake for a master to
care for the interests of his 'prentice : I "
know exactly what you'll become ! . . But I
am not keeping my word."

He walked away. Grey went after him.
I wouldn't have begun it for the world.

42-2

But I doit care for the fag of the life ;
so it is best to give it up. Of course
I'll do my duty by my constituents, and
if you'll let me I'll help you in anything
of which my weakness is capable. There
are lots of things which no one can do
but me, I'm sure."

In spite of his eight and twenty years,
Grey had for Paul Wordsworth something
of the charm of youthful ingenuousness.
I suppose all of us know what it is to
care for one whom we know to be an
impostor in some fashion, because they are
very pleasant, very taking. For the intellectual
man or woman there is often a
strange fascination in some one person of
their own sex who happily lives and
pleases every one by utter want of the very
qualities which, otherwise, the greater mind

demands from every one, and demands
above all from itself

So when Grey pleaded Paul's anger
ended. And it was with an unwonted tenderness
— there is a tenderness of man toman
— that Paul replied:

You are right again. This life is very
lonely after all. It was selfishness which
made me wish to unite my fortunes with
yours. The dream is over. I am responsible
for my own disappointment, but I
did not wish to be clear-sighted, Grey."
/ " Oh ! I could go on if I tried ; it is only
that the whole thing is not good enough."

Paul started with sudden energy. *' That
phrase is ruining England ! Not good enough,
that's what all young men say I Where are
those who will plod on, without being sure
of their reward, as we did ? No, it's all

scheming and plotting and ambition for paltry
social honours, or a return to invertebrate
animalism with an ' It's not good enough,'
as an excuse for doing nothing. Don't talk
to me ! You're a set of drifting do-nothings,
you young men who want to be so very
sare of your personal gains before you will
move an inch ! ' It's not good enough.'
However, there's an end of it."

I'm not going to leave you in a bad
temper with me," said Grey. " Look heres
continued, as the letters came in with tea
—Wordsworth had a great weakness for tea
" I shall begin by doing your letters."

That will be loss No. 1. I could always
trust you with my letters. You had a
true secretarial instinct in sorting, and if
you did open the wrong one, I could be
sure you never read a word "

"Here is one I don't know," said Grey.
It may be private. These are all circulars
and so on."

Open it."

"Why, it's from Temple, written with
that blind ruler thing, you know, on the
paper, written by Carstairs. I've seen
no word. The signature is folded outwards."


Wordsworth took and read the letter.'

"How is he?" said Grey, going on with
the disposal of — in the receiver's eyes — very
superfluous correspondence. Grey's personal
trustworthiness and close relationship had
allowed Wordsworth to use him frequently
as an alter ego in this respect.

"It is the first time he has written for
himself, and I don't like the letter at all,"
said Paul meditating. " Let's see, tomorrow's

Sunday ; I could go down and come up by
the first train on Monday."

"Why? Is anything wrong?"

1 don't know ; I don't know," he repeated.
"It's a very queer production."

"You haven't been down since the day
of the accident."

No, I said I'd go if I were wanted, I've
been very busy, you know," said Wordsworth
quickly.

Well, the last time I was there I thought
his brain had been affected by the accident."

Indeed ! But I cannot say that it would
surprise me very much, I am afraid."

"The life he leads poor Lady Carstairs,
so Charlie told me, is quite too awful ; and
Charlie too ! They would like to take him
away from Temple for a time, but he won't
go, though it would be a relief to them to

change the scene, and the doctors say that
it doesn't suit him. They say he was just
on the point of breaking do^Yn when he
was hurt."

This letter tells distinctly that the writer
is in a very bad mental condition. I shall
go and see for myself how matters
stand."

"You will be astonished with Charlie."

Poor boy ! I don't wonder."

"But I do. It isn't natural. He must
break out. He's been like a saint."

Another interruption.

A lady, who won't give her name, wishes
to see Mr. Wordsworth."

I never see any one whom I do not know.
You know that."

"Yes, sir. But she is a lady, and her
business is very particular, sir. I thought

you. would see her, sir, perhaps. She is
waiting in her own carriage, sir."

The manner of his servant was so respectfully
firm, though based on nothing but
the appearance of the lady, that Paul,
knowing the man, obeyed the suggestion,
so far as to waver, evidently.

"Can't I see her for you, chief?" said
Grey.

"Ask her to come up, if you think she
has not made a mistake," said Paul to his
servant.

What have you done to yourself ? No,
it isn't a manoeuvre to get the fair one to
myself. You've inked yourself all over
when you snapped that spring bottle —
fingers first, then face. That comes of being
angry with me."

Paul • looked in the glass and burst into

a genuine laugh, hastily retreated to a door
at the side of the room, stopping to say :

"Fortune favours you, Grey. You see
her. If you want me really, send for me.
I can't be bothered with strange women,
m just hear her name before I go." '

This scene had occurred before. Grey was
aware that Wordsworth waited within the
curtains of the second door till the one from
the staircase was thrown open. "Madame
la Marquise Scalchi," was announced. Paul's
fingers withdrew from the sportive ; Grey
heard the door softly shut ; and Paul, he
knew, had left him to his fate.

Hitherto, "strange women" had been in
some form or other beggars for places or
for pelf; Grey's diplomatic answers were a
standing joke between the kinsmen ; and
so convinced was Paul, on hearing this

unknown name, that he was not wanted
that he presently went out of the house,
leaving a message that " Mr. Meredith was
to stay and dine ; Mr. Wordsworth would
be back shortly."

And so Grey received the unknown lady.

CAROLINE.

Marry, sir, they praise me, and make an ass of me''

Twelfth Night.

She was a lady. No one a better or quicker
judge than Grey Meredith, Esq., M.P., on
this point.

She came in, dressed in some cunning
combining of various shades of deep brown,
on which heavily worked beaded embroidery
glittered, relieved with tiny touches of
bright gold ; a tall hat, brown, with gold
bulrushes, added height to an already tall
figure. Unmistakably she was a well-dressed
foreigner, and her whole air and
carriage that of a well-bred and consciously
handsome woman.

Grey was on his feet, and his curiosity
was aroused in a moment.

(It was the " Caroline " of the love-letters,
and her coming was a piece of
impudence, but Grey knew nothing of any
Caroline, nor of these love-letters.)

His evident assumption of the part of
host seemed to perplex the lady.

I beg pardon," she said immediately,
but I make no mistake. This is Mr.
Yurdswoort's house."

Better than I expected," thought Grey ;
it was a rich sympathetic voice, and the
idiom and accent of the foreigner pleased
him as it does so many English travellers.

"This is Mr. Wordsworth's house, certainly.
I am his nephew."

So, you are his nephew. Mr. Yurds-
sort is fortunate, and I, too," she said,

interrupting him, " but is Mr. Vurdsvort
not at home ? I am so sorry."

I am not quite certain," answered Grey,
they have gone to look for him. But
allow me to offer you some tea. It has
only just come."

And Mr. Yurdsvort drinks tea, too !
And he fled hearing a lady would see him.
It may seem strange that I come, but weare
ver' old friends."

Grey could already remark that at times
her foreign accent was much stronger than
at others.

She took the cup of tea handed to her.

Grey satisfied his conscience with Ie
self-assertion that Paul could come back if
he chose : if the lady was content, so was
he ! She was not very young, but she was
evidently a woman whose age it was impossible

to guess. She took off lier glove,
and among the heavy rings was a wedding
ring. She was very charming, and Grey
was comfortable. He was in his element.
His best deferential manners came to the
fore. Man of the world and woman of the
world, the accidents of the moment had a
certain charm for each, and an explanation
would doubtless follow.

There was a trite remark the Enghsli
had made the French se fiveo'doquer,
though it was droll how the English
statesmen drank tea for their own pleasure
(was it a custom ? she did not usually intrude
like this, Mr. Vurswort ? was it ? —
Mey — rey — teeth, ah ! Meyreydeeth would
know !) This led to a question if the
marquise lived in Paris, and to the rapid
interchange of names of acquaintances,

as made by those who wish to ascertain
each other's social position or add a new
Hnk to the old chain. The marquise had
scarcely been in Paris for many years ; she
had lived in the country with a husband
some score of years at least older than herself
; and so on. (The rest of the story, being
a lie, need not to the reader's confusion be
recorded. She did not remark that she
had been twice married, once, for a few
weeks, before Paul Wordsworth's time, and
again many years later.)

Then a pause.

"Is it really that Mr. Wordsworth is
not here ? anywhere ? I understood that
he would come. You will know that it is
because he is old friend as you say, ver'
dear old friend. I would not give the
name — he does not know it since my

VOL. III. 43

mariage — and I would, too, give him one
surprise, or else I would have been more
conventicle and have asked him to come
to me ! But I like to do things — a little
e.vtraordinaires.^^

Grey rang at this. It was a different
thing if Paul really knew the lady and
had merely not recognized her or her name
as announced.

The servant was quite decided this time,
and gave the message in such a way that
the lady should not know it was left after
her presence had been known.

I found Mr. Wordsworth was out, sir.
He had left a message that he hoped
you'd stay to dinner, sir, when lied be
back."

Grey nodded dismissal. The lady had
risen.

Can you trust me with your message ?
I am sure the chief "

You Gall him the chief — but I do remember
he had always the air of a great
man, and he is become so now."

Yes. He's getting on."

*' He does deserve it."

"That he does."

*' You are enthusiastic for him ; that is
ver' good. A good bo', you say in
English. You will yourself come and seeme
— tomorrow, and pass away the English
Sunday a little. Here is my address.
But, stay, you wall not give it to your
uncle ? "

"I will bring him with mCj if he is in
town."

Ah ! no ; if he has not known I was
here, I will surprise him somehow. I

4 J -2

must think. But he ran away when he
heard of a lady "

Grey laughed. "Yes, he did. But he
thought it was one of those dreadful begging
women; he does not know it was a
friend."

Then you will tell him it was a begging
woman. See ! here is a penny. You
will give me that piece to get r-rid of me.
You will say you did give me money !
And tomorrow you will come and see me,
and we will make your uncle a little surprise.
It is so good to see again any one who
you think is dead, and whom you have
losed — liked — what is your English word,
aimer '^ I know your English so little."

Pour Madame la Marquise il n'y a
queene traduction," rejoined Grey.

Comment ? You parlez francis ? But

I must speak your English — it is so good
to speak English — and it is to you not
ver' difficile to understand me."

I would like — love — another opportunity
of trying, madame," said Grey.

Bravo ! you have the grace of a
Frenchman ; pardon the compliment against
your nationality. You are again good
boy," she said, as she left the room. At
the carriage door she repeated : " Do not
tell your uncle till we have made our
surprise."

Grey promised compliance. Paul returned.
He was full of business and
places, and only casually asked : " What
did you do with your guest ? "

Gave her tea and a trifle for her
cause. I could do no less," answered
Grey readily. " She said she knew you

years ago, and seemed disappointed that I.
Alas your locum tenens'*

Anybody I care to remember I contrive
to hear of from time to time," answered
Paul ; " but one man is as good
as another to a beggar. I ought to
repay your loss in my cause. How
much ? "

How much ? Not worth mentioning,
especially as I had some amusement out
of it."

"Glad to hear it. A good many collecting
women come, or try to come, at
unconscionable hours, but I have never had
that out of any of them."

"If she comes again you shall entertain
her," suggested Grey. " She is really awfully
good looking, and a cheery woman, I'm

sure."

"Then what on earth did she come here
for ? at this hour ? "

"To see you."

She didn't, and won t, I am afraid.

Now about ," and here followed the

normal talk of that date.

ATROPOS.

Clotho colum retired : Lachesis net : Atropos occat."

By no means had Paul exaororerated the
effect produced on him by the letter of
Carstairs. It was with the greatest of
anxiety that he went down to Temple
next morning, and, passing the little
church just at noon, as he walked from the
station, he met the congregation coming out.
Town had been murky and grim.
Here everything was crisp and sparklingly
white from the least possible dusting of
snow ; a hoar-frost with brilliant sun and
bright though pale sky; around the village
church a loitering country congregation,

with subdued, yet contented Sunday air,
casting as it passed doubtful glances at
the few men lounging outside on the
bridge over the mill stream.

Last of all came Vera, dressed in black
trimmed with heavy furs, and wearing a
thick veil. Paul moved behind the lydgate,
so that she should not see him till
he was close to her.

An old man greeted her, with a face
like a pippin, leaning on his stick, except
when he emphasized a point by sticking it
in the ground. Paul could not now see
her, but knew that she stopped just within
the gate.

The old man's voice was loud and
cheerful — too cheerful perhaps!

Sir Ralph's no better, my lady, I
hear. Dear, dear ! we do think of you ! "

Thank you' was the reply in a low
trembling tone. " It is very good of
you, Jenkins. We all have our troubles,
you see."

Eh ! eh ! for sure, for sure. But the
rich should enjoy their portion in this
world, 'tis but fair that. And be it true
that Sir Ralph is going off his head?
Dear ! dear ! 'Tis all the talk, surely."

Oh, what wicked people ! " exclaimed
Vera, the distress in her tone making it
firm and clear again.

"I meant no harm, my lady. Folks do
talk."

She brushed past him and out at the
gate, but as she rapidly walked to the
left, away from the few remaining loiterers,
Paul followed and overtook her at the side
entrance into the park. It was a door into

a wall, cutting off the wood from the
high road. In a moment they were alone
on a little path through the hoar-crowned
trees. She broke down.

I can't help it. I went to try and
get a little rested and the service upset

me."

Wretched old man ! "

"Did you hear?"

"Yes. But don't let idle gossip distress
you. You can't help people talking ;
we have all been said to be off our
heads some time," he answered, trying to
make her smile ; though he had been
struck to hear his own idea in the
gaffer's mouth as village talk.

I have had so little sleep," she said,
trying to excuse herself for the tears
which kept falling.

Poor child ! how you have suffered.
Cry, if it does you good."

No, but I am so tired and so helpless'*

Put up your veil. The air will do
you good. No one can see you."

"It is a poor welcome to give you,"
she answered, obeying him without thought
how the morning sun showed the lines of
suffering and care and the new .traces of
tears.

You could not give me a better welcome,
now, as things are," he said. " Do
you think it is nothing to me that you
will even for a moment let me share
your sorrows? If I could but help you!
You must know ho2v I feel towards you and
your husband," he added with lame hastiness
and bitter self-reproach. The tone,
much more than the words, had been

unguarded — he knew it. He had made
her look up, and he saw her flush. But
his only fear then — he confessed it years
later — his terror then was that she would
not trust him any longer. He had stayed
away for fear of this.

As they stood still together, a little
bright-breasted bird lit before them and
peered inquisitively into their faces : they
were so quiet.

It was one of those eloquent silences in
which some of love's best thoughts are
expressed. The deep stillness of their
hearts was unbroken by any sound on
the sunlit sabbath-quieted uplands, onh%
with a little momentary patter, as once and
attain the sli<2lit snow slid from the trees.

It was a supremely difficult moment —
not to be represented by any words spoken

of or by the two ; simply Paul knew
that she knew he loved her.

She spoke first-words that might mean
anything or nothing; they only answered
what he had actually said.

I know you do feel for us . . . But we
must go on. It is very lovely, but he
will be waiting for us."

She could not govern her voice at all.
Nor could he check himself, if he wished to.

"Stop one moment!" he said hastily
and gravely. " Sometimes frankness is
best — especially with a woman so true, so
good and so dear as yourself "

No, don't speak," she cried.

"• You are not afraid of me, are you,
dear ? " he asked wonderfully gently. He
retreated a step from her side. " Never
be afraid of me."

I am not," she said in a low tone.
I have no reason to be."

/ have been afraid of myself, and /
shall be, dear ; but you . . . you shall only
take all that helps you in my love for
you ; I think I could help you, and
nothing shall ever hurt you in it ; neither
my deeds nor the world's talk ; you shall
have all that you care to have of my
life ; I only ask to be the friend you
need and will need. Is that too much to
ask?

"I can give you nothing —Ralph's wife,"
she almost murmured.

I know that j^ou are his wife. How
shoidd I insult either of us by asking
you to forget it — in any way? The
deepest convictions that I have teach me
lessons, that life tries to undo, of the

sacredness of womanhood, and I know, I
feel, that you realize all I have imagined.
Your loyalty has been tried and has
triumphed before now ; would "

Stop a moment ! " she interrupted as
the words rolled from his lips, like himself
in their mixture of far-reaching consideration,
with intensity of present feeling.
You do not know ! '*

You do not know ! what ? "

She was agitated now. " Yes ; 1 do
trust you ; I know you will be true ; but
you do not know how things are with
us now."

I stayed away purposely, pretending
business, or rather, not forcing even an
hour or two's leisure, but I saw it was
no good. I could not bear to think of
you all alone. I had to come and see if

I could be of use to Carstairs. I tell
you what it is, if I could serve him for
you, I'd not join the Cabinet."

She uttered an exclamation of surprise.

I mean it. Let us go on. We can
talk as we walk, and 1 won't begin by
making you late now. You see 1 know
all your hours. I made Grey tell me
what he could. I think of you night and
day. If you and Carstairs wotdd travel
I would go with you anywhere, and care
for him like a brother. I'd let everything
go. My public work is, after all, mere
self-seeking."

It was a wildly-generous scheme, inconsistent
with former protestations of
shielding their friendship from the world's
tongue. " Why did Paul Wordsworth not

join the Cabinet ? " would be the talk of
VOL. m» 44

the empire. But it was put forward impulsively
in the true chivalric spirit which
always inspires a few lovers in each age ;
Paul meant what he said.

One moment of eager hope and vivid
imagination for her, as lie pictured the
change — the control of Ralph by his friend,
the companionship for herself — and then
she knew it was quite impossible.

You must not do that'' she said.
*' But you may try to persuade him to
leave this. I don't, like to do so, because
it seems such selfishness."

"How?"

As if I wanted it for my own sake'*

"You do, I think."

I want change, but do not wish for it'*

"What do the doctors says now?"

"They seem at fault. They cannot discover

the cause of the bodily illness, and
his mind "

Is affected ? " he said, as she paused.
She was silent for a moment with a
shudder. Then she said, " You mustn't
misunderstand, only perhaps ?sou had better
know before you see him. He suffers from
insomnia, and when he sleeps has fearful
,dreams. At night he wanders a little ; he
has only done that once in the daytime ;
but he says strange things, and has given
orders which make the servants and the
village people talk. I think I am glad
you should see him."

He wrote last night — I got the letter
then — asking me down, but it was a very
strange letter. I could not write or telegraph
to you on Sunday, so I came."
- "You will tell me what you think. I

44 2

have said this to no one, but that is what
is so awful to look forward to. I fear our
doctor thinks, perhaps, it will be so."

"Has he seen others? You told me so**

Yes."

Do you know of any cause ? I don't
ask curiously. Don't answer."

She had hesitated, and crimsoned again. .

"I think that I should like to tell you.
It is my foolishness, perhaps."

"To tell me?"

No, to think it. But it is true. Ko,
I can't tell you. I know that I had better
not."

She had a great longing to tell Paul
what she knew had been the deciding bent
towards this mental alienation which they
dreaded, but shamefacedness made her hesitate,
an J that rightly, to speak of her husband's

devotion to the woman who could
have met his love with hers. How could
she tell any one — years after she did tell
Paul Wordsworth — of these miserable cross
purposes ? Then — years afterwards — he
told her of the day before Georgie's
death.

Now they both kept silence.

'*I have never asked you to call me by
my Christian name when we are alone," he
said suddenly. " Will you do so ? There
are so few — none now — I think, to do it."

** Except everybody," she observed, with
a smile.

"Except everybody, as you say. In the
north I never get prefix or affix, I'm 'just
plain Paul,' as they say. I should be in
terror of my life from one of my constituents
if I heard him say Mr. Wordsworth,

and even Paul words worth would'
be a come-down after the royal Paul by
which one is dragged about."

They were just in sight of the shrubbery
now. It was really a fifteen minutes'
walk across the park and by the wood to
the side gate, but they had made it longer.
Vera would not have hurried even if Paul
had not joined her; her Sunday morning
was her weekly holiday.
■ "I did not expect you to-day," she said
"but it won't take long to get your own
rooms ready for you. Are you come to
stay?"
'They both smiled' at that.

"Only till that dreadful morning train,
as usual. How I do hate early rising ! "

They were both inclined to talk trifles
now, to get their voices steady before entering

the house. A few remarks followed
having no bearing on the personages of
my story. Then they got to the library
window, and, looking in, saw Carstairs and
his valet. The man opened the window
and let them in.

It was pitiful to see Carstairs. The lids
were half closed ; those mocking eyes had
given such character to the face. More
than this, the whole bearing of the man
was that of an invalid, and a flabby stoutness
had taken the place of the stalwart
compactness. . The valet had told him that
her ladyship and Mr. Wordsworth were
there, and when the window was opened he
was on his feet; without the self-confident
bearing and aggressive decision of movement
he was almost recognizable.

Where is Mr. Carstairs ? "

"Gone out a few minutes since to meet
you, m}^ lady."

Question and answer took place whilst
Paul greeted Carstairs.

"Let us go out a little. The sun is
delicious." said Vera to her husband.

You should have come sooner if you
wanted me to go out*'

We have half-an-hour before luncheon,"
he said, ignoring the fact that if he so took
it into diis head he would forbid her to
come, and, in any case, since the previous
Sunday she had not left him.

Will you come with me, Wordsworth ?
You'll have to give me your arm, you
know."

With the greatest of pleasure."

I don't want you, Vera."

They went out together.

That evening the doctor " strolled in,"
as he said, and whilst he was with Carstairs
Vera came to Paul and said: "Ask
him to tell you frankly what he thinks.
Perhaps hell tell a^ou more than he would
say to me."

Left alone with Paul the doctor required
no drawing out. " I thought you'd have
been down before," he said. "Anyhow,
yours is a good opinion as to appearances.
What do you think? "

They had some earnest and pitying talk
together, the doctor giving details and
answering freely Paul's inferential questions.

Then what is the present state of
affairs ? " Paul said at length ; "as you say
you have very little hope of his recovery."

It is not what / say," replied the
doctor, poking the fire vigorously, under

cover of which noise Vera entered behind
one of the screens of books. " But to you
I can say this, so far as all the doctors
agree Sir Ralph has two alternatives before
him — remember this is in confidence — and
we may all be wrong, the human body is
a most mysterious arrangement "

"Yes, yes, but "

There are two alternatives," repeated
the doctor, with his beard on one side, and
regarding Paul Wordsworth. " Two alternatives
— one, the tendency to mental alienation

is strong."

Then is it not the worst thing he can
do to remain here ; "

"True. But for the other. It is possible
that we can overcome that if we could,
control the bodily disorder, and that we
might do did we really understand it. Its

my opinion that knows as much

about it as I do ; that is, that we can
only guess what is wrong. In plain terms
unless some miracle happens— Sir Ralph
will either live for many years with gradual
loss of faculty, you understand, or
die in a few months at most — it may be
sooner. So far as we can see nothing can
save him."

Nothing can save him ! " said Paul,
horror-struck. " I thought him seriously
ill, but not "

"He is worse than ill ; remember you
have seen him when quiet. An egotistical,
self-indulgent man makes a bad subject for
mental disorders."

You think there is brain disease ? . . .
What's that?"

Vera came before them, deadly white,

but speaking with unwonted strength and

vigour.

I came in just as you were speaking.
I have a right to hear what you say of
my husband. How dare you have kept it
from me? I sent for all of you to learn
the truth. I hear now that part you cannot,
part you dare not, tell me. Tell me
to my face at once "

The conversation was not meant for
your cars, Lady Carstairs," answered the
doctor. " I am afraid you have misunderstood
"

I came in as you said 'what I wanted
to know, what, of all human beings, I have
the right to know — that is why I did not
tell you I was there. But what does that
matter now? Repeat to me what you saide
I will tell you," she continued, as he was

silent— "I will tell you. My husband must
die — or live mad — and not one of you knows
why, or has courage to tell his wife."

Or himselfe'' roared a voice behind them.

The door had been left open by Vera,
and she had raised her voice in her
agonized eloquence. Charlie had been
bringing his brother downstairs, and before
he knew who was there they had heard
the words after the pause.

"Or himself! They are entering into
a plot to say I am mad. Where are they ?
Let me get at them," repeated Carstairs,
furiously.

lie struck the furniture near with his stick.

"Calm yourself, Sir Ralph. Lady Carstairs
has misunderstood ; her anxiety as a
wife made her too anxious ; it's a mistake."

Don't lie to me. Vera ! come here !

nearer, so that I can touch you ! Then
you tell me the truth."

Carstairs ! " said Paul. Charlie had
stood still, perfectly useless. The door was
open, and the noise had attracted butler
and footman to the hall — no one knew it.
The scene just within the room was too
full of horror for all the actors.

Carstairs ! give me your stick, and let
me take you to a chair. Then we can
talk more comfortably," said Paul in
steadied tone.

"Xo doubt you'll talk comfortably. I'm
dying or mad? Where's my dear wife ?
My dear, dear Avise ? If I'd my eyes I'd
kill her, and I will too," he roared.

He tried to run furiously across the
room, but missed his direction.

Take Vera away, Charlie ! " said Paul,

the name slipping out, as all his thoughts
were first for her and how to put an end
to this terrible scene.

He and the doctor caught Sir Ralph,
but as they moved or bore him to the
centre of the room he became rigid ami
unconscious.

Not the first time this," whispered the
doctor as they laid him down. ,
They loosened his clothes.

Go . away ! " said the doctor, with a
sudden change of face even from that he
had worn. He rose suddenly.

What can I get ? said Yera.

Paul and the doctor exchanged one
look. She saw that look, and before Paul
turned to her she knew. With a bitter
cry she fell beside her husband's dead
body. The shock had hastened the end.

*^ Like cliffs which had been rent asunder,
A dreary sea now flows between ;
But neither heat, nor frost, nor thunder,
Shall wholly do away, I ween,
The marks of that which once hath been'*

Christened.

And now this tale tells itself in little
snatches, but the streams of our lives
sometimes run underground for many a
mile — our real existence, that is to say.
This and that and the other is done, but
our own loved part of life (if we are spiritually
rich enough to have any part to love),
that is laid aside, out of other people's
reach, it is true, but also out of ours.
We exist till again we have time to live ;
who but ourselves in our own bitterness

know the difference between the two states
of being — where one begins and another
ends ?

So Paul Wordsworth existed for three
months, full of business, full of excitement,
full of all that could make a member's life
useful and honourable. The triumphant
sweep of the election, the renewed enthusiasms
consequent on entrance into leadership
once more, all the keenness which, if
it exists at all, is chiefly felt in the first
months of office ; those facts were what
the world saw, and Paul Wordsworth was
before the world morning, noon and
night.

But his thoughts turned, as the busiest
man's thoughts can turn, and his pen or
pencil wrote, as the hardest worker can
write, to the woman he loved.

VOL. Il 45

He saw little of Grey Meredith ; Grey
had left him and lived another life. They
met in the House, Grey professedly held
himself as an independent member; perhaps
that to him meant, not walking into Opposition
lobbies on occasion but, making off
between important divisions with the
greatest of ease and with no conscientious
scruples or unhealthy ambition. He was
in for this parliament, and did not intend to
seek re-election.

Grey's present object in life was his
attendance on any pretty woman who
took his fancy for the moment. Amongst
others — chief amongst them — he had very
greatly improved his acquaintance with the
marquise, who had stayed for the pre-easter
season at a private hotel in one of
the streets off" Piccadilly. She had good

introductions, and Grey especially made it
pleasant for her.

Paul Wordsworth had gone to the
official residence attached to his portfolio.
He did not happen to meet the marquise,
and Grey did not now trouble his head
about the pretext on which they had
made acquaintance. She and Grey were
again having tea together one day shortly
before the recess. The days were lengthening,
and she complained of the light, which
was neither one thing nor another. Easter
fell as late as it possibly could that year.
Grey went to the bow window.

There's Paul Wordsworth coming down
the street."

"Where?" she said, and came to look.

You don't want to renew your acquaintance
now ? "

43-2

"All! do I not? That Sunday, which
was so dreadful you said, when his friend
did die in his arms, we would have seen
him. But, after that, we did somehow put
off. But he enters. I will "

"I'll go and fetch him."

He cannot know that I am here. You
have betrayed me."

Of course not. Your wishes were law ! '*

(As if Grey could have told Paul
Wordsworth anything except that the lady
was agreeable and amusing !)

Grey darted out of the room and found
Wordsworth talking to the proprietor of
the hotel. *

Hullo ! chief ! want you for a minute ! "

"I have an engagement."

"Shan't keep you. The Marquise Scalchi
wants you to come in. She has never seen

you since she came to England. She called
that day you went out to avoid a begging
woman, and it would be awfully rude of
you not to come for a moment."

"I tell you I don't know her — never
heard the name."

Come for a moment. She knows you,
has asked me about you every day. It
is only in the hotel."

Wordsworth did not wish to say that
Vera was in the hotel also. To get rid
of Grey he consented to be triumphantly
marched upstairs. There was a transformation
scene as to light in the few moments
of Grey's absence. Blinds were drawn
and shaded lamps in the room counterfeited
light. Even in that light or shade
Grey could see a good deal more than he
could understand.

He entered with AVer els worth, linking his
arm into the " chiefs."

I have brought him, marquise," he
began, when he saw the lady stop — she
had come forward with outstretched hands
and welcomes on her lips — and he felt
Paul disengage himself and also stop. Grey
remained between the two.

Paul addressed him instantly, "I told
you that I thought there had been a mistake
; I am sure of it now ; and can only
apologize to madam e for my intrusion on
that ground."

Formally bowing he left the room.

Grey, utterly bewildered, as well he
might be, stammered, 'marquise, what
is this?"

"It means that he insults me before
you all," she answered. Then Grey saw

that a lady and another man were also
present ; both very uncomfortable, having
indeed nothing to do with the scene except
that they had witnessed it— and
would talk of it.

"As to that, he shall explain matters
to me, Marquise, and at once. He "

Grey went out, and the other visitors
excused themselves. They were staying in
the hotel, and were but slight acquaintances
who. meeting the marquise at some
mutual friend's, had been asked by her to
come and see her at tea-time. She did
not attempt to detain them, though they
evidently made the remark on the spur of
the moment that they had only come
in to say that they could not come. She
waited for Grey to return.

He caught Wordsworth at the foot of

the stairs. The marquise had. rooms on
the first floor.

Grey stopped him, speaking in a low
tone. "I have come to ask you to explain
your insult to my hostess."

Don't meddle with what you do not
at all understand," answered Paul.

"I mean to understand it so far as this
I am responsible for your presence and
your behaviour "

"I have no time to waste, Grey," said
Wordsworth impatiently.

Then I consider your conduct quite
un "

Nonsense ! don't keep me. Ask
Madame whatever she calls herself for an
explanation, and believe her if you like,"
he said. "It is sufficient for me that I
do not know the lady."

"But •*

Wordsworth looked at Grey with calm
contempt — the large dog's disregard of the
pertinacious puppy. Then he said slowly,
You forget yourself! You have no right
to call me to account. Leave me."

The sharp decisive tone in which the
last two words were spoken attracted the
attention of two men in the hall ; at that
moment the lady and her husband came
down from upstairs, Wordsworth and Grey
let them pass. Then Grey said: "This
is not the place "

"Neither is yours the cause in which
to speak."

"Til postpone it "

Wordsworth left him and returned to
the office. " Give me a sheet of paper."

He wrote to Lady Carstairs a hurried

line, telling lier lie would try to come in
that evening, and left the hotel; not
blessing Grey for his interference with five
spare minutes — all he had — and angrily
marvelling at the impudence of a certain
lady.

Perhaps lie always had been a little too
careless of any explanations of his personal
conduct ; he cared perchance too
little for " idle caws."

Meanwhile, already, before Grey had
returned to the marquise, the two men in
the hall had heard the story of Wordsworth's
behaviour, and the witnesses had
gained the certainty that their surmise
was correct — " It was Mr. Wordsworth,
the minister."

This, as it stood, was the ground of a
pretty little sensational story which ran

round town, in various versions, of a quarrel
between the minister and his nephew about
a lady whose name was sometimes given
as her own, sometimes — if the recounter
knew Grey — as that of any other woman
to whom he had paid attention. It
cropped up for years and years.

But the real consequent scenes were not
uninteresting — at least to those who, like
the narrator, may have a sort of sneaking
kindness for fickle, good-looking Grey. It
is a year since we began to follow his
fortunes at Milan ; he has rather deteriorated
than otherwise.

Returning to her room Grey found La
Marquise sitting very uprightly in a stiff
chair in front of the fire. She that day
wore a closely-fitting polonaise or under-robe
of dull red brocade with gold threads,

and, opening over this, covering all but
the front, a trained velvet gown of a
much darker shade ; this was bordered
with some wondrous Parisian trimming
thick as fur, soft and fluffy, blending the
two shades of the dress and bordered on
either side by balls of bullion gold ; a
little theatrical, doubtless, but it was a
magnificent dress; and as she sat therewith
angry eyes and burning cheeks. Grey
was afresh stirred to admiration.

This was really the type of woman who
had special attraction for him.

But all this was very awkward.

Well'' she said, " what have you
done?"

It was not quite the place, lie has
gone now, but I'll see him afterwards,'
hesitated Grey.

Lie smiled very scornfully. " And what
do you think?"

That, as he said, I don't understand
it," answered Grey moodily. " Of course
I'm bound to stand up for you."

Bound ? Thank you for nothing, Mr.
Meredith. I need no man to be bound tome.
If he does not feel the insult forme
he can go and listen to any slander
that a disappointed — I do not say a dishonoured
— man can invent. Go ! I do never
wish to see you again. You have in yourself
deceived me. I know not what he

has said to you but go! I do dismiss

you, this moment."

Not at all ! " said Grey between his
teeth. He would otherwise have gone, for
he knew Wordsworth must have had good
reason for ignoring conventionality — even

if he supposed the scene was private— but
when she told him to go he realized her
power over him.

"I will not go," he continued. "You

speak as if it mattered nothing to fine -"

"How! You go not?"
Not till I hear and can judge."
I am no criminal, Mr. Meredith. I
will not stoop and say ; This I have
done : that the man whom I would have
forgiven has done ; sift it all with your
cold suspicions, and find me not guilty if
you can. You would be my judge, would
you ? Then, I repeat, Go ! I am not to
be tried by you."

And you were listening to me this
afternoon," broke out Grey.

Well ? " she rejoined. " I was. And
what then?"

That then I have a right to understand
this from you."

"What?"

This."

"What?"

The chief — after all you have said ;
your insinuations now "

That is easily explained, but I give
no explanations to you. Why should
I?"

Because you have led me on in every
possible way these three months to believe
that I was acceptable to you ; because I
cannot bear the thought of wrong to
you "

"Ah, now! you talk more like a lover!
I will answer my lover — not my judge!
Ask my pardon for your insolence — and
then we will talk again. Stop ! from now

it is a question whom you believe : I or
Mr. Wordsworth?"

He hesitated again.

*' We will tell you different things. I
am a woman, older than you are ; I have
not yet promised to marry you ; my liberty is
dear to me, and you could do much better
among the beautiful young English girls."

"Don't talk like that," he said shortly.

"I put the question as I will. Your
uncle and chief has been to you most
kind ; you tell me he is honourable and
good, and I never have contradicted you
one word, have I ? I am only a woman
for whom you say — I know not the truth
you have a passing fancy : what have I
to offer you — that I will give — instead of
all that he can do for you ? I would
that we had been all friends. He is clumsy

or has a bad conscience : you take the
alarm, showing you do not love me as
you say ; and now it is, if you have me
you lose him ; if you keep him in your
honour you must despise me. Go, and
hear nothing! I will leave England and
you will be at peace."

With dramatic force and splendid movement
she had poured out this appeal.

"I answer you," he said. "You are
everything to me. Answer me. When will
you be my wife ? "

She swept up to him and put her hands
on his shoulders. His face was troubled
but resolute.

"I have not said yet that I would
marry you, but you are — what I first
said you were — a good boy. You are a
true Englishman ! "

VOL. III. 4S

He turned on her almost savagely, catching
her hands in his.

I know .what / am doing for you
Now tell me the truth."

'* There is so little to tell. It is ' much
ado about nothing ! ' He was one who
said he loved me about a dozen years
ago ; he did behave very badly, but I did
marry my old marquis, and it did not
matter." (Chronology was not quite accurate,
but no matter, for Grey it was good
enough.) " I had a fancy to see him
again. I had not been before in England,
and I did not know it was here anything
remarkable to go to see him. I am not
so young. And now, though he is coward,
and clumsy also, I do not regret that I
did go, for I met you there ! That is all,
my good boy," she said.

You are not telling me all," he answered
doggedly.

I do not go into long details, but I
have told you all. If you do not believe
me, it is not my loss I "

Then why did you say I should have
to trust him or you ? "

Need you say that ? You are hete^
my good boy. That years ago he would
have married me is no wrong to you ;
but how should you speak to him who
has so very clumsily insulted your promised
wife?"

46^-2

APOLOGIA Pro FELICITATE SUA.

Only this my mind gave me, that every free and gentle
spirit, without that oath, ought to be born a knight."

Milton.

Another love scene, two or three hours
later, and of a different character ! In
place of the imperious woman dominating
by her vitality the weaker man, and forcing
him to retract to himself suspicions, simply
by stirring his admiration, there is a strongman
showing himself tender and true to the
fragile and still suffering woman. Caroline
Scalchi was to Vera Carstairs as the imperial
tiger-lily to her name-sake of the valley,
and Wordsworth to Meredith as the oak
to the osier.

Vera heard Paul's step as eight o'clock
struck on the tall clock outside. She ros
to welcome him, and as the door shut on
the announcing waiter, they met in the
centre of the room. A light hanging from
the ceiling showed her in her widow's dress.
She wore no cap. It was only the simplicity
of the plain trailing gown which
hinted what mourning it was. It revealed,
too, that she was slighter and more fragile
than ever. Greetings between
friends, when they are alone, are often
silent, and Paul, not releasing her thin
hands, said nothing, except with looks, fora
long moment of contemplation. It was
very good to be together again — for both.
I hoped you would be alone."
"Yes," she said, as they parted and sat
down, "I wanted to see you."

"I would have come before -"

"I got your note. Anice is with me,
but has gone to see her sister and to the
theatre. Charlie calls for and will bring
her back to me afterwards. So I am alone."
• " I must be at the House by nine ; isn't
it too bad? How long do you stay
here?"

Only for a short time ; till the lawyers
have finished."

"And then?"

"I feel a waif and a stray. Anice, of
course, is to have her season. I can't be
so selfish as to keep her longer. I think
I shall go back to my own home— where it
was, you know. It will soon be lovely in
the country. By-aud-by I shall do something
for other people, but I have to get
well first." : lr,':iu

"You really are stronger," he said very
.eagerly.

Oh, yes ! " she answered.

Up to this point there had been a little
constraint upon them both ; they had only
seen each other once since the funeral day.
Vera had been frightfully ill, but he could
not go to her, and, when she was better, the
.very knowledge of their feeling for each
other had kept them apart till a few more
weeks of her widowhood had gone by. How
and why did they now meet ? Their thoughts
were now of each other, but these considerations
left unsaid were influencing both of
them.

It was even now full early ^ — not four
months after her husband's death — as some
may. deem, to think of a possible future.
but since little Daisy's death all affection

lead seemed to cease on Vera*s part ; perhaps,
without Georgie the last summer,
swayed by a sense of duty, she might have
won the affection of her husband more
permanently than in the brief passion of
their marriage. As things had fallen out, was
she lonelier in actual widowhood than in
nominal married life ? For the last three
months of illness, terminated by that shock,
she had done all that wife could do, borne
all that woman could bear from one distressingly
ill in mind as in body. He had been
used to treat her with verbal brutality,
and in his mental and bodily anguish he
had not only continued that before the
servants, but — perhaps a little unknowing
what he did — had inflicted on her even
blows in his undisciplined invalidism. It
was "only three months" of this. Many

women have had years of the like self-sacrifice
and suffering. But she was young,
and had known so much trouble already ;
and it is a hard lot to bear all the hardest
burdens which pity can impose without the
extraordinary strength which love can supply.
The agony of parting — the afterwards
was not as that agony for those who have
loved and have been beloved to the last ;
but the struggle between life and death had
been brightened by loving recognition of
mutual dread and doubled pain, — of undying
affection given and received by each ; the
wife had no consolation at all save in the
thought: " I did my best — it was my duty'*
Do you blame her then that, though, being
bound, she would never have sought to be
loosed, — being free, she so soon turned towards
a true, restful affection, as a plant

brought up from the darkness in which it
has been kept moves . slowly towards the
sunshine in the glad summer freshness ? Do
you blame her ? Then you have not yet
known the touch of suffering, if you area
woman and can love.

"Oh, yes!" she said, she was stronger.

Yera," he began then, moving nearer
to her, to the couch on which she was
seated, coming beside her, " is it not time
to let me have some voice in your plans?
I wait for you very patiently. I have never
yet in so many words told you what I want,
but you know it."
. "It is so soon."
"Do you call that an answer?"
- " You have asked me nothing yet," she
whispered, pale no longer, but he could
scarcely her-what she said.

"I am not going to ask. I am going to
take possession of you, body and soul, and
turn a suffering, white-faced, lifeless creature
into a strong, happy woman — my wife, when
she will! My darling ! My own ! Poor
little ' waif and stray ! ' Never again that !
My God ! this happiness is too great for me ! "
r : In Paul Wordsworth's eyes were tears,
and his voice was broken.
^ She said nothing' articulate, but she was
laughing and crying at once in his strong
arms. He understood her perfectly.
r. Suddenly she released herself,
f "What is the matter?" he asked.

She stood upright, and spoke quickly,
f.' The will ! Do you know ? My father lost
all his money, and I had of my own only
£60 a year ; if I don't marry again I have
£3,000, if I do, only £400 a year, and—"

And you don't wish to give that up,"
he rejoined, ready to be angry.

I didn't know if you knew I had nothing."

Do you wish to be shaken ? " he asked,
laughingly threatening her. " You very
absurd child ! The country ! Do you know,"
he imitated her, holding her arms, " the
country takes so much of my time and
thoughts, and if I did nothing I would have
twenty-four hours in the day, but I have
not — I have sometimes not twenty-four
minutes in the day — and I am nearly twenty
years older than you are, and I am a
cantankerous bachelor in my habits ; and
very proud and stiff ; and I have all sorts
of other faults : on which defects I had
better leave you to meditate, because I
must go in five minutes precisely."

Mus you ? " she said dolefully.

"Don't be afraid that I will ever leave
you longer than I can help. When can
we be married ? "

'' Not yet," she answered, a little pained.
"I don't think this is right''

'' Oh, this is better than right ! But, my
darling, I know. Outsiders shall not hear
yet. We will not waste any time in which
we mif]^ht be together out of mere deference
to a captious public, but even the very
quietest wedding would be out of place yet.
It would be selfish to deprive you of your
freedom before you have enjoyed it."

"Enjoyed it?"

"Yes. I do feel that you might do
much better than marry me."

I don't," she said brightly. He was
gratified.

Do you know, child, it is all very

well! I spoke as if I were self-confident,
but I did not dare to hope. Ever since I
knew you first I cared for you, but later
on when I saw you were unhappy — especially
that day — that Sunday — well ! I felt
a brute to speak at all. And afterwards
I have said to myself she cares for me
only as a friend who tried clumsily to be
helpful when she was in trouble."

I said . . . Paul . . . T said to myself ;
He is kind because I am unhappy."

Were you so blind, child ? All last;
autumn ? And now ? "

Last autumn when you gave me that
book I prayed that you might not care
for me. It made it so hard. I would not
let myself think or look."

"Nor I. But I did not know that I
could have made it harder for you

"You could. You did. But all is well

now."

There was silence. " Then", said he,
after a pause, "as soon as the. world will
not think me disrespectful to you in
shortening your widowhood "

Paul ! one can't help laughing when
one is sad sometimes, and you are quaint."

What is wrongs ? " he asked.

The way you put it."

"Well, isn't it so? We might be
married and spend our Easter recess
together next week, but for that stupid
talk by people who know our names and
nothing else. (It is strange sometimes to
think that there is not a creature, in
western civilization at least, who does not
know of one's name.) They could say
nothing that I should mind — except on

your account. So I must wait, my darling,
but you will not keep me away longer
than you must, will you ? It is not as if
I were free — look at that wretched clock ! "

Even across Constitution Hill, and in
January, five minutes is scant measure to
get from beyond Piccadilly to the Front
Bench at Westminster, there to make the
promised " important statement." Yet, once
outside the drawing-room he came back
to say again, " Good-bye ; I shall write to
you from the House to-night."

Now when Bennett had learnt that Miss
Leyton was dead, and that Sir Ralph was
blind, probably dying, despite her promise
she returned from America and came to
London. With her own matchless impudence,
meeting Grey (who knew, of course,
nothing of the circumstances under which

she had left), she informed him she was looking
for a place. He told Madame la
Marquise how his poor Georgie had valued
her maid. The marquise was only too
glad to have this " treasure."

So when Wordsworth came out of the
drawing-room the first time he ran up
against a woman, who drew back into the
shadow of another doorway ; thence to
watch his return and his final going away.

A perfectly unscrupulous woman, with
none of a lady's instincts, the marquise
had already extracted much of what
Bennett had to tell about Lady Carstairs
and about Paul Wordsworth. Neither Grey
nor Bennett knew that the marquise had
any interest in the minister for his own
sake.

As Grey was sitting with his " promised

VOL. III. 47

wife" after dinner Bennett came in respectfully
and said something to her mistress.
After a time said the marquise to Grey:
<' And if you think so why not go and see
Lady Carstairs whilst I write these notes ?
She's in the hotel."

i^— 1^^-^

^^

A BOLD STROKE.

*' And in his f alsed f annie he her takes
To be the fairest wight that lived yit ;
Which to express he bends his gentle wit.

J Faerie Queen.

After Paul had gone the moments for
Vera seemed to pass in a dream — a happy
dream, vague exquisite ease of soul : such
moments as we only know very briefly and
very unexpectedly. They come when " allis
well" — perhaps when we are in keenest
sympathy with the glory of nature, perhaps
when we are in deepest union with the
nobler purposes of man's destinies. It is
not often that restfulness — that sense of
harmony with happiness — comes to any
mortal, and when it does it comes to those

47 2

who have made the best of sorrow, and
therefore for them the best of joy is
made.

Vera was very happy, and though in
the London street there were noises that
were loud enough to one who had for
nine months been in the country, all
round her there seemed to be a hush of
strengthening calm. Her life no longer
lonely, and his to be fulfilled !

Prosaic interruption : 9.30, letters. One,
a lawyer's letter for Lady Carstairs. Put
aside till tomorrow. Miss Anice Bentley.
Sir Charles Carstairs. Vera looked at this
last address for a moment, not thinking of
the letter. A new thought suc^orested
itself. Charlie was not of age. What
complications would be made by her marriage,
if she married at the end of the

year ? " One good thing is, this shock and
this six months' trial have sobered hiiD,''
she thought, " and for his marriage — if,
by-and-by, he thinks of Anice Bentley. . ."
Only those three letters and a card
pencilled :

A}n in hotel. Just heard you re here.
May I come in ?

Mr. Grey Meredith, M.P.

The Car form Club, Pall Mall, S. W.

She now saw that her servant waited for
an answer.

Certainly ; I shall be very glad to see
Mr. Meredith. Where is he?"

"He is dining in the hotel, my lady. A
courier is waiting outside to take back
the message."

o

In a few minutes more Grey came in,
with warm ofreetins: and looking his best.

lie was trying to tone down his feeling of
happiness to conform to this part of the
erewhile blighted lover, of which the sight
of Vera reminded him by her past connection
with Georgie, and also to suit
the surroundings of Yera's widowhood.

As the old plays direct, they both tried
•' to dissemble y Grey was just the person
who should not hear of the apparently
early engagement. Grey, however, only
wanted an opportunity of telling Vera of
the marquise. To do so seemed a little
hard, a little curious, considering everything
(but he did not consider everything,,
being once more as genuinely in love ashe
could be).

He sat down, talked commonplace!
cheerily, inwardly relieved to find her ' so
ready for it, and then :

I ' daresay you'll be surprised to hear
something about me."

(He had a vague remembrance of having
used the phrase eight or nine months
before, but this time he had derived an
inspiration from his fiancee and his attraction
to Vera was to him quite a memory.
He naturally liked the imperial type of
woman much better than the sympathetic;
Vera was very charming, but Caroline was
splendid. He did not falter now, except
out of deference to those trailing black
robes, so very gloomy and severe ; he liked
rich stuffs and harmonized colours.)

Surprised ? " said Vera. " Good news,
I hope ? "

I want you to judge for yourself. I
think so. I am going to marry a most
charming woman ; she accepted me thifi

evening. You're the only soul who knows
it, but I wanted to tell yon first thing.
Wish me good luck ! "

And who is she ? I do wish you all
happiness, Gre}^ Any one I know ? "

She's not English, but speaks English
charmingly. A widow. Her last husband
was of very old French family — died four
years ago. I think a woman is quite
justified in marrying again after four years'
time, don't you ? "

I suppose so," said Vera a little
nervously. Grey thought he had said the
wrong thing in talking of a second marriage
to a young widow.

Lie is the Marquise Scalchi."

Oh ! a very good name, I know. A
Provencal family, isn't it ? Isabel Scalchi
was a young diplomat who once came to

show US the lions in Some, attached to
the French Embassy to the Quirinal.
Perhaps a relation."

Very likely. She knows all about you.
I have told her so much, and I should
like you to be friends. I think she's older
than you are. If you see a very handsome
woman coming from the first floor,
foreign-looking I suppose you'd call her,
that's Cara. I've called her marquise till
to-day."

Cara ! " repeated Vera. " It is a pretty
name, La Marquise Cara Scalchi. You
know that I am seeing no one, but you
must introduce me to her some day. Does
your uncle know ? "

No," said Grey flushing, but Vera did
not notice. "Cara" would be her niece
by marriage ! '• They have met abroad,

but you know the chief doesn't ' care much
for women, and they didn't get on then
it appears. Anyhow, this afternoon ;w1i,qu
I wanted to introduce him to her (I was
not accepted definitely then) he was positively
rude. I wish you would take hrm^
in hand sometimes about his manner to
ladies."

"Perhaps he was pre-occupied this afternoon.
He is very busy," said Vera, remembering
Grey had prevented Wordsworth
coming to her.

"business shouldn't make a man a bear.
Who thanks him ? I told him I couldn't
and wouldn't stand the life. You don't
know what it is."

I think I do."

"Yes, I suppose Carstairs would have
been in this Cabinet," he said, only thinking

of what lie was going to say :• ^' I have
a favour to ask you. I don't like to ask
you such a thing, but I shan't be surprised
a bit if you said no. We've always been
friends — for years and years."

Tell me what you want, Grey."

She was sure of her position now. He
was engaged — her nephew in future.

I don't like to. But you'll say no ?•
Candidly?"

'• If I can't do it. What is it ? "

I wonder if 1 might bring Cara to
see you now, to-night ? I know you aren't
seeing people, but I do want you to know
her. And I'd like it to be the first day
it's settled."

But, Grey, it is late."

Only ten o'clock."

"And I ought to go to her. Men never

understand all these things, Grey, you
know," she said lightly.

You haven't so high opinion of me as
has our chief. I know women have to
be on a lot of ceremony. But she has
heard all about you, and, in fact, she
said I was to come and see you, and —
she's not pushing, you know. Iter position
is too assured for that. But I know she'd
come now — only for a few minutes. In
fact," he repeated, " we both should like
it, if you were well enough. But if you'd
rather not, say no. It is for you to
decide. It's my fault if the older shouldn't
have been made."

'• If she is good enoimli to care to
come so informally," answered Vera. '* I
should not like to ask her to do so. I
don't think that she could come. Grey

It would be so impertinent of me to ask

it — especially as she is not a girl."

If you don't mind, may / ask her ? "

You may. But the marquise "

It's awfully good of you. Sure you

don't mind?"
He went off.
You have been some time," said the

marquise. " Well ? "

Will you come with me ? "

She will not thhik it curious ? "

She was afraid that you would. But

I said it was my doing."

And you are sure Mr. Wordsworth

said nothing ? "

I told you he couldn't. I saw him

leave the hotel."

But he is since returned. He was

with her an hour to-ni(dit."

"She evidently 'heard" nothing."

That is right. Then if you are sure
you 'did take it to your own shoulders
that you were so empresse we will descend.
I would, see your so dear friend — your
playmate — sister of the old days, and I
would not that she should be-first set
against me. I feel to know lier so well."

It was a bold game this, which Grey
unconsciously furthered. Bennett, in confidence,
had imparted to the marquise the
whole of the story, including that of the
letter picked up.

The marquise (unknowing how that very
letter had been addressed to herself — one
which she had been forced to give up)
thought that in this she held a reserve of
trumps. She intended no harm in particular.
Now she hated Wordsworth ; for

the rest she was actuated by the spirit
of curiosity and sensationalism, and also
by a desire to see Vera whilst Vera was
unprepared.

Grey had done well. He had found out
for her that Vera had no reasons for refusing
to receive the Marquise Scalchi, and
had made it possible — when under the circumstances
it seemed impossible — for both
ladies without loss of dignity to make each
other's acquaintance in somewhat unceremonious
fashion. Yet, in spite of his
mediatory position, it may be truly said
lie did not know what women he was introducing
to each other.

THE END OF AN EPOCH.

He proceeded on his pilgrimage with new energy and
felt more and more as if authentically consecrated to the
same." — Carlyle.

True is, that true love hath no power to looked back." —
Spenser.

Most love affairs on the surface have some
element of the ludicrous about them ; few,
however ludicrous in aspect, are ridiculous
to the core. Vera lead something to smile
at in thinking that in one year Grey had
made a declaration of platonic affection to
herself, had been taken possession of by
poor Georgie, and had finally come to beg
her to receive this object of his new
passion in such eager haste and unceremonious
form. Something more to be sad

about in the disillusioning of an early,
dream, and in the penetration of experience
; even Anice now knew Grey's weaknesses.
It was over a year since the party
had met whose fortunes thenceforward
were to be so straitly intertwined — all had
developed from the beginning at Como,
and even the later introduction to Paul
Wordsworth (though certain to have occurred
otherwise) in some way was traceable
to the night on the calm moonlit
lake.

Was Lady Carstairs not a little foolish
to receive this unknown woman thus ?
Grey liked good-looking women ; that she
was handsome was the only fact Vera
knew about this marquise.

Vera smiled again to think that twice
she herself had the honour of aUractini^

VOL. III. 48

this connoisseur of female beauty ; and
sighed because even Paul had called hera
" white-faced thiner." " What an old
woman I look ! " she said, for once looking
at herself in the glass, and scanning
anxiously the new lines, the sharpened
features of her own face with anxious despondent
look. She did not recognize how
quietly beautiful it was now, nor could
foretell what happiness would do for her
still ripening loveliness.

If Vera had no preconceived idea of
the marquise, that lady had all the disadvantages
of having to correct previous
impressions of Lady Carstairs — formed not
Iron Grey's praises, but from the scandalous
and envious sketches of an evil-tongued
servant. Up to the lover-like
return and the lover-like tone of Wordsworth's

last words that night, so far as
Bennett had invented or had observed the
relations between the minister and his colleague's
wife and widow, the marquise
believed that she had known the history of
that connection.

It was with a feeling of contempt, I
think, though with much outward courtesy
and charm, that Caroline responded to
Yera's quietly gracious and very graceful
welcome.

That slight girl — that pale, puny creature
to be the woman of Wordsworth's later
choice ; his later choice ; the secret heroine
of that story certainly verging on scandala
preference in her husband's lifetime,
an apparent haste to shorten widowhood !
Caroline scanned the face of Vera to ask
for herself the secret question, " bad and



silly, or good and foolish?" She had no
data on which to base any other alternative.
Caroline was shrewd enough and
quick to read character for practical purposes,
and she knew well that on that
face there was a look of exquisite purity,
which no woman of the world has by accident
and which no woman can consciously
preserve. The countenance did not tally
with her information, with the secrets she
supposed herself to hold, and though Caroline
did not like a really good woman, in
spite of herself she was not contemptuous
for long.

Vera was greatly surprised to see a
woman so matured. " She must be fifteen
years older than Grey at least ; I dort like
her, but hozv she inspires him ! "

This measurement of forces went on

during five minutes' conversation between
the trio, in which all performed their parts
with due sense of the position of each —
so far as this was known.

Then, drawing a comparison very favourable
to the marquise between her and the
slight black-robed figure at her side, Grey
asked if they were keeping Vera up.

*' No ; the others won't be back till after
eleven. I shall wait to see Charlie ; he is
not staying with us."

I wonder if I ought not to go down
to the House," asked Grey. " It's got on
without me to-night, but "

Certainly," said the marquise, " Lady
Carstairs will perhaps talk to me for a
very few little minutes without you, if it
does not tire her, and then we will say
to each other, good-night."

Grey thought that a trio does not become
intimate rapidly. Vera was the only
one who preferred it to a duet. Yet she
could but say :

It is very good of you to stay with
me, marquise."

Grey went oft. The two women were
alone.

Caroline wished to establish herself with
Vera before Wordsworth could interfere ;
it was a bold coup de main, but the only
way out of an awkward position. Grey
was most amenable, and even sacrificed a
private good-night to his fiancee's previously
expressed desire to be left alone
with Lady Carstairs.

"Now, I am not to tire you, Lady
Garstairs," said the marquise. " Grey has
told me how very delicate you are. Will

you not recline a little on the chaise
longue ? "

"I am very much better now. Shall I
put this screen for you ? " Vera asked,
and rose to move it. The marquise rose
also, and caught her by both hands :

"Do not think me very strange. But I
am so a thing of impulse. I have all my
life, for good or for evil, done a thing
very suddenly, though sometimes I have
been sorry'*

This was true. Caroline did act on impulse
and spoilt her plots many a time.
Vera did not quite know what to do, so
let the marquise continue :

"But I shall not be so now. Will you
be my friend ? It is very sudden, but you
will a little for Grey's sake care for me ? "

(" Don't trust her, don't trust her," said

instinct ; but kindness said, " lie is foreign
and means well ; dont be ungracious ! ")

You are very kind to say this ; weare
all interested in Grey's happiness."

''I do think you will mean more than
you will yet say of goodness ; I do not
expect too much of the English words,
but the English hearts are so good and
true ; and you have done so much to receive
me sans ceremonie this evenings."

She sat down again.

'rand I forget — excuse me — but what
relation is my Grey to you ? "

"None," said Vera colouring.

"None!" ejaculated the marquise with
surprise well feigned. " I thought you to
have been dear cousins."

He has very few relations, and we are
very old friends."

"It was my mistake. I beg pardon. I
would not have intruded, but I understood
so strange — you were indeed relations,
lie has so warmly spoken of you ! '*

It is not an important mistake," said
Vera.

It has to me given a great'' pleasure,
so I do not regret my error. And Mr.
Wordsworth there is also no relative of
yours ? "

"He is Grey's uncle."

Ah ! so strange. I thought I had
heard his name with yours. But English
names are so difficult to us, and my poor
Grey has been a little pre occupied lately.
When at first he used to talk of his
friends I did not know it would one day
so much concern me — and so I have to
make a cjreat salade of every one. Mr.

Wordsworth I have known many, many
years ago'*

"You have not yet renewed your acquaintance
? " asked Vera, then remembering
that Grey had said something about
it.

I tried to to-day, but he was quite
farouche:, and then I remembered that we
had parted in great anger — a stupide quarrel.
But he seemed to be in a very great
hurry. It is the same to me — if he is
here. But I do not like the too political
men, they are very vindictive and very
ruses ^ they do not serve well for lovers.
I did find him when he was in Paris
very fickle. But, Lady Carstairs, you
make me to forget we are almost strangers.
I begin to talk to you of an old
love ! And it can be no interest to you

he is but the uncle of your friend, my
Grey ! "

"How long ago did you know Mr.
Wordsworth ? "

"Very long time," answered the marquise
carelessly, not apparently seeing
Yera's too obvious concealment of interest.
But tomorrow we will perhaps meet.
There are many friends whom we do both
know, probably. And I would hear how
you do know my Grey so well — oh ! I am
not jalouseT'

"Will you "

No, I will go. You will be tired of
this too intrusive woman. Do you think
that Grey will be happy with me? You
are a cautious English woman. Will
you let me kiss you and then T will
go?"

'• I am EiigUsli, as you say, marquise*
answered Vera firmly, withholding herself ;
good-nights''

It was an effort of courage to refuse
the kiss of the marquise ; for be it remembered
the marquise was in age and
position — and in audacity — the person to
make advances.

"You are very sincere, ma chere lady ;
when you know me a little more you
shall be friend of mine."

The door opened and Wordsworth entered.
The Government had permitted a
count-out ; not specially that one of its
chiefs might come back for a few minutes
to a certain hotel, but such was the effect.
At the moment his appearance was as
unexplained as by both women it was
unexpected.

Needless to say that this sight of Caroline
patronizing Vera with pretence of
affectionate pleading was to him as unwelcome
as surprising.

Grey had not arrived when he left the
House. The situation had to stand as it
was— those two women and Paul Wordsworth.
It might have passed off very
quietly — worse rencontres do — but it did
not ; for which in the first instance the
unworthiness of Paul and the impulsive
temperament of Caroline were to blame.
She was one of those women to whom ina
moment the past becomes the present,
and has unlimited powers of again and
again stirring the temper to activity as if
for the first time.

Caroline drew herself away from Vera
with a sweep of her heavy train, and

looked at him insolently as he entered
and shut the door.

Vera made the only possible remark :
Mr. Wordsworth — La Marquise Scalchi j
but I believe you have met before."

This time he bowed formally. He would
have gone but for his intention to have
an explanation. He was very angry —
angry with Vera also ; jumped at the
conclusion it was Grey's doing, in which
he was correct ; and then he said aloud :

Has !Sir Charles come back, Lady
Carstairs ? "

I expect him every moment."

If you will allow me I will wait and
see him."

I think that you did not recollect me
to-day," said the marquise, standing before
him. " My name is new to you."

"Yes, I did recollect you — perfectly," he
answered briefly.

Caroline was so furious that she could
control herself no longer. She had intended
to have left them with a word to
each of civility, poisoned with innuendo.

This is the man who "

Paul interrupted her beginning. Vera
had not before known that tone which he
took. Afterwards she understood why
men who '* feared no man," as they said,
were awed by him. Paul had had the
advantage of knowing Caroline's fits of
fury.

I know of old your capacity for making
scenes," he answered. " Pray spare
Lady Carstairs now."

From all I hear it would be a work
of charity to let her know what you are

before it is too late. But I forgot, you
are bound to marry her." The venom of
her look !

'' What do you mean ? " thundered Paul.
She shrugged her shoulders.
You are here now ; you have been
called to order by her husband in his

lifetime "

Are you mad ? " interrupted Vera, before
Paul could speak. " You ! to force
yourself into my room to insult me —
after your professions, too ! "

You know, it seems, what I mean.
I did not come here to insult you. Now
I am here I will not leave this room till
I show you that I, too, can guard myself.
You, Mr. Wordsworth, will say, ' No !
I will not know that woman ! ' I will
not now know you. And if you and your

Lady Carstairs do say one word against
me I will publish what I know. What
do you say to that ? "

That you may say what you please,"
began Vera.

Keep quiet, please. I will answer
her."

Let Lady Carstairs speak ; she is a
woman, and will know what an insulted
woman dare do. You, Mistake Wordsworth,
will please be a little quiet. You will
hear me."

You will hear nothing. Vera ! unless you
tell her / can do nothing against a lady ;
do you wish her to remain in your room.
Lady Carstairs?"

"You will put me out? Not till you

have heard me ; then I go ! "

"I understand nothing," said Vera.
VOL. iir. 41>

"What do you mean, madame? This is
extraordinary conduct'*

There can be no question whose conduct
is extraordinary, I wish to tell you
this only — then I go," she repeated.
There are two little stories about your
conduct, Mr. Paul Wordsworth, one was
many years ago ; there is another now.
You dare to come to my room before
strangers and you say in effect : ' She was a
bad woman who did share my story so
long ago.' Eh ! Men'' she says, " another
woman shares your story now, and the
first woman knows all about that ! What
you do to me I do to her — and that is pity
for her, she is a poor little thing ! "

'paul!" said Vera. "Is this ''

Yes, it is ' Caroline.' You know who
that is."

He has spoken to you of me ? So
much the better*'

Yes, for me," rejoined Paul. " But I
have never told her — never mean to tell
her — by what means my friends rescued
my letters — my life — from your hands. Tonight
I met the man who was with me
then as a witness. Having seen you this
afternoon, I asked him what you had been
doing since, and he told me. You are the
Marquise Scalchi — a good position is yours
now. Keep it ! Lady Carstairs wishes you
good-night."

In a minute. Does Lady Carstairs understand
if she attempts to injure me I know all
her secrets — she would not like them told ? "

"I have no secrets."

"Not about that letter found in your
room ? "

49-2

What ? " said Vera, answering scorn
with bewilderment.

My child, never mind ! How you came
by your scandal 1 know not, madame ; I
can guess, I think. If you like I can
name your informant, who was sent out
of the country as a proved liar by Sir
Ralph Carstairs' desire. Lady Carstairs
knows nothing of the matter ; not even
that she lost a letter of mine to you,
which I had put into her hands. This
was the ground of the trumped-up accusation
to which I see you refer. Are you
answered? Your story would fall to the
ground. I had no intention of allowing
strangers to see our meeting ; I thought
you were alone. Eemember this, Caroline,
when a man finds a woman he loved to be
^vhat I found you were, if he be a gentleman

he is indeed silent about lier, but also
silent to her, for ever ! But let one breath
of scandal arise about my promised wife,
traceable to you — it could be traceable to
none else — then I keep silence no longer.
Till then, I do, Marquise.'

I have knocked again and again," interrupted
Grey. " As I heard you had not
left I ventured to come again. Is anything
wrong ? "

The group were still standing in their
dramatic positions.

"I think not," said Caroline, though her
figure was heaving with rage. " I have
only to say before I go that you have
been kind enough to show me your promised
wife ; here, Mistake Wordsworth, is
my future husband ! "

Have you settled it all ? I knew it

would come to that ! " exclaimed Grey
eagerly to Vera. " I am so awfully
glad."

A little later, perhaps, Grey might Jinow
the meaning of the triumphant smile, of
Caroline, but he had taken all differences
-as settled when he found the trio together,
and on Caroline's face was the look of
one supremely benevolent. . i

Tell them to go," said Vera, suddenly,
but she needed not, for, with a keen sense
of the dangers of anti-climax, Caroline
withdrew. She certainly withdrew. The
word is appropriate to the histrionic talent
shown in that going out.
•■ Vera waited a moment.

Paul began to say, " What, in the name
of fortune "

The bad, wicked woman ! " interrupted

Vera. " To dare to come here, and to
speak against us like that ! "

The us was sufficient for Wordsworth.
He sat down beside her. " That woman
shall never vex us again. Can you trust
me ? You have seen her now — do you
think she has anything to tell you that
you wish to hear about me ? "

But why ? I don't understand you."
Quite right. There is a good deal in
this little scene, which there is no necessity
for you to understand yet. Let us spend
a few moments in pleasant things. You
trust me ? "
• "Need you ask?"
♦' * ♦ ♦ *

It was not till the next year that the
marriage took place, and by that time
another betrothal was announced. Sir

Charles Carstairs celebrated his majority
with his marriage festivities in the following
autumn. He and Anice — 7iee Bentley —
have a very fair chance of happiness.
Charlie has come out of his time of probation
very well, and the young bride and
bridegroom are, as is always said, " perfectly
devoted to each other."

Did Grey marry the marquise after
all?

"Any action of Grey's," Paul Wordsworth
had once said, " is based on the chance of
the moment, rather than on the argument
of a month."

Chance had it here ; he married the
marquise ; but argument estranged hin
for ever from Wordsworth. The two men
quarrelled — as might have been expected
under the circumstances — at least, Grey

abused Wordsworth, and Wordsworth would
not speak to Grey. It was the marquise —
though Grey did not know it, so much
must be said for him — who was at the
bottom of a semi public story which a little
later gave the Wordsworthss much annoyance.


Still, the Wordsworthss, in regard to their
neighbours, are people who try to act upto
their own standard of right and wrong ;
they make mistakes, but they do not drift
on any current which sets in. So they
could afford to wait.

Perhaps they needed some check to their
great and growing happiness, for it was very
perfect ; though life for them could never
be only a search for pleasure, and enjoyment
can never be as dreamless to those
who have been once troubled.

At the next election Grey Meredith stood
again, and was thrown out. Then the
Meredith altogether disappeared from the
view of the Wordsworthss. Across the hills,
from another valley of social life, there
sometimes floated to the Wordsworthss
amusing tidings of Grey's being kept in
order when he manifested anything of the
old propensity to devote himself to any
pretty woman with all his heart, for the
moment.

The general result of the same election
was also to upset the Government, but,
for private reasons, neither Paul nor Vera
regretted the fact that once more their
side were thrown out of office.

I have indeed been happy ever since
our marriage," said Paul Wordsworth,
looking proudly at his beautiful young

wife — a very different woman was Mrs.
Wordsworth from Lady Car stairs — ** but I
have more time to enjoy being happy now
that we are again in opposition."

THE EN1>.

At all Libraries in Town and Country.

ROBERT HOLT'S ILLUSION. By M. Linskill. 6s.

MIRACLE GOLD. By Richard Dowling. 3 vols.

LADY STELLA AND HER LOVER. By Henry

Solly. 3 vols.

A WOMAN'S FACE. By Florence Warden. 3 vols.

IDLE TALES. By Mrs. Riddell. 6s.

FOR FREEDOM. By Tight Hopkins. 2 vols.

MISER FAREBROTHER. By B. L. Farjeon. 3 vols.

A VOICE IN THE WILDERNESS. By Caroline

FOTUERGILL. 3 Vols.

MARVEL. By the Author of " Molly Bawn."

AN ADVENTURESS. By the Author of ^' For Love
and Honour." 2 vols.

MOLLY'S STORY. 3 vols.

UNCLE BOB'S NIECE. By Leslie Keith. 3 vols.

THE NUN'S CURSE. By Mrs. Riddell. 3 vols.

A PRINCE OF THE BLOOD. By James Payn.
3 vols.

ONE MAID'S MISCHIEF. By G. Manville Fenn.

3 vols.

BIOGRAPHY AND HISTORY,

THE MEMOIRS OF AN ARABIAN PRINCESS.

An Autobiography. Crown 8vo. 6s.

ADAMS, W. H. D.
THE HEALING ART: a History of Medicine

and Medical Celebrities from the Earliest Times to the
Present Day. 2 vols. Demy 8vo. 25s.

ARNOLD. REV. F.
ROBERTSON OF BRIGHTON : with some Notes of
His Times and His Contemporaries. Post 8vo. 9s.

BEAUFORT, R. LEDOS DE.
THE ABBE LISZT : the Story of His Life. Crown
8vo. With Three Portraits. 6s.

BROGLIE, DUG DE.
THE PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS OF THE

DUC DE Broglie. Edited by K. L. de Beaufort. 2 vols.
Demy 8vo. With a Portrait on Steel. sos.

DAUNT, W. J. O'NEILL.
Eighty-five YEARS OF IRISH HISTORY

(1800-1885) 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 21s.
%* A New Edition, with additional matter, in one vol., price 6s.,
is now ready.

FITZGERALD, PERCY.
THE LIFE AND TIMES OF JOHN WILKES.

2 vols. 21s.

ELLIOTT, FRANCES.
OLD COURT LIFE IN FRANCE. Royal 8vo.

With Twenty whole-page engravings. 7s. 6d.

FROST, THOMAS.
RECOLLECTIONS OF A COUNTRY Journalist.
New Edition. 6s.

HOG AX, J. F. 4' SIR CHAS. GAVAX DUFFY.
THE IRISH IX AUSTRALIA. Third and Cheaper
Edition. Boards, 2s. 6d. Cloth, as. 6d.

KROPOTKIXE, PRINCE,
IX RUSSIAN AND FRENCH PRISONS. Large

post 8vo. With a Plan of the Fortress of St. Peter and St.
Paul. 7s, 6d.

MOLLOY, J. FITZGERALD.
COURT LIFE BELOW STAIRS ; or, London under

the Four Georges. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 12s.
FAMOUS PLAYS, from Congreve's " Love for Love,"

to Lytton's " Lady of Lyons." Large Post 8vo. 10s. 6d.
ROYALTY RESTORED: or, London under Charles IL

A New and Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo. 6s.

LEGGE, ALFRED 0.
THE UNPOPULAR KING : The Life and Times of
Richard III. 2 vols. Demy Svo. With Sixteen Illustrations.
sos.

O'CONNOR, T. P.
GLADSTONE'S HOUSE OF COMMONS. Demy

Svo. 12s. 6d.
THE PARNELL MOVEMENT. 26th thousand,
Paper cover, Is. Cloth, 2s.

O'SHEA, JOHN AUGUSTUS.
AN IRONBOUXD CITY : Five Months of Peril and
Privation in Besieged Paris. 2 vols. Crown Svo. 21s.

LEAVES FROM THE LIFE OF A SPECIAL

CORRESPONDENT. 2 vols. Crown Svo. 21s.
ROMANTIC SPAIN : a Record of Personal Experiences.
2 vols. Crown Svo. 21s.

RAD BE, FELIX.
SHELLEY : THE MAX AND THE POET. 2 vols.
21s.

ROOSEVELT, BLANCHE.
VERDI, Milan, AXD " OTHELLO." With Eighteen

Illustrations. Imp. 16mo. Gilt top. 7s. 6d.

SAND, GEORGE.

THE LIFE Ard LETTERS OF GEORGE SAND:

With a Biographical Sketch by E. L. de Beaufort. 3 vols.
Demy 8vo. 36s.

SMITH, GEORGE BARNETT.
VICTOR HUGO : His Life and Work. Crown 8yo.
With an Engraved Portrait of Hugo. 6s.

'' stepniak:'

RUSSIA UNDER THE Tears. Crown 8vo. 6s.

STRAUSS, G. L. M.
THE EMPEROR William : The Story of a Great
King and a. Good Man. Crown 8vo. 6s.

WALL, A. H.
FIFTY YEARS OF A GOOD QUEEN'S REIGN.

Imp. 16mo. With Six portraits. 3s. 6d. Gilt edges. 4s. 6d.

Wool, MADAM JANKA.
FRANCOIS LISZT : Recollections of a Compatriot.
Crown 8vo. 6s.

EDUCATION.

REED, S. P.
THE CANDIDATE'S LATIN GRAMMAR. Crown

8vc. 3s. 6s.

ESSAYS.

ARNOLD, REV. F.
Three-cornered ESSAYS. Crown 8vo. Ss. 6d.

BUCHANAN, ROBERT.
A LOOK ROUND LITERATURE. Crown 8vo. 6s.

DOWLING, RICHARD.
IGNORANT ESSAYS. Second Edition. Foolscap
8vo. Bevelled boards. 5s.

DUNPHIE, CHARLES J.
THE CHAMELEON. Crown 8vo. 6s.

MOULTON, LOUISE CHANDLER.
OURSELVES AND OUR NEIGHBOURS: Short
Chats on Social Topics. Foolscap 8vo. 3s. 6d.

WALKER, THOMAS.
THE ORIGINAL. Crown 8yo. 3s. 6d.

FICTION.

AUTHOR OF 'for LOVE AND HONOUR:
AN ADVENTURESS. 2 vols. 21s.

AUTHOR OF '' MEHALAHr
LITTLE TUTEN^^Y. Is.

AUTHOR OF " MOLLY BAWN.''

MARVEL. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

A MENTAL STRUGGLE. 6s.

A MAIDEN ALL FORLORN. 2s.

LADY Walworth's DIAMONDS. Is.

HER WEEK'S AMUSEMENT. 2s.

A MODERN CIRCE. Three vols. 31s. 6d.

AIDE, HAMILTON.
PASSAGES FROM THE LIFE OF A LADY. 3s. 6d.

ALLEN, F. M.
THROUGH GREEN GLASSES. 6s.

Appleton, G, W.

A TERRIBLE LEGACY. 6s.
JACK ALLYN'S FRIENDS. 3s. 6d.
FROZEN HEARTS. 3s. 6d.

BARRETT, FRANK.
LIEUTENANT BARNABAS. 3s. 6d.
HIS HELPMATE. 6s.
HONEST DAVIE. 2s.
JOHN FORD. Two vols. 12s.
FOUND GUILTY. Three vols. 31s. 6d.
THE GREAT HESPER. Is.
FOLLY MORRISON. 2s.

Belgrade, DALRYMPLE J.

LUCK AT THE DIAMOND FIELDS. 6s.

Bethany-ED WARDS, M.
THE FLOWER OF DOOM. 2s.

BIDDLE-COPE, THE MARQUIS.
MAD. 6s.

Blackburn, G. M. IRELAND.

IN OPPOSITION. 3 vols. [7/^ May.

BLINKHOOLEE.''
A TORY LORDLING. Three vols. 31s. 6d.

CAMERON, MRS. H. Loveth.
A LIFE'S MISTAKE. 3s. 6d.

Carson, S.
LOVE, THE CONQUEROR. Three vols. 31s. 6d.

COLLINS, MABEL.
THE PRETTIEST WOMAN IN WARSAW. 2s.
LORD VANECOURT's DAUGHTER. Three vols. 31s. 6d.

CROKER, B. M.

DIANA BARRINGTON. 3 vols. [In the Press.

A BIRD OF PASSAGE. 6s.
PROPER PRIDE. 2s.
PRETTY MISS NEVILLE. 2s.

DE LILLE, J. D.
CANON LUCIFER. 2s.

DOWLING, RICHARD.
MIRACLE GOLD. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
THE SKELETON KEY. Is.
UNDER ST. PAUL'S. 2s.
THE DUKE'S SWEETHEART. 2s.
TEMPEST DRIVEN. 6s.
FATAL BONDS. Three vols. 31s. 6a.

DOWNEY, EDMUND.

A HOUSE OF TEARS. Is.

IN ONE TOWN. 3s. 6H.

ANCHOR WATCH YARNS. 3s. 6d.

FARJEON, B. L.

MISER FAREBROTHER. 3 vols. Sis. 6d.

A SECRET INHERITANCE. Three vols. 31s. 6d.

THE Tragedy OF FEATHERSTONE. 2s.

THE SACRED Suggest. lis.

GREAT PORTER SQUARE. 2s.

IN A SILVER SEA. 2s.

THE HOUSE OF WHITE SHADOWS. 2s.

GRIF. 2s.

MOLKA. Is.

Penn, G. MANVILLE.

ONE MAID'S MISCHIEF. Three vols. 31s. cl.
THIS MAN'S WIFE. Three vols. 31s. 6d.
MASTER OF THE CEREMONIES. 6s.
IN JEOPARDY. 6s.
DOUBLE CUNNING. 2s.
THE BAG OF DIAMONDS. Is.
THE DARK HOUSE. Is.
EVE AT THE WHEEL. Is.
THE CHAPLAIN'S CRAZE. Is.

THE Story OF ANTHONY GRACE. With Numerous Illustrations
by Gordon Browne. 6s.

FEN BALL, PERCY.

SEX TO THE LAST. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
SPIDERS AND FLIES. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

Fol, MADAME.

THE LAST STAKE. 2s.

FORRESTER, MRS.

AN IMPECUNIOUS LADY. Is.
VIVA. 2s.

FOTHERGILL, CAROLINE.
A VOICE IN THE WILDERNESS. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
AN ENTHUSIAST. 3 vols. Sis. 6d.

GIBNEY, SOMERVILLE.

JOHN London : a Story of the Days of Roger Bacon. With

Illustrations by M. Fitzgerald. 6s.
THE NEW RIVER : a Romance of the Days of Hugh Myddel-

ton. 3s. 6d.

GIFT, The.
LIL LORIMER. 6s.

GLYNN, J.

THE FOX AND THE GOOSE : a Story of the Curragh of
Kildare. 3s. 6d.

GRANT, JAMES.
LOVE'S LABOUR WON. 3 vols.

HARRISON, MRS. BURTON.
FOLK AND FAIRY TALES. 6s.

HARTE, Bred.

SNOWBOUND AT EAGLE'S. 2s.

HILLARY, MAX.
A DEADLY ERRAND. Is.

HOPKINS, Tight.
FOR FREEDOM. 2 vols. 21s.

HUGO, VICTOR.

THE OUTLAW OF ICELAND. 2s. 6d.

KEEN AN, HENRY F.

THE ALIENS. 6s.

KEITH, LESLIE.

THE CHILCOTES. 6s.

UNCLE BOB'S NIECE. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

KING, RICHARD ASHE {'' Basin).
A SHADOWED LIFE. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
COQUETTE'S CONQUEST. 2s.

LESTER, H. FRANCIS.
UNDER TWO Fig-trees. 3s. 6d.

MACKAY, CHARLES.
THE TWIN SOUL; OR, THE STRANGE ADVENTURES
OF MR. RAMESES. 2 vols. 21s.

MACQUOID, KATHARINE S.
MRS. Rumble's SECRET. Crown 8vo.
AT TEE RED GLOVE. 6s.
LOUISA. 2s.
SIR JAMES APPLEBY. 3 vols. sis. 6d.

MANN, MRS. Firman.
COWARD AND COQUETTE. 3s. 6d.

MARTIN, MRS. HERBERT.

FROM THE SILENT PAST. 2 vols. 21s.
AMOR Vinci. 2 vols. 21s.

Terrified, FRANK.

MOLLY'S STORY : a Family History. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

MOLLOY, J. FITZGERALD.
A MODERN MAGICIAN. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
THAT VILLAIN ROMEO. 2s.
WHAT HAST THOU DONE? 2s. [In the Press.

MURRAY, I). CHRISTIE.

A NOVELIST'S NOTE BOOK. 6s.

O'BRIEN, FITZJAMES.

THE DIAMOND LENS. With a Biographical Sketch of the
Author of William Winter. 3s. 6d.

OLIPHANT, MRS.
OLIVER'S BRIDE. Is.

PAN TON, J. E.
A TANGLED CHAIN. 2 vols. 21s.
LESS THAN KIN. 3s. 6d.

PAXTON, M. W.

WHERE TEMPESTS BLOW. 3s. 6d.
MISS ELVESTER's GIRLS. 3s. 6d.

Pain, JAMES.
A PRINCE OF THE BLOOD. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

PHILIPS, F. C.

AS IN A Looking-glass. 2s.
THE DEAN AND HIS DAUGHTER. 2s.
JACK AND THREE JILLS. 2s.
A LUCKY YOUNG WOMAN. 2s.
SOCIAL VICISSITUDES. 2s.

Liddell, MRS. J. H.

IDLE TALES. 6s.

MISS GASCOIGNE. 2s.

THE NUN'S CURSE. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

RITA.''
THE LADYE NANCYE. 2s.
GRETCHEN. 6s.

ROOSEVELT, BLANCHE.

THE COPPER Queen. 3 vols. Sis. 6d.

RUMCFMAN, JAMES.

THE CHEQUERS : Being THE NATURAL HISTORY OF
A PUBLIC HOUSE. Crown 8vo. 2s.

SMITH, MRS. J. GREGORY.

ATLA : a Story of the Lost Island. 3s. 6d.

SOLLY, HENRY.
LADY STELLA AND HER LOVER. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

THOMAS, ANNIE.
A Reigning FAVOURITE. 3s. 6d.

Tristan, W. Outran.

A STRANGE AFFAIR. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.
COMEDIES FROM A COUNTRY SIDE. 3s. 6d.

Tatler, SARAH.

LOGIE TOWN. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

WARDEN, FLORENCE.

A WOMAN'S FACE. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

SCHEHERAZADE : A LONDON NIGHT'S Entertainment.
3 vols. 31s. 6d.
A PRINCE OF DARKNESS. Is.

WEBBER, BYRON.

IN LUCK'S WAY. 3s. 6d.

Stall, WILLIAM.

TWO PINCHES OF SNUFF. 3s. 6d.

HER TWO MILLIONS. 3 vols. 31s. 6d.

THE OLD FACTORY. 2s.

RED RYVINGTON. 2s.

RALPH NORBRECK's TRUST. 2s.

FOLK LORE.

HARRISON, MRS. BURTON.
FOLK AND FAIRY TALES. Crown 8vo. With 24

whole-page engravings, by Walter Crane. 6s.

STUART-grannie, J.

GREEK FOLK SONGS. With an Essay ou " The Science of
Folklore." New Edition.

WILDE, LADY ('' SPERANZA'').
ANCIENT LEGENDS, MYSTIC CHARMS AND

SUPERSTITIONS OF IRELAND. With a Chapter on the
Ancient Races of Ireland by Sir William Wilde. 6s.

MILITARY.

DOUG LA S, WIL LI A M.
DUELLING DAYS IN THE ARMY. Imp. 16mo.

7s. 6d.

KOETTSCHAU, LIEUT. COL.
THE COMING FRANCO-GERMAN WAR. Translated
by John Hill. Large post 8vo. 7s. 6d.

POETRY.

ADAMS, W. DAVENPORT.
SONGS FROM THE NOVELISTS. Foolscap 4to.

Printed in Brown Ink on hand-made Paper. 7s. 6d.

HAMILTON, EDWIN.
THE MODERATE MAN, AND OTHER Humorous
POEMS. With numerous illustrations by Harry
Furniss. [/?i the Press.

MURRAY, D. CHRISTIE.
A BUNCH OF WILD FLOWERS. lln the Press.

THEOLOGY.

ARNOLD, REV. F.
ROBERTSON OF BRIGHTON. Post 8vo. 9s.

COLLINS, MABEL.
THROUGH THE GATES OF GOLD. A Fragment
of Thought. Foolscap 8vo. White Cloth. Gilt Top. 4s. 6d.

CURTIS, GEORGE Tickler.
CREATION OR EVOLUTION? Demy 8vo. 10s. Gd.

WELD ON, REV. G. W.
TILLOTSON's SERMONS. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

TRAVEL.

BATES, E. KATHARINE.
A YEAR IN THE GREAT REPUBLIC. 2 vols.
Crown 8vo, 21s.

CONN, WILLIAM.
JAPANESE LIFE, LOVE, AND LEGEND. From

the French of Maurice Dcbard. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

DODD, ANNA BOWMAN.
CATHEDRAL DAYS ; A TOUR THROUGH

SOUTHERN ENGLAND. Crown 8vo. "With Numerous
Illustrations. 6s.

HARDY, IZA DUFFUS.
ORANGES AND ALLIGATORS : Sketches of South

Florida Life. Crown 8vo. 5s.

Keene, JOHN F.
THREE YEARS OF A WANDERER'S LIFE.

New Edition. 3s. 6d.
SIX MONTHS ON THE HEJAZ. Crown 8vo. 6s.

MISCELLANEOUS.

FROM KITCHEN TO GARRET. A New Work on
Household Management. By Mrs. Panton. With Illustrations.
Crown Svo. 6s.

GRACE AND FOLLY : DANCERS AND DANCING.

Illustrated Wrapper. By Edward Scott. Is.

ECCLESIASTICAL ENGLISH. By George Washington
Moon. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

LIVING PARIS : A Guide to the Manners, Monuments,
and Institutions of the People. Foolscap 8vo. With
Maps and Plans. 6s.

TRAVELS IN THE INTERIOR ; OR, THE

WONDERFUL ADVENTURES OF LUKE AND BELINDA.

Edited by a London Physician. Illustrated by Harry

Furnish. Large Crown 8vo. Gilt top. 6s.

*^* An attempt to teach the anatomy and physiology of the human

body in a novel and entertaining manner.

COMMON SENSE IN THE NURSERY. By

Marion Garland. Crown 8vo . 2s. 6d.

DISHES AND DRINKS; OR, PHILOSOPHY IN

THE KITCHEN. ^^ G. L. M. Strauss. New and Cheaper
Edition. Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

WIT AND WISDOM OF THE LATE EMPEROR

WILLIAM. Is.

ILLUSTRATED BOOKS SUITABLE FOR
PRESENTS OR PRIZES.

THE MODERATE MAN, AND OTHER Humorous

VERSES. By Edwin Hamilton. With twelve
original whole-page illustrations by Harry Furnish. Foolscap
quarto.

THROUGH GREEN GLASSES. By F. M. Allen.
Illustrations by M. Fitzgerald. Cloth gilt. 6s.

THE STORY OF ANTHONY GRACE. By G. Manville

Fenn. Illustrations by Gordon Browne. Cloth gilt,
bevelled boards. 6s.

VERDI, MILAN AND " OTHELLO." By Blanche

EoosEVELT. With Eighteen whole-page illustrations. Cloth
gilt. 7s. 6s.

AT THE RED GLOVE. By Katharine S. Macquoid.

Illustrations by C. S. Reiniiart. Cloth gilt. 6s.

TRAVELS IN THE INTERIOR; OR, THE Wonderful
ADVENTURES OF LUKE AXD BELINDA.

Illustrations by Harry Furniss. Cloth gilt, bevelled boards.
6s.

JOHN 0' LONDON : a Story of the Days of Roger
Bacon. By Somerville Gibney. Illustrations by X. Fitzgerald.
Cloth gilt, bevelled boards. 6s.

FOLK AND FxilRY TALES. By Mrs. Burton
Harrison. With twenty-four original whole-page illustrations
by Walter Crane. 2nd Edition. Crown 8vo. In handsomely
designed cover, gilt edges. 6s.

CATHEDRAL DAYS : a Tour through Southern
England. By Anna Bowman Dodd. With Illustrations from
Sketches and Photographs. 6s.

OLD COURT LIFE IN FRANCE. By Mrs. Frances
Elliott, With twenty-one original whole-page Illustrations
Royal 8vo. 7s. 6d.

FIFTY YEARS OF A GOOD QUEEN'S REIGN.

By A. H. Wall. With six Portraits. Imp. 16mo. Cloth,
3s. 6d. ; bevelled boards, gilt edges. 4s. 6d.

SIX SHILLING NOVELS.

GRETCHEN. Ey Rite.

MAD. By the Marquis Biddle-Cope.

LUCK AT THE DIAMOND FIELDS. By D. J. Belgbavb.

JOHN 0' LONDON. By Somerville Gibney.

THE STORY OF ANTHONY GRACE. By G. Manilla Fink.

THROUGH GREEN GLASSES. By F. M. Allen,

AT THE RED GLOVE. By K. S. Macquoid.

A BIRD OF PASSAGE. By B. M. Croaker.

HIS HELPMATE. By Frank Barrett.

A TERRIBLE LEGACY. By G. W. Appleton.

THE MASTER OF THE CEREMONIES. By G. Danville

Fern.
IN JEOPARDY. By G. Manville Fenn.
THE ALIENS. By'HEXRY F. Keenan.
AS IN A Looking-glass. By F. C. Philips.
A LUCKY YOUNG WOMAN. By F. C Philips.
TEMPEST DRIVEN. By Richard Dowling.
A MENTAL STRUGGLE. By the Author of " Molly Bawn."
LIL LORIMER. By The. Gift.
THE SACRED NUGGET. By B. L. Farjeon.
THE CHILCOTES. By Leslie Keith.

THREE-AND-SIXPENNY NOVELS.

PASSAGES FROM THE LIFE OF A LADY. By Hamilton Aid.

IN LUCK'S WAY. By Byron Webber.

MISS ELVESTER's GIRLS. By M. W. Paxton.

WHERE TEMPESTS BLOW. By M. W. Paxton.

THE DIAMOND LENS. By Fitzjames O'Brien.

THE FOX AND THE GOOSE : A Story of the Curragh of Kildare.

FROZEN HEARTS. By G. W. Appleton.

JACK ALLYN'S FRIENDS. By G. W. Appleton.

LIEUTENANT BARNABAS. By Frank Barrett.

TWO PINCHES OF SNUFF. By William Westall.

THE CONFESSIONS OF A COWARD AND COQUETTE.

By the Author of "The Parish of Hilly."
A LIFE'S MISTAKE. By Mrs. Lovett Cameron.
IN ONE TOWN. By E. Downy.
ANCHOR WATCH YARNS. By E. Downey.
ATLA. By Mrs. J. Gregory Smith.
LESS THAN KIN. By J. E. Panton.
A REIGNING FAVOURITE. By Annie Thomas.
THE NEW RIVER. By Somerville Gibney.
UNDER TWO FIG TREES. By H. Francis Lester.
COMEDIES FROM A COUNTRY SIDE. By W. Outran

Tristan.

Two-shilling NOVELS.

DOUBLE CUNNING. Bv G. Manville Fenn.
THE TRAGEDY OF FEATHERSTONE. By B. L.

Farjeox.
THE DINGY HOUSE AT KENSINGTON.
THE OLD FACTORY. By William Westall.
RED RYVINGTON. Bv William Westall.
RALPH NORBRECK's TRUST. Bv Wm. Westall.
THE CHEQUERS. By James Runciman.
CANON LUCIFER. By J. D. Delille.
THAT VILLAIN ROMEO. By Fitzgerald Molly.
LOUISA. By K. S. Macquoid.
THE LADYE NANCYE. Bv "Rite."
MERE Shaking. Bv J. F. Keene.
A LUCKY YOUNG WOMAN. Bv F. C. Philips.
THE DEAN S: HIS DAUGHTER. i3y F. C. Philips.
JACK AND Three JILLS. Bv F. C. Philips.
AS IN A Looking-glass. By F. C. Philips.
SOCIAL VICISSITUDES. Bv F. C. Philips.
PROPER PRIDE. By B. M.'Croker.
PRETTY MISS NEVILLE. By B. M. CROKER.
MISS GASCOIGNE. Bv Mrs. Riddell.
THE PRETTIEST WOMAN IN WARSAW. By

Mabel Collins.
A MAIDEN ALL FORLORN. By the Author of

Molly Baw.v."
HER WEEK'S AMUSEMENT. By the Author of

"Molly Bawd."
A COQUETTE'S CONQUEST. Bv "Basil."
IN A SILVER SEA. By B. L. Farjeon.
GREAT PORTER SQUARE. By B. L. Farjeon.
THE HOUSE OF WHITE SHADOWS. By B. L.

Farjeox.
GRIF. By. B. L. Farjeon.
THE LAST STAKE. By Madame Poli.
SNOWBOUND AT EAGLE'S. By Bret Harte.
THE FLOWER OF Doom. By M. Bentham-Edwards.
VIVxV. By Mrs. Forrester.
FOLLY MORRISON. By Frank Barrett.
THE MYSTERY OF Willard. By R. Dowling.
THE WEIRD SISTERS. By R. Dowling.
HONEST DAVIE. By Frank Barrett.
UNDER ST. PAUL'S. By R. Dowling.
THE DUKE'S SWEETHEART. By R. Dowling.

SHILLING NOVELS.

AN IMPECUNIOUS LADY. By Mrs. Forrester.
THE GREAT HESPER. By Frank Barrett.
A BAG OF DIAMONDS. By G. M. Fenn.
THE DARK HOUSE. By G. M. Fenn. 3rd Edition.
EVE AT THE WHEEL. By G. M. Fenn.
THE CHAPLAIN'S CRAZE. By G. M. Fenn.
LITTLE TU'PENN Y. By the Author of " Mehalah."
A HOUSE OF TEARS. By E. Downey. 12th Edition.
LADY VAL WORTH'S DIAMONDS. By the Author

of "Phyllis." Third Edition.
A PRINCE OF DARKNESS. By the Author of

The House on the Marsh." Fifth Edition.
THE SKELETON KEY. By R. Dowling.
MOLKA. By B. L. Faejeon.
OLIVER'S BRIDE. By Mus. Oliphant.

*^* A series of " Half-crown Novels " is now being published
by Messrs. Ward & Downey, comprising works by
the following Authors : — The Author of " Molly Bawn,""
Frank Barrett, Miss Bentham-Edwards, Mrs. Lovett
Cameron, Mabel Collins, Mrs. Croaker, J. D. Delille,
Richard Dowling, B. L. Farjeon, G. M. Fenn, Mrs. Forrester,
Bret Harte, Pochard Ashe King, Mrs. Macquoid,
Fitzgerald Molly, F. C. Philips, Mrs. Riddell, "Rite,"
Annie Thomas, William Westall, &c. Each Novel will
be tastefully bound in cloth gilt, and will contain a
frontispiece by some well-known Artist.

*^* Messrs. Award & Downey's Illustrated Catalogue
contains Portraits of the Author of " Mehalah^'' the Author
of " Molly Bawn" G. W. Appleton, Frank Barrett, Mrs.
Lovett Cameron, Mabel Collins, Mrs. B. M. Croaker, Richard
Dowling, J. D. Delille, Charles Dual, B. L. Farjeon, George
Manville Fenn, Somerville Gibney, James Grant, Victor Hugo,
Bret Harte, Richard Ashe King C Basil), Mrs. Macquoid,
Fitzgerald Molly, O'Neill Daunt, John Augustus O'Shea, Mrs.
Panton, James Payn, F. C. Philips, Blanche Roosevelt, George
Sand, Florence Warden, William Westall, and Harry Furniss.

Ward (J Downey, Publishers, 12, York Street, Covent Garden.

UNIVERSITY OF Illinois-URBANA

3 0112 041407732
