m

ESP "?v h3

^ *#

i

%

Theft, mutilation, and undermining of books are reasons
for disciplinary action and may result in dismissal from
the University.
To renew call Telephone Center, 333-8400

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS LIBRARY AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN

HUG

AUG







L161— O-1096

BY THE AUTHOR OF

"THE DANVERS JEWELS."

Es list eine alter Geschichte."

IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

LONDON:
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

^ubltsfjcts in ©rtrinarg to $?cr Jftajrstg tfjc <&uftn,
1889.

(All rights reserved.)

C 4T4 s

TO

MY FATHER.

CHAPTER I.

Dear heart, Miss Ruth, my dear, now
don't ye be a-going yet, and me that hasn't
set eyes on ye this month and more, and as
hardly hears a body speak from morning till
night"

"Come, come, Mrs. Eccles, I am always
finding people sitting here. I expect to seethe
latch go every minute."

"Well, and if they do, and some folks are
always a-dropping in, and a-setting themselves
down, and a clack-clacking till a body can't
get a bit of peace ! And the things they
say! Eh! Miss Ruth, the things I have

VOL. I. T

heard folks say, a-setting as it might be
there, in poor Eccles his old chair by the
chimney, as the Lord took him in."

To the uninitiated, Mrs. Eccles' allusion
might have seemed to refer to photography.
But Ruth knew better ; a visitation from the
Lord being synonymous in Slumberleigh
parish with a fall from a ladder, a stroke of
paralysis, or the midnight cart-wheel that
disabled Brown when returning late from
the Blue Dragon "not quite himself."

"Lor!" resumed Mrs. Eccles, with an
extensive sigh, " there's a deal of talk in the
village now," glancing inquisitively at her
visitor, " about him as succeeds to old Mr.
Dare ; but I never listen to their tales."

They made a pleasant contrast to each
other, the neat old woman, with her shrewd
spectacled eyes and active hard-worked
fingers, and the young girl, tranquil, graceful,
sitting in the shadow, with her slender un-gloved
hands in her lap.

They were not sitting in the front parlour,

because Ruth was an old acquaintance ; but
Mrs. Eccles had a front parlour — a front
parlour with the bottled-up smell in it peculiar
to front parlours ; a parlour with a real
mahogany table, on which photograph albums
and a few select volumes were symmetrically
arranged round an inkstand, nestling in a
very choice woodwork mat ; a parlour with
wax flowers under glass shades on the
mantel-piece, and an avalanche of paper roses
and mixed paper herbs in the fireplace.

Ruth knew that sacred apartment well.
She knew the name of each of the books ;
she had expressed a proper admiration for
the wax flowers ; she had heard, though she
might have forgotten, for she was but young,
the price of the " real Brussels " carpet, and
so she might safely be permitted to sit in
the kitchen, and watch Mrs. Eccles darning
her son's socks.

I am almost afraid Ruth liked the kitchen
best, with its tiled floor and patch of afternoon
sun ; with its tall clock in the corner,

its line of straining geraniums in the low ,
and its high mantel-piece crowned
by two china dogs with red lozenges on
them, holding baskets in their mouths.

"Yes, a deal of talk there is, but nobody
rightly seems to know anything for certain,"
continued Mrs. Eccles, spreading out her
hand in the heel of a fresh sock, and
pouncing on a modest hole. " Ye see,
we never gave a thought to him y with
that great hearty Mr. George, his eldest
brother, to succeed when the old gentleman
went. And such a fine figure of a man in
his clothes as poor Mr. George used to be,
and such a favourite with his old uncle !
And then to be took like that, horseback
riding at polar, only six weeks after the old
gentleman ! But I can't hear as anybody's
set eyes on his half-brother as comes in for
the property now. He never came to
Vandon in his uncle's lifetime. They say
old Mr. Dare couldn't bide the French
madam as his brother took when his first

wife died — a foreigner, with black curls ; it
wasn't likely. He was always partial to Mr.
George, and he took him up when his father
died ; but he never would have anything to
say to this younger one, been' nothing' in the
world, so folks say, but half a French, and

black, like his mother. I wonder now "

began Mrs. Eccles tentatively, with her
usual love of information.

I wonder now," interposed Ruth quietly,
how the rheumatism is getting on ? I saw
you were in church on Sunday evening. "

Yes, my dear," began Mrs. Eccles, readily
diverted to a subject of such interest as herself.
" Yes, I always come to the evening
service now, though I won't deny as the
rheumatics are very pinching at times. But,
dear Lord ! I never come up to the stalls
near the chancel, so you ain't likely to seeme.
To see them Harrises always a-going'
up to the very top, it does go agen me. I
don't say as it's everybody as ought to take
the lowest place. The Lord knows I'm

not proud, but I won't go into them chairs
down by the font myself; but to see them
Harrises that to my certain knowledge hasn't
a bite of butcher's meat in their heads but
onset a week, a-settin themselves up "

Now, Mrs. Eccles, you know perfectly
well all the seats are free in the evening."

And so they may be, Miss Ruth, my
dear — and don't ye be a-getting up yet — and
good Christians, I'm sure, the quality are to
abide it. And it did my heart good to hear
the Honourable John preaching as he did
in his new surplice (as Wider Egg always
puts too much blue in the surplices to my
thinking), all about rich and poor, and one
with another. A beautiful sermon it was.
But I wouldn't come up like they Harrises.
There's things as is suitable, and there's
things as is not. No, I keep to my own
place; and I had to turn out old Bessie
Pugh this very last Sunday night, as I found
a-cocked up there, tho' I was not a matter
of five minutes late. Bessie Pugh always

was one to take upon herself, and, as I often
says to her, when I hear her a-going' on about
free grace and the like, ' Bessie,' I says, 'if
I was a wider on the parish, and not so
much as a pig to fat up for Christmas, and
coming to church regular on Loaf Sunday,
which it's not that I ain't sorry for ye, but
/ wouldn't take upon myself, if I was you, to
talk of things as I'd better leave to them as
is beholden to nobody and pays their rent

regular. I've no patience But eh, dear

Miss Ruth ! look at that gentleman going
down the road, and the dog too. Why, ye
haven't so much as got up. He's gone.
He was a foreigner, and no mistake. Why,
good Lord ! there he is coming back again.
He's seen me through the winder. Mercy
on us ! he's opening the gate ; he's coming
to the door."

As she spoke, a shadow passed before the
window, and some one knocked.

Mrs. Eccles hastily thrust her darning-needle
into the front of her bodice, the

general rendezvous of the pins and needles
of the establishment, and proceeded to open
the door and plant herself in front of it.

Ruth caught a glimpse of an erect light-grey
figure in the sunshine, surmounted by a
brown face, and the lightest of light-grey
hats. Close behind stood a black poodle of
a dignified and self-engrossed deportment,
wearing its body half shaved, but breaking
out in ruffles round its paws, and a
tuft at the end of a stiffly undemonstrative
tail.

The key of the church is kep' at Joneses
by the pump," said Mrs. Eccles, in the
brusque manner peculiar to the freeborn
Briton when brought in contact with a
foreigner.

Thank you, madam," was the reply, in
the most courteous of tones, and the grey hat
was off in a moment, showing a very dark,
cropped head, "but I do not look for the
church. I only ask for the way to the house
of the pastor, Mr. Alwynn."

Mrs. Eccles gave full and comprehensive
directions in a very high key, accompanied
by much gesticulation, and then the grey hat
was replaced, and the grey figure, followed
by the black poodle, marched down the little
garden path again, and disappeared from
view.

Mrs. Eccles drew a long breath, and
turned to her visitor again.

Well, my dear, and did ye ever see the
like of that ? And his head, Miss Ruth !
Did ye take note of his head ? Not so much
as a shudder of a parting. All the same all
the way over ; and asking the way to the
Rectory. Why, you ain't never going yet ?
Well, good-bye, my dear, and God bless ye !
And now," soliloquized Mrs. Eccles, as Ruth
finally escaped, " I may as well run across to
Joneses, and see if they know anything about
the gentleman, and if he's put up at the
inn."

It was a glorious July afternoon, but it

was hot. The roads were white, and the
tall hedgerows grey with dust. A waggon-load
of late hay, with a swarm of children
just out from school careering round it, was
coming up the road in a dim cloud of dust.
Ruth, who had been undecided which way to
take, beat a hasty retreat towards the churchyard,
deciding that, if she must hesitate, todo
so among cool tombstones in the shade.
She glanced up at the church clock, as she
selected her tombstone under one of the
many yew trees in the old churchyard.
Half-past four, and already an inner voice
was suggesting tea ! To miss live o'clock
tea on a thirsty afternoon like this was not
to be thought of for a moment. She had
no intention of going back to tea at Atherton,
where she was staying with her cousins,
Mr. and Mrs. Dangers. Two alternatives
remained. Should she go to Slumberleigh
Hall close by, and see the Thursbys, who
she knew had all returned from London
yesterday, or should she go across the fields

to Slumberleigh Rectory, and have tea with
Uncle John and Aunt Fanny ?

She knew that Sir Charles Dangers, Ralph
Dangers's eldest brother, was expected at
Atherstone that afternoon. His aunt, Lady
Mary Cunningham, was also staying there,
partly with a view of meeting him. Ralph
Dangers had not seen his brother or Lady
Mary her nephew for some time, and, judging
by the interest they seemed to feel in his
visit, Ruth had determined not to interrupt a
family meeting, in which she imagined she
might be dc trop.

My fine tact," she thought, "will enable
them to have a quiet talk among themselves
till nearly dinner-time. But I must not
neglect myself any longer. The Hall is the
nearest, and the drive is shady ; but, to put
against that, Mabel will insist on showing 1
me her new gowns, and Mrs. Thursby will
make her usual remarks about Aunt Fanny.
No ; in spite of that burning expanse of
glebe, I will go to tea at the Rectory. I

have not seen Uncle John for a week, and —
who knows ? — perhaps Aunt Fanny may be
out."

So the gloves were put on, the crisp white
dress shaken out, the parasol put up, and
Ruth took the narrow church path across the
fields up to Slumberleigh Rectory.

For many years since the death of her
parents, Ruth Deyncourt had lived with
her grandmother, a wealthy, witty, and wise
old lady, whose house had been considered
one of the pleasantness in London by those
to whom pleasant houses are open.

Lady Deyncourt, a beauty in her youth, a
beauty in middle life, a beauty in her old
age, had seen and known all the marked
men of the last two generations, and had
reminiscences to tell which increased in point
and flavour, like old wine, the longer they
were kept. She had frequented as a girl the
Miss Berry' drawing-room, and people were
wont to say that hers was the nearest approach
to a salon which remained after the

Miss Berry disappeared. She had married
a grave politician, a rising man, whom she
had pushed into a knighthood, and at one
time into the ministry. If he had died
before he could make her the wife of a
premier, the disappointment had not been
without its alleviations. She had never
possessed much talent for domestic life, and,
the yoke once removed, she never felt the
least inclination to take it upon herself again.
As a widow, her way through life was one
long triumphal procession. She had daughters,
dull, tall, serious girls, with whom she
had nothing in common, whom she educated
well, brought out, laced in, and then married,
one after another, relinquishing the last with
the utmost cheerfulness, and refusing the
condolences of friends on her lonely position
with her usual frankness.

But her son, her only son, she had loved.
He was like her, and understood her, and
was at ease with her, as her daughters had
never been. The trouble of her life was

the death of her son. She got over it, as
she got over everything ; but when several
years afterwards his widow, with whom, it is
hardly necessary to say, she was not on
speaking terms, suddenly died (being a fainthearted,
feeble creature), Lady Deyncourt
immediately took possession of her grandchildren
— a boy and two girls — and proceeded
as far as in her lay to ruin the boy
for life.

"A woman," she was apt to remark in
after-years, " is not intended by nature to
manage any man except her husband. I ama
warning to the mothers, aunts, and grandmothers,
particularly the grandmothers, of
the future. A husband is a sufficient field
for the employment of a woman's whole
energies. I went beyond my sphere, and I
am punished."

And when Raymond Deyncourt finally
disappeared in America for the last time,
having been fished up therefrom on several
occasions, each time in worse case than the

last, she excommunicated him, and cheerfully
altered her will, dividing the sixty thousand
pounds she had it in her power to leave
between her two granddaughters, and letting
the fact become known, with the result that
Anna was married by the end of her second
season ; and if at the end of five seasons
Ruth was still unmarried, she had, as Lady
Deyncourt took care to inform people, no
one to thank for it but herself.

But in reality, now that Anna was provided
for, Lady Deyncourt was in no hurry to part
with Ruth. She liked her as much as it was
possible for her to like any one — indeed, I
think she even loved her in a way. She
had taken but small notice of her while she
was in the schoolroom, for she cared little
about girls as a rule ; but as she grew up tall,
erect, with the pale, stately beauty of a lily,
Lady Deyncourt's heart went out to her.
None of her own daughters had been so ,
so ornamental. Ruth's
clothes always looked well on her, and she

had a knack of entertaining people, and much
taste in the arrangement of flowers. Though
she had inherited the Deyncourt earnestness
of character, together with their dark serious
eyes and a certain annoying rigidity as to
right and wrote, these defects were counterbalanced
by flashes of brightness and humour
which reminded Lady Deyncourt of herself
in her own brilliant youth, and inclined her
tc be lenient, when in her daughters' cases
she would have been sarcastic. The old
woman and the young one had been great
friends, and not the less so perhaps because
of a tacit understanding which existed between
them that certain subjects should be avoided
upon which, each instinctively felt, they were
not likely to agree. And if the shrewd old
woman of the world ever suspected the
existence of a strength of will and depth of
character in Ruth, such as had in her own
early life been a source of annoyance and
perplexity to herself in her dealings with her
husband, she was skilful enough to ignore

any traces of it that showed themselves in
her granddaughter, and thus avoided those
collisions of will, the result of which she felt
might have been doubtful.

And so Ruth had lived a life full of varied
interests, and among interesting people, and
had been woke up suddenly in a grey and
frosted dawn to find that chapter of her life
closed. Lady Deyncourt, who never thought
of travelling without her maid and footman,
suddenly went on a long journey alone one
wild January morning, starting without any
previous preparation for a land in which she
had never professed much interest heretofore.
It seemed a pity that she should have
to die when she had so thoroughly acquired
the art of living with little trouble to herself,
and much pleasure to others ; but so it
was.

And then in Ruth's confused remembrance
of what followed, all the world seemed to
have turned to black and grey. There was
no colour anywhere, where all had been

VOL. I. 2

colour before. Miles of black cloth and
crape seemed to extend before her ; black
horses came and stamped black hoof-marks
in the snow before the door. Endless
arrangements had to be made, endless letters
to be written. Something was carried
heavily downstairs all in black, scoring the
wall at the turn on the stairs in a way which
would have annoyed Lady Deyncourt exceedingly
if she had been there to see it, but
she had left several days before it happened.
The last pale shadow of the kind, gay little
grandmother was gone from the great front
bedroom upstairs. Mr. Alwynn, one of
Ruth's uncles, came up from the country and
went to the funeral, and took Ruth away afterwards.
Her own sister Anna was abroad
with her husband, her brother Raymond had
not been heard of for years. As she drove
away from the house, and looked up at the
windows with wide tearless eyes, she suddenly
realized that this departure was final, that
there would be no coming back, no home left

for her in the familiar rooms where she and
another had lived so honor together.

Uncle John was by her side in the carriage,
patting her cold hands and telling her not to
cry, which she felt no inclination to do ; and
then, seeing the blank pallor in her face, he
suddenly found himself fumbling for his own
pocket handkerchief.

CHAPTER II.

On this particular July afternoon, Mr
Alwynn, or, as his parishioners called him,
The Honourable John," was sitting in his
arm-chair in the little drawing-room of
Slumberleigh Rectory. Mrs. Honourable
John was pouring out tea ; and here, once
and for all, let it be known that meals, particularly
five o'clock tea, will occupy a large
place in this chronicle, not because of any
importance especially attaching to them, but
because in the country, at least in Slumber-leigh,
the day is not divided by hours but by
the meals that take place therein, and to
write of Slumberleieh and its inhabitants
with disregard to their divisions of time is
impossible, and cannot be done."

So I repeat boldly, Mr. and Mrs. Alwynn
were at tea. They were alone together, for
they had no children, and Ruth Deyncourt,
who had been living with them since her
grandmothers death in the winter, was now
staying with her cousin, Mrs. Ralph Dangers,
at Atherstone, a couple of miles away.

If it had occasionally crossed Mr. Alvvynn's
mind during the last few months that he
would have liked to have a daughter like
Ruth, he had kept the sentiment to himself,
as he did most sentiments in the company of
his wife, who, while she complained of his
habit of silence, made up for it nobly herself
at all times and in all places. It had often
been the subject of vague wonder among his
friends, and even at times to Mr. Alwynn
himself, how he had come to marry " Fanny,
my love."

Mr. Alwynn dearly loved peace and quiet,
but these dwelt not under the same roof
with Mrs. Alwynn. Nay, I even believe, if
the truth were known, he liked order and

tidiness, judging by the exact arrangement of
his own study, and the rueful glances he
sometimes cast at the litter of wools and
letters on the newspaper table, and the gay
garden hats and goloshes, hidden but not
concealed, under the drawing-room sofa.
Conversation about the dearness of butchers'
meat and the enormities of servants palled
upon him, I think, after a time, but he had
taken his wife's style of conversation for
better for worse when he took her gaily
dressed self under those ominous conditions,
and he never showed impatience. He loved
his wife, but I think it grieved him when
smart-coloured glass vases were strewn
among the cherished bits of old china and
enamel which his soul loved. He did not
like chromo-lithographs or the framed photographs,
which Mrs. Alwynn called her
momentums of travel," among his rare old
prints either. He bore them, but after their
arrival in company with large and inappropriate
nails, and especially after the cut glass

candlesticks appeared on the drawing-room
chimney-piece, he ceased to make his little
occasional purchases of old china and old
silver. The curiosity shops knew him no
more, or if he still at times brought home
some treasure in his hat-box on his return
from Convocation, it was unpacked and
examined in private, and a little place was
made for it among the old Chelsea figures on
the bookcase in his study, which had stood
ever since he had inherited them from his
father on the drawing-room mantel-piece, but
had been silently removed when a pair of
comic china elephants playing on violins had
appeared in their midst.

Mr. Alwynn sighed a little when he looked
at them this afternoon, and shook his head ;
for had he not brought back in his empty
soup tin an old earthenware cow of Dutch
extraction which he had long: coveted on the
shelf of a parishioner ? He had bought it
very dear, for when in all his life had he
ever bought anything cheap ? And now, ashe

was tenderly wiping a suspicion of beef-tea
off it, he wondered, as he looked round
his study, where he could put it. Not among
the old oriental china, where bits of Wedgwood
had already elbowed in for want of
room elsewhere. Among his Lowestoft cups
and saucers ? Never. He would rather
not have it than see it there. He had a
vision of a certain bracket, discarded from the
hall, and put aside by his careful hands in
the lowest drawer of the cupboard by the
window, in which he kept little stores of
nails and string and brown paper, among
which " Fanny, my love " performed fearful
ravages when minded to tie up a parcel.

Mr. Alwynn nailed up the bracket under
an old etching, and placed the cow thereon,
and, after contemplating it over his spectacles,
went into the drawing-room to tea with his
wife.

Mrs. Alwynn was a stout, florid, good-humoured
looking woman, with a battered
fringe, considerably younger than her husband

in appearance, and with a tendency to bright
colours in dress.

Barnes is very poorly, my dear," said
Mr. Alwynn, patiently fishing out one of the
lumps of sugar which his wife had put in his
tea. He took one lump, but she took two
herself, and consequently always gave him
two. " I should say a little strong soup
would "

At this juncture the front door-bell rang,
and a moment afterwards "Mr. Dare" was
announced.

The erect, light-grey figure which had
awakened the curiosity of Mrs. Eccles came
in close behind the servant. Mrs. Alwynn
received a deep bow in return for her look
of astonishment ; and then, with an eager
exclamation, the visitor had seized both Mr.
Alwynn's hands, regardless of the neatly
folded slice of bread-and-butter in one of
them, and was shaking them cordially.

Mr. Alwynn looked for a moment as
astonished as his wife, and the blank, deprecating

glance he cast at his visitor showed
that he was at a loss.

The latter let go his hands, and spread his
own out with a sudden gesture.

"Ah! you do not know me," he said,
speaking rapidly ; " it is twenty years ago,
and you have forgotten. You do not remember
Alfred Dare, the little boy whom
you saw last in sailing costume, the little boy
for whom you cut the whistles, the son of
your old friend, Henry Dare ? "

Good gracious !" ejaculated Mr. Alwynn,
with a sudden flash of memory. " Henry's
other son. I remember now. It is Alfred,
and I remember the whistles too. You have
your mother's eyes. And, of course, you
have come to Vandon now that your poor

brother We have all been wondering

when you would turn up. My dear boy, I remember
you perfectly now ; but it is a longtime
ago, and you have changed very much."

Between eight years and twenty-eight
there is a great step," replied Dare, with a

brilliant smile. " How could I expect that
you should remember all at once ? But you
are not changed. I knew you the first
moment. It is the same kind, good face
which I remember well."

Mr. Alwynn blushed a faint blush, which
any word of praise could always call up ; and
then, reminded of the presence of Mrs.
Alwynn by a short cough, which that lady
always had in readiness wherewith to recall
him to a sense of duty, he turned to her
and introduced Dare.

Dare made another beautiful bow ; and
while he accepted a cup of tea from Mrs.
Alwynn, Mr. Alwynn had time to look
attentively at him with his mild grey eyes.
He was a slight, active-looking young man
of middle height, decidedly un-english in
appearance and manner, with dark, roving
eyes, moustaches very much twirled up, and
a lean brown face that was exceedingly
handsome in a style to which Mr. Alwynn
was not accustomed.

And this was Henry Dare's second son,
the son by his French wife, who had been
brought up abroad, of whom no one had
ever heard or cared to hear, who had now
succeeded, by his half-brother's sudden death,
to Vandon, a property adjoining Slumber-leigh.


The eager foreign face was becoming
familiar to Mr. Alwynn. Dare was like his
mother ; but he sat exactly as Mr. Alwynn
had seen his father sit many a time in that
very chair. The attitude was the same.
Ah ! but that flourish of the brown hands !
How unlike anything Henry would have
done ! And those sudden movements ! He
was roused by Dare turning quickly to him
again.

I am telling Mrs. Alwynn of my journey
here," he began ; " of how I miss my train ;
of how I miss my carriage, sent to meet me
from the inn ; of how I walk on foot up the
long hills ; and when I get there, they think
I am no longer coming. I arrived only last

night at Vandon. To-day I walk over to
see my old friend at Slumberleigh."

Dare leant forward, laying the tips of his
fingers lightly against his breast.

You seem to have had a good deal of
walking," said Mr. Alwynn, rather taken
aback, but anxious to be cordial ; " but, at
any rate, you will not walk back. You must
stay the night now you are here, mustn't he,
Fanny ?"

Dare was delighted — beaming. Then his
face became overcast. His eyebrows went
up. He shook his head. Mr. and Mrs.
Alwynn were most kind — but — he became
more and more dejected — a bag, a simple
valise —

It could be sent for.

Ah ! Mr. Alwynn was too good. He
revived again. He showed his even white
teeth. He was about to resume his tea,
when suddenly a tall white figure came lightly
in through the open French window, and a
clear voice began —

Oh, Uncle John, there is such a heathen
of a black poodle making excavations in the
flower-beds ! Do "

Ruth stopped suddenly as her eyes fell
upon the stranger. Dare rose instinctively.

"This is Mr. Dare, Ruth," said Mr.
Alwynn. " He has just arrived at Vandon."

Ruth bowed. Dare surpassed himself,
and was silent. All his smiles and flow of
small talk had suddenly deserted him. He
began patting his dog, which had followed
Ruth indoors, and a moment of constraint
fell upon the little party.

She is shy," said Dare to himself. " She
is adorably shy."

Ruth's quiet, self-possessed voice dispelled
that pleasing illusion.

I have had a very exhausting afternoon
with Mrs. Eccles, Aunt Fanny, and I have
come to you for a cup of tea before I go
back to Atherstone."

Why did you walk so far this hot afternoon,
my dear ; and how are Mrs. Dangers

and Lady Mary ; and is any one else staying
there ; and, my dear, are the dolls finished ? "

They are," said Ruth. " They are all
outrageously fashionable. Even Molly is
satisfied. There is to be a school-feast here
tomorrow," she added, turning to Dare, who
appeared bewildered at the turn the conversation
was taking. " All our energies for
the last fortnight have been brought to bear
on dolls. We have been dressing dolls
morning, noon, and night."

When is it to be, this school-feast ?" said
Dare eagerly. " I will buy one, three dolls."

After a lengthy explanation from Mrs.
Alwynn as to the nature of a school-feast as
distinct from a bazaar, Ruth rose to go, and
Mr. Alwynn offered to accompany her part
of the way.

And so that is the new Mr. Dare about
whom we have all been speculating," she
said, as they strolled across the fields together.
"He is not like his half-brother."

No ; he seems to be entirely a Frenchman.

You see, he was educated abroad, and
that makes a great difference. He was a
very nice little boy twenty years ago. I
hope he will turn out well, and do his duty
by the place."

The neighbouring property of Vandon,
with its tumbledown cottages, its neglected
people, and hard agent, were often in Mr.
Alwynn's thoughts.

Oh, Uncle John, he will, he must ! You
must help him and advise," said Ruth eagerly.
"He ought to stay and live on the place, and
look into things for himself."

I am afraid he will be poor," said Mr.
Alwynn meditatively.

"Anyhow, he will be richer than he was
before," urged Ruth, "and it is his duty todo
something for his own people."

When Ruth had said it was a duty, she
imagined, like many another young soul
before her, that nothing remained to be said,
having yet to learn how much beside often
remained to be done.

"We shall see," said Mr. Alwynn, who
had seen something of his fellow-creatures ;
and they walked on together in silence.

The person whose duty Ruth had been
discussing so freely, looked after the two
retreating figures till they disappeared, and
then turned to Mrs. Alwynn.

"You and Mr. Alwynn also go to the
school-feast tomorrow ?"

Mrs. Alwynn, a little nettled, explained
that of course she went, that it was her own
school-feast, that Mrs. Thursby at the Hall
had nothing to do with it. (Dare did not
know who Mrs. Thursby was, but he listened
with great attention.) She, Mrs. Alwynn,
gave it herself. Her own cook, who
had been with her five years, made the
cakes, and her own donkey cart conveyed
the same to the field where the repast was
held.

"Miss Deyncourt, will she be there?"
asked Dare.

Mrs. Alwynn explained that all the neigh-vol.

I. X

boyhood, including the Thursbys, would be
there ; that she made a point of asking the
Thursbys.

I also will come," said Dare gravely.

CHAPTER III.

Atherstone was a rambling, old-fashioned,
black-and-white house, half covered with ivy,
standing: in a rambling, old-fashioned garden
a charming garden, with clipped yews, and
grass paths, and straggling flowers and herbs
growing up in unexpected places. In front
of the house, facing the drawing-room
windows, was a bowling-green, across which,
at this time of the afternoon, the house had
laid a cool green shadow.

Two ladies were sitting under its shelter,
each with her work.

It was hot still, but the shadows were
deepening and lengthening. Away in the
sun, hay was being made and carried, with
cracking of whips and distant voices.

Beyond the hayfields la)' the silver band of
the river, and beyond again the spire of
Slumberleigh Church and a glimpse among
the trees of Slumberleigh Hall.

Ralph has started in the dog-cart to
meet Charles. They ought to be here in
half an hour, if the train is punctual," said
Mrs. Ralph.

She was a graceful woman, with a placid,
gentle face. She might be thirty, but she
looked younger. With her pleasant home,,
and her pleasant husband, and her child to
be mildly anxious about, she might well look
young. She looked particularly so now, as
she sat in her fresh cotton draperies, winding
wool with cool white hands.

The handiwork of some women has a hard
masculine look. If they sew, it is with thick
cotton in some coarse material ; if they knit,
it is with cricket-balls of wool which they
manipulate into wiry stockings and comforters.
Evelyn's wools, on the contrary,
were always soft, fleecy, liable to weak-minded

tangles, and to turning after long
periods of time into little feminine futilities
for which it was difficult to divine any
possible use.

Lady Mary Cunningham, her husband's
aunt, made no immediate reply to her small
remark. Evelyn Dangers was not a little
afraid of that lady, and, in truth, Lady Mary,
with her thin face and commanding manner,
was a very imposing person. Though past
seventy, she sat erect in her chair, her stick
by her side, some elaborate embroidery in
her delicate old ringed hands. Her pale,
colourless eyes were as keen as ever. Her
white hair was covered by a wonderful lace
cap, which no one had ever succeeded in
imitating, that fell in soft lappets and graceful
folds round the severe, dignified face. Molly,
Evelyn's little daughter, stood in great awe
of Lady Mary, who had such a splendid
stick with a silver crook of her very own,
and who made remarks in French in Molly's
presence which that young lady could not

understand, and felt that it was not intended
she should. She even regarded with a certain
veneration the cap itself, which she had once
met in equivocal circumstances, journeying
with a plait of white hair towards Lady
Mary's rooms.

It was the first time since their marriage,
of which she had not approved, that Lady
Mary had paid a visit to Ralph and Evelyn
at Atherstone. Lady Mary had tried to
marry Ralph in days gone by to a woman
who — but it was an old story and better
forgotten. Ralph had married his first
cousin when he had married Evelyn, and
Lady Mary had strenuously objected to the
match, and had even gone so far as to
threaten to alter certain clauses in her will,
which she had made in favour of Ralph,
her younger nephew, at a time when she
was at careers drawn with her eldest
nephew, Charles, now Sir Charles Dangers.
But that was an old story too, and better
forgotten.

When Charles succeeded his father some
three years ago, and when after eight years
Molly had still remained an only child,
and one of the wrong kind, of no intrinsic
value to the family, Lady Mary decided that
bygones should be bygones, and became
formally reconciled to Charles, with whom
she had already found it exceedingly inconvenient,
and consequently unchristian, not
to be on speaking terms. As long as he
was the scapegrace son of Sir George
Dangers, her Christian principles remained
in abeyance ; but when he suddenly succeeded
to the baronetcy and Stoke Moreton, the air
of which suited her so well, and, moreover*
to that convenient pied a terre, the house in
Belgrade Square, she allowed feelings, which
she said she had hitherto repressed with
difficulty, their full scope, expressed a Christian
hope that now that he had come to his
estate Charles would put away Bohemian
things, and instantly set to work to find a
suitable wife for him.

At first Lady Mary felt that the task
which she had imposed upon herself would
(D.V.) be light indeed. Charles received
her overtures with the same courteous
demeanour which had been the chief sting
of their former warfare. He had paid his
creditors no one knew how, for his father
had left nothing to him unentailed ; and once
out of money difficulties, he seemed in no
hurry to plunge into them again. If he had
not as yet thoroughly taken up the life of an
English country gentleman for want of that
necessary adjunct which Lady Mary was so
anxious to supply, at least he lived in
England and in good society. In short,
Lady Mary was fond of telling her friends,
Charles had entirely reformed, hinting at the
same time that she had been the humble
instrument in the hands of an all-wise
Providence which had turned him back into
the way in which the English aristocracy
should walk, and from which he had deviated
so long. But one thing remained — to marry

him. Every one said Charles must marry.
Lady Mary did not say it, but with her
whole soul she meant it. What she intended
to do, she, as a rule, performed ; occasionally
at the expense of those who were little able
to afford it, but still the thing was (always,
of course, by the co-operation of Providence)
done. Ralph certainly had proved an exception
to the rule. He had married Evelyn
against Lady Mary's will, and consequently
without the blessing of Providence. After
that, of course, she had never expected there
would be a son, and with each year her
anxiety to see Charles safely married had
increased. He had seemed so amenable
that at first she could hardly believe that the
steed which she had led to waters of such
divers merit would refuse to drink from any
of them. If rank had no charm for him,
which apparently it had not, she would try
beauty. When beauty failed, even beauty
with money in its hand, Lady Mary hesitated,
and then fell back on goodness. But either

the goodness was not good enough, or, as
Lad)- Mary feared, it was not sufficiently
High Church to be really genuine — even
goodness failed. For three years she had
strained every nerve, and at the end of them
she was no nearer the object in view than
when she began.

An inconvenient death of a sister, with
whom she had long since quarrelled about
church matters (and who had now gone
where her folly in differing from Lady Mary
would be fully, if painfully, brought home to
her), had prevented Lady Mary continuing
her designs this year in London. But if
thwarted in one direction, she knew how to
throw her energies into another. The first
words she uttered indicated what that
direction was.

Evelyn's little remark about the dog-cart,
which had crone to meet Charles, had so
long remained without any response, that she
was about to coin another of about the same
stamp, when Lady Mary suddenly said, with

a decision that was intended to carry conviction
to the heart of her companion —

It is an exceedingly suitable thing."

Evelyn evidently understood what it was
that was so suitable, but she made no reply.

A few years ago," continued Lady Mary,
I should have looked higher. I should
have thought Charles might have done
better, but — - — "

"He never could do better than — than,"
said Evelyn, with a little mild flutter. " There
is no one in the world more "

Yes, yes, my dear, of course, we all know
that," returned the elder lady. " She is
much too good for him, and all the rest of it.
A few years ago, I was saying, I might not
have regarded it quite in the light I do now.
Charles, with his distinguished appearance
and his position, might have married anybody.
But time passes, and I am becoming seriously
anxious about him ; I am, indeed. He is
eight and thirty. In two years he will be
forty ; and at forty, you never know what a

man may not do. It is a critical age even
when they are married. Until he is forty, a
man may be led under Providence into forming
a connection with a woman of suitable
age and family. After that age he will never
look at any girl out of her teens, and either
perpetrates a folly, or does not marry at all.
If the Dangers family is not to become
extinct, or to be dragged down by a
dalliance, measures must be taken at once."
Evelyn winced at the allusion to the extinction
of the Dangers family, of which
Charles and Ralph were the only representatives.
She felt keenly having failed to
give Ralph a son, and the sudden smart of
the old hurt added a touch of sharpness to
her usually gentle voice as she said —

I cannot see what has been left undone."

No, my dear," said Lady Mary, more

suavely, " you have fallen in with my views

most sensibly. I only hope Ralph "

Ralph knows nothing about it."

u Quite right. It is very much better he

should not. Men never can be made to look
at things in their proper light. They have
no power of seeing an inch in front of them.
Even Charles, who is less dense than most
men, has never been allowed to form an idea
of the plans which from time to time I have
made for him. Nothing sets a man more
against a marriage than the idea that it has
been put in his way. They like to think it
is all their own doing, and that the whole
universe will be taken by surprise when the
engagement is given out. Charles is no
exception to the rule. Our duty is to
provide a wife for him, and then allow him
to think his own extraordinary cleverness
found her for himself. How old is this
cousin of yours, Miss Deyncourt ? "

About three and twenty."

Exceedingly suitable. Young, and yet
not too young. She is not beautiful, but she
is decidedly handsome, and very high-bred
looking, which is better than beauty. I
know all about her family ; good blood on

both sides ; no worsted thread. I forget if
there is any money."

This was a pious fraud on Lady Mary's
part, as she was of course aware of the exact
sum.

Lady Deyncourt left her thirty thousand
pounds," said Evelyn unwillingly. She
hated herself for the part she was taking
in her aunt's plans, although she had been
so unable to support her feeble opposition
by any show of reason that it had long
since melted away before the consuming fire
of Lady Mary's determined authority.

Twelve hundred a year," said that lady.
I fear Lady Deyncourt was far, very far,
from the truth, but she seems to have made
an equitable will. I am glad Miss Deyn-
court is not entirely without means ; and she
has probably something of her own as well.
The more I see of that girl the more convinced
I am that she is the very wife for
Charles. There is no objection to the match
in any way, unless it lies in that disreputable

brother, who seems to have entirely disappeared.
Now, Evelyn, mark my words.
You invited her here at my wish, after I saw
her with that dreadful Alwynn woman at the
flower-show. You will never regret it. I
am seventy-five years of age, and I have
seen something of men and women. Those
two will suit."

Here comes the dog-carts' said Evelyn,
with evident relief.

Where is Miss Deyncourt ? "

She went off to Slumberleigh, some time
ago. She said she was going to the Rectory,
I believe."

It is just as well. Ah ! here is Charles."

A tall, distinguished-looking man in a light
overcoat came slowly round the corner of the
house as she spoke, and joined them on the
lawn. Evelyn went to meet him with evident
affection, which met with as evident a return,
and he then exchanged a more formal greeting
with his aunt.

Come and sit down here," said Evelyn,

pulling forward a garden chair. " How hot
and tired you look ! "

I am tired to death, Evelyn. I went to
London in May a comparatively young man.
Aunt Mary said I ought to go, and so, of
course, I went. I have come back not only
sadder and wiser — that I would try to bear
but visibly aged."

He took off his hat as he spoke, and
wearily pushed back the hair from his forehead.
Lady Mary looked at him over her
spectacles with grave scrutiny. She had not
seen her nephew for many months, and she
was not pleased with what she saw. His
face looked thin and worn, and she even
feared she could detect a grey hair or two in
the licht hair and moustache. His tired,
sarcastic eyes met hers.

I was afraid you would think I had gone
off" he said, half shutting his eyes in the
manner habitual to him. " I fear I took
your exhortations too much to heart, and
overworked myself in the good cause."

A season is always an exhausting thing,"
said Lady Mary ; " and I dare say London
is very hot now."

Hot ! It's more than hot. It is a solemn
warning to evildoers ; a foretaste of a future
state."

I suppose everybody has left town by
this time ? " continued Lady Mary, who
often found it necessary even now to ignore
parts of her nephew's conversation.

By everybody I know you mean one
family. Yes, they are gone. Left London
to-day. Consequently, I also conveyed my
remains out of town, feeling that I had done
my duty."

Where is Ralph ? " asked Evelyn, rising,
dimly conscious that Charles and his aunt
were conversing in an unknown tongue, and
feeling herself de trop.

I left him in the shrubbery. A stoat
crossed the road before the horse's nose as
we drove up, and Ralph, who seems to have
been specially invented by Providence for

vol. i. 4

the destruction of small vermin, was in
attendance on it in a moment. I had seen
something of the kind before, so I came on."

Evelyn laid down her work, and went
across the lawn and round the corner of the
house in the direction of the shrubbery, from
which the voice of her lord and master " rose
in snatches," as he plunged in and out among
the laurels.

"And how is Lord Hope Acton?" continued
Lady Mary, with an air of elaborate
unconcern. " I used to know him in old
days as one of the best waltzers in London.
I remember him very slim and elegant-looking
; but I suppose he is quite elderly now,
and has lost his figure, or so some one was
saying ? "

Not lost, but gone before, I should say,
to judge by appearances," said Charles
meditatively, gazing up into the blue of the
summer sky.

The mixed impiety and indelicacy of her
nephew's remark caused a sudden twitch to

the High Church embroidery in Lady Mary's
hand ; but she went on a moment later in her
usual tone.

And Lady Hope Acton ? Is she in
stronger health ? "

(( I believe she was fairly well ; not robust,
you know, but, like other fond mothers with
daughters out, ' faint yet pursuing.' "

Lady Mary bit her lip; but long experience
had taught her that it was wiser to refrain
from reproof, even when it was so urgently
needed.

And their daughter, Lady Grace ? How
beautiful she is ! Was she looking as lovely
as usual ? "

More so," replied Charles with conviction.
" Her nose is even straighter, her
eyelashes even longer than they were last
summer. I do not hesitate to say that her
complexion is all that her fancy paints it."

You are so fond of joking, Charles, that
I don't know when you are serious. And
you saw a good deal of her ? "

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

Of course I did. I leant on railings in
the Row, and watched her riding with Lord
Hope Acton, whose personal appearance
you feel such an interest in. At the meeting
of the four-in-hands, was not she on the box-seat
beside me ? At Henley, were we not in
the same boat ? At Buckingham, did we not
watch polo together, and together drink our
tea ? At Lord's, did not I tear her new
muslin garment in helping her up one of
those poultry ladders on the Warrington'
draw ? Have I not taken her into dinner

o

five several times ? Have I not danced
with her at balls innumerable ? Have I not,
in fact, seen as much of her as — of several
others ? "

Oh, Charles ! " said Lady Mary, " I wish
you would talk seriously for one moment,
and not in that light way. Have you
spoken ?"

"In a light way, I should say I had spoken
a good deal ; but, seriously — No. I have
never ventured to be serious."

But you will be. After all this, you will
ask her ? "

Aunt Mary," replied Charles, with gentle
reproach, ''a certain delicacy should be
observed in probing the exact state of a
man's young affections. At five and thirty
(I know I am five and thirty, because you
have told people so for the last three years),
there exists a certain reticence in the youthful
heart which declines to lay bare its inmost
feelings even for an aunt to — we won't say
peck at, but — speculate upon. I have told
you all I know. I have done what I was
bidden to do, up to a certain point. I am
now here to recruit, and restore my wasted
energies, and possibly to heal (observe, I say
possibly) my wounded affections in the
intimacy of my family circle. That reminds
me, that little ungrateful imp Molly has not
yet made the slightest demonstration of joy
at my arrival. Where is she ?" and without
waiting for an answer, which he was well
aware would not be forthcoming, Charles

rose and strolled towards the house with his
hands behind his back.

Molly ! " he called. " Molly ! " standing
bareheaded in the sunshine, under a certain
latticed window, the iron bars of which
suggested a nursery within.

There was a sudden answering cackle of
delight, and a little brown head was thrust
out amid the ivy.

Come down this very moment, you little
hard-hearted person, and embrace your old
uncle."

"I'm coming', Uncle Charles, I'm coming' ; "
and the brown head disappeared, and a few
seconds later a white frock and two slim
black legs rushed round the corner, and
Molly precipitated herself against the waistcoat
of " Uncle Charles."

What do you mean by not coming down
and paying your respects sooner ? " he said,
when the first enthusiasm of his reception
was over, looking down at Molly with a
great kindness in the keen light eyes which

had looked so apathetic and sarcastic a
moment before.

As he spoke, Ralph Dangers, a square,
ruddy man in grey knickerbockers, came
triumphantly round from the shrubbery, holding
by its tail a minute corpse with outstretched
arms and legs.

Got him ! " he said, smiling, and wiping
his brow with honest pride. " See, Charles ?
See, Molly ? Got him ! "

Don't bring it here, Ralph, please. Weare
going to have tea," came Evelyn's gentle
voice from the lawn ; and Ralph and the
terrier Vic retired to hang the body of the
slain upon a fir tree on the back premises,
the recognized lone home of stoats, and
weasels at Atherstone.

Molly, in the presence of Lady Mary and
the stick with the silver crook, was always
more or less depressed and shy. She felt
the pale cold eye of that lady was upon her,
as indeed it generally was, if she moved or
spoke. She did not therefore join in the

conversation as freely as was her wont in the
family circle, but sat on the grass by her
uncle, watching him with adoring eyes, trying
to work the signet ring off his big little
finger, which in the memory of man — of
Molly, I mean— had never been known to
work 'off, while she gave him the benefit of
small pieces of local and personal news ina
half whisper from time to time as they
occurred to her.

Cousin Ruth is staying here, Uncle
Charles."

Indeed," said Charles absently.

His eyes had wandered to Evelyn taking
Ralph his cup of tea, and giving him a look
with it which he returned — the quiet grave
look of mutual confidence which sometimes
passes between married people, and which
for the moment makes the single state seem
very single indeed.

Molly saw that he had not heard, and that
she must try some more exciting topic in
order to rivet his attention.

There was a mouse at prayers yesterday,
Uncle Charles."

There wasrit f "

Uncle Charles was attending again now.

Molly gave an exact account of the great
event, and of how " Nanny " had gathered
her skirts round her, and how James had
laughed, only father did not see him, and

how There was a great deal more, and

the story ended tragically for the mouse,
whose final demise under a shovel when
prayers were over Molly described in graphic
detail.

11 And how are the guinea pigs ? " asked
Charles, putting down his cup.

Come and see them," whispered Molly,
insinuating her small hand delightedly into
his big one ; and they went off together, each
happy in the society of the other. Charles
was introduced to the guinea pigs, which had
multiplied exceedingly since he had presented
them, the one named after him being even
then engaged in rearing a large family.

Then, after Molly had copiously watered
her garden, and Charles's unsuspecting boots
at the same time, objects of interest still
remained to be seen and admired ; confidences
had to be exchanged ; inner pockets
in Charles's waistcoat to be explored ; and it
was not till the dressing-bell and the shrill
voice of " Nanny" from an upper window
recalled them, that the friends returned
towards the house.

As they turned to go indoors, Charles saw
a tall white figure skimming across the
stretches of low sunshine and long shadow
in the field beyond the garden, and making
swiftly for the garden gate.

Oh, Molly, Molly!" he said, in a tone of
sudden consternation, squeezing the little
brown hand in his. " Who is that ? "

Molly looked at him astonished. A moment
ago Uncle Charles had been talking merrily,
and now he looked quite sad.

It's only Ruth," she said reassuringly.

Who is Ruth ? "

Cousin Ruth," replied Molly. " I told
you she was here."

She's not staying here ? "

Yes, she is. She is rather nice, only she
says the guinea pigs smell nasty, which isn't
true. She will be late " — with evident concern
— " if she is going to be laced up ; and I
know she is, because I saw it on her bed.
She doesn't see us yet. Let us go and meet
her."

Run along then," said Charles, in a tone
of deep dejection, loosing Molly's hand. " I
think I'll go indoors,"

CHAPTER IV.

Fve done Uncle Charles a button-hole,
and put it in his water-bottles said Molly, in
an important affairs whisper, as she came
into Ruth's room a few minutes before dinner,
where Ruth and her maid were struggling
with a black-lace dress. " Mrs. Jones, you
must be very quick. Why do you have pins
in your mouth, Mrs. Jones ? James has got
his coat on, and he is going to ring the bell
in one minute. I told him you had only just
got your hair done ; but he said he could not
help that. Uncle Charles," peeping through
the door, " is going down now, and he's goton
a beautiful white waistcoat. He's brought
that nice Mr. Brown with him that unpack
his things and plays on the concertina. Ah !
there's the bell ; " and Molly hurried down

to give a description of the exact stage at
which Ruth's toilet had arrived, which Ruth
cut short by appearing hard upon her heels.

It is a shame to come indoors now, isn't
it ? " said Charles, as he was introduced and
took her in to dinner in the wake of Lady
Mary and Ralph. "Just the first cool time
of the day."

Is it ? " said Ruth, still rather pink with
her late exertions. "When I heard the
dressing-bell ring across the fields, and the
last gate would not open, and I found
the railings through which I precipitated
myself had been newly painted, I own I
thought it had never been so hot all day."

How trying it is to be forgotten ! " said
Charles, after a pause. " We have met
before, Miss Deyncourt ; but I see you don't
remember me. I gave you time to recollect
me by throwing out that little remark about
the weather ; but it was no good."

Ruth glanced at him and looked puzzled.

I am afraid I don't," she said at last, " I

have seen you playing polo once or twice,
and driving your four-in-hand ; but I thought
I only knew you by sight. When did we
meet before ? "

You have no recollection of a certain
ball after some theatricals at Stoke Moreton
which you and your sister came to, as little
girls in pigtails ? "

Of course, I remember that. And were
you there ? "

Was I there ? Oh, the ingratitude of
woman ! Did not I dance three times with
each of you, and suggest chicken at supper
instead of lobster salad ? Does not the
lobster salad awaken memories ? Surely you
have not forgotten that ? "

Ruth began to smile.

I remember now. So you were the kind
man, name unknown, who took such care
of Anna and me ? How good-natured you
were !

Thanks ! You evidently do remember
now, if you say that. I recognized you at

once when I saw you again, by your likeness
to your brother Raymond. You were very
like him then, but much more so now. How
is he ? "

Ruth's dark-grey eyes shot a sudden
surprised glance at him. People had seldom
of late inquired after Raymond.

I believe he is quite well," she replied
in a constrained tone. " I have not heard
from him for some time."

It is some years since I met him," said
Charles, noting but ignoring her change of
tone. " I used to see a good deal of him
before he went to — was it America ? I
heard from him about three years ago. He
was prospecting, I think, at that time."

Ruth remembered that Charles had succeeded
his father about three years ago.
She remembered also Raymond's capacities
for borrowing. A sudden instinct told her
what the drift of that letter had been. The
blood rushed into her face.

Oh ! he didn't— did he ? "

The other three people were talking
together ; Lady Mary, opposite, was joining
with a bland smile of inward satisfaction
in the discussion between Ralph and Evelyn
as to the rival merits of " Cochin China "
and " Plymouth Rocks."

If he did," said Charles quietly, " it was
only what we had often done for each other
before. There was a time, Miss Deyncourt,
when your brother and I both rowed in the
same boat; and both, I fancy, split on the
same rock. It is not so long ago since "

There was a sudden silence. The chicken
question was exhausted. It dropped dead.
Charles left his sentence unfinished, and,
turning to his brother, the conversation
became general.

In the evening, when the others had said
good night, Charles and Ralph went out
into the cool half-darkness to smoke, and
paced up and down on the lawn in the soft
summer night. The two brothers had not

met for some time, and in an undemonstrative
way they had a genuine affection
for each other, which showed itself on this
occasion in walking about together without
exchanging a word.

At last Charles broke the silence. " I
thought, when I settled to come down here,
you said you would be alone ? " There was
a shade of annoyance in his tone.

Well, now, that is just what I said at
the time," said Ralph sleepily, with a yawn
that would have accommodated a Jonah,
"only I was told I did not understand.
They always say I don't understand, if
they're set on anything. I thought you
wanted a little peace and quietness. I said
so ; but Aunt Mary settled we must have
some one. I say, Charles," with a chuckle
of deep masculine cunning, " you just lookout.
There's some mystery up about Ruth.
I believe Aunt Mary got Evelyn to ask her
here with an eye to business."

I would not do Aunt Mary the injustice

VOL. I. 5

to doubt that for a moment," replied Charles
rather bitterly ; and they relapsed into
silence and smoke.

Presently Ralph, who had been out all
day, yawned himself into the house, and left
Charles to pace up and down by himself.

If Lady Mary, who was at that moment
composing herself to slumber in the best
spare bedroom, had heard the gist of Ralph's
remarks to his brother, I think she would
have risen up and confronted him then and
there on the stairs. As it was, she meditated
on her couch with much satisfaction, until
the sleep of the just came upon her, little
recking that the clumsy hand of brutal man
had even then torn the veil from her carefully
concealed and deeply laid feminine plans.

Charles, meanwhile, remained on the lawn
till late into the night. After two months
of London smuts, and London smoke, and
London nights, the calm scented darkness
had a peculiar charm for him. The few
lights in the windows were going out oneby

one, and thousands and thousands were
coming out in the quiet sky. Through the
still air came the sound of a corncrake
perpetually winding up its watch at regular
intervals in a field hard by. A little desultory
breeze hovered near, and just roused the
sleepy trees to whisper a good night. And
Charles paced and paced, and thought of
many things.

Only last night ! His mind went back to
the picture-gallery where he and Lady Grace
had sat, amid a grove of palms and flowers.
Through the open archway at a little distance
came a flood of light, and a surging echo of
plaintive, appealing music. It was late, or
rather early, for morning was looking in with
cold, dispassionate eyes through the long
windows. The gallery was comparatively
empty for a London gathering, for the
balconies and hall were crowded, and the
rooms were thinning. To all intents and
purposes they were alone. How nearly —
how nearly he had asked for what he knew

would not have been refused ! How nearly
he had decided to do at once what nwht
still be put off till tomorrow ! And he must
marry. He often told himself so. She was
there beside him on the yellow brocade
ottoman. She was much too good for him ;
but she liked him. Should he do it ? Now ?
he asked himself, as he watched the slender
gloved hand swaying the feather fan with
monotonous languor.

But when he took her back to the ballroom,
back to an expectant, tired mother,
he . had not done it. He should be at
their house in Scotland later. He thought
he would wait till then. He breathed a
long sigh of relief in the quiet darkness
now, at the thought that he had not done
it. He had a haunting presentiment, that
neither in the purple heather, any more than
in a London ball-room, would he be able to
pass beyond that " certain point," to which
in divers companionship, with or without
assistance, he had so often attained.

For Charles was genuinely anxious to
marry. He regarded with the greatest
interest every eligible and ineligible young
woman whom he came across. If Lady
Mary had been aware of the very serious
light in which he had considered Miss Louisa
Smith, youngest daughter of a certain curate
Smith, who in his youth had been originally
extracted from a refreshment room at Liverpool
to become an ornament of the Church,
that lady would have swooned with horror.
But neither Miss Louisa Smith, with her bun
and sandwich ancestry, nor the eighth Lord
Breakwater's young and lovely sister, though
both willing to undertake the situation, were
either of them finally offered it. Charles
remained free as air, and a dreadful stigma
gradually attached to him as a heartless flirt
and a perverter of young girls' minds from
men of more solid worth. A man who
pleases easily and is hard to please soon gets
a bad name among — mothers. I don't think
Lady Hope Acton thought very kindly of

him, as she sped up to Scotland in the night
mail.

Perhaps he was not so much to blame as
she thought. Long ago, ten long years ago,
in the reckless days of which Lady Mary had
then made so much and now made so little,
poor Charles had been deeply in love with
a good woman, a gentle quiet girl, who after
a time had married his brother Ralph. No
one had suspected his attachment, Ralph and
Evelyn least of all, but several years elapsed
before he found time to visit them at Atherton
; and I think his fondness for Molly
had its origin in his feeling for her mother.
Even now it sometimes gave him a strange
pang to meet the adoration in Molly's eyes,
which, with their dark lashes, she had copied
so exactly from Evelyn's.

And now that he could come with ease on
what had been forbidden ground, he had
seen of late clearly, with the insight that
comes of dispassionate consideration, that
Evelyn, the only woman whom he had ever

earnestly loved, whom he would have turned
heaven and earth to have been able to marry,
had not been in the least suited to him, and
that to have married her would have entailed
a far more bitter disappointment than the
loss of her had been.

Evelyn made Ralph an admirable wife.
She was so placid, so gentle, and — with the
exception of muddy boots in the drawing-room
— so unexactinof. It was sweet to see
her read to Molly, but did she never take up
a book or a paper ? What she said was
always gracefully put forth ; but oh ! in old
days, used she in that same gentle voice to
utter such platitudes, such little stereotyped
remarks ? Used she in the palmy days that
were no more (when she was not Ralph's
wife), so mildly but so firmly to adhere to a
preconceived opinion ? Had she formerly
such fixed opinions on every subject in
general, and on new laid eggs and the
propriety of chicken-hutches on the lawn in
particular ? Disillusion may be for our good,

like other disagreeable things, but it is seldom
pleasant at the time, and is apt to leave in all
except the most conceited natures (whose lifelong
mistakes are committed for our learning)
a strange self distrustful caution behind, which
is mortally afraid of making a second mistake
of the same kind.

Charles suddenly checked his pacing.

And yet surely, surely, he said to himself,
there were in the world somewhere, good
women of another stamp, who might be found
for diligent seeking.

He turned impatiently to go indoors.

"Oh, Molly, Molly!" he said half aloud,
gazing at the darkened windows behind which
the body of Molly was sleeping, while her
little soul was frisking away in fairyland,
why did you complicate matters by being
a little girl ? " With which reflection he
brought his meditations to a close for the
night.

CHAPTER V.

Molly awoke early on the following morning,
and early informed the rest of the household
that the weather was satisfactory. She
flew into Ruth's room with the hot water, to
wake her and set her mind at rest on a
subject of such engrossing interest ; she imparted
it repeatedly to Charles through his
keyhole, until a low incoherent muttering
convinced her that he also was rejoicing in
the good news. She took all the dolls out of
the baskets in which Ruth's careful hands
had packed them the evening before, in the
recognized manner in which dolls travel
without detriment to their toilets, namely,
head downwards, with their orange top boots
turned upwards to the sky. In short,

Molly busied herself in the usual ways in
which an only child finds employment.

It really was a glorious day. Except in
Molly's eyes it was almost too good a day
for a school-feast ; too good a day, Ruth
thought, as she looked out, to be spent
entirely in playing at endless games of
Sally Water" and "Oranges and Lemons,"
and in pouring out sweet tea in a tent. She
remembered a certain sketch at Arleigh, an
old deserted house in the neighbourhood,
which she had long wished to make. What
a day for a sketch ! But she shut her eyes
to the temptation of the evil one, and went
out into the garden, where Molly's little
brown hands were devastating the beds for
the approaching festival, and Molly's shrill
voice was piping through the fresh morning
air.

There had been rain in the night, and
to-day the earth had all her diamonds on,
just sent down reset from heaven. The
trees came out resplendent, unable to keep

their leaves still for very vanity, and dropping
gems out of their settings at every rustle.
No one had been forgotten. Every tiniest
shrub and plant had its little tiara to show ;
rare jewels cut by a Master Hand, which atman's
rude touch, or, for that matter, Molly's
either, slid away to tears.

You don't mean to say, Molly," said
Charles, later in the day, when all the dolls
had been passed in review before him, and
he had criticised each, " that you are going
to leave me all day by myself? What shall
I do between luncheon and tea time, when I
have fed the guinea pigs and watered the
blue-bella,' as you call it ? — Where has that
imp disappeared to now ? I think," with a
glance at Ruth, who was replacing the cotton
wool on the doll's faces, " I really think,
though I own I fancied I had a previous
engagement, that I shall be obliged to come
to the school-feast too."

Don't," said Ruth, looking up suddenly
from her work with grey serious eyes. " Be

advised. No man who respects himself
makes himself commonly attending village
school-feasts and attempting to pour out tea,
which he is never allowed to do in private
life."

I could hand buns," suggested Charles.
You take a gloomy view of your fellow-creatures,
Miss Deyncourt. I see you underrate
my powers with plates of buns."

Far from it. I only wished to keep you
from quitting your proper sphere."

What, may I ask, is my proper sphere ? "

Not to come to school-feasts at all ; or, if
you feel that is beyond you, only to arrive
when you are too late to be of any use ; to
stand about with a hunting-crop in your hand
for, of course, you will come on horseback
—rand then, after refreshing all of us workers
by a few well-chosen remarks, to go away
again at an easy canter."

I think I could do that, if it would give
pleasure ; and I am most grateful to you for
pointing out my proper course to me. I

have observed it is the prerogative of woman
in general not only to be absolutely convinced
as to her own line of action, but also to be
able to point out that of man to his obtuser
perceptions."

I believe you are perfectly right," said
Ruth, becoming serious. " If men, especially
prime ministers, were to apply to almost any
woman I know (except, of course, myself) for
advice as to the administration of the realm
or their own family affairs, I have not the
slightest doubt that not one of them would
be sent empty away, but would be furnished
instantly with a complete guide-book as to
his future movements on this side the crave."

Oh, some people don't stop there," said
Charles. " Aunt Mary, in my young days,
used to think nothing of the 'grave if I had
displeased her. She still revels in a future
court of justice, and an eternal cat-o'-nine-tails
beyond the tomb. Well, Molly, so here you
are, back again ! What's the last news ? "

The news was the extraordinary arrival of

five new kittens, which, according to Molly,
the old stable cat had just discovered in a
loft, and took the keenest personal interest
in. Charles was dragged away only half
acquiescent, to help in a decision that must
instantly be come to, as to which of the two
spotted or the three plain ones should be kept.

It was a day of delight to Molly. She
had the responsibility and honour of driving
Ruth and the dolls in her own donkey-cart
to the scene of action, where the school
children, and some of the idlest or most
good-natured of Mrs. Alwynn's friends, were
even then assembling, and where Mrs. Alwynn
herself was already dashing from point to
point, buzzing like a large " bumble " bee.

As the donkey-cart crawled up, a grey figure
darted out of the tent, and flew to meet them
from afar. Dare, who had been on the lookout
for them for some time, offered to lift out
Molly, helped out Ruth, held the baskets,
wished to unharness the donkey, let the
wheel go over his patent leather shoe, and in

short made himself excessively agreeable, if
not in Ruth's, at least in Molly eyes, who
straightway entered into conversation with
him, and invited him to call upon herself and
the guinea pigs at Atherstone at an early date.

Then ensued the usual scene at festivities
of this description. Tea was poured out like
water (very like warm water), buns, cakes,
and bread and butter were eaten, were
crumbled, were put in pockets, were stamped
underfoot. Large open tarts, covered with
thin sticks of pastry, called by the boys " the
tarts with the grubs on 'em," disappeared
apace, being constantly replaced by others
made in the same image, from which the
protecting but adhesive newspaper had to be
judiciously peeled. When the last limit of the
last child had been reached, the real work of
the day began — the games. Under a blazing
sun for the space of two hours "Sally Water"
or " Nuts in May" must be played, with an
occasional change to "Oranges and Lemons."

Ruth, who had before been staying with

the Alwynns at the time of their school-feast,
hardened her heart and began that immoral
but popular game of " Sally Water."

"Sally, Sally Water, come sprinkle your pan;
Rise up a husband, a handsome young man.
Rise, Sally, rise, and don't look sad,
You shall have a husband, good or bad."

The last line showing how closely the state
of feeling of village society as regards the
wedded state resembles the view taken of it
in the highest circles.

Other games were already in full swing.
Mrs. Alwynn, flushed and shrill, was organizing
an infant troop. A good-natured curate
was laying up for himself treasure elsewhere,
by a present expenditure of halfpence
secreted in a tub of bran. Dare, not to be
behindhand, took to swinging little girls w r with
desperate and heated good-nature. His bright
smile and genial brown face soon gained the
confidence of the children ; and then he swung
them as they had never been swung before.
It was positively the first time that some of

the girls had ever seen their heels above
their heads. And his powers of endurance
were so great. First his coat and then his
waistcoat were cast aside as he warmed to
his work, until at last he draped the sleeve
of his shirt out of the socket, and had to
retire into private life behind a tree, in
company with Mrs. Eccles and a needle and
thread. But he reappeared again, and was
soon swept into a game of cricket that was
being got up among the elder boys ; bowled
the schoolmaster ; betted brilliantly and with
considerable nourish for a few moments, only
to knock his own wickets down with what
seemed singular want of care ; and then
fielded with cat-like activity and an entire
oblivion of the game, receiving a swift ballon
his own person, only to choke, coil himself
up, and recover his equanimity and the ball
in a moment.

All things come to an end, and at last the
Slumberleigh church clock struck four, and
vol. i. 6

Ruth could sink giddily on to a bench,
and push back the few remaining hairpins
that were left to her, and feebly endeavour,
with a pin eagerly extracted by
Dare from the back of his neck, to join the
gaping ruin of torn gathers in her dress,
so daintily fresh two hours ago, so dilapidated
now.

There they come," said Mrs. Alwynn
indignantly, who was fanning herself with
her pocket-handkerchief, which stout women
ought to be forbidden by law to do. " There
are Mrs. Thursby and Mabel. Just like
them, arriving when the games are all over !
And, dear me ! who is that with them ?
Why, it is Sir Charles Dangers. I had no
idea he was staying with them. Brown
particularly told me they had not brought
back any friend with them yesterday. Dear
me ! How odd ! And Brown "

Sir Charles Dangers is staying at Atherton,"
said Ruth.

At Atherstone, is he ? Well, my dear,

this is the first I have heard of it, if he is.
I don't see what there is to make a secret
of in that. Most natural he should be staying
there, I should have thought. And if that's
one of Mabel's new gowns, all I can say is
that yours is quite as nice, Ruth, though I
know it is from last year, and those full
fronts as fashionable as ever."

As Mr. and Mrs. Alwynn went forward
to meet the Thursbys, Charles strolled upto
Ruth, and planted himself deliberately in
front of her.

You observe that I am here ? " he said.

I do."

At the proper time ? "

At the proper time."

And in my sphere ? I have tampered
with no buns, you will remark, and teapots
have been far from me."

I am rejoiced my little word in season
has been of such use."

It has, Miss Deyncourt. The remark
you made this morning I considered honest,

though poor ; and I laid it to heart accordingly.
But," with a change of tone, " you
look tired to death. You have been out in
the sun too long. I am going off now. I
only came because I met the Thursbys,
and they dragged me here. Come home
with me through the woods. You have
no idea how agreeable I am in the open
air. It will be shady all the way, and not
half so fatiguing as being shaken in Molly's
donkey-cart."

"In the donkey-cart I must return, however,
if I die on the way," said Ruth, with
a tired smile. " I can't leave Molly. Besides,
all is not over yet. The races and prizes
take time ; and when at last they are dismissed,
a slice of "

No, Miss Deyncourt, no ! Not more
food ! "

A slice of cake will be applied externally
to each of the children, which rite brings the
festivities to a close. There ! I see the dolls
are being carried out. I must cro ; " and a

moment later Ruth and Molly and Dare,
who had been hovering near, were busily
unpacking and shaking out the dolls ; and
Charles, after a little desultory conversation
with Mabel Thursby, strolled away,
with his hands behind his back and his
nose in the air in the manner habitual to
him.

And so the day wore itself out at last ;
and after a hymn had been shrieked, the
children were dismissed, and Ruth and Molly
at length drove away.

Hasn't it been delicious ? " said Molly.
And my doll was chosen first. Lucy Big,
With the rash on her face, got it. I wish
little Sarah had had it. I do love Sarah so
very much ; but Sarah had yours, Ruth, with
the real pocket and the handkerchief in it.
That will be a surprise for her when she
gets home. And that new gentleman was
so kind about the teapots, wasn't he ? He
always filled mine first. He's coming to
see me very soon, and to bring a curious

black dog that he has of his very own,
called "

'stop, Molly," said Ruth, as the donkey's
head was being sawed round towards the
blaine lwh-road ; " let us go home through
the woods. I know it is longer, but I can't
stand any more sun and dust to-day."

"You do look tired," said Molly, "and
your lips are quite white. My lips turned
white once, before I had measles, and I felt
very curious inside, and then spots came allover.
You don't feel like spots, do you,
Cousin Ruth ? We will go back by the
woods, and I'll open the gates, and you shall
hold the reins. I dare say Balaam will like
it better too."

Molly had called her donkey Balaam partly
owing to a misapprehension of Scripture
narrative, and partly owing to the assurance
of Charles, when in sudden misgiving she
had consulted him on the point, that Balaam
had been an ass.

Balaam's reluctant under-jaw was accordingly

turned in the direction of the woods,
and, little thinking the drive might prove
an eventful one, Ruth and Molly set off at
that easy amble which a well-fed pampered
donkey will occasionally indulge in.

CHAPTER VI.

After the glare and the noise, the shrill
blasts of penny trumpets, and the sustained
beating of penny drums, the silence of the
Slumberleigh woods was delightful to Ruth ;
the comparative silence, that is to say, for
where Molly was, absolute silence need never
be feared.

Long before the first gate had been
reached Balaam had, of course, returned to
the mode of procedure which suited him and
his race best, and it was only when the road
inclined to be downhill that he could be
urged into anything like a trot.

Never mind," said Molly consolingly to
Ruth, as he finally settled into a slow lounge,
gracefully waving his ears and tail at the

army of flies which accompanied him, " when
we get to the place where the firs are, and
the road goes between the rocks, its downhill
all the way, and we'll gallop down."

But it was a long way to the firs, and
Ruth was in no hurry. It was an ideal
afternoon, verging towards evening ; an afternoon
of golden lights and broken shadows,
of vivid greens in shady places. It must
have been on such a day as this, Ruth
thought, that the Almighty walked in the
garden of Eden when the sun was low,
while as yet the tree of knowledge was butin
blossom, while as yet autumn and its
apples were far off, long before fig-leaves
and millinery were thought of.

On either side the bracken and the ladyfern
grew thick and high, almost overlapping
the broad moss-grown path, across which the
young rabbits popped away in their new
brown coats, showing their little white linings
in their lazy haste. A dog-rose had hung
out a whole constellation of pale stars for

Molly to catch at as they passed. A family
of honeysuckle clung, faint and sweet, just
beyond the reach of the little hand that
stretched after them in turn.

They had reached the top of an ascent
that would have been a level to anything but
the mean spirit of a donkey, when Molly
gave a start.

Cousin Ruth ! there's something creeping
among the trees. Don't you hear it ?
Oh-heh!"

There really was a movement in the
bracken, which grew too thick and high to
allow of anything being easily seen at a little
distance.

If it's a lion," said Molly in a faint
whisper, " and I feel in my heart it is, he
must have Balaam."

Balaam at this moment pricked his large
ears, and Molly and Ruth both heard the
snapping of a twig, and saw a figure slip
behind a tree. Molly's spirits rose, and
Ruth's went down in proportion. The woods

were lonely, and they were nearing the most
lonely part.

"It's only a man," said Ruth rather sharply.
I expect it is one of the keepers." (Oh,
Ruth !). " Come, Molly, we shall never get
home at this rate. Whip up Balaam, and
let us trot down the hill." -

Much relieved about Balaam's immediate
future, Molly incited him to a really noble
trot, and did not allow him to relapse even
on the flat which followed. Through the
rattling and the jolting, however, Ruth could
still hear a stealthy rustle in the fern and
underwood. The man was following them.

He's coming after us," whispered Molly,
with round frightened eyes, " and Balaam
will stop in a minute, I know. Oh ! Cousin
Ruth, what shall we do ? "

Ruth hesitated. They were nearing the
steep pitch where the firs overhung the road,
which was cut out between huge boulders of
rock and sandstone. The ground rose rough
and precipitous on their right, and fell away

to their left. Just over the brow of the hill,
out of sight, was, as she well knew, the
second crate. The noise in the brushwood

o

had ceased. Turning suddenly, her quick
eye just caught sight of a figure disappearing
behind the slope of the falling ground to the
left. He was a lame man, and he was
running". In a moment she saw that he was
making a short cut, with the intention of
waylaying them at the gate. He would get
there long before they would, and even then
Balaam was beginning the ascent, which
really was an ascent this time, at his slowest
walk.

Molly's teeth were chattering in her little
head.

Now, Molly," said Ruth sharply, " listen
to me, and don't be a baby. He'll wait for
us at the gate, so he can't see us here. Get
out this moment, and we will both run up
the hill to the keeper's cottage at the top
of the bank. We shall get there first, because
he is lame."

They had passed the bracken now, and
were among the moss and sandstone beneath
the firs. Ruth hastily dragged Molly out
of the cart without stopping Balaam, who
proceeded, twirling his ears, leisurely without
them.

i( Oh, my poor Balaam ! " sobbed Molly,
with a backward glance at that unconscious
favourite marching towards its doom.

There is no time to think of poor Balaam
now," replied Ruth. " Run on in front of
me, and don't step on anything crackly."

Never in this world," thought Ruth,
will I come alone here with Molly again.
Never again will I- — ■ — "

But it was stiff climbing, and the remainder
of the resolution was lost.

They are high to the right above the
white gate now. The keepers cottage is
in sight, built against a ledge of rock, upto
which wide rough steps have been cut
in the sandstone. Ruth looks down at the
gate below. He is waiting — the dreadful

man is waiting there, as she expected ; and
Balaam, toying with a fern, is at that moment
coming round the corner. She sees that he
takes in the situation instantly. There is
but one way in which they can have fled,
and he knows it. In a moment he comes
halting and pounding up the slope. He sees
their white dresses among the firs. Run,
Molly ! run, Ruth ! Spare no expense. If
your new black sash catches in the briars,
let it catch ; heed it not, for he is making
wonderful play with that lame leg up the
hill. It is an even race. Now for the stone
steps ! How many more there are than there
ever were before ! Quick through the wicket,
and up through the little kitchen garden.
Molly is at the door first, beating upon it,
and calling wildly on the name of Brown.

And then Ruth's heart turns sick within
her. The door is locked. Through the window,
which usually blossoms with geraniums,
she can see the black fireplace and the bare
walls. No Brown within answers to Molly's

cries. Brown has been turned away for
drinking. Mrs. Brown, who hung a slender
wash " on the hedge only last week, has
departed with her lord. Brown's cottage is
tenantless. The pursuer must have known
it when he breasted the hill. A mixed sound
as of swearing and stumbling comes from the
direction of the stone steps. The pursuer is
evidently intoxicated, probably lunatic !

Quick, Molly!" gasps Ruth, "round by
the back, and then cut down towards the
young plantation, and make for the road
again. Don't stop for me."

The little yard, the pigsty, the water-butt,
fly past. Past fly the empty kennels.
Past does not fly the other gate. Locked ;
padlocked. It is like a bad dream. Molly,
with a windmill-like exhibition of black legs,
gives Ruth a lead over. Now for it, Ruth !
The bars are close together and the gate is
high. It is not a time to stick at trifles.
What does it matter if you can get over best
by assuming a masculine equestrian attitude

for a moment on the top bar ? There !
And now, down the hill again, away to your
left. Take to your heels, and be thankful
they are not high ones. Never mind if your
hair is coming down. You have a thousand
good qualities, Ruth, high principles, and a
tender conscience, but you are not a swift
runner, and you have not played M Sally
Water " all day for nothing. Molly is far in
front now. A heavy trampling is not far
behind ; nay, it is closer than you thought.
And your eyes are becoming misty, Ruth,
and armies of drums are beating every other
sound out of your ears — that shouting behind
you, for instance. The intoxicated, murderous
lunatic is close behind. One minute ! Two
minutes ! How many more seconds can you
keep it up ? Through the young plantation,
down the hill, into the sandy road again, the
sandy, uphill road. How much longer can
you keep it up ?

Charles strolled quietly homewards, enjoying

the beauties of nature, and reflecting on
the quantity of rabbit shooting that Mr.
Thursby must enjoy. He may also have
mused on Lady Grace, for anything that can
be known to the contrary, and have possibly
made a mental note that if it had been she
whom he had asked to walk home with him,
instead of Ruth, he would not have been
alone at that moment. Be that how it may,
he leisurely pursued his path until a fallen
tree beside the bank looked so inviting, that
(Evelyn and Ralph having gone out to
friends at a distance) Charles, who was in
no hurry to return to Lady Mary, seated
himself thereon, with a cigarette to bear him
company.

To him, with rent garments and dust upon
her head, and indeed all over her, suddenly
appeared Molly ; Molly, white with panic,
breathless, unable to articulate, pointing in
the direction from which she had come. Ina
moment Charles was tearing down the
road at full speed. A tall, swaying figure

VOL. I. 7

almost ran against him at the first turn, and
Ruth only avoided him to collapse suddenly
in the dry ditch, her face in the bank, and a
yard of sash biting the dust along the road
behind her.

Her pursuer stopped short. Charles made
a step towards him, and stopped short also.
The two men stood and looked at each other
without speaking.

When Ruth found herself in a position to
make observations, she discovered that she
was sitting by the roadside, with her head
resting against — was it a tweed arm or the
bank ? She moved a little, and found that
first impressions are apt to prove misleading.
It was the bank. She opened her eyes to
see a brown, red-lined hat on the ground
beside her, half full of water, through which
she could dimly discern the golden submerged
name of the maker. She seemed to have
been contemplating it with vague interest for
about an hour, when she became aware that

some one was dabbing her forehead with a
wet silk handkerchief.

Better ? " asked Charles's voice.

Oh ! " gasped Ruth, suddenly trying to
sit up, but finding the attempt resulted only
in the partial movement of a finger somewhere
in the distance. " Have I really —
surely, surely, I was not so abject as to
faint f"

Truth," said Charles, with a reassured
look in his quick, anxious eyes, " obliges me
to say you did."

I thought better of myself than that."

Pride goes before a fall or a faint."

"Oh, dear!" turning paler than ever.
u Where is Molly ? "

She is all right," said Charles hastily,
applying the pocket handkerchief again.
Don't alarm yourself, and pray don't try to
get up. You can see just as much of the
view sitting down. Molly has gone for the
donkey-cart."

"And that dreadful man ?"

That dreadful man has also departed.
By the way, did you see his face ? Would
you know him again if the policeman succeeds
in finding him ? "

No ; I never looked round. I only saw,
when he began to run to cut us off at the
gate, that he was lame."

"Hem!" said Charles reflectively. Then
more briskly, with a new access of dabbing,
How is the faintness going on ?"

Capitally," replied Ruth, with a faint,
amused smile ; " but — if it does not seem
ungrateful — I should be very thankful if I
might be spared the rest of the water in the
hat, or if it might be poured over me at once,
if you don't wish it to be wasted."

Have I done too much ? I imagined
my services were invaluable. Let me help
you to find your own handkerchief, if you
would like a dry one for a change. Ah !
what a good shot into that labyrinth of
drapery. You have found it for yourself.
You are certainly better."

But my self-respect," replied Ruth, drying
her face, " is gone for ever."

I lost mine years ago," said Charles,
carefully dusting Ruth's hat, " but I got over
it. I had no idea those bows were supported
by a wire inside. One lives and learns."

I never did such a thing before," continued
Ruth ruefully. " I have always felt a
sort of contempt for girls who scream or
faint just when they ought not."

For my part, I am glad to perceive you
have some little feminine weakness. Your
growing solicitude also as to the state of
your back hair is pleasing in the extreme."

I am too confused and shaken to retaliate
just now. You are quite right to make hay
while the sun shines ; but, when I am myself
again, beware ! "

"And your gown," continued Charles.
11 What yawning gulfs, what chasms appear ;
and what a quantity of extraneous matter
you have brought away with you. Reminiscences
of travel — burrs, very perfect specimens

of burrs, thistledown, chips of fir,
several complete spiders' webs ; and your
sash, which seems to have a particularly
adhesive fringe, is a museum in itself. Ah !
here comes that coward of little cowards,
Molly, with Balaam and the donkey-cart."

Molly, who had left Ruth for dead, greeted
her cousin with a transport of affection, and
then proceeded to recount the fearful risks
that Balaam had encountered by being
deserted, and the stoic calm with which he
had waited for them at the gate.

He's not a common donkey," she said
with pride. " Get in, Ruth. Are you
coming in, Uncle Charles ? There's just
room for you to squeeze in between Ruth
and me — isn't there, Ruth ? Oh, you're not
going to walk beside, are you ? "

But Charles was determined not to let
them out of his sight again, and he walked
beside them the remainder of the way to
Atherstone. He remained silent and preoccupied
during the evening which followed,

pored over a newspaper, and went off to his
room early, leaving Ralph dozing in the
smoking-room.

It was a fine moonlight night, still and
clear. He stood at the open window looking
out for a few minutes, and then began
fumbling in a dilapidated old travelling-bag
such as only rich men use.

"Not much," he said to himself, spreading
out a few sovereigns and some silver on the
table ; " but it will do."

He put the money in his pocket, took off
his gold hunting watch, and then went back
to the smoking-room.

I am going out again, Ralph, as I did
last night. If I come in late, you need not
take me for a burglar."

Ralph murmured something unintelligible,
and Charles ran downstairs, and let himself
out of the drawing-room French window,
that long French window to the ground,
which Evelyn had taken a fancy to in a
neighbours drawing-room, and which she

could never be made to see was not in keeping
with the character of her old black-and-white
house. He put the shutter back after
he had passed through, and carefully drawing
the window to behind him, without actually
closing it, he took a turn or two upon the
bowling-green, and then walked off in the
direction of the Slumberleigh woods.

After the lapse of an hour or more he
returned, as quietly as he had gone, let
himself in, made all secure, and stole up to
his room.

CHAPTER VII.

Vandon was considered by many people to
be the most beautiful house in shire.

In these days of great brand-new imitation
of intensely old houses, where the amount of
ground covered measures the purse of the
builder, it is pleasant to come upon a place
like Vandon, a quiet old manor-house, neither
large nor small, built of ancient bricks, blent
to a dim purple and a dim red by that subtle
craftsman Time.

Whoever in the years that were no more
had chosen the place whereon to build had
chosen well. Vandon stood on the slope of
a gentle hill, looking across a sweep of green
valley to the rising woods beyond, which in
days gone by had been a Roman camp, and

where the curious might still trace the wide
ledges cut among the regular lines of the
trees.

Some careful hand had planned the hanging
gardens in front of the house, which fell
away to the stream below. Flights of wide
stone steps led down from terrace to terrace,
each built up by its south wall covered with
a wealth of jasmine and ivy and climbing
roses. But all was wild and deserted now.
Weeds had started up between the stone
slabs of the steps, and the roses blossomed
out sweet and profuse, for it was the time of
roses, amid convolvulus and campion. The
quaint old dovecote near the house had
almost disappeared behind the trees that had
crowded up round it, and held aloft its
weathercock in silent protest at their encroachment.
The stables close at hand, with
their worn-out clock and silent bell, were
tenantless. The coach-houses were full of
useless old chariots and carriages. Into one
splendid court coach the pigeons had found

their way through an open window, and had
made nests, somewhat to the detriment of
the green-and-white satin fittings.

Great cedars, bent beneath the weight of
years, grew round the house. The patriarch
among them had let fall one of his gnarled
supplicating arms in the winter, and there it
still lay where it had fallen.

Anything more out of keeping with the
dignified old place than its owner could
hardly be imagined, as he stood in his eternal
light-grey suit (with a badge of affliction
lightly borne on his left arm), looking at his
heritage, with his cropped head a little on
one side.

The sun was shining, but, like a smile on
a serious face, Vandon caught the light on
all its shuttered windows, and remained
grave, looking out across its terraces to the
forest.

"If it were but a villa on the Mediterranean,
or a house in London," he said to
himself; "but I have no chance." And he

shrugged his shoulders, and wandered back
into the house again. But if the outside
oppressed him, the interior was not calculated
to raise his spirits.

Dare had an elegant taste, which he had
never hitherto been able to gratify, for blue
satin furniture and gilding ; for large mirrors
and painted ceilings of lovers and cupids,
and similar small deer. The old square hall
at Vandon, with its great stained glass
windows, representing the various quarterings
of the Dare arms, about which he knew
nothing and cared less, oppressed him. So
did the black polished oak floor, and the
walls with their white bas-reliefs of twisting-wreaths
and scrolls, with busts at intervals
of Cicero and Dante, and other severe and
melancholy personages. The rapiers upon
the high white chimney-piece were more to
his taste. He had taken them down the
first day after his arrival, and had stamped and
cut and thrust in the most approved style, in
the presence of Faust, the black poodle.

Dare was not the kind of man to be
touched by it ; but to many minds there
would have been something pathetic in seeing
a house, which had evidently been an object
of the tender love and care of a bygone
generation, going to rack and ruin from
neglect. Careful hands had embroidered in
the fine exquisite work of former days
marvellous coverlets and hangings, which
still adorned the long suites of empty bedrooms.
Some one had taken an elaborate
pleasure in fitting up those rooms, had put
pot-pourra in tall Oriental jars in the passages,
had covered the old inlaid Dutch chairs with
dim needlework.

The Dare who had lived at court, whose
chariot was now the refuge of pigeons, whose
court suits, with the tissue paper still in the
sleeves, yet remained in one of the old oak
chests, and whose jewelled swords still hung
in the hall, had filled one of the rooms with
engravings of the royal family and ministers
of his day. The Dare who had been an

admiral had left his miniature surrounded
by prints of the naval engagements he had
taken part in, and on the oak staircase a
tattered flag still hung, a trophy of unremembered
victory.

But they were past and forgotten. The
hands which had arranged their memorials
with such pride and love had long since gone
down to idleness, and forgetfulness also.
Who cared for the family legends now ?
They, too, had gone down into silence.
There was no one to tell Dare that the old
blue enamel bowl in the hall, in which he
gave Faust refreshment, had been brought
back from the loot of the Winter Palace of
Pekin ; or that the drawer in the Hester
table in the drawing-room was full of treasured
medals and miniatures, and that the key
thereof was rusting in a silver patch-box on
the writing-table.

The iron-clamped boxes in the lumber-room
kept the history to themselves of all
the silver plate that had lived in them once

upon a time, although the few odd pieces
remaining hinted at the splendour of what
had been. In one corner of the dining-room
the mahogany tomb still stood of a great
gold racing cup, under the portrait of the
horse that had won it ; but the cup had
followed the silver dinner service, had followed
the diamonds, had followed in the
wake of a handsome fortune, leaving the
after generations impoverished. If their
money is taken from them, some families are
left poor indeed, and to this class the Dares
belonged. It is curious to notice the occasional
real equality underlying the apparent
inequality of different conditions of life. The
unconscious poverty, and even bankruptcy,
of some rich people in every kind of wealth
except money affords an interesting study ;
and it seems doubly hard when those who
have nothing to live upon, and be loved and
respected for except their money, have even
that taken from them. As Dare wandered
through the deserted rooms, the want of

money of his predecessors, and consequently
of himself, was borne in upon him. It
fell like a shadow across his light pleasure-loving
soul. He had expected so much
from this unlooked-for inheritance, and all
he had found was a melancholy house with
a past.

He went aimlessly through the hall into
the library. It was there that his uncle had
lived ; there that he had been found when
death came to look for him ; among the
books which he had been unable to carry
away with him at his departure ; rare old
tomes and first editions, long shelves of dead
authors, who, it is to be hoped, continue to
write in other worlds for those who read
their lives away in this. Old Mr. Dare's interests
and affections had all been bound in
morocco and vellum. A volume lay open on
the table, where the old man had put it down
beside the leather arm-chair where he had
sat, with his back to the light, summer and
winter, winter and summer, for so many years.

No one had moved it since. A wavering
pencil-mark had scored the page here and
there. Dare shut it up, and replaced it
among; its brethren. How triste and silent
the house seemed ! He wondered what the
old uncle had been like, and sauntered into
the staircase hall, where the Dares that had
gone before him lived, much in need of
varnish. But these were too ancient to have
his predecessor among them. He went into
the long oak-panelled dining-room, where,
above the high carved dado, were more
Dares. Perhaps that man with the book
was his namesake, the departed Alfred Dare.
He wondered vaguely how he should look
when he also took his place among his
relations. Nature had favoured him with
a better moustache than most men, but he
had a premonitory feeling that the very
moustache itself, though undeniable in real
life, would look out of keeping among these
bluff, frank, light-haired people, of whom
it seemed he — he who had never been

VOL. i. 8

near them before — was the living representative.


A sudden access of pleasurable dignity
came over him as he sat on the dining-table,
the great mahogany dining-table which still
showed vestiges of a bygone polish, and was
heavily tinted by long years of hammered
applause. These ancestors of his ! He
would not disgrace them. A few minutes
ago he had been wondering whether Vandon
might not be let. Now, with one of the
rapid transitions habitual to him, he resolved
that he would live at Vandon, that in all
things he would be as they had been. He
would become that vague, indefinable, to him
mythical personage — a " country squire."
Fortunately, he had a neat leg for a stocking.
It was lost, so to speak, in his present
mode of dress ; but he felt that it would
appear to advantage in the perpetual knickerbockers
which he supposed it would be his
lot to wear. It would also become his duty
and his pleasure to marry. For those who

tread in safety the slippery heights of married
life he felt a true esteem. It would be a
strain no doubt, a great effort; but at this
moment he was capable of anything. The
finger of duty was plain. And with that
adorable Miss Ruth, with or without a

fortune Alas ! he trusted she had a

fortune, for, as he came to think thereon,
he remembered that he was desperately
poor. As far as he could make out from
his agent, a grim silent man, who had taken
an evident dislike to him from the first, there
was no money anywhere. The rents would
come in at Michaelmas ; but the interest of
heavy mortgages had to be paid, the estate
had to be kept up. There was succession
duty ; there were debts — long outstanding
debts, which came pouring in now, which
Waters spread before him with an iron smile,
and which poor Dare contemplated with his
head on one side and solemn, arched eyebrows.
When Dare was not smiling, he was
always preternaturally solemn. There was

no happy medium in his face, or consequently
in his mind, which was generally gay, but if
not, was involved in a tragic gloom.

These bills, my friend," he would say at
last, tapping them in deep dejection, and
raising his eyebrows into his hair, " how
do we pay them ? "

But Waters did not know. How should
he, Waters, know ? Waters only knew that
the farmers would want a reduction in these
bad times — Mr. Dare might be sure of that.
And what with arrears, and one thing and
another, he need not expect more than two-thirds
of his rents when they did arrive.
Mr. Dare might lay his account for that.

The only money which Dare received, to
carry on with on his accession to the great
honour and dignity of proprietor of Vandon,
was brought to him by the old dairyman
of the house, a faithful creature, who produced
out of an old stocking the actual coins
which she had received for the butter and
cheese she had sold, of which she showed

Dare an account, chalked up in some dead
language on the dairy door.

She was a little doubled-up woman, who
had served the family all her life. Dare's
ready smile and handsome face had won her
heart before he had been many days at
Vandon, in spite of " his foreign ways," and
he found himself constantly meeting her
unexpectedly round corners, where she had
been lying in wait for him, each time with
a secret revelation to whisper respecting
what she called the " join's on."

You'll not tell on me, sir, but it's only
right you should know as Mrs. Smith " (the
housekeeper of whom Dare stood in mortal
terror) "has them fine damask table-cloths
out for the housekeeper's room. I see 'em
myself ; and everything going' to rag and ruin
in the linen closet ! " Or, " Joseph has took
in another flitch this very day, sir, as Mrs.
Smith sent for, and the old flitch all cut to
waste. Dore go and look at the flitches, sir,
and the hams. They're in the room over the

stables. And it's always butter, butter, butter
in the kitchen ! Not a bit o' dripping used.
There's not a pot of dripping in the larder,
or so much as a skin of lard. Where does
it all go to ? You ask Mrs. Smith, and how
she sleeps in her bed at night I don't know!"

Dare listened, nodded, made his escape,
and did nothing. In the village it was as
bad. Time, which had dealt so kindly with
Vandon itself, had taken the straggling village
in hand too. Nothing could be more picturesque
than the crazy black and white
houses, with lichen on their broken-in thatch,
and the plaster peeling off from between the
irregular beams of black wood ; nothing more
picturesque — and nothing more miserable.

When Time puts in his burnt numbers and
brown madders with a lavish hand, and
introduces his beautiful irregularities of outline,
and his artistic disrepair, he does not
look to the drainage, and takes no thought
for holes in the roof.

Dare could not go out without eager

women sallying out of cottages as he passed,
begging him just to come in and walk upstairs.
They would say no more — but would the new
squire walk upstairs ? And Dare would

stumble up and see enough to promise

Alas ! how much he promised in those early
days. And in the gloaming, heavy dull-eyed
men met him in the lanes coming back
from their work, and followed him to "beg
pardon, sir, and " lay before the new squire
things that would never reach him through
Waters — bitter things, small injustices, too
trivial to seem worthy of mention, which
serve to widen the gulf between class and
class. They looked to Dare to help them,
to make the crooked straight, to begin a new
regime. They looked to the new king to
administer his little realm, the new king, who,
alas ! cared for none of these things. And
Dare promised that he would do what he
could, and looked anxious and interested, and
held out his brown hand, and raised hopes.
But he had no money — no money.

He spoke to Waters at first ; but he soon
found that was no good. The houses were
bad ? Of course they were bad. Cottage
property did not pay ; and would Mr. Dare
kindly tell him where the money for repairing
them was to come from ? Perhaps Mr. Dare
might like to put a little of his private
fortune into the cottages and the drains and
the new pumps. Dare winced. His fortune
had not gone the time-honoured way of the
fortunes of spirited young men of narrow
means with souls above a sordid economy,
but still it had gone all the same, and in a
manner he did not care to think of.

It was after one of these depressing interviews
with Waters, that Ralph and Evelyn
found the new owner of Vandon when they
rode over together to call, a day or two after
the school-feast. Poor Dare was sitting on
the low ivy-covered wall of the topmost
terrace, a prey to the deepest dejection. If
he had lived in Spartan days, when it was
possible to conceal gnawing foxes under

wearing apparel, he would have made no use
of the advantages of Grecian dress for such
a purpose. Captivated by Evelyn's gentleness
and sympathetic manner (strangers
always thought Evelyn sympathetic), and
impressed by Ralph's kindly, honest face, he
soon found himself telling them something of
his difficulties, of the maze in which he
found himself, of the snubs which Waters
had administered.

Ralph slapped himself with his whip,
whistled, and gave other masculine signs of
interest and sympathy. Evelyn looked from
one to the other, amiably distressed in her
well-fitting habit. After a long conversation,
in which Evelyn disclosed that Ralph was
possessed of the most extraordinary knowledge
and experience in such matters, the
two good-natured young people, seeing he
was depressed and lonely, begged him to
come and stay with them at Atherstone the
very next day, when he might discuss his
affairs with Ralph, if so disposed, and take

counsel with him. Dare accepted with the
most genuine pleasure, and his speaking
countenance was in a moment radiant with
smiles. Was not the little Molly of the
school-feast their child ? and was not Miss
Deyncourt likewise staying with them ?

When his visitors departed, Dare took a
turn at the rapiers ; then opened the piano
with the internal derangement, and sang to
his own accompaniment a series of little confidential
French songs, which would have
made the hair of his ancestors stand on end,
if painted hair could do such a thing. And
the " new squire," as he was already called,
shrugged his shoulders, and lowered his voice,
and spread out his expressive rapid hands,
and introduced to Vandon, one after another,
some of those choice little ditties, French and
English, which had made him such a favourite
companion in Paris, so popular in a certain
society in America.

CHAPTER VIII.

Sir Charles ?"

Miss Deyncourt ! "

I fear," with a glance at the yellow-back
in his hand, " I am interrupting a studious
hour, but "

Not in the least, I assure you," said
Charles, shutting his novel. " What is
regarded as study by the feminine intellect,
is to the masculine merely relaxation. I
was ' unbending over a book,' that was all."

The process of " unbending " was being
performed in the summer house, whither he
had retired after Evelyn and Ralph had
started on their afternoon's ride to Vandon,
in which he had refused to join.

I thought I should find you here," continued

Ruth frankly. " I have been wishing
to speak to you for several days, but you areas
a rule so surrounded and encompassed on
every side by Molly, that I have not had an
opportunity."

It had occurred to Charles once or twice
during the last few days that Molly was
occasionally rather in the way. Now he was
sure of it. As Ruth appeared to hesitate, he
pulled forward a rustic contorted chair for
her.

No, thanks;" she said. " I shall not long
interrupt the unbending process. I only
came to ask "

To ask ? " repeated Charles, who had
got up as she was standing, and came and
stood near her.

You remember the first evening you were
here ? "

I do."

And what we spoke of at dinner ? '

Perfectly. '

I came to ask you how much you lent

Raymond ? " Ruth's clear, earnest eyes
were fixed full upon him.

At this moment Charles perceived Lady
Mary at a little distance, propelling herself
gently over the grass in the direction of the
summer-house. In another second she had
perceived Charles and Ruth, and had turned
precipitately, and hobbled away round the
corner with surprising agility.

Confound her ! " inwardly ejaculated
Charles.

I wish to know how much you lent
him ? " said Ruth again, as he did not answer,
happily unconscious of what had been going
on behind her back.

Only what I was well able to afford."

And has he paid it back since ? "

I am sure he understood I should not
expect him to pay it back at once."

But he has had it three years."

Charles did not answer.

I feel sure he is not able to pay it. Will
you kindly tell me how much it was ? "

No, Miss Deyncourt ; I think not."

Why not ? "

Because — excuse me, but I perceive that
if I do you will instantly wish to pay it."

I do wish to pay it."

I thought so."

There was a short silence.

I still wish it," said Ruth at last.

Charles was silent. Her pertinacity
annoyed and yet piqued him. Being unmarried,
he was not accustomed to opposition
from a woman. He had no intention
of allowing her to pay her brother's debt,
and he wished she would drop the subject
gracefully, now that he had made that fact
evident.

Perhaps you don't know," continued
Ruth, " that I am very well off." (As if he
did not know it. As if Lady Mary had not
casually mentioned Ruth's fortune several
times in his hearing !) " Lady Deyncourt
left me twelve hundred a year, and I have a
little of my own besides. You may not be

aware that I have fourteen hundred and
sixty-two pounds per annum."

I am very glad to hear it."

That is a large sum, you will observe."

It is riches," assented Charles, " if your
expenditure happens to be less."

It does happen to be considerably less in
my case."

You are to be congratulated. And yet I
have always understood that society exacts
great sacrifices from women, in the sums
they feel obliged to devote to dress."

Dress is an interesting subject, and I
should be delighted to hear your views on
it another time ; but we are talking of something
else just at this moment."

I beg your pardon," said Charles quickly,
who did not quite like being brought back
to the case in point. " I — the truth was, I
wished to turn your mind from what we
were speaking of. I don't want you to count
sovereigns into my hand. I really should
dislike it very much."

You intend me to think from that remark
that it was a small sum," said Ruth, with
unexpected shrewdness. " I now feel sure
it was a large one. It ought to be paid, and
there is no one to do it but me. I know
that what is firmness in a man is obstinacy
in a woman, so do not on your side be too
firm, or, who knows ? you may arouse some
of that obstinacy in me to which I should
like to think myself superior."

If," said Charles, with sudden eagerness,
as if an idea had just struck him, " if I let
you pay me this debt, will you on your side
allow me to make a condition ? "

I should like to know the condition first."

Of course. If I agree " — Charles's light-grey
eyes had become keen and intent — " if
I agree to receive payment of what I lent
Deyncourt three years ago, will you promise
not to pay any other debt of his, or ever to
lend him money without the knowledge and
approval of your relations ? "

Ruth considered for a few minutes.

I have so few relations," she said at
length, with rather a sad smile, " and they
are all prejudiced against poor Raymond. I
think I am the only friend he has left in the
world. I am afraid I could not promise
that."

Well," said Charles eagerly, " I won't
insist on relations. I know enough of those
thorns in the flesh myself. I will say instead
'natural advisers.' Come, Miss Deyncourt,
you can't accuse me of firmness now ! "

My natural advisers," repeated Ruth
slowly. " I feel as if I ought to have natural
advisers somewhere ; but who are they ?
Where are they ? I could not ask my sister
or her husband for advice. I mean, I could
not take it, if I did. I should think I knew
better myself. Uncle John ? Evelyn ?
Lord Polesworth ? Sir Charles, I am afraid
the truth is I have never asked for advice in
my life. I have always tried to do what
seemed best, without troubling to know what
other people thought about it. But as I am

vol. 1. 9

anxious to yield gracefully, will you substitute
the word ' friends ' for ' natural advisers ' ? I
hope and think I have friends whom I could
trust."

Friends, then, let it be," said Charles.
Now," holding out his hand, " do you
promise never, et cetera, et cetera, without first
consulting your friends ? "

Ruth put her hand into his.

I do."

That is right. How amiable we are
both becoming ! I suppose I must now
inform you that two hundred pounds is the
exact sum I lent your brother ? "

Ruth went back to the house, and in a few
minutes returned with a cheque in her hand.
She held it towards Charles, who took it,
and put it in his pocket-book.

Thank you," she said, with gratitude in
her eyes and voice.

We have had a pitched battle," said
Charles, relapsing into his old indifferent
manner. " Neither of us has been actually

defeated, for we never called out our reserves,
which I felt would have been hardly fair on
you; but we do not come forth with flying
colours. I fear, from your air of elation, you
actually believe you have been victorious."

I agree with you that there has been no
defeat," replied Ruth ; " but I won't keep
you any longer from your studies. I am
just going out driving with Lady Mary to
have tea with the Thursbys."

Miss Deyncourt, don't allow a natural
and most pardonable vanity to delude you to
such an extent. Don't go out driving the
victim of a false impression. If you will
consider one moment "

Not another moment," replied Ruth ;
"our bugles have sung truce, and I am not
going to put on my war-paint again for any
consideration. There comes the carriage," asa
distant rumbling was heard. " I must not
keep Lady Mary waiting ; " and she was gone.

Charles heard the carriage roll away again,
and when half an hour later he sauntered

back towards the house, he was surprised to
see Lady Mary sitting in the drawing-room
window.

"What! Not gone, after all!" he exclaimed,
in a voice in which surprise was
more predominant than pleasure.

No, Charles," returned Lady Mary in
her measured tones, looking slowly up at him
over her gold-rimmed spectacles. " I felt a
slight return of my old enemy, and Miss
Deyncourt kindly undertook to make my
excuses to Mrs. Thursby."

No one knew what the old enemy was, orin
what manner his mysterious assaults on
Lady Mary were conducted ; but it was an
understood thing that she had private dealings
with him, in which he could make himself
very disagreeable.

Has Molly gone with her ? "

No ; Molly is making jam in the kitchen,
I believe. Miss Deyncourt most good-naturedly
offered to take her with her ; but "
(with a shake of the head) " the poor child's

totally unrestrained appetites and lamentable
self-will made her prefer to remain where
she was."

I am afraid," said Charles meditatively, as
if the idea were entirely a novel one, " Molly
is getting a little spoilt amongst us. It is
natural in you, of course ; but there is no
excuse for me. There never is. There are,
I confess, moments when I don't regard the
child's immortal welfare sufficiently to make
her present existence less enjoyable. What
a round of gaiety Molly's life is ! She flits
from flower to flower, so to speak ; from me
to cook and the jam-pots ; from the jam-pots
to some fresh delight in the loft or in your
society. Life is one long feast to Molly.
Whatever that old impostor the Future may
have in store for her, at any rate she is
having a good time now."

There was a shade of regretful sadness in
Charles's voice that ruffled his aunt.

The child is being ruined," she said with
resigned bitterness.

Not a bit of it. I was spoiled as a child,
and look at me ! "

You are spoilt. I don't spoil you ; but
other people do. Society does. And the
result is that you are so hard to please that
I don't believe you will ever marry. You
look for a perfection in others which is not
to be found in yourself."

I don't fancy I should appear to advantage
side by side with perfection," said Charles in
his most careless manner ; and he rose and
wandered away into the garden.

He was irritated with Lady Mary, with her
pleased looks during the last few days, with
her annoying celerity that afternoon in the
garden. It was all the more annoying
because he was conscious that Ruth amused
and interested him in no slight degree. She
had the rare quality of being genuine. She
stood for what she was without effort or self-consciousness.
Whether playful or serious,
she was always real. Beneath a reserved
and rather quiet manner there lurked a

piquant unconventionality. The mixture of
earnestness and humour, which were so closely
interwoven in her nature that he could never
tell which would come uppermost, had a
strange attraction for him. He had crown
accustomed to watch for and try to provoke
the sudden gleam of fun in the serious eyes,
which always preceded a retort given with an
air of the sweetest feminine meekness, which
would make Ralph rub himself all over with
glee, and tell Charles, chuckling, he " would
not get much change out of Ruth."

If only she had not been asked to Atherton
on purpose to meet him ! If only
Lady Mary had not arranged it ; if only
Evelyn did not know it ; if only Ralph had
not guessed it ; if only he himself had not
seen it from the first instant ! Ruth and
Molly were the only two unconscious persons
in the house.

I wonder," said Charles to himself, " why
people can't allow me to manage my own
affairs ? Oh, what a world it is for unmarried

men with money ! Why did I not marry
fifteen years ago, when every woman with a
straight nose was an angel of light ; when I
felt a noble disregard for such minor details
as character, mind, sympathy, if the hair and
the eyes were the right shade ? Why did I
not marry when I was out of favour with my
father, when I was head over ears in debt,
and when at least I could feel sure no one
would marry me for my money ? Molly," as
that young lady came running towards him
with lingering traces of jam upon her flushed
countenance, " you have arrived just in time.
Uncle Charles was getting so dull without
you. What have you been after all this
time ? "

Cook and me have made thirty-one pots
and a little one," said Molly, inserting a very
sticky hand into Charles's. " And your Mr.
Brown helped. Cook told him to go along
at first — which wasn't kind, was it ? — but he
stayed all the same ; and I skimmed with a
big spoon, and she poured it in the pots.

Only they aren't covered up with paper yet,
if you want to see them. And oh ! Uncle
Charles, what do you think ? Father and
mother have come back from their ride, and
that nice funny man who was at the school-feast
is coming here tomorrow, and I shall
show him my guinea pigs. He said he
wanted to see them very much."

Oh, he did, did he ? When was that ? "
At the school-feast. Oh ! " with enthusiasm,
"he was so nice, Uncle Charles, so
attentive, and getting things when you want
them ; and the wheel went over his foot
when he was shaking hands, and he did not
mind a bit ; and he filled our teapots for us,
Ruth's big one, you know, that holds such
a lot."

Oh ! He filled the big teapot did he ? "
Yes, and mine too ; and then he helped
us to unpack the dolls. He was so kind tome
and Cousin Ruth."

Kind to Miss Deyncourt, was he ? "
1 Yes ; and when we went away he ran

J

and opened the gate for us. Oh, there
comes Cousin Ruth back again in the carriage.
I'll run and tell her he's coming. She will
be glad."

Aunt Mary is right," said Charles, watching
his niece disappear. " Molly has formed
a habit of expressing herself with unnecessary
freedom. Decidedly she is a little spoilt,"

CHAPTER IX.

Dare arrived at Atherstone the following
afternoon. Evelyn and Ralph, who had
enlarged on the state of morbid depression
of the lonely inhabitant of Vandon, were
rather taken aback by the jaunty appearance
of the sufferer, when he appeared, overflowing
with evident satisfaction and small talk, his
face wreathed with smiles.

He bears up wonderfully," said Charles
aside to Ruth later in the evening, as Dare
warbled a very discreet selection of his best
songs after dinner. " No one knows better
than myself that many a breaking heart beats
beneath a smiling waistcoat, but unless we
had been told beforehand we should never
have guessed it in his case."

Dare, who was looking at Ruth, and saw
Charles go and sit down by her, brought his
song to an abrupt conclusion, and made his
way to her also.

"You also sing, Miss Deyncourt ? " he
asked. " I am sure, from your face, you sing."

I do."

"Thank Heaven!" said Charles fervently.
I did you an injustice. I thought you were
going to say ' a little.' Every singing young
lady I ever met, when asked that question,
invariably replied 'a little'"

I leave my friends to say that for me,"
said Ruth.

Perhaps you yourself sing a little ? " asked
Dare, wishing Charles would leave Ruth's
ball of wool alone.

"No," said Charles; "I have no tricks."
And he rose and went off to the newspaper
table. Dare's songs were all very well, but
really his voice was nothing so very wonderful,
and he was not much of an acquisition
in other ways.

Then Dare took his opportunity. He
dropped into Charles's vacant chair ; he
wound wool ; he wished to learn to knit ; his
inquiring mind craved for information respecting
shooting stockings. He talked of music ;
of songs, Italian, French, and English ; of
American nigger melodies. Would Miss
Deyncourt sing ? Might he accompany
her ? Ah ! she preferred the simple old
English ballads. He loved the simple English
ballad.

And Ruth, nothing loth, sang in her fresh,
clear voice one song after another, Dare
accompanying her with rapid sympathy and
ease.

Charles put down his paper, and moved
slightly, so that he had a better view of the
piano. Evelyn laid down her work and
looked affectionately at Ruth.

Exquisite," said Lady Mary from time to
time, who had said the same of Lady Grace's
wavering little soprano.

You also sing duets ? You sing duets ? "

eagerly inquired Dare, the music-stool creaking
with his suppressed excitement ; and,
without waiting for an answer, he been
playing the opening chords of " Greeting."

The two voices rose and fell together, now
soft, now triumphant, harmonizing as if they
sung together for years. Dare's second was
low, pathetic, and it blended at once with
Ruth's clear young contralto. Charles wondered
that the others should applaud when
the duet was finished. Ruth's voice went
best alone in his opinion.

And the ' Cold Blast ' ? " asked Dare
immediately afterwards. " The ' Cold Blast '
was here a moment ago " — turning the leaves
over rapidly. " You are not tired, Miss
Deyncourt ? "

"Tired!" replied Ruth, her eyes sparkling.
"It never tires me to sing. It rests
me."

Ah ! so it is with me. That is just how
I feel," said Dare. " To sing, or to listen to
the voice of — of "

Of what ? Confound him ! " wondered
Charles.

Of another" said Dare. " Ah ! here he
is ! " and he pounced on another song, and
lightly touched the opening chords.

* Oh ! Wert thou in the cold blast,' "

sang Ruth, fresh and sweet.

'" I'd shelter thee'"

Dare assured her with manly fervour. He
went on to say what he would do if he were
monarch of the realm, affirming that the
brightest jewel of his crown would be his
queen.

(" Anyhow, he can't pronounce Scotch,"
Charles thought.)

Would be his queen," Dare repeated, with
subdued emotion and an upward glance at
Ruth, which she was too much absorbed in
the song to see, but which did not escape
Charles. Dare's dark sentimental eyes
spoke volumes of — not sermons — at that
moment.

"Oh! Uncle Charles," whispered Molly,
who had been allowed to sit up about two
hours beyond her nominal bedtime, at which
hour she rarely felt disposed to retire ; " oh,
Uncle Charles! 'The brightest jewel in his
crown ! ' Don't you wish you and me could
sing together like that ? "

Charles moved impatiently, and took up
his paper again.

The evening passed all too quickly for
Dare, who loved music and the sound of his
own voice, and he had almost forgotten, until
Charles left him and Ralph alone together in
the smoking-room, that he had come to
discuss his affairs with the latter.

Dear me," said Evelyn, who had followed
her cousin to her room after they had dispersed
for the night, and was looking out of
Ruth's window, "that must be Charles
walking up and down on the lawn. Well
now, how thoughtful he is to leave Mr.
Dare and Ralph together. You know, Ruth,
poor Mr. Dare's affairs are in a very bad

way, and he has come to talk things over
with my Ralph."

I hope Ralph will make him put his
cottages in order," said Ruth with sudden
interest, shaking back her hair from her
shoulders. " Do you think he will ? "

Whatever Ralph advises will be sure to
be right," replied Evelyn, with the soft conviction
of his infallibility which caused her to
be considered by most of Ralph's masculine
friends an ideal wife. It is women without
reasoning powers of any kind whom the
nobler sex should be careful to marry, if they
wish to be regarded through life in this
delightful way by their wives. Men not
particularly heroic in themselves, who yet
are anxious to pose as heroes in their
domestic circle, should remember that the
smallest modicum of common sense on the
part of the worshipper will inevitably mara
happiness, the very existence of which
depends entirely on a blind unreasoning
devotion. In middle life the absence of

VOL. I. IO

reason begins perhaps to be felt ; but why
in youth take thought for such a far-off
morrow !

I hope he will," said Ruth, half to herself.
'* What an opportunity that man has if he
only sees it. There is so much to be done,
and it is all in his hands."

Yes, it's not entailed ; but I don't think
there is so very much," said Evelyn. " But
then, so long as people are nice, I never care
whether they are rich or poor. That is the
first question I ask when people come into
the neighbourhood. Are they really nice ?
Dear me, Ruth, what beautiful hair you
have ; and mine coining off so ! And, talking
of hair, did you ever see anything like Mr.
Dare's ? Somebody must really speak to
him about it. If he would keep his hands
still, and not talk so quick, and let his hair
grow a little, I really think he would not
look so like a foreigner."

I don't suppose he minds looking like
one."

My dear ! "

His mother was a Frenchwoman, wasn't
she ? I am sure I have heard so fifty times
since his uncle died."

And if she was," said Evelyn reprovingly,
is not that an extra reason for his giving
up anything that will remind people of it ?
And we ought to try and forget it, Ruth, and
behave just the same to him as if she had
been an Englishwoman. I wonder if he is a
Roman Catholic ? "

Ask him."

I hope he is not," continued Evelyn,
taking up her candle to go. "We never had
one to stay in the house before. I don't
mean," catching a glimpse of Ruth's face,
that Catholics are — well — I don't mean
that. But still, you know, one would not like
to make great friends with a Catholic, would
one, Ruth ? And he is so nice and so amusing
that I do hope, as he is going to be a neighbour,
he is a Protestant." And after a few
more remarks of about the same calibre from

Evelyn, the two cousins kissed and parted
for the night.

"Will he do it?" said Ruth to herself,
when she was alone. " Has he character
enough, and perseverance enough, and money
enough ? Oh ! I wish Uncle John would
talk to him."

Ruth was not aware that one word from
herself would have more weight with a manlike
Dare than any number from an angel of
heaven, if that angel were of the masculine
gender. If at the other side of the house
Dare could have known how earnestly Ruth
was thinking about him, he would not have
been surprised (for he was not without experience),
but he would have felt immensely
flattered.

Vandon lay in a distant part of Mr.
Alwynn's parish, and a perpetual curate had
charge of the district. Mr. Alwynn consequently
seldom went there, but on the few
occasions on which Ruth had accompanied
him in his periodical visits, she had seen

enough. Who cares for a recital of what she
saw ? Misery and want are so common.
We can see them for ourselves any day. In
Ruth's heart a great indignation had kindled
against old Mr. Dare, of Vandon, who was
inaccessible as a ghost in his own house,
haunting the same rooms, but never to be
found when Mr. Alwynn called upon him to
"put things before him in their true light."
And when Mr. Dare descended to the
Vandon vault, all Mr. Alwynn's interest, and
consequently a good deal of Ruth's, had
centred in the new heir, who was so difficult
to find, and who ultimately turned up from
the other end of nowhere just when people
were beginning to despair of his ever turning
up at all.

And now that he had come. Would
he make the crooked straight ? Would the
new broom sweep clean ? Ruth recalled
the new broom's brown handsome face, with
the eager eyes and raised eyebrows, and
involuntarily shook her head. It is difficult

to be an impartial judge of any one with a
feeling for music, and a pathetic tenor voice ;
but the face she had called to mind did not
inspire her with confidence. It was kindly,
amiable, pleasant ; but was it strong ? In
other words, was it not a trifle weak ?

She found herself comparing it with
another, a thin, reserved face, with keen
light eyes and a firm mouth ; a mouth with
a cigar in it at that moment on the lawn.
The comparison, however, did not help her
meditations much, being decidedly prejudicial
to the "new broom ; " and the faint chime of
the clock on the dressing-table breaking in
on them at the same moment, she dismissed
them for the night, and proceeded to busy
herself in putting to bed her various little
articles of jewellery before betaking herself
there also.

Any doubts entertained by Evelyn about
Dare's religious views were completely set at
rest the following morning, which happened

to be a Sunday. He appeared at breakfast
in a black frock coat, the splendour of which
quite threw Ralph's ancient Sunday garment
into the shade. He wore also a chastened,
decorous aspect, which seemed unfamiliar to
his mobile face, and rather ill suited to it.
After breakfast he inquired when service
would be, and expressed a wish to attendit.
He brought down a hiorh hat and an
enormous Prayer-book, and figured with them
in the garden.

Who is going to Greenacre, and who is
going to Slumberleigh ? " called out Ralph
from the smoking-room window. " Because,
if any of you are going to foot it to Slumber-leigh,
you had better be starting. Which
are you going to, Charles ? "

I am going where Molly goes. Which
is it to be, Molly ? "

Slumberleigh," said Molly with decision,
because it's the shortest sermon, and I
want to see the little foal in Brown's field."

Slumberleigh be it," said Charles. " Now,

Miss Deyncourt," as Ruth appeared, "which
church are you going to support — Greenacre,
which is close in more senses than one,
where they never open the windows, and the
clergyman preaches for an hour ; or Slumber-leigh,
shady, airy, cool, lying past a meadow
with a foal in it ? If I may offer that as any
inducement, Molly and I intend to patronize
Slumberleigh"

Ruth said she would do the same.

Now, Dare, you will be able to decide
whether Greenacre, with a little fat tower, or
Slumberleigh, with a beautiful tall steeple,
suits your religious views best."

I will also go to Slumberleigh," said
Dare, without a moment's hesitation.

I thought so. I suppose " — to Ralph and
Evelyn — " you are going to Greenacre with
Aunt Mary ? Tell her I have gone to
church, will you ? It will cheer her up.
Sunday is a very depressing day with her,
I know. She thinks of all she has done in
the week, preparatory to doing a little more

on Monday. Good-bye. Now then, Molly,
have you got your Prayer-book ? Miss
Deyncourt, I don't see yours anywhere.
Oh, there it is! No, don't let Dare carry
it for you. Give it me. He will have
enough to do, poor fellow, to travel with his
own. Come, Molly ! Is Vic chained up ?
Yes, I can hear him howling. The craving
for church privileges of that dumb animal,
Miss Deyncourt, is an example to us Christians.
Molly, have you got your penny ?
Miss Deyncourt, can I accommodate you
with a threepenny bit ? Now, arc we all
ready to start ? "

When this outburst of eloquence has
subsided," said Ruth, " the audience will be
happy to move on."

And so they started across the fields,
where the grass was already springing faint
and green after the hay making. There was
a fresh wandering air, which fluttered the
ribbons in Molly's hat, as she danced on
ahead, frisking in her short white skirt

beside her uncle, her hand in his. Charles
was the essence of wit to Molly, with his
grave face that so seldom smiled, and the
twinkle in the kind eyes, that always went
before those wonderful delightful jokes which
he alone could make. Sometimes, as she
laughed, she looked back at Ruth and Dare,
half a field behind, in pity at what they were
missing.

Shall we wait and tell them that story,
Uncle Charles ?"

No, Molly. I dare say he is telling her
another which is just as good."

I don't think he knows any like
yours."

Some people like the old, old story
best."

Do I know the old, old one, Uncle
Charles ? "

"No, Molly."

Can you tell it ? "

No. I have never been able to tell that
particular story."

"And do you really think he is telling it
to her now ? " with a backward glance.

Not at this moment. It's no good
running back. He's only thinking about it
now. He will tell it her in about a month
or six weeks' time."

I hope I shall be there when he tells it."

I hope you may ; but I don't think it is
likely. And now, Molly, set your hat straight,
and leave off jumping. I never jump when
I go to church with Aunt Mary. Quietly
now, for there's the church, and Mr. Alwynn's
looking out of the window."

Dare, meanwhile, walking with Ruth,
caught sight of the church and loch-gate
with heartfelt regret. The stretches of sunny
meadow land, the faint clamour of church
bells, the pale, refined face beside him, had
each individually and all three together
appealed to his imagination, always vivid
when he himself was concerned. He suddenly
felt as if a great gulf had fixed itself,
without any will of his own, between his old

easy-going life and the new existence that
was opening out before him. He had
crossed from the old to the new without any
perception of such a gulf, and now, as he
looked back, it seemed to yawn between him
and all that hitherto he had been. He did
not care to look back, so he looked forward.
He felt as if he were the central figure (when
was he not a central figure ?) in a new drama.
He was fond of acting, on and off the stage,
and now he seemed to be playing a new
part, in which he was not yet thoroughly at
ease, but which he rather suspected would
become him exceedingly well. It amused
him to see himself going to church — to
church ! to hear himself conversing on
flowers and music with a young English girl.
The idea that he was rapidly falling in love
was specially delightful. He called himself a
vieux scdldrat, and watched the progress of
feelings which he felt did him credit with
extreme satisfaction. He and Ruth arrived
at the church porch all too soon for Dare ;

and though he had the pleasure of sitting on
one side of her during the service, he would
have preferred that Charles, of whom he felt
a vague distrust, had not happened to be on
the other.

CHAPTER X.

"My dear," said Mrs. Alwynn to her husband
that morning, as they started for church
across the glebe, " if any of the Atherstone
party are in church, as they ought to be, for
I hear from Mrs. Smith that they are not at
all regular at Greenacre — only went once last
Sunday, and then late — I shall just tell Ruth
that she is to come back to me tomorrow.
A few days won't make any difference to
her, and it will fit in so nicely her coming
back the day you go to the palace. After
all I've done for Ruth, new curtains to her
room, and the piano tuned and everything, I
don't think she would like to stay there with
friends, and me all by myself, without a
creature to speak to. Ruth may be only a

niece by marriage, but she will see in a
moment "

And in fact she did. When Mrs. Alwynn
took her aside after church, and explained
the case in the all-pervading whisper for
which she had apparently taken out a patent,
Ruth could not grasp any reason why she
should return to Slumberleigh three days
before the time, but she saw at once that
return she must if Mrs. Alwynn chose to
demand it ; and so she yielded with a good
grace, and sent Mrs. Alwynn back smiling to
the loch-gate, where Mr. Alwynn and Mabel
Thursby were talking with Dare and Molly,
while Charles interviewed the village policeman
at a little distance.

No news of the tramp," said Charles,
meeting Ruth at the gate ; and they started
homewards in different order to that in which
they had come, in spite of a great effort at
the last moment on the part of Dare, who
thought the old way was better. " The
policeman has seen nothing of him. He has
gone off to pastures new, I expect."

I hope he has."

Mrs. Alwynn does not want you to leave
Atherstone tomorrow, does she ? "

I am sorry to say she does."

11 But you won't go ? "

I must not only go, but I must do it as
if I liked it."

I hope Evelyn won't allow it."

While I am living with Mrs. Alwynn, I
am bound to do what she likes in small
things."

Hem ! "

I should have thought, Sir Charles, that
this particularly feminine and submissive
sentiment would have met with your
approval."

(t It does; it does," said Charles hastily.
Only, after the stubborn rigidity of your
shall I say your — week-day character,
especially as regards money, this softened
Sabbath mood took me by surprise for a
moment."

You should see me at Slumberleigh,"

said Ruth, with a smile half sad, half
humorous. " You should see me tying up
Uncle John's flowers, or holding Aunt
Fanny's wools. Nothing more entirely feminine
and young ladylike can be imagined."

It must be a great change, after living
with a woman like Lady Deyncourt — to
whose house I often went years ago, when
her son was living — to come to a place like
Slumberleigh."

"It is a great change. I am ashamed to
say how much I felt it at first. I don't know
how to express it ; but everything down here
seems so small and local, and hard and fast."

I know," said Charles gently ; and they
walked on in silence. " And yet," he said at
last, " it seems to me, and I should have
thought you would have felt the same, that
life is very small, very narrow and circumscribed
everywhere ; though perhaps more
obviously so in Crawford and Slumberleighs.
I have seen a good deal during the last
fifteen years. I have mixed with many sorts

VOL. I. II

and conditions of men, but in no class or
grade of society have I yet found independent
men and women. The groove is as narrow
in one class as in another, though in some it
is better concealed. I sometimes feel as if I
were walking in a ball-room full of people all
dancing the lancers. There are different sets
of course — fashionable, political, artistic — but
the people in them are all crossing over, all
advancing and retiring, with the same apparent
aimlessness, or setting to partners."

"There is occasionally an aim in that."

Charles smiled grimly.

They follow the music in that as in
everything else. You go away for ten years,
and still find them on your return, going
through the same figures to new tunes. I
wonder if there are any people anywhere in
the world who stand on their own feet, and
think and act for themselves ; who don't set
their watches by other people's ; who don't live
and marry and die by rote, expecting to go
straight up to heaven by rote afterwards ! "

I believe there are such people," said
Ruth earnestly ; " I have had glimpses of
them, but the real ones look like the shadows,
and the shadows like the real ones, and — we
miss them in the crowd."

Or one thinks one finds them, and they
turn out only clever imitations after all. In
these days there is a mania for shamming
originality of some kind. I am always
imagining people I meet are real, and not
shadows, until one day I unintentionally put
my hand through them, and find out my mistake.
I am getting tired of being taken in."

And some day you will get tired of being
cynical."

I am very much obliged to you for your
hopeful view of my future. You evidently
imagine that I have gone in for the fashionable
creed of the young man of the present
day. I am not young enough to take
pleasure in high collars and cheap cynicism,
Miss Deyncourt. Cynical people are never
disappointed in others, as I so often am,

because they expect the worst. In theory I
respect and admire my fellow-creatures, but
they continually exasperate me because they
won't allow me to do so in real life. I have
still — I blush to own it — a lingering respect
for women, though they have taken pains to
show me, time after time, what a fool I am
for such a weakness."

Charles looked intently at Ruth. Women
are so terribly apt in handling any subject to
make it personal. Would she fire up, or
would she, like so many women, join in abuse
of her own sex ? She did neither. She was
looking straight in front of her, absently
watching the figures of Dare and Molly in
the next field. Then she turned her grave,
thoughtful chance towards him.

I think respect is never weakness," she
said. " It is a sign of strength, even when it
is misplaced. There is not much to admire
in cunning people who are never taken in.
The best people I have known, the people
whom it did me good to be with, have been

those who respected others and themselves.
Do not be in too great a hurry to get rid of
any little fragment that still remains. You
may want it when it is gone."

Charles's apathetic face had become
strangely earnest. There was a keen
searching look in his tired, restless eyes.
He was about to make some answer, when
he suddenly became aware of Dare and
Molly sitting perched on a gate close at
hand waiting for them. Never had he perceived
Molly's little brown face with less
pleasure than at that moment. She scrambled
down with a noble disregard of appearances,
and tried to take his hand. But it was
coolly withdrawn. Charles fell behind on
some pretence of fastening the gate, and
Molly had to content herself with Ruth's
and Dare's society for the remainder of the
walk.

Ruth had almost forgotten, until Molly
suggested at luncheon a picnic for the
following day, that she was returning to

Slumberleigh on Monday morning; and when
she made the fact known, Ralph had to be
hushed " several times by Evelyn for
muttering opinions behind the sirloin respecting
Mrs. Alwynn, which Evelyn seemed to
have heard before, and to consider unsuited
to the ears of that lady's niece.

But if you go away, Cousin Ruth, we can't
have the picnic ; can we, Uncle Charles ? "

Impossible, Molly. Rather bread-and-butter
at home, than a mixed biscuit in the
open air without Miss Deyncourt."

Is Mrs. Alwynn suffering ? " asked Lady
Mary politely down the table.

Ruth explained that she was not in ill
health, but that she did not wish to be left
alone ; and Ralph was " hushed " again.

Lady Mary was annoyed, or more properly
speaking, she was " moved in the spirit''
which in a Churchman seems to be the
same thing as annoyance in the unregenerate
or unorthodox mind. She regretted Ruth's
departure more than any one, except perhaps

Ruth herself. She had watched the girl very
narrowly, and she had seen nothing to make
her alter the opinion she had formed of her ;
indeed, she was inclined to advance beyond
it. Even she could not suspect that Ruth
had " played her cards well ; " although she
would have aided and abetted her in anyway
in her power, if Ruth had shown the
slightest consciousness of holding cards at
all, or being desirous of playing them. Her
frank yet reserved manner, her distinguished
appearance, her sense of humour (which
Lady Mary did not understand, but which
she perceived others did), and the quiet
savoir faire of her treatment of Dare's
advances, all enhanced her greatly in the
eyes of her would-be aunt. She bade her
good-bye with genuine regret. The only
person who bore her departure without a
shade of compunction being Dare, who stood
by the carriage till the last moment, assuring
Ruth that he hoped to come over to the
Rectory very shortly ; while Charles and

Molly held the gate open meanwhile, at the
end of the short drive.

I know that Frenchman means business,"
said Lady Mary wrathfully to herself, as she
watched the scene from the garden. Her
mind, from the very severity of its tension,
was liable to occasional lapses of this painful
kind from the spiritual and ecclesiastical to
the mundane and transitory. " I saw it
directly he came into the house ; and with
his opportunities, and living within a stone's
throw, I should not wonder if he were to
succeed. Any man would fetch a fancy
price at Slumberleigh ; and the most fastidious
woman in the world ceases to be critical, if
she is reduced to the proper state of dulness.
He is handsome, too, in his foreign way.
But she does not like him now. She is
inclined to like Charles, though she does not
know it. There is an attraction between the
two. I knew there would be. And he likes
her. Oh, what fools men are! He will go
away ; and Dare, on the contrary, will ride

over to Slumberleigh every day, and by the
time he is engaged to her Charles will see
her again, and find out that he is in love
with her himself. Oh, the folly, the density,
of unmarried men ! and, indeed " (with a
sudden recollection of the deceased Mr.
Cunningham), " of the whole race of them !
But of all men I have ever known, I really
think the most provoking is Charles."

"Musing?" inquired her nephew, sauntering
up to her.

I was thinking that we had just lost the
pleasantness person of our little party," said
Lady Mary, viciously seizing up her work.

I am still here," suggested Charles, byway
of consolation. " I don't start for
Norway in Wyndham's yacht for three days
to come."

Do you mean to say you are going to
Norway ? "

I forget whether it was to be Norway ;
but I know I'm booked to go yachting
somewhere. It's Wyndham's new toy. He

paid through the parental nose for it, and
he made me promise in London to go with
him on his first cruise. I believe a very
charming Miss Wyndham is to be of the
party."

"And how long, pray, are you going to
yacht with Miss Wyndham ? "

"It is with her brother I propose to go.
I thought I had explained that before. I
shall probably cruise about, let me see, for
three weeks or so, till the grouse shooting
begins. Then I am due in Scotland, at the
Hope Actons, and several other places."

Lady Mary laid down her work, and rose
to her feet, her thin hand closing tightly
over the silver crook of her stick.

Charles," she said, in a voice trembling
with anger, looking him full in the face,
you are a fool ! " and she passed him without
another word, and hobbled away rapidly
into the house.

Am I ? " said Charles, half aloud to himself,
when the last fold of her garment had

been twitched out of sight through the
window. Ami? Molly," with great gravity,
as Molly appeared, " yes, you may sit on my
knee ; but don't wriggle. Molly, what is a
fool ? "

I think its Race, only worse," said Molly.
Uncle Charles, Mr. Dare is going away
too. His dog-cart has just come into the
yard."

Has it ? I hope he won't keep it
waiting."

You are not going away, are you ? "

"Not for three days more."

Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday. Why,
they will be gone in a moment."

But to Charles they seemed three very
long days indeed. He was annoyed with
himself for having made so many engagements
before he left London. At the time
there did not seem anything better to be
done, and he supposed he must go somewhere
; but now he thought he would have
liked to stay on at Atherstone, though he

would not have said so to Lady Mary for
worlds. He was tired of rushing up and
down. He was not so fond of yachting,
after all ; and he remembered that he had
been many times to Norway.

I would get out of it, if I could," he said
to Lady Mary on the last morning ; " and of
this blue serge suit too (you should see Miss
Wyndham in blue serge !) ; but it is not a
question of pleasure, but of principle. I
don't like to throw over Wyndham at the
last moment, after what you said when I
failed the Hope Actons last year. Twins
could not feel more exactly together than
you and I do where a principle is involved.
I see you are about to advise me to keep
my engagement. Do not trouble to do so.
I am going to Portsmouth by the midday
train. Brown is at this moment packing my
telescope and life-belt."

CHAPTER XI.

It was the end of August. The little lawn
at Slumberleigh Rectory was parched and
brown. The glebe beyond was brown. So
was the field beyond that. The thirsty road
was ash white between its grey hedgerows.
It was hotter in the open air than in the
house, but Ruth had brought her books out
into the garden all the same, and had made
a conscientious effort to read under the
chestnut-tree.

For under the same roof with Mrs. Alwynn
she had soon learned that application or
study of any kind was an impossibility.
Mrs. Alwynn had several maxims as to the
conduct of herself, and consequently of everyone
else, and one of those to which she most

frequently gave utterance was that "young
people should always be cheery and sociable,
and should not be left too much to themselves."


When in the winter Mr. Alwynn had
brought home Ruth, quite overwhelmed for
the time by the shock of the first real trouble
she had known, Mrs. Alwynn was kindness
itself in the way of food and warm rooms,
but the only thing Ruth craved for, to be
left alone, she would not allow for a moment.
No ! Mrs. Alwynn was cheerful, brisk, and
pious, at intervals. If she found her niece
was sitting in her own room, she bustled
upstairs, poked the fire, gave her a kiss, and
finally brought her down to the drawing-room,
where she told her she would be as
quiet as in her own room. She need not be
afraid her uncle would come in ; and she
must not allow herself to get moped. What
would she, Mrs. Alwynn, have done, she
would like to know, if, when she was in
trouble — and she knew what trouble meant,

if any one did — she had allowed herself to
get moped. Ruth must try and bear up.
And at Lady Deyncourt's age it was quite
to be expected. And Ruth must remember
she still had a sister, and that there was a
happy home above. And now, if she would
get that green wool out of the red plush
iron (which really was a work-box — such a
droll idea, wasn't it ?), Ruth should hold the
wool, and they would have a cosy little chat
till luncheon time.

And so Mrs. Alwynn did her duty by
her niece ; and Ruth, in the dark days that
followed her grandmother's death, took all
the little kindnesses in the spirit in which
they were meant, and did her duty by her
aunt.

But after a time Mrs. Alwynn became
more exacting. Ruth was visibly recovering
from what Mrs. Alwynn called "her bereavement."
She could smile again without an
effort ; she took long walks with Mr. Alwynn,
and, later in the spring, paid a visit to her

uncle, Lord Polesworth. It was after this
visit that Mrs. Alwynn became more exacting.
She had borne with half attention and
a lack of interest in crewel-work while Ruth
was still " fretting," as she termed it. But
when a person lays aside crape, and goes
into half-mourning, the time has come when
she may — nay, when she ought to be
chatty." This time had come with Ruth,
but she was not " chatty." Like Mrs. Dombey,
she did not make an effort, and as the
months passed on, Mrs. Alwynn began to
shake her head, and to fear that " there was
some officer or something on her mind."
Mrs. Alwynn always called soldiers officers,
and doctors physicians.

Ruth on her side was vaguely aware that
she did not give satisfaction. The small
talk, the perpetual demand on her attention,
the constant interruptions seemed to benumb
what faculties she had. Her mind became
like a machine out of work — rusty, creaking,
difficult to set going. If she had half an

hour of leisure she could not fix her attention
to anything. She, who in her grandmother's
time had been so keen and alert, seemed
to have drifted, in Mrs. Alwynn's society,
into a torpid state, from which she made
vain attempts to emerge, only to sink the
deeper.

When she stood once more, fresh from a
fortnight of pleasant intercourse with pleasant
people, in the little ornate drawing-room at
Slumberleigh, on her return from Atherstone,
the remembrance of the dulled, confused
state in which she had been living with her
aunt returned forcibly to her mind. The
various articles of furniture, the red silk
handkerchiefs dabbed behind pendent plates,
the musical elephants on the mantel-piece,
the imitation Eastern antimacassars, the
shocking fate in the way of nailed and glued
pictorial ornamentation that had overtaken
the back of the cottage piano — indeed, all the
various objects of luxury and vertu with
which Mrs. Alwynn had surrounded herself,

VOL. I. 12

seemed to recall to Ruth — as the apparatus
of the sick-room recalls the illness to the
patient, the stupor into which she had fallen
in their company. With her eyes fixed upon
the new brass pig (that was at heart a pen-wiser)
which Mrs. Alwynn had pointed out
as the gift of Mabel Thursby, who always
brought her back some little " tasty thing
from London " — with her eyes on the brass
pig, Ruth resolved that, come what would,
she would not allow herself to sink into such
a state of mental paralysis again.

To read a book of any description was out
of the question in the society of Mrs. Alwynn.
But Ruth, with the connivance of Mr.
Alwynn, devised a means of eluding her
aunt. At certain hours in the day she was
lost regularly, and not to be found. It was
summer, and the world, or at least the neighbourhood
of Slumberleigh Rectory, which was
the same thing, was all before her where to
choose. In after-years she used to say that
some books had always remained associated

with certain places in her mind. With
Emerson she learned to associate the scent
of hay, the desultory remarks of hens, and
the sudden choruses of ducks. Carlyle's
Sartor Resorts," which she read for the
first time this year, always recalled to her
afterwards the leathern odour of the box-room,
with an occasional soupcon of damp
flapping linen in the orchard, which spot was
not visible from the Rectory windows.

Gradually Mrs. Alwynn became aware of
the fact that Ruth was never to be seen with
a book in her hand, and she expressed fears
that the latter was not keeping up her
reading.

And if you don't like to read to yourself,
my dear, you can read to me while I work.
German, now. I like the sound of German
very well. It brings back the time when your
Uncle John and I went up the Rhine on our
honeymoon. And then, for English reading
there's a very nice book Uncle John
has somewhere on natural history, called

Animals of a Quiet Life," by a Mr. Hare,
too — so comical, I always think. It's good
for you to be reading something. It is what
your poor dear granny would have wished if
she had been alive. Only it must not be
poetry, Ruth, not poetry."

Mrs. Alwynn did not approve of poetry.
She was wont to say that for her part she
liked only what was perfectly true, by which
it is believed she meant prose.

She had no books of her own. In times
of illness she borrowed from Mrs. Thursby
(who had all Miss Young's works, and selections
from the publications of the S.P.C.K.).
On Sundays, when she could not work, she
read, half aloud, of course, with sighs at
intervals, a little manual called " Gold Dust,"
or a smaller one still, called " Pearls of Great
Price," which she had once recommended to
Charles, whom she knew slightly, and about
whom she affected to know a great deal,
which nothing (except pressing) would induce
her to repeat; which rendered the application

of the " Pearls," to be followed by the
Dust," most essential to his future welfare.

On this particular morning in August,
Ruth had slipped out as far as the chestnut-tree,
the lower part of which was hidden from
the Rectory windows by a blessed yew
hedge. It was too hot to walk, it was too
hot to draw, it was even too hot to read. It
did not seem, however, to be too hot to
ride, for presently she heard a horse's hoofs
clattering across the stones of the stable-yard,
and she knew, from the familiarity of
the sound at that hour of the day, that Dare
had probably ridden over, and, more probably
still, would stay to luncheon.

The foreign gentleman, as all the village
people called him, had by this time become
quite an institution in the neighbourhood of
Vandon. Every one liked him, and he liked
every one. Like the sun, he shone upon the
just and the unjust. He went to every tennis
party to which he was invited. He was
pleased if people were at home when he

called. He became in many houses a
privileged person, and he never abused his
privileges. Women especially liked him.
He had what Mrs. Eccles denned as " such
a way with him ; " his way being to make
every woman he met think that she was
particularly interesting in his eyes — for the
time being. Men did not, of course, care for
him so much. When he stayed anywhere, it
was vaguely felt by the sterner sex of the
party that he stole a march upon them.
While they were smoking, after their kind,
in clusters on the lawn, it would suddenly be
observed that he was sitting" in the drawing-room,
giving a lesson in netting, or trying
over a new song encircled by young ladyhood.
It was felt that he took an unfair
advantage. What business had he to comedown
to tea in that absurd amber plush
smoking suit, just because the elder ladies
had begged to see it ? It was all the more
annoying, because he looked so handsome
in it. Like most men who are admired

by women, he was not much liked by
men.

But the house to which he came the
oftener was Slumberleigh Rectory. He was
faithful to his early admiration of Ruth ; and
the only obstacle to his making her (in his
opinion) happy among women, namely, her
possible want of fortune, had long since been
removed by the confidential remarks of Mrs.
Alwynn. To his foreign habits and ideas,
fourteen or fifteen hundred a year represented
a very large sum. In his eyes Ruth was an
heiress, and in all good earnest he set himself
to win her. Mr. Alwynn had now become
the proper person to consult regarding his
property ; and at first, to Ruth's undisguised
satisfaction, he consulted him nearly every
other day, his horse at last taking the turn
for Slumberleigh as a matter of course.
Many a time in these August days might
Mrs. Eccles and all the other inhabitants of
Slumberleigh have seen Dare ride up the
little street, taking as much active exercise

as his horse, only skywards ; the saddle being
him merely a point of rebound.

But if the object of his frequent visits was
misunderstood by Ruth at first, Dare did not
allow it to remain so long. And not only
Ruth herself, but Mr. and Mrs. Alwynn, and
the Rectory servants, and half the parish were
soon made aware of the state of his affections.
What was the good of being in love, of
having in view a social aim of such a praiseworthy
nature, if no one were aware of the
same ? Dare was not the man to hide even
a night light under a bushel ; how much less a
burning and a shining hymeneal torch such as
this. His sentiments were strictly honourable.
If he raised expectations, he was also quite
prepared to fulfil them. Miss Deyncourt was
quite right to treat him with her adorable,
placid assumption of indifference, until his
intentions were more avowed. In the meanwhile,
she was an angel, a lily, a pearl, a
star, and several other things, animal, vegetable,
and mineral, which his vivid imagination

chose to picture her. But whatever Dare's
faults may have been — and Ruth was not
blind to them— he was at least head over
ears in love with her, fortune or none ; and
as his attachment deepened, it burned up
like fire all the little follies with which it had
begun.

A clergyman has been said to have made
love to the helpmeet of his choice out of the
Epistle to the Galatians. Dare made his
out of material hardly more promising — plans
for cottages, and estimate of repairs. He
had quickly seen how to interest Ruth,
though the reason for such an eccentric
interest puzzled him. However, he turned
it to his advantage. Ruth encouraged, suggested,
sympathized in all the little he was
already doing, and the much that he proposed
to do.

Of late, however, a certain not ungrounded
suspicion had gradually forced itself upon her
which had led her to withdraw as much as she
could from her former intercourse with Dare ;

but her change of manner had not quite the
effect she had intended.

She thinks I am not serious," Dare had
said to himself ; " she thinks that I play
with her feelings. She does not know me.
To-morrow I ride over ; I set her mind at
rest. To-morrow I propose ; I make an
offer ; I claim that adored hand ; I — become
engaged."

Accordingly, not long after the clatter of
horse's hoofs in the stable-yard, Dare himself
appeared in the garden, and perceiving Ruth,
for whom he was evidently looking, informed
her that he had ridden over to ask Mr.
Alwynn to support him at a dinner his
tenants were giving in his honour — a custom
of the Vandon tenantry from time immemorial,
on the accession of a new landlord. He
spoke absently ; and Ruth, looking at him
more closely as he stood before her, wondered
at his altered manner. He had a rose in
his button-hole. He always had a rose in
his button-hole ; but somehow this was more

of a rose than usual. His moustaches were
twirled up with unusual grace.

"You will find Mr. Alwynn in the study,"
said Ruth hurriedly.

His only answer was to cast aside his whip
and gloves, as possible impedimenta later on,
and to settle himself, with an elegant arrangement
of the choicest gaiters, on the grass at
her feet.

It is probably very disagreeable to repeat
in any form, however discreetly worded, the
old phrase —

The reason why I cannot tell,
But I don't like you, Doctor Fell."

But it must be especially disagreeable, if a
refusal is at first not taken seriously, to be
obliged to repeat it, still more plainly, a
second time. It was Ruth's fate to be
obliged to do this, and to do it hurriedly,
or she foresaw complications might arise.

At last Dare understood, and the sudden
utter blankness of his expression smote Ruth

to the heart. He had loved her in his way-after
all. It is a bitter thing to be refused.
She felt that she had been almost brutal in
her direct explicitness, called forth at the
moment by an instinct that he would proceed
to extreme measures unless peremptorily
checked.

I am so sorry," she said involuntarily.

Poor Dare, who had recovered a certain
amount of self-possession now that he was
on his feet again, took up his gloves and
riding-whip in silence. All his jaunty self-assurance
had left him. He seemed quite
stunned. His face under his brown skin
was very pale.

I am so sorry," said Ruth again, feeling
horribly guilty.

"It is I who am sorry," he said humbly.
I have made a great mistake, for which I
ask pardon ; " and, after looking at her for a
moment, in blank incertitude as to whether
she could really be the same person whom
he had come to seek in such happy confidence

half an hour before, he raised his hat, his
new light-grey hat, and was gone.

Ruth watched him go, and when he had

disappeared, she sat down again mechanically

in the chair from which she had risen a few

moments before, and pressed her hands

tightly together. She ought not to have

allowed such a thing to happen, she said to

herself. Somehow it had never presented

itself to her in its serious aspect before. It

is difficult to take a vain man seriously.

Poor Mr. Dare ! She had not known he was

capable of caring so much about anything.

He had never appeared to such advantage in

her eyes as he had done when he had left

her the moment before, grave and silent.

She felt she had misjudged him. He was

not so frivolous, after all. And now that

her influence was at an end, who would keep

him up to the mark about the various duties

which she knew now he had begun to fulfil

only to please her ? Oh, who would help

and encourage him in that most difficult of

positions, a landowner without means sufficient
for doing the best by land and tenantry ?
She instinctively felt that he could not be
relied upon for continuous exertion by
himself.

I wish I could have liked him," said
Ruth to herself. " I wish, I wish I could ! "

CHAPTER XII.

During the whole of the following week
Dare appeared no more at Slumberleigh.
Mrs. Alwynn, whose time was much occupied
as a rule in commenting on the smallest
doings of her neighbours, or in wondering
why they left undone certain actions which
she herself would have performed in their
place, Mrs. Alwynn would infallibly have
remarked upon his absence many times
during every hour of the day, had not her
attention been distracted for the time being
by a one-horse fly which she had seen go
up the road on the afternoon of the day of
Dare's last visit, the destination of which
had filled her soul with anxious conjecture.
She did not ascertain till the following day

that it had been ordered for Mrs. Smith of
Greenacre ; though, as she told Ruth, she
might have known that, as Mr. Smith was
going for a holiday with Mrs. Smith, and
their pony lame in its feet, that they would
have to have a fly, and with that hill up to
Greenacre she was surprised one horse was
enough !

When the question of the fly had been
thus satisfactorily settled, and Mrs. Alwynn
had ceased wondering whether the Smiths
had gone to Tenby or to Rhyl (she always
imagined people went to one or other of
these two places), her whole attention reverted
to a screen which she was making, the
elegance and novelty of which supplied her
with a congenial subject of conversation for
many days.

There is something so new in a screen,
an entire screen of Christmas cards," Mrs.
Alwynn would remark. " Now, Mrs.
Thursby's new screen is all pictures out of
the Graphic, and those coloured Christina

numbers. She has put all her cards in a
book. There is something rather pass about
those albums, I think. Now I fancy this
screen will look quite out of the common,
Ruth ; and when it is done, I shall get some
of those Japanese cranes, and stand them on
the top. Their claws are made to twist
round, you know, and I shall put some
monkeys — you know those droll chenille
monkeys, Ruth — creeping up the sides to
meet the cranes. I don't honestly think,
my dear" — with complacency — "that many
people will have anything like it."

Ruth did not hesitate to say that she felt
certain very few would.

Mrs. Alwynn was delighted at the interest
she took in her new work. Ruth was coming
out at last, she told her husband ; and she
passed many happy hours entirely absorbed
in the arrangement of the cards upon the
panels. Ruth, thankful that her attention
had been providentially distracted from the
matter that filled her own thoughts in a way

vol. i. 13

that surprised and annoyed her, sorted, and
snipped, and pasted, and decided weighty
questions as to whether a goitre robin on a
twig should be placed next to a smiling plum-pudding,
dancing a polka with a turkey, or
whether a congealed cross with " Christian
greeting " in icicles on it, should separate the
two.

To her uncle Ruth told what had happened ;
and as he slowly wended his way to Vandon
on the day fixed for the tenants' dinner, Mr.
Alwynn mused thereon, and I believe, if the
truth were known, 'he was sorry that Dare
had been refused. He was a little before
his time, and he stopped on the bridge, and
looked at the river, as it came churning and
sweeping below, fretted out of its usual calm
by the mill above. I think that as he leaned
over the low stone parapet he made many
quiet little reflections, besides the involuntary
one of himself in the water below. He
would have liked (he was conscious that it
was selfish, but yet he would have liked) to

have Ruth near him always. He would
have liked to see this strange son of his old
friend in good hands, that would lead him —
as it is popularly supposed a woman's hand
sometimes can — in the way of all others, in
which Mr. Alwynn was anxious that he
should walk ; a way in which he sometimes
feared that Dare had not made any great
progress as yet. Mr. Alwynn felt at times,
when conversing with him, that Dare's life
could not have been one in which the nobler
feelings of his nature had been much brought
into play, so crude and unformed were his
ideas of principle and responsibility, so slack
and easy-going his views of life.

But if Mr. Alwynn felt an occasional
twinge of anxiety and misgiving about his
young friend, it speedily turned to self-upbraiding
for indulging in a cynical, unworthy
spirit, which was ever ready to seek
out the evil and overlook the good ; and he
gradually convinced himself that only favourable
circumstances were required for the

blossoming forth of those noble attributes, of
which the faintest indications on Dare's part
were speedily magnified by the powerful lens
of Mr. Alwynn's charity to an extent which
would have filled Dare with satisfaction, and
would have overwhelmed a more humble
nature with shame.

And Ruth would not have him ! Mr.
Alwynn remembered a certain passage in his
own youth, a long time ago, when somebody
(a very foolish somebody, I think) would not
have him either ; and it was with that
remembrance still in his mind that he met
Dare, who had come as far as the lodge
gates to meet him, and whose forlorn appearance
touched Mr. Alwynn's heart the moment
he saw him.

There was not time for much conversation.
To his astonishment, Mr. Alwynn found
Dare actually nervous about the coming
ordeal ; and on the way to the Green
Dragon, where the dinner was to be given,
he reassured him as best he could, and

suggested the kind of answer he should
make when his health was drunk.

When, a couple of hours later, all was
satisfactorily over, when the last health had
been drunk, the last song sung, and Dare
was driving Mr. Alywnn home in the shabby
old Vandon dog-cart, both men were at first
too much overcome by the fumes of tobacco,
in which they had been hidden, to say a
word to each other. At last, however, Mr.
Alwynn drew a long breath, and said faintly —

I trust I may never be so hot again.
Drive slowly under these trees, Dare. It is
cooling to look at them, after sitting behind
that steaming volcano of a turkey. How is
your head getting on ? I saw you went in
for punch."

"Was that punch?" said Dare. "Then
I take no more punch in the future."

You spoke capitally, and brought in the
right sentiment, that there is no place like
home, in first-rate style. You see, you need
not have been nervous."

Ah ! but it was you who spoke really
well," said Dare, with something of his old
eager manner. "You know these people.
You know their heart. You understand them.
Now, for me, I said what you tell me, and
they were pleased, but I can never be with
them like you. I understand the words they
speak, but themselves I do not understand."

It will come."

"No," with a rare accession of humility. "I
have cared for none of these things till — till
I came to hear them spoken of at Slumber-leigh
by you and — and now at first it is
smooth because I say I will do what I can,
but soon they will find out I cannot do much,
and then " He shrugged his shoulders.

They drove on in silence.

But these things are nothing — nothing,"
burst out Dare at last in a tremulous voice,
to the one thing I think of all night, all
day — how I love Miss Deyncourt, and how,"
with a simplicity which touched Mr. Alwynn,
she does not love me at all."

There is something pathetic in seeing any
cheerful, light-hearted animal reduced to
silence and depression. To watch a barking,
worrying, jovial puppy suddenly desist from
parachute expeditions on unsteady legs, and
from shaking imaginary rats, and creep, tail
close at home, overcome by affliction, into
obscurity, is a sad sight. Mr. Alwynn felt
much the same kind of pity for Dare, as he
glanced at him, resignedly blighted, handsomely
forlorn, who but a short time ago had
taken life as gaily and easily as a boy home
for the holidays.

Sometimes," said Mr. Alwynn, addressing
himself to the mill, and the bridge, and the
world in general, " young people change their
minds. I have known such things happen."
I shall never change mine."
Perhaps not; but others might."
Ah! "and Dare turned sharply towards
Mr. Alwynn, scanning his face with sudden
eagerness. " You think — you think possibly
»

I don't think anything at all," interposed
Mr. Alwynn, rather taken aback at the
evident impression his vague words had
made, and anxious to qualify them. " I was
only speaking generally ; but — ahem ! there
is one point, as we are on the subject
that "

Yes, yes ? "

Whether you consider any decision as
final or not," Mr. Alwynn addressed the
clouds in the sky, " I think, if you do not
wish it to be known that anything has taken
place, you had better come and see me
occasionally at Slumberleigh. I have missed
your visits for the past week. The fact is,
Mrs. Alwynn has a way of interesting herself
in all her friends. She has a kind heart, and
you understand — any little difference in
their behaviour might be observed by her,
and might possibly — might possibly " — Mr.
Alwynn was at a loss for a word — " be, in short,
commented on to others. Suppose now you
were to come back with me to tea to-day?"

And Dare went, nothing loth, and arrived
at a critical moment in the manufacture of
the screen, when all the thickest Christmas
cards threatened to resist the influence of
paste, and to curl up, to the great anxiety of
Mrs. Alwynn.

One of the principal reasons of Dare's
popularity was the way in which he threw
his whole heart into whatever he was doing,
for the time ; never for a long time, certainly,
for he rarely bored himself or others by
adherence to one set of ideas after its novelty
had worn off.

And now, as if nothing else existed in the
world, and with a grave manner suggesting
repressed suffering and manly resignation, he
concentrated his whole mind on Mrs. Alwynn's
recalcitrant cards, and made Ruth grateful to
him by his tact in devoting himself to her
aunt and the screen.

"Well, I never!" said Mrs. Alwynn, after
he was gone. " I never did see any one like
Mr. Dare. I declare he has made the church

stick, Ruth, and ' Blessings on my friend,'
which turned up at the corners twice when
you put it on, and the big middle one of the
kittens skating too ! Dear me ! I am pleased.
I hope Mrs. Thursby won't call till it's
finished. But he did not look well, Ruth,
did he ? Rather pale now, I thought."
He has had a tiring day," said Ruth.

CHAPTER XIII.

At Slumberleigh you have time to notice the
change of the seasons. There is no hurry
at Slumberleigh. Spring, summer, autumn,
and winter, each in their turn, take quite a
year to come and go. Three months ago
it was August ; now September had arrived.
It was actually the time of damsons. Those
damsons which Ruth had seen dangling for
at least three years in the cottage orchards
were ripe at last. It seemed ages ago since
April, when the village was a foaming mass
of damson blossom, and the " plum winter "
had set in just when spring really seemed
to have arrived for good. It was a well-known
thing in Slumberleigh, though Ruth
till last April had not been aware of it, that

God Almighty always sent cold weather
when the Slumberleigh damsons were in
bloom, to harden the fruit. And now, the
lame, the halt, and the aged of Slumberleigh
all with one consent mounted on tottering
ladders to pick their damsons, or that mysterious
fruit, closely akin to the same, called
black Lamas plums."

There were plum accidents, of course, in
plenty. The Lord took Mrs. Eccles' own
uncle from his half-filled basket to another
world, for which, as a " tea and coffee totally,"
he was, no doubt, well prepared. The too
receptive organisms of unsuspecting infancy
suffered in their turn. In short, it was a
busy season for Mr. and Mrs. Alwynn.

Ruth had plenty of opportunities now for
making her long-projected sketch of the
ruined house of Arleigh, for the old woman
who lived in the lodge close by, and had
charge of the place, had " wicked " her back
in a damson tree, and Ruth often went to
see her. She had been Ruth's nurse in her

childhood, and having originally come from
Slumberleigh, returned there when the Deyn-
court children grew up, and lived happily
ever after, with the very blind and entirely
deaf old husband of her choice, in the grey
stone lodge at Arleigh.

It was on her return from one of these
almost daily visits that Mrs. Eccles pounced
on Ruth as she passed her gate, and under
pretence of inquiring after Mrs. Cotton, informed
her that she herself was suffering in
no slight degree. Ruth, who suddenly remembered
that she had been remiss in
dropping in " on Mrs. Eccles of late,
dropped in then and there to make up for
past delinquencies.

Is it rheumatism again ? " she asked, as
Mrs. Eccles seemed inclined to run off at
once into a report of the goings on of Widow
Jones's Sally.

Not that, my dear, so much as a sinking,"
said Mrs. Eccles, passing her hand slowly
over what seemed more like a rising thana

depression in her ample figure. " But
there ! I've not been myself since the Lord
took old Samiwell Price, and that's the truth."

Samuel Price was the relation who had
entered into rest off a ladder, and Ruth
looked duly serious.

I have no doubt it upset you very much,"
she said.

Well, miss," returned Mrs. Eccles with
dignity, "it's not as if I'd had my 'earth
before. I've had something wrong in the
cistern" (Ruth wondered whether she meant
system) " these many years. From a gell
I suffered in my inside. But lor ! I was
born to trouble, baptized in a bucket, and
taken with collects at a week old. And how
did you say Mrs. Cotton of the lodge might
be, miss, as I hear is but poorly too ? "

Ruth replied that she was better.

She's no size to keep her in 'earth," said
Mrs. Eccles, "and so bent as she does grow
to be sure. Eh, dear, but it's a good thing
to be tall. I always think little folks they're

like them little watches, they've no room for
their insides. And I wonder now" — Mrs.
Eccles was coming to the point that had
made her entrap Ruth on her way past —
I wonder now "

Ruth did not help her. She knew too
well the universal desire for knowledge of
good and evil peculiar to her sex, to doubt
for a moment that Mrs. Eccles had begged
her to " step in " only to obtain some piece
of information, about which her curiosity had
been aroused.

I wonder, now, if Cotton at the lodge
has heard anything of the poachers again
this year, round Arleigh way ? "

Not that I know of," said Ruth, surprised
at the simplicity of the question.

Dear sakes ! and to think of 'em at
Vandon last night, and Mr. Dare and the
keepers out all night after 'em."

Ruth was interested in spite of herself.

"And the doctor sent for in the middle
of the night," continued Mrs. Eccles, covertly

eyeing Ruth. " Poor young gentleman !
For all his fortin ways, there's a many in
Vandon as sets store by him."

I don't think you need be uneasy about
Mr. Dare," said Ruth coldly, conscious that
Mrs. Eccles was dying to see her change
colour. " If anything had happened to him,
Mr. Alwynn would have heard of it. And
now," rising, " I must be going ; and if I
were you, Mrs. Eccles, I should not listen to
all the gossip of the village."

Me listen ! " said Mrs. Eccles, much
offended. " Me, as is too poorly so much as
to put my foot out of the door ! But, dear
heart ! " with her usual quickness of vision,
if there isn't Mr. Alwynn and Dr. Brown
riding up the street now in Dr. Brown's
gig ! Well, I never ! and Mr. Alwynn
a-getting out, and a-talking as grave as can
be to Dr. Brown. Poor Mr. Dare ! Poor
dear young gentleman ! "

Ruth was conscious that she beat rather a
hurried retreat from Mrs. Eccles' cottage,

and that her voice was not quite so steady as
usual when she asked the doctor if it were
true that Mr. Dare had been hurt.

"All the village will have it that he is
killed ; but he is all right, I assure you, Miss
Deyncourt," said the kind old doctor, so
soothingly and reassuringly that Ruth grew
pink with annoyance at the tone. " Not a
scratch. He was out with his keepers last
night, and they had a brush with poachers ;
and Martin, the head keeper, was shot in the
leg. Bled a good deal, so they sent for me ;
but no danger. I picked up your uncle hereon
his way to see him, and so I gave him a
lift there and back. That is all, I assure you. "

And Dr. Brown and Mrs. Eccles, straining
over her geraniums, both came to the same
conclusion, namely, that, as Mrs. Eccles
elegantly expressed it, " Miss Ruth wanted
Mr. Dare."

"And he'll have her, too, I'm thinking,
one of these days," Mrs. Eccles would remark
to the circle of her acquaintance.
vol. i. 14

Indeed, the match was discussed on
numerous ladders, with almost as much
interest as the unfailing theme of the damsons
themselves.

And Dare rode over to the Rectory as
often as he used to do before a certain day
in August, when he had found Ruth under
the chestnut-tree ; the very day before Mrs.
Alwynn started on her screen, now the completed
glory of the drawing-room.

And was Ruth beginning to like him ?

As it had not occurred to her to ask
herself that question, I suppose she was not.

Dare had grown very quiet and silent of
late, and showed a growing tendency to dark
hats. His refusal had been so unexpected,
that the blow, when it came, fell with all the
more crushing force. His self-love and self-esteem
had been wounded ; but so had something
else. Under the velvet corduroy
waistcoat, which he wore in imitation of
Ralph, he had a heart. Whether it was one
of the very best of its kind or warranted to

wear well is not for us to judge ; but, at any
rate, it was large enough to take in a very
real affection, and to feel a very sharp pang.
Dare's manner to Ruth was now as diffident
as it had formerly been assured. To some
minds there is nothing more touching than a
sudden access of humility on the part of a
vain man.

Whether Ruth's mind was one of this
class or not we do not pretend to know.

CHAPTER XIV.

It was Sunday morning at Atherstone. In
the dining-room, breakfasting alone, for he
had come down late, was Sir Charles Dangers.
His sudden arrival on the previous Saturday
was easily accounted for. When he had
casually walked into the drawing-room late
in the evening, he had immediately and
thoroughly explained the reasons of his unexpected
arrival. It seemed odd that he
should have come to Atherstone, in the
midland counties, "on his way" between
two shooting visits in the north, but so it
was. It might have been thought that one
of his friends would have been willing to
keep him two days longer, or receive him
two days earlier ; but no doubt every one

knows his own affairs best, and Charles
might certainly, " at his age," as he was so
fond of saying, be expected to know his.

Anyhow, there he was, leaning against
the open window, coffee-cup in hand, lazily
watching the dwindling figures of Ralph and
Evelyn, with Molly between them, disappearing
in the direction of Greenacre church
hard by.

The morning mist still lingered on the
land, and veiled the distance with a tender
blue. And up across the silver fields, and
across the standing armies of the yellowing
corn, the sound of church bells came from
Slumberleigh, beyond the river ; bringing
back to Charles, as to us all, old memories,
old hopes, old visions of early youth, long
cherished, long forgotten.

The single bell of Greenacre was giving
forth a slow, persistent, cracked invitation to
true believers, as an appropriate prelude to
Mr. Smith's eloquence ; but Charles did not
hear its testimony.

He was listening to the Slumberleieh bells.
Was that the first chime or the second ?

Suddenly a thought crossed his mind.
Should he go to church ?

He smiled at the idea. It was a little late
to think of that. Besides, he had let the
others start, and he disliked that refuse of
mildew and dust, 'Greenacre.

There was Slumberleieh !

<z>

There went the bells again !

Slumberleigh ! Absurd ! Why, he should
positively have to run to get there before the
First Lesson ; and that mist meant heat, or
he was much mistaken.

Charles contemplated the mist for a few
seconds.

Tang, ten, ting, tong, tung !

He certainly always made a point of going
to church at his own home. A good example
is, after all, just as important in one place as
another.

Tang, tong, ten, tung, ting ! went the
bells.

Why not run ? " suggested an inner
voice. " Put down your cup. There ! Now !
Your hat's in the hall, with your gloves
beside it. Never mind about your Prayer-book.
Dear me ! Don't waste time looking
for your own stick. Take any. Quick ! out
through the garden gate! No one can see
you. The servants have all gone to church
except the cook, and the kitchen looks out
on the yew hedge."

"Over the first stile," said Charles to
himself. " I am out of sight of the house
now. Let us be thankful for small mercies.
I shall do it yet. Oh, what a fool I am !
I'm worse than Race, as Molly said. I shall
be rushing precipitately down a steep place
into the sea next. Confound this gate !
Why can't people leave them open ? At
any rate, it will remain open now. I am
not going to have my devotions curtailed by
a gate. I fancied it would be hot, but never
anything half as hot as this. I hope I shan't
meet Brown taking a morning stroll. I

value Brown ; but I should have to dismiss
him if he saw me now. I could never meet
his eye again. What on earth shall I say to
Ralph and Evelyn when I get back ? What
a merciful Providence it is that Aunt Mary
is at this moment intoning a response in the
highest church in Scarborough ! "

Ting, ting, ting I

Mr. Alwynn is getting on his surplice, is
he ? Well, and if he is, I can make a final
rush through the corn, can't I ? there's nota
creature in sight. The bell's down ? What
of that ? There is the voluntary. Easy
over the last fields. There are houses insight,
and there may be wicked Sabbath-breakers
looking out of windows. Brown's
foal has grown since July. Here we are !
I am not the only Christian hurrying among
the tombs. I shall get in with ' the wicked
man ' after all."

Some people do not look round in church ;
others do, Mrs. Alwynn always did, partly

because she wished to see what was going
on behind her, and partly because, in turning
back again, she could take a stealthy survey
of Mrs. Thursby's bonnet, in which she
always felt a burning interest, which she
would not for worlds have allowed that lady
to suspect.

If the turning round had been all, it would
have mattered little; but Mrs. Alwynn suffered
so intensely from keeping silence, that she
was obliged to relieve herself at intervals by
short whispered comments to Ruth,

On this particular morning it seemed as if
the comments would never end.

<( I am so glad we asked Mr. Dare into
our pew, Ruth, The Thursbys are full.
That's Mrs, Thursby's sister in the red
bonnet."

Ruth made no reply. She was following
the responses in the psalms with a marked
attention, purposely marked to check conversation,
and sufficient to have daunted
anybody but her aunt.

Mrs. Alwynn took a spasmodic interest in
the psalm, but it did not last.

Only two basses in the choir, and the
new Te Deum> Ruth ! How vexed Mr.
Alwynn will be ! "

No response from Ruth. Mrs. Alwynn
took another turn at her Prayer-book, and
then at the con cremation.

' I am become as it were a monster
unto ' Ruth! Ruth!"

Ruth at last turned her head a quarter
of an inch.

Sir Charles Dangers is sitting in the free
seats by the font."

Ruth nailed her eyes to her book, and
would vouchsafe no further sign of attention
during the rest of the service ; and Dare, on
the other side, anxious to copy Ruth in
everything, being equally obdurate, Mrs.
Alwynn had no resource left but to follow
the service half aloud to herself, at the times
when the congregation were not supposed to
join in, putting great emphasis on certain

words which she felt applicable to herself, ina
manner that effectually prevented any one
near her from attending to the service at all.

It was with a sudden pang that Dare,
following Ruth out into the sunshine after
service, perceived for the first time Charles,
standing, tall and distinguished-looking, beside
the rather insignificant heir of all the
Thursbys, who regarded him with the mixed
admiration and gnawing envy of a very
young man for a man no longer young.

And then — Charles never quite knew how
it happened, but with the full intention of
walking back to the Rectory with the
Alwynns, and staying to luncheon, he actually
found himself in Ruth's very presence accepting
a cordial invitation to luncheon at
Slumberleigh Hall. For the first time during
the last • ten years he had done a thing he
had no intention of doing. A temporary
long-lost feeling of shyness had seized upon
him as he saw Ruth coming out, tall and
pale and graceful, from the shadow of the

church porch into the blaze of the midday
sunshine. He had not calculated either for
that sudden disconcerting leap of the heart
as her eyes met his. He had an idiotic
feeling that she must be aware that he had
run most of the way to church, and that he
had contemplated the burnished circles of
her back hair for two hours, without a
glance at the fashionably scraped-up headdress
of Mabel Thursby, with its hogged
mane of little wire curls in the nape of the
neck. He felt he still looked hot and dusty,
though he had imagined he was quite cool
the moment before. To his own astonishment,
he actually found his self-possession
leaving him; and though its desertion proved
only momentary, in that moment he found
himself walking away with the Thursbys in
the direction of the Hall. He was provoked,
angry with himself, with the Thursbys, and,
most of all, with Mr. Alwynn, who had come
up a second later, and asked him to luncheon
as a matter of course, also Dare, who accepted

with evident gratitude. Charles felt
that he had not gone steeplechasing over the
country only to talk to Mrs. Thursby, and to
see Ruth stroll away over the fields with
Dare towards the Rectory.

However, he made himself extremely
agreeable, which was with him more a matter
of habit than those who occasionally profited
by it would have cared to know. He asked
young Thursby his opinion on E.C. cartridges
; he condoled with Mrs. Thursby on
the loss of her last butler, and recounted
some alarming anecdotes of his own French
cook. He admired a pallid water-colour
drawing of Venice, in an enormous frame on
an enormous easel, which he rightly supposed
to be the manual labour of Mabel Thursby.

When he rose to take his leave, young
Thursby, intensely flattered by having been
asked for that opinion on cartridges by so
renowned a shot as Charles, offered to walk
part of the way back with him.

I am afraid I am not going home yet,"

said Charles lightly. " Duty points in the
opposite direction. I have to call at the
Rectory. I want Mr. Alwynn's opinion on
a point of clerical etiquette, which is setting
my young spiritual shepherd at Stoke
Moreton against his principal sheep, namely,
myself. '

And Charles took his departure, leaving
golden opinions behind him, and a determination
to invite him once more to shoot,
in spite of his many courteous refusals of the
last few years.

Mrs. Alwynn always took a nap after
luncheon, in her smart Sunday gown, among
the mustard-coloured cushions of her hicrh-

o

art sofa. Mr. Alwynn, also, was apt at the
same time to sink into a subdued, almost
apologetic, doze in the old arm-chair which
alone had resisted the march of discomfort
and so called " taste " which had invaded the
rest of the little drawing-room of Slumber-leigh
Rectory. Ruth was sitting with her
dark head leant against the open window-frame.

Dare had not stayed after luncheon,
being at times nervously afraid of giving her
too much of his society, and she was at
liberty to read over again, if she chose, the
solitary letter which the Sunday post had
brought her. But she did not do so ; she
was thinking.

And so her sister Anna was actually returning
to England at last ! She and her
husband had taken a house in Rome, and
had arranged that Ruth should join them in
London in November, and go abroad with
them after Christmas for the remainder of
the winter. She had pleasant recollections
of previous winters in Rome, or on the
Riviera with her grandmother, and she was
surprised that she did not feel more interested
in the prospect. She supposed she would
like it when the time came, but she seemed
to care very little about it at the present
moment. It had become very natural to live
at Slumberleigh, and although there were
drawbacks — here she glanced involuntarily

at her aunt, who was making her slumbers
vocal by a running commentary on them
through her nose — still she would be sorry
to go. Mr. Alwynn gave the ghost of a
miniature snore, and, opening his eyes, found
Ruth's bent affectionately upon him. Her
mind went back to another point in Anna's
letter. After dilating on the extreme admiration
and regard entertained for herself by
her husband, his readiness with shawls, etc.,
she went on to ask whether Ruth had heard
any news of Raymond.

Ruth sighed. Would there ever be any
news of Raymond ? The old nurse at
Arleigh always asked the same question.
"Any news of Master Raymond ?" It was
with a tired ache of the heart that Ruth
heard that question, and always gave the
same answer. Once she had heard from
him since Lady Deyncourt's death, after she
had written to tell him, as gently as she
could, that she and Anna had inherited all
their grandmother had to leave. A couple

of months later she had received a hurried
note in reply, inveighing against Lady
Deyncourt's injustice, saying (as usual) that
he was hard up for money, and that, when he
knew where it might safely be sent, he should
expect her and her sister to make up to him
for his disappointment. And since then,
since April — not a word. June, July, August,
September. Four months and no sign.
When he was in want of money his letters
heretofore had made but little delay. Had
he fallen ill, and died out there, or met his
death suddenly perhaps in some wild adventure
under an assumed name ? Her lips
tightened, and her white brows contracted
over her absent eyes. It was an old anxiety,
but none the less wearing because it was old.
Ruth put it wearily from her, and took up
the first book which came to her hand, to
distract her attention.

It was a manual out of which Mrs. Alwynn
had been reading extracts to her in the
morning, while Ruth had been engaged in

vol. 1. 15

preparing herself to teach in the Sunday
school. She wondered vaguely how pleasure
could be derived, even by the most religious
persons, from seeing favourite texts twined in
and out among forget-me-nots, or falling
aslant in old English letters off bunches of
violets ; but she was old enough and wise
enough to know that one man's religion iso

o

another man's occasion of stumbling. Books
are made to fit all minds, and small minds
lose themselves in large-minded books. The
thousands in which these little manuals are
sold, and the confidence with which their
readers recommend them to others, indicate
the calibre of the average mind, and shows
that they meet a want possibly " not known
before," but which they alone, with their
little gilt edges, can adequately fill. Ruth
was gazing in absent wonder at the volume
which supplied all her aunt's spiritual needs,
when she heard the wire of the front doorbell
squeak faintly. It was a stiff-necked
and obdurate bell, which for several years
Mr. Alwynn had determined to see about.

A few moments later, James, the new and
inexperienced footman, opened the door
about half a foot, put in his head, murmured
something inaudible, and withdrew it again.

A tall figure appeared in the doorway, and
advanced to meet her, then stopped midway.
Ruth rose hastily, and stood where she had
risen, her eyes glancing first at Mr. and then
at Mrs. Alwynn.

The alien presence of a visitor had not
disturbed them. Mrs. Alwynn, her head
well forward, and a succession of chins
undulating in perfect repose upon her chest,
was sleeping as a stout person only can — allover.
Mr. Alwynn, opposite, his thin hands
clasped listlessly over his knee, was as unconscious
of the two pairs of eyes fixed upon
him as Nelson himself, laid out in Madame
Tussaud's.

Charles's eyes, twinkling with suppressed
amusement, met Ruth's. He shook his head
energetically, as she made a slight movement
as if to wake them, and stepping forward,

pointed with his hat towards the open
window, which reached to the ground. Ruth
understood, but she hesitated. At this
moment Mrs. Alwyrin began a variation on
the simple theme in which she had been
indulging, and in so much higher a key, that
all hesitation vanished. She stepped hastily
out through the window, and Charles
followed. They stood together for a moment
in the blazing sunshine, both too much
amused to speak.

"You are bareheaded," he said suddenly ;
is there any " — looking round — " any shade
we could take refuge under ? "

Ruth led the way round the yew hedge to
the horse chestnut; that horse chestnut under
which Dare had once lost his self-esteem.

I am afraid," said Charles, " I arrived at
an inopportune moment. As I was lunching
with the Thursbys, I came up in the hope of
finding Mr. Alwynn, whom I wanted to
consult about a small matter in my own
parish."

Charles was quite pleased with this
sentence, when he had airily given it out.
It had a true ring about it he fancied, which
he remembered with gratitude was more than
the door bell had. Peace be with that doorbell,
and with the engaging youth who
answered it.

I wish you had let me wake Mr.
Alwynn," said Ruth. "He will sleep on
now till the bells begin. "

On no account. I should have been
shocked if you had disturbed him. I assure
you I can easily wait until he naturally wakes
up ; that is," with a glance at the book in
her hand, " if I am not disturbing you — if
you are not engaged in improving yourself
at this moment."

No. I have improved myself for the
day, thanks. I can safely afford to relax
a little now."

"So can I. I resemble Lady Mary in
that. On Sunday mornings she reflects on
her own shortcomings ; on Sunday afternoons

she finds an innocent relaxation in pointing-out
mine."

Where is Lady Mary now ? "

I should say she was in her bath chair
on the Scarborough sands at this moment."

I like her," said Ruth with decision.

Tastes differ. Some people feel drawn
towards wet blankets, and others have a
leaning towards pokers. Do you know why
you like her ? "

I never thought about it, but I suppose
it was because she seemed to like nie."

Exactly. You admired her good taste.
A very natural vanity, most pardonable in
the young, was gratified at seeing marks of
favour so well bestowed."

I dare say you are right. At any rate,
you seem so familiar with the workings of
vanity in the human breast that it would bea
pity to contradict you."

By the way," said Charles, speaking in
the way people do who have nothing to say,
and are trying to hit on any subject of conversation,

" have you heard any more of
your tramp ? There was no news of him
when I left. I asked the Slumberleigh
policeman about him again on my way to
the station."

I have heard no more of him, though
I keep his memory green. I have not forgotten
the fright he gave me. I had always
imagined I was rather a self-possessed person
till that day."

I am a coward myself when I am
frightened," said Charles consolingly, "though
at other times as bold as a lion."

They were both sitting under the nickering
shadow of the already yellowing horse
chestnut tree, the first of all the trees to set
the gorgeous autumn fashions. But as yet
it was paling only at the edges of its slender
fans. The air was sweet and soft, with a
voiceless whisper of melancholy in it, as if
the summer knew, for all her smiles, her hour
had well-nigh come.

The Rectory cows, the mottled one, and

the red one, and the big white one that was
always milked first, came slowly past on their
way to the pond, blinking their white eyelashes
leisurely at Charles and Ruth.

44 It is almost as hot as that Sunday in
July when we walked over from Atherstone.
Do you remember ? " said Charles suddenly.

-Yes."

She knew he was thinking of their last
conversation, and she felt a momentary surprise
that he had remembered it.

44 We never finished that conversation," he
said, after a pause.

No ; but then, conversations never are
finished, are they ? They always seem to
break off just when they are coming to the
beginning. A bell rings, or there is an
interruption, or one is told it is bedtime."

Or fools rush in with their word where
you and I should fear to tread, and spoil
everything."

4 eyes."

And have you been holding the wool and

tying up the flowers, as you so graphically
described, ever since you left Atherstone in
July ? "

44 I hope I have ; I have tried."

I am sure of that," he said with sudden
earnestness ; then added more slowly, " I
have not wound any wool ; I have only
enjoyed myself."

Perhaps," said Ruth, turning her clear
frank gaze upon him, " that may have been
the harder work of the two ; it sometimes is."

His light restless eyes, with the searching
look in them which she had seen before,
met hers, and then wandered away again
to the level meadows, and the woods, and
the faint sky.

1 think it was," he said at last ; and
both were silent. He reflected that his conversations
with Ruth had a way of beginning
in fun, becoming more serious, and ending in
silence.

The bells rang out suddenly.

Charles thought they were full early.

Mr. Alwynn will wake up now," said
Ruth. " I will tell him you are here."

But before she had time to do more than
rise from her chair, Mr. Alwynn came slowly
round the yew hedge, and stopped suddenly
in front of the chestnut tree, amazed at what
he saw beneath it. His mild eyes gazed
blankly at Charles through his spectacles,
gathering a pained expression as they peered
over the top of them, which did not lessen
when they fell on Ruth.

Charles explained in a few words the
purport of his visit, which had already explained
itself quite sufficiently to Mr. Alwynn ;
and mentioning that he had waited in the
hope of presently finding Mr. Alwynn •' disengaged
" (at this Mr. Alwynn blushed a
little), asked leave to walk as far as the
church with him to consult him on a small
matter, etc., etc. It was a neat sentence, but
it did not sound quite so well the third time.
It had lost by the heathenish and vain
repetitions to which it had been subjected.

Certainly, certainly," said Mr. Alwynn ;
mollified but still discomposed. " You should
have waked me, Ruth," turning reproachfully
to his niece, whose conduct had never in his
eyes fallen short of perfection till this moment.
Little nap after luncheon. Hardly asleep.
You should have waked me."

There was Aunt Fanny," said Ruth,
feeling as if she had committed some grave
sin.

Ah-h ! " said Mr. Alwynn, as if her reason
were a weighty one, his memory possibly
recalling the orchestral nourish which as a
rule heralded his wife's return to consciousness.
" True, true, my dear. I must be
going," as the chime ceased. " Are you
coming to church this afternoon ? "

Ruth replied that she was not ; and Mr.
Alwynn and Charles departed together,
Charles ruefully remembering that he had
still to ask advice on a subject the triviality
of which would hardly allow of two opinions.

Ruth watched them walk away together,

and then went back noiselessly into the
drawing-room.

Mrs. Alwynn was sitting bolt upright, her
feet upon the floor, her gown upon the
sofa. Her astonished eyes were fixed upon
the dwindling figures of Mr. Alwynn and
Charles.

Goodness, Ruth ! " she exclaimed, u who
is that white waistcoat walking with your
uncle ? "

Ruth explained.

Dear me ! And as likely as not he came
to see the new screen. I know Mrs. Thursby
tells everybody about it. And his own house
so full of beautiful things too. Was ever
anything so annoying ! We should have had
so much in common, for I hear his taste is
quite — well, really quite out of the way.
How contrary things are, Ruth ! You awake,
and me asleep, when it might just as well
have been the other way. But it is Sunday,
my dear, so we must not complain. And
now, as we have missed church, I will lie

down again, and you shall read me that nice
sermon, which I always like to hear when I
can't go to church, the one in the green book,
about Nabob's vineyard."

CHAPTER XV.

Great philosophers and profound metaphysicians
should by rights have lived at
Slumberleigh. Those whose lines have
fallen to them " ten miles from a lemon,"
have time to think, if so inclined.

Only elementary natures complain of their
surroundings ; and though at first Ruth had
been impatient and depressed, after a time
she found that, better than to live in an
atmosphere of thought, was to be thrown
entirely on her own resources, and to do her
thinking for herself.

Some minds of course sink into inanition if
an outward supply of nutriment is withheld.
Others get up and begin to forage for themselves.
Happy are these — when the transition

period is over — when, after a time, the
first and worst mistakes have been made
and suffered for, and the only teaching that
profits anything at all, the bitter teaching of
experience, has been laid to heart.

Such a nature was Ruth's, upright, self-reliant,
without the impetuosity and impulsiveness
that so often accompanies an independent
nature, but accustomed to look at every thing-through
her own eyes, and to think, but not
till now to act for herself.

She had been brought up by her grandmother
to believe that before all things
noblesse oblige; to despise a dishonourable
action, to have her feelings entirely under
control, to be intimate with few, to be
courteous to all. But to help others, to give
up anything for them, to love an unfashionable
or middle-class neighbour, or to feel a
personal interest in religion, except as a
subject of conversation, had never found a
place in Lady Deyncourt's code, or consequently
in Ruth's, though, as was natural

with a generous nature, the girl did many
little kindnesses to those about her, and was
personally unselfish, as those who live with
self-centred people are bound to be if there
is to be any semblance of peace in the
house.

But now, new thoughts were stirring within
her, were leavening her whole mind. All
through these monotonous months she had
watched the quiet routine of patient effort
that went to make up the sum of Mr.
Alwynn's life. He was a shy man. He
seldom spoke of religion out of the pulpit,
but all through these long months he preached
it without words to Ruth, as she had never
heard it preached before, by

The best portion of a good man's life —
His little, nameless, unremembered acts
Of kindness and of love."

It was the first time that she had come into
close contact with a life spent for others, and
its beauty appealed to her with a new force,
and gradually but surely changed the current

of her thoughts, until, as " we needs must
love the highest when we see it," she unconsciously
fell in love with self-sacrifice.

The opinions of most young persons, however
loudly and injudiciously proclaimed,
rarely do the possessors much harm, because
they are not as a rule acted upon ; but with
some few people a change of views means a
change of life. Ruth was on the edge of a
greater change than she knew.

At first she had often regretted the chapter
of her life that had been closed by Lady
Deyncourt's death. Now, she felt she could
not go back to it, and find it all-sufficient as
of old. It would need an added element,
without which she began to see that any sort
or condition of life is but a stony, dusty
concern after all — an element which made
even Mr. Alwynn's colourless existence a
contented and happy one.

Ruth had been telling him one day, as
they were walking together, of her sister's
plans for the winter, and that she was sorry

vol. 1. 16

to think her time at Slumberleigh was
drawing to a close.

I am afraid," he said, " in spite of all you
say, my dear, it has been very dull for you
here. No little gaieties or enjoyments such
as it is right young people should have. I
wish we had had a picnic, or a garden party,
or something. Mabel Thursby cannot be
happy without these things, and it is natural
at your age that you should wish for them.
Your aunt and I lead very quiet lives. It
suits us, but it is different for young people."

Does it suit you ? " asked Ruth with
sudden earnestness. " Do you really like it,
or do you sometimes get tired of it ? "

Mr. Alwynn looked a little alarmed and
disconcerted. He never cared to talk about
himself.

I used to get tired," he said at last, with
reluctance, " when I was younger. There
were times when I foolishly expected more
from life than — than, in fact, I quite got, my
dear ; and the result was, I fear I had a very

discontented spirit — an unthankful, discontented
spirit' he repeated with sad retrospection.


Something in his tone touched Ruth to
the quick.

And now ?"

I am content now."

Uncle John, tell me. How did you
grow to feel content ? "

He saw there were tears in her eyes.

It took a long time," he said. " Anything
that is worth knowing, Ruth, takes a
long time to learn. I think I found in the
end, my dear, that the only way was to put
my whole heart into what I was doing " (Mr.
Alwynn's voice was simple and earnest, as if
he were imparting to Ruth a great discovery).
I had tried before, from time to time, of
course, but never quite as hard as I might
have done. That was where I failed. When
I put myself on one side, and really settled
down to do what I could for others, life
became much simpler and happier."

He turned his grave, patient eyes to Ruth's
again. Was something troubling her ?

I have often thought since then," he went
on, speaking more to himself than to her,
that we should consider well what we are
keeping back our strength for, if we find
ourselves refusing to put the whole of it into
our work. When at last one does start, one
feels it is such a pity one did not do it earlier
in life. When I look at all the young faces
growing up around me, I often hope, Ruth,
they won't waste as much time as I did."

How simple it seemed while she listened
to him ; how easy, how natural, this life for
others !

She could not answer. One sentence of
Mr. Alwynn's was knocking at the door of
her heart for admission ; was drowning with
its loud beating the sound of all the rest —

We should consider well what we are
keeping back onr strength for, if we refuse to
put the whole of it into our work!'

She and Mr. Alwynn walked on in silence ;

and, after a time, always afraid of speaking
much on the subject that was first in his own
mind, he began to talk again on trivial
matters, to tell her how he had met Dare
that morning, and had promised on her behalf
that she would sing at a little local concert
which the Vandon schoolmaster was getting
up that week to defray the annual expense of
the Vandon cricket club, and in which Dare
was taking a vivid interest.

You won't mind singing, will you, Ruth ? "
asked Mr. Alwynn, wishing she would show a
little more interest in Dare and his concert.

Oh no, of course not," rather hurriedly.
I should be glad to help in any way."

And I thought, my dear, as it would begetting
late, we had better accept his offer of
staying the night at Vandon."

Ruth assented, but so absently that Mr.
Alwynn dropped the subject with a sigh,
and walked on, revolving weighty matters
in his mind. They had left the woods now,
and were crossing the field where, two

months ago, the school-feast had been held.
Mr. Alwynn made some slight allusion to it,
and then coughed. Ruth's attention, which
had been distracted, came back in a moment.
She knew her uncle had something which he
did not like, something which yet he felt it
his duty to say, when he gave that particular
cough.

That was when you were staying with
the Dangers, wasn't it, Ruth ? " in a would-be
casual, disengaged tone.

Yes ; I came over from Atherstone with
Molly Dangers."

I remember," said Mr. Alwynn, looking
extremely uncomfortable ; " and — if I am not
mistaken — ahem ! Sir Charles Dangers was
staying there at the same time ? "

Certainly he was."

Yes, and I dare say, Ruth — I am not
finding fault, far from it — I dare say he made
himself very agreeable for the time being ? "

I don't think he made himself so. I
should have said he was naturally so, without

any effort, just as some people are naturally
the reverse."

Indeed ! Well, I have always heard he
was most agreeable; but I am afraid — I
think perhaps it is just as well you should
know — forewarned is forearmed, you know —
that, in fact, he says a great deal more than
he means sometimes."

Does he ? I dare say he does."
"He has a habit of appearing to take a
great interest in people, which I am afraid
means very little. I dare say he is not fully
aware of it, or I am sure he would struggle
against it, and we must not judge him ; but
still, his manner does a great deal of harm.
It is peculiarly open to misconstruction. For
instance," continued Mr. Alwynn, making
a rush as his courage began to fail him, " it
struck me, Ruth, the other day — Sunday, was
it ? Yes, I think it was Sunday — that really
he had not much to ask me about his weekday
services. I — ahem ! I thought he need
not have called."

I dare say not."

But now, that is just the kind of thing he
does — calls, and, er — under chestnut-trees, and
that sort of thing — and how are young people
to know unless their elders tell them that it
is only his way, and that he has done just
the same ever so often before ? "

And will again," said Ruth, trying to keep
down a smile. " Is it true (Mabel is full of
it) that he is engaged, or on the point of
being so, to one of Lord Hope Acton's
daughters ? "

People are always saying he is engaged,
to first one person and then another," said
Mr. Alwynn, breathing more freely now that
his duty was discharged. " It often grieves
me that your aunt mentions his engagement
so confidently to friends, because it gives
people the impression that we know, and we
really don't. He is a great deal talked about,
because he is such a conspicuous man in the
county, on account of his wealth and his
place, and the odd things he says and does.

There is something about him that is different
from other people. I am sure I don't know-why
it is, but I like him very much myself.
I have known him do such kind things.
Dear me ! What a pleasant week I had at
Stoke Moreton last year. It is beautiful,
Ruth ; and the collection of old papers and
manuscripts unique ! Your aunt was in
Devonshire with friends at the time. I wish
he would ask me again this autumn, to see
those charters of Edward Iv's reign that
have been found in the secret drawer of an
old cabinet. I hear they are quite small, and
have green seals. I wish I had thought of
asking him about them on Sunday. If they
are really small, but it was only Archdeacon
Eldon who told me about them, and he never
sees anything any particular size — if they

should happen to be really small " And

Mr. Alwynn turned eagerly to the all-engrossing
subject of the Stoke Moreton charters,
which furnished him with conversation till
they reached home.

We should consider ivell what we are keeping
back our strength for, if we refuse to put
the whole of it into our work!'

All through the afternoon and the quiet
monotonous evening, these words followed
Ruth. She read them between the lines of
the book she took up. She stitched them
into her sewing. They went upstairs with
her at night, they followed her into her room,
and would not be denied. When she had
sent away her maid, she sat down by the
window, and, with the full harvest moon for
company, faced them and asked them what
they meant. But they only repeated themselves
over and over again. What had they
to do with her ? Her mind tried to grapple
with them in vain. As often as she came to
close quarters with them they eluded her and
disappeared, only to return with the old
formula.

Her thoughts drifted away at last to what
Mr. Alwynn had said of Charles, and all the
disagreeable things which Mabel had come

up on Monday morning, with a bunch of late
roses, on purpose to tell her respecting him.
She had taken Mabel's information at its true
worth, which I fear was but small ; but she
felt annoyed that both Mabel and Mr.
Alwynn should have thought it necessary
to warn her. As if, she said to herself, she
had not known ! Really, she had not been
born and bred in Slumberleigh, nor had she
lived there all her life. She had met men of
that kind before. She always liked them.
Charles especially amused her, and she could
see that she amused him ; and, now she came
to think of it, she supposed he had paid hera
good deal of attention at Atherstone, and
perhaps he had not come over to Slumber-leigh
expressly to see Mr. Alwynn. It was
as natural to men like Charles to be always
interested in some one, as it would be unnatural
in others ever to be so, except as
the result of long forethought, and with a
wedding ring and a set of bridesmaids well
in view. But to attach any importance to

the fact that Charles liked to talk to her
would have been absurd. With another manit
miofht have meant much ; but she had
heard of Charles and his misdoings long
before she had met him, and knew what to
expect. Lord Breakwater's sister had confided
to her many things respecting him, and
had wept bitter tears on her shoulder, when
he suddenly went off to shoot grizzlies in the
Rocky Mountains.

"He has not sufficient vanity to know that
he is exceedingly popular," said Ruth to herself.
" I should think there are few men,
handicapped as he is, who have been liked
more entirely for themselves, and less for
their belongings ; but all the time he probably
imagines people admire his name, or his
place, or his income, and not himself, and
consequently he does not care much what he
says or does. I am certain he does not
mean to do any harm. His manner never
deceived me for a moment. I can't see why
it should others ; but from all accounts he

seems to be frequently misunderstood. That
is just the right word for him. He is misunderstood.
At any rate I never misunderstood
him. That Sunday call might have
made me suspicious of any ordinary mortal ;
but I knew no common rule could apply to
such an exception as he is. I only wonder,
when he really does find himself in earnest,
how he is to convey his meaning to the future
Lady Dangers. What words would be
strong enough ; what ink would be black
enough to carry conviction to her mind ? "

She smiled at the thought, and, as she
smiled, another face rose suddenly before
her — Dare's, pale and serious, as it had been
of late, with the wistful anxious eyes. Heat
least, had meant a great deal, she thought
with remorse. He had been in earnest,
sufficiently in earnest to make himself very
unhappy, and on her account.

Ruth had known for some time that Dare
loved her ; but to-night that simple unobtrusive
fact suddenly took larger proportions,

came boldly out of the shadow, and
looked her in the face.

He loved her. Well, what then ?

She turned giddy, and leaned her head
against the open shutter.

In the silence the words that had haunted
her all the afternoon came back ; not loud as
heretofore, but in a whisper, speaking to her
heart, which had begun to beat fast and
loud.

We should consider well what we are
keeping back our strength for, if we refuse to
put the whole of it into our work."

What work was there for her to do ?

The giddiness and the whirl in her mind
died down suddenly, like a great gust on the
surface of a lake, and left it still and clear
and cold.

The misery of the world and the inability
to meet it had so often confused and weighed
her down, that she had come back humbly of
late to the only possibility with which it was
in her power to deal, come back to the well-worn

groove of earnest determination to do
as much as in her lay, close at hand, when
she could find a field to labour in. And now
she suddenly saw, or thought she saw, that
she had found it. She had been very anxious
as to whether Dare would do his duty, but
till this moment it had never struck her that
it might be her duty to help him.

She liked him ; and he was poor — too
poor to do much for the people who were
dependent on him, the poor struggling people
of Vandon. Their sullen, miserable faces
rose up before her, and their crazy houses.
Fever had broken out again in the cottages
by the river. He needed help and encouragement,
for he had a difficult time
before him. And she had these to give, and
money too. Could she do better with them ?
She knew Mr. Alwynn wished it. And as
to herself ? Was she never going to put self
on one side ? She had never liked any one
very much — at least, not in that way — but
she liked him.

The words came like a loud voice in the
silence. She liked him. Well, what then ?

She shut her eyes, but she only shut out
the moon's pale photographs of the fields and
woods. She could not shut out these stern
besieging thoughts.

What was she holding back for ? For
some possible ideal romantic future ; for the
prince of a fairy story ? No ? Well, then,
for what ?

The moon went behind a cloud, and took
all her photographs with her. The night
had turned very cold.

To-morrow," said Ruth to herself, rising
slowly ; " I am too tired to think now. Tomorrow
! "

And as she spoke the faint chime of the
clock upon her table warned her that already
it was tomorrow.

And soon, in a moment, as it seemed
to her, before she had had time to think, it
was again tomorrow, a wet, dim tomorrow,

and she was at Vandon, running up the wide
stone steps in the starlight, under Dare's
protecting umbrella, and allowing him to
take her wraps from her before the hall fire.

The concert had gone off well. Ruth was
pleased, Mr. Alwynn was pleased. Dare was
in a state of repressed excitement, now flying
into the drawing-room to see if there were
a good fire, as it was a chilly evening ; now
rushing thence to the dining-room to satisfy
himself that all the immense and elaborate
preparations which he had enjoined on the
cook had been made. Then, Ruth must be
shown to her room. Who was to do it ?
He flew to find the housekeeper, and after
repeated injunctions to the housemaid, whom
he met in the passage, not to forget the hot
water, took Mr. Alwynn off to his apartment.

The concert had begun, as concerts always
seem to do, at the exact time at which it is
usual to dine, so that it was late before the
principal performers and Mr. Alwynn reached
Vandon. It was later still before supper

vol. 1. 17

came, but when it came it was splendid.
Dare looked with anxious satisfaction over
a soup tureen at the various spiced and
glazed forms of indigestion, sufficient for a
dozen people, which covered the table. It
grieved him that Ruth, confronted by a
spreading ham, and Mr. Alwynn, half hidden
by a boulder of turkey, should have such
moderate appetites. But at least she was
there, under his roof, at his table. It was
not surprising that he could eat nothing
himself.

After supper, Mr. Alwynn, who combined
the wisdom of the worldly serpent with the
harmlessness of the clerical dove, fell — not
too suddenly — asleep by the fire in the ,
and Ruth and Dare went into the
hall, where the piano was. Dare opened it
and struck a few minor chords. Ruth sat
down in a great carved arm-chair beside the
fire.

The hall was only lighted by a few tall
lamps high on pedestals against the walls,

which threw great profiles of the various
busts upon the dim bas-reliefs of twining
scroll-work ; and Dare, with his eyes fixed
on Ruth, began to play.

There is in some music a strange appeal
beyond the reach of words. Those mysterious
sharps and flats, and major and minor
chords, are an alphabet that in some occult
combinations forms another higher language
than that of speech, a language which, as we
listen, thrills us to the heart.

It was an old piano, with an impediment
in its speech, out of the yellow notes of which
Ruth could have made nothing ; but in Dare's
hands it spoke for him as he never could
have spoken for himself.

His eyes never left her. He feared to
look away, lest he should find the presence
of that quiet graceful figure by his fireside
had been a dream, and that he was alone
again with the dim lamps, alone with Dante,
and Cicero, and Seneca.

The firelight dwelt ruddily upon her grave,

clear-cut face and level brows, and upon the
folds of her white gown. It touched the
slender hands clasped lightly together on her
knee, and drew sudden sparks and gleams
out of the diamond pin at her throat.

His hands trembled on the keys, and ashe
looked his heart beat high and higher,
loud and louder, till it drowned the rhythm
of the music. And as he looked, her calm
eyes met his.

In another moment he was on his knees
beside her, her hands caught in his trembling
clasp, and his head pressed down upon them.

I know," he gasped, " it is no good.
You have told me so once. You will tell
me so again. I am not good enough. I am
not worthy. But I love you ; I love you ! "

In moments of real feeling the old words
hold their own against all modern newcomers.
Dare repeated them over and over
again in a paroxysm of overwhelming emotion
which shook him from head to foot.

Something in his boyish attitude and in

his entire loss of self-control touched Ruth
strangely. She knew he was five or six
years her senior, but at the moment she felt
as if she were much older than he, and a
sudden vague wish passed through her mind
that he had been nearer her in age ; not
quite so young.

Well ? " she said gently ; and he felt her
cool, passive hands tremble a little in his.
Something in the tone of her voice made
him raise his head, and meet her eyes looking
down at him, earnestly, and with a great
kindness in them.

A sudden eager light leapt into his face.

"Will you?" he whispered breathlessly,
his hands tightening their hold of hers.
"Will you?"

There was a moment's pause, in which the
whole world seemed to stand quite still and
wait for her answer.

Yes," she said at last, " I will."

I am glad I did it," she said to herself

half an hour later, as she leaned her tired
head against the carved oak chimney-piece
in her bedroom, and absently traced with her
finger the Latin inscription over the fireplace.
I like him very much. I am glad I did it."

CHAPTER XVI.

For many years nothing had given Mr.
Alwynn such heartfelt pleasure as the news
Ruth had to tell him, as he drove her back
next morning to Slumberleigh, behind Mrs.
Alwynn's long-tailed ponies.

It was a still September morning, with a
faint pearl sky and half-veiled silver sun.
Pale gleams of sunshine wandered across the
busy harvest fields, and burnished the steel
of the river.

Decisions of any kind rarely look their
best after a sleepless night ; but as Ruth saw
the expression of happiness and relief that
came into her uncle's face, when she told him
what had happened, she felt again that she
was glad — very glad.

Oh, my dear ! my dear ! " — Mr. Alwynn
was driving the ponies first against the bank,
and then into the opposite ditch — " how-glad
I am ; how thankful ! I had almost
hoped, certainly ; I wished so much to think
it possible ; but then, one can never tell.
Poor Dare ! poor fellow ! I used to be so
sorry for him. And how much you will be
able to do at Vandon among the people. It
will be a different place. And it is such a
relief to think that the poor old house will be
looked after. It went to my heart to see the
way it had been neglected. I ventured this
morning, as I was down early, to move some
of that dear old Worcester further back into
the cabinet. They really were so near the
edge, I could not bear to see them ; and I
found a Sevres saucer, my dear, in the
library, that belonged to one of those beautiful
cups in the drawing-room. I hope it
was not very wrong, but I had to put it
among its relations. It was sitting with a
Delf mug on it, poor thing. Dear me ! I

little thought then — Really, I have never
been so glad about anything before."

After a little more conversation, and after
Mr. Alwynn had been persuaded to give the
reins to his niece, who was far more composed
than himself, his mind reverted to his
wife.

I think, my dear, until your engagement
is more settled, till I have had a talk with
Dare on the subject (which will be necessary
before you write to your Uncle Francis), it
would be as well not to refer to it before — in
fact, not to mention it to Mrs. Alwynn.
Your dear aunt's warm heart and conversational
bent make it almost impossible for her
to refrain from speaking of anything that
interests her ; and indeed, even if she does
not say anything in so many words, I have
observed that opinions are sometimes formed
by others as to the subject on which she is
silent, by her manner when any chance
allusion is made to it."

Ruth heartily agreed. She had been

dreading the searching catechism through
which Mrs. Alwynn would certainly put her
the minute inquiries as to her dress, the
hour, the place ; whether it had been " standing
up or sitting down ; " all her questions of
course interwoven with personal reminiscences
of " how John had done it," and her
own emotion at the time.

It was with no small degree of relief at
the postponement of that evil hour that Ruth
entered the house. As she did so a faint
sound reached her ear. It was that of a
musical-box.

Dear ! dear ! " said Mr. Alwynn, as he
followed her. " It is a fine day. Your aunt
must be ill."

For the moment Ruth did not understand
the connection of ideas in his mind, until she
suddenly remembered the musical-box, which,
Mrs. Alwynn had often told her, was " so nice
and cheery on a wet day, or in time of
illness."

She hurriedly entered the drawing-room,

followed by Mr. Alwynn, where the first
object that met her view was Mrs. Alwynn
extended on the sofa, arrayed in what she
called her tea-gown, a loose robe of blue
cretonne, with a large vine-leaf pattern
twining over it, which broke out into grapes
at intervals. Ruth knew that garment well.
It came on only when Mrs. Alwynn was
suffering. She had worn it last during a
period of entire mental prostration, which
had succeeded all too soon an exciting
discovery of mushrooms in the glebe. Mr.
Alwynn's heart and Ruth's sank as they
caught sight of it again.

With a dignity befitting the occasion,
Mrs. Alwynn recounted in detail the various
ways in which she had employed herself
after their departure the previous evening,
up to the exact moment when she slipped
going upstairs, and sprained her ankle, ina
blue and green manner that had quite
alarmed the doctor when he had seen it,
and compared with which Mrs. Thursby's

gathered finger in the spring was a mere
bagatelle.

Mrs. Thursby stayed in bed when her
finger was bad," said Mrs. Alwynn to Ruth,
when Mr. Alwynn had condoled, and had
made his escape to his study. " She always
gives way so ; but I never was like that. I
was up all the same, my dear."

I hope it does not hurt very much," said
Ruth, anxious to be sympathetic, but succeeding
only in being commonplace.

It's not only the pain," said Mrs. Alwynn,
in the gentle resigned voice which she always
used when indisposed — the voice of one at
peace with all the world, and ready to depart
from a scene consequently so devoid of
interest ; " but to a person of my habits, Ruth
never a day without going into the larder,
and always seeing after the servants as I do
first one duty and then another — and the
chickens and all. It seems a strange thing
that I should be laid aside."

Mrs. Alwynn paused, as if she had not for

the nonce fathomed the ulterior reasons for
this special move on the part of Providence,
which had crippled her, while it left Ruth and
Mrs. Thursby with the use of their limbs.

However," she continued, " I am not
one to repine. Always cheery and busy,
Ruth, that is my motto. And now, my dear,
if you will wind up the musical-box, and then
read me a little bit out of 'Texts with
Tender Twining ' " (the new floral manual
which had lately superseded the " Pearls "),
after that we will start on one of my scrap-books,
and you shall tell me all about your
visit to Vandon."

It was not the time Ruth would have
chosen for a tete-astute with her aunt. She
was longing to be alone, to think quietly over
what had happened, and it was difficult to
concentrate her attention on pink and yellow
calico, and cut out coloured royal families,
and foreign birds with a good grace.
Happily Mrs. Alwynn, though always requiring
attention, was quite content with the

half of what she required ; and, with the
"Buffalo Girls," and the "Danube River"
tinkling on the table, conversation was somewhat
superfluous.

In the afternoon Dare came, but he was
waylaid in the hall by Mr. Alwynn, and taken
into the study before he could commit himself
in Mrs. Alwynn's presence. Mrs.
Thursby and Mabel also called to condole,
and a little later Mrs. Smith of Greenacre,
who had heard the news of the accident from
the doctor. Altogether it was a delightful
afternoon for Mrs. Alwynn, who assumed for
the time an air of superiority over Mrs.
Thursby to which that lady's well-known
chronic ill-health seldom allowed her to lay
claim.

Mrs. Alwynn and Mrs. Thursby had
remained friends since they had both arrived
together as brides at Slumberleigh, in spite
of a difference of opinion which had at one
time strained friendly relations to a painful
degree, as to the propriety of wearing the

hair over the top of the ear. The hair
question settled, a temporary difficulty, extending
over a few years, had sprung up in
its place, respecting what Mrs. Thursby
called " family." Mrs. Alwynn's family was
not her strong point, nor was its position
strengthened by her assertion (unsupported
by Mrs. Markham), that she was directly
descended from Queen Elizabeth. Consequently,
it was trying to Mrs. Thursby — who,
as every one knows, was one of the brainless
Copley of Copley— that Mrs. Alwynn, who
in the lottery of marriage had drawn an
honourable, should take precedence of herself.
To obviate this difficulty, Mrs. Thursby,
with the ingenuity of her sex, had at one time
introduced Mr. and Mrs. Alwynn as " our
Rector," and " our Rectors wife," thus
denying them their name altogether, for fear
lest its connection with Lord Polesworth
should be remembered, and the fact that Mr.
Alwynn was his brother, and consequently
an honourable, should transpire.

This peculiarity of etiquette entirely escaped
Mr. Alwynn, but aroused feelings in the
breast of his wife which might have brought
about one of those deeply rooted feuds, which
so often exist between the squire's and
clergyman's families, if it had not been for
the timely and serious illness in which Mrs.
Thursby lost her health, and the principal
part of the other subject of disagreement —
her hair.

Then Queen Elizabeth and the honourable
were alike forgotten. With her own
hands Mrs. Alwynn made a certain jelly,
which Mrs. Thursby praised in the highest
manner, saying she only wished that it had
been the habit in her family to learn to do
anything so useful. Mrs. Thursby's new
gowns were no longer kept a secret from
Mrs. Alwynn, to be suddenly sprung upon
her at a garden party, when, possibly in an
old garment herself, she was least able to
bear the shock. Bygones were bygones,
and, greatly to the relief of the two husbands,

their respective wives made up their differences.


And a very pleasant afternoon it has
been," said Mrs. Alwynn, when the Thursbys
and Dare, who had been loth to go, had
taken their departure. " Mrs. Thursby and
Mabel, and Mrs. Smith and Mr. Dare. Four
to tea. Quite a little party, wasn't it, Ruth ?
And so informal and nice ; and the buns came
in as naturally as possible, which no one
heard me whisper to James for. I think
those little citron buns are nicer than a great
cake like Mrs. Thursby's ; and hers are
always so black and over-baked. That is
why the cook sifts such a lot of sugar over
them. I do think one should be real, and
not try to cover up things. And Mr. Dare
so pleasant. Quite sorry to go he seemed.
I often wonder whether it will be you or
Mabel in the end. He ought to be making
up his mind. I expect I shall have a
little joke with him about it before long.
And such an interest he took in the

vol. 1. 18

scrap-book. I asked him to come again
tomorrow."

I don't expect he will be able to do so,"
said Mr. Alwynn. " I rather think he will
have to go to town on business''

Later in the evening, Mr. Alwynn told
Ruth that in the course of his interview he
had found that Dare had the very vaguest
ideas as to the necessity of settlements ; had
evidently never given the subject a thought,
and did not even know what he actually
possessed.

Mr. Alwynn was secretly afraid of what
Ruth's trustee, his brother, Lord Polesworth
(now absent shooting in the Rocky Mountains),
would say if, during his absence, their
niece was allowed to engage herself without
suitable provision ; and he begged Ruth not
to do anything rash" in the way of speaking
of her engagement, until Dare could, with the
help of his lawyer, see his way to making
some arrangement.

I know he has no money," said Ruth

quietly ; " that is one of the reasons why I
am going to marry him."

Mr. Alwynn, to whom this seemed the
most natural reason in the world, was not
sure whether it would strike his brother with
equal force. He had a suspicion that when
Lord Polesworth's attention should be turned
from white boats and brown bears to the fact
that his niece, who had means of her own,
had been allowed to engage herself to a poor
man, and that Mr. Alwynn had greatly
encouraged the match, unpleasant questions
might be asked.

Francis will be back in November," said
Mr. Alwynn. " I think, Ruth, we had better
wait till his return before we do anything
definite."

Anything more definite, you mean," said
Ruth. " I have been very definite already,
I think. I shall be glad to wait till he comes
back, if you wish it, Uncle John. I shall try
to do what you both advise. But at the
same time I am of age ; and if my word is

worth anything, you know I have given that
already."

Dare felt no call to go to London by the
early train on the following morning, so he
found himself at liberty to spend an hour at
Slumberleigh Rectory on his way to the
station, and by the advice of Mr. Alwynn
went into the garden, where the sound of the
musical-box reached the ear but in faint
echoes, and where Ruth presently joined
him.

In his heart Dare was secretly afraid of
Ruth"; though, as he often told himself, it was
more than probable she was equally afraid of
him. If that was so, she controlled her feelings
wonderfully, for, as she came to meet
him, nothing could have been more frankly
kind, more friendly, or more composed than
her manner towards him. He took her outstretched
hand and kissed it. It was not
quite the way in which he had pictured to
himself that they would meet ; but if his
imagination had taken a somewhat bolder

flight in her absence, he felt now, as she
stood before him, that it had taken that flight
in vain. He kept her hand, and looked
intently at her. She did not change colour,
nor did that disappointing friendliness leave
her steady eyes.

She does not love me," he said to himself.
" It is strange, but she does not. But
the day will come."

You are going to London, are you not ? "
asked Ruth, withdrawing her hand at last ;
and after hearing a detailed account of his
difficulties and anxieties about money matters,
and after taking an immense weight off his
mind by telling him that they would have no
influence in causing her to alter her decision,
she sent him beaming and rejoicing on his
way, quite a different person to the victim of
anxiety and depression who had arrived at
Slumberleigh an hour before.

Mrs. Alwynn was much annoyed at Dare's
entire want of heart in leaving the house
without coming to see her, and during the

remainder of the morning she did not cease
to comment on the differences that exist
between what people really are and what
they seem to be, until, in her satisfaction at
recounting the accident to Evelyn Dangers,
a new and sympathetic listener, she fortunately
forgot the slight put upon her ankle
earlier in the day. The complete enjoyment
of her sufferings was, however, destined to
sustain a severe shock the following morning.

She and Ruth were reading their letters,
Mrs. Alwynn, of course, giving Ruth the
benefit of the various statements respecting
the weather which her correspondents had
confided to her, when Mr. Alwynn came in
from the study, an open letter in his hand.
He was quite pink with pleasure.

"He has asked me to so and see them,"
he said, " and they are small, and have green
seals, all excepting one " — referring to the
letter — " which has a big red seal in a tin
box, attached by a tape. Ruth, I am perfectly
convinced beforehand that those charters

are grants of land of the fourteenth or
fifteenth century. Sir Charles mentions that
they are in black letter, and only a few lines
on each, but he says he won't describe them
in full, as I must come and see them for
myself. Dear me ! how I shall enjoy
arranging them for him, which he asks me
to do. I had really become so anxious about
them, that a few days ago I determined to
set my mind at rest, and I wrote to him to
ask for particulars, and that is his answer."

Mr. Alwynn put Charles's letter into her
hand, and she glanced over it.

"Why, Uncle John, he asks Aunt Fanny
as well ; and — ' if Miss Deyncourt is still with
you, pleasure,' etc. — and vie, too."

"When is it for?" asked Mrs. Alwynn,
suddenly sitting bolt upright.

"Let me see. 'Black letter size about'
where is it? Here. ' Tuesday, the 25th,
for three nights. Leaving home following
week for some time. Excuse short notice,'
etc. It is next week, Aunt Fanny."

I shall not be able to go," gasped Mrs.
Alwynn, sinking back on her sofa, while
something very like tears came into her eyes ;
"and I've never been there, Ruth. The
Thursbys went once, in old Sir George's time,
and Mrs. Thursby always says it is the show
place in the county, and that it is such a pity
I have not seen it. And last autumn, when
John went, I was in Devonshire, and never
even heard of his going till I got home,
or I'd have come back. Oh, Ruth ! oh,
dear ! "

Mrs. Alwynn let her letters fall into her
lap, and drew forth the coloured pocket-handkerchief
which she wore, in imitation of
Mabel Thursby, stuck into the bodice of her
gown, and at • the ominous appearance of
which Mr. Alwynn suddenly recollected a
duty in the study and retreated.

With an unerring instinct Ruth flew to the
musical-box and set it going, and then knelt
down by the prostrate figure of her aunt, and
administered what sympathy and consolation

she could, to the " cheery " accompaniment
of the " Buffalo Girls."

Never mind, dear Aunt Fanny. Perhaps
he will ask you again when you are
better. There will be other opportunities."

I always was unlucky," said Mrs. Alwynn
faintly. " I had a swelled face up the Rhine
on our honeymoon. Things always happen
like that with me. * At any rate " — after a
pause — "there is one thing. We ought to
try and look at the bright side. It is not as
if we had not been asked. We have not
been overlooked."

No," said Ruth promptly ; and in her own
mind she registered a vow that in her future
home she would never give the pain that
being overlooked by the larger house can
cause to the smaller house.

And I will stay with you, Aunt Fanny,"
she went on cheerfully. " Uncle John can
go by himself, and we will do just what we
like while he is away, won't we ? "

But at this Mrs. Alwynn demurred. She

was determined that if she played the role of
a martyr she would do it well. She insisted
that Ruth should accompany Mr. Alwynn.
She secretly looked forward to telling Mabel
that Ruth was going. She did not mind
being left alone, she said. She desired, with
a sigh of self-sacrifice, that Mr. Alwynn
should accept for himself and his niece. She
had not been brought up to consider herself,
thank God. She had her faults, she knew.
No one was more fully aware of them than
herself; but she was not going to prevent
others enjoying themselves because she herself
was laid aside.

And now, my dear," she said, with a
sudden return to mundane interests that succeeded
rather unexpectedly to the celestial
spirit of her previous remarks, " you must bethinking
about your gowns. If I had been
going, I should have had my ruby satin done
up — so beautiful by candlelight. What have
you to wear ? That white lace tea-gown with
the silver grey train is very nice ; but you

ought not to be in half mourning now. I
like to see young people in colours. And
then there is that crolcl-and- white brocade,
Ruth, that you wore at the drawing-room last
year. It is a beautiful dress, but rather too
quiet. Could not you brighten it up with
a few cherry-coloured bows about it, or a
sash ? I always think a sash is so becoming.
If you were to bring it down, I dare say I
could suggest something. And you must
be well dressed, for though he only says
friends,' you never can tell whom you may
not meet at a place like that."

END of vol. 1.

PRINTED BY WILLIAM Closes AND SONS, LIMITED,

LONDON AND Eccles, G., C. fr Co.

y*j\

moi

V J

^J

m

w*-

*+*■'■ p &F7P.

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS-URBANA

3 0112 041675189

^tafc' j*



^ V4'-H

wm

■^.^

*^ Ai

^^•',

t^

{

^^j?^'.-*f

^^ *-

"^^ 1^ .aa."^-

•vJ' ^-^.ih

#j

:X

^

%

\

Y

BY THE AUTHOR OF

"THE DANVERS JEWELS."

"Es sterne alter Geschichte."

IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. II.

LONDON:
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

^ublisfjcrs in (Drtiinarg to %vc ;^ajcst2 tfje ^\xun.
1889.

fall rights reserved.)

2^3

SIR CHARLES DANVERS.

CHAPTER I.

The last week of September found Charles
back at Stoke Moreton to receive the
'friends" of whom Mrs. Alwynn spoke.
People whose partridges he had helped to
kill were now to be gathered from the east
and from the west to help to kill his. From
the north also priests were comines, were

leaving their mountains to But the

remainder of the line Is invidious. The
Hope Actons had written to offer a visit at
Stoke Moreton, on the strength of an old
promise to Charles, a promise so old that
he had forgotten it, until reminded, that next

VOL. II. IC)

time they were passing they would take his
house on their way. They had offered their
visit exactly at the same time for which he
had just Invited the Alwynns and Ruth.
Charles felt that they were not quite the
people whom he would have arranged to
meet each other, but as Fate had so decreed
it, he acquiesced calmly enough.

But when Lady Mary also wrote tenderly
from Scarborough, to ask if she could be of
any use in helping to entertain his guests,
he felt it imperative to draw the line, and
wrote a grateful effusion to his aunt, saying
that he could not think of asking her to
leave a place where he felt sure she was
deriving spiritual and temporal benefit. In
order to assist at so unprofitable a festivity
as a shooting party. He mentioned casually
that Lady Grace Lawrence, Miss Deyncourt,
and Miss Wyndham were to be of the party,
which details he Imagined might have an
interest for her amid her graver reflections.

The subject of Ruth's coming certainly

had a prominent place in his own graver
reflections. For the last fortnight, as he
went from house to house, he had been
wondering how he could meet her again, and
when Mr. Alwynn's letter concerning the
charters was forwarded to him, a sudden
inspiration made him then and there send
the invitation which had arrived at Slumber-leigh
Rectory a few days before. He
groaned in spirit as he wrote It, at the
thought of r^Irs. Ahvynn disporting herself,
dressed in the brightest colours, among his
other guests ; and It w-as with a feeling of
thankfulness that he found Ruth and Mr.
Alwynn were coming without her.

He had felt very little interest so far in
the party, which, with the exception of the
Hope Actons, had been long arranged, but
now he found himself looking forward to it
with actual impatience, and he returned home
a day before the time, instead of an hour or
two before his guests were expected, as was
his wont.

The Wyndhams and Hope Actons, with
Lady Grace in tow, were the first to appear
upon the scene. Mr, Alwynn and Ruth
arrived a few hours later, amid a dropping
fire of young men and gun cases, who kept
on turning up at intervals during the afternoon,
and, according to the mysterious nocturnal
habits of their kind, till late Into the
night.

If ever a man appears to advantage it is
on his native hearth, and as Charles stood
on his in the long hall, where It was the
habit of the house to assemble before dinner,
Ruth found that her attempts at conversation
were rather thrown away upon Lady Grace,
with whom she had been renewing an old
acquaintance, and whose interest for the time
being entirely centred In the carved coats of
arms and heraldic designs with which the
towering white stone chimney-piece was
covered.

Lady Grace was one of those pretty,
delicate creatures who remind one of a very

elaborate rosebud. There was an appearance
of ultra refinement about her, a look of
that refinement which Is in itself a weakness,
a poverty of blood, so to speak, the opposite
and more pleasing, but equally unwholesome
extreme of coarseness. She looked very
pretty as, having left Ruth, she stood by
Charles, passing her little pink hand over
the lowest carvings, dim and worn with the
heat of many generations of fires, and listened
with rapt attention to his answers to her
questions.

And the hall is so beautiful," she said,
looking round with childlike curiosity at the
walls covered with weapons, and with a long
array of armour ; and at the massive pillars
of carved white stone which rose up out of
the polished floor to meet the raftered ceiling.
It is so — so uncommon."

Whatever Charles's other failings may
have been, he was an admirable host. The
weather was fine. What can be finer than
September when she is in a good humour ?

The two first days of Ruth's visit were unalloyed
enjoyment. It seemed like a sudden
return to the old life with Lady Deyncourt,
when the round of country visits regularly
succeeded the season in London. Of Mr.
Alwynn she saw little or nothing. He was
burled In the newly discovered charters. Of
Charles she saw a good deal, more than at
the time she was quite aware of, for he
seemed to see a great deal of everybody,
from Lady Grace to the shy man of the
party, who at Stoke Moreton first conceived
the Idea that he was an acquisition to society.
But whether Charles made the opportunities
or not which came so ready to his hand, still
he found time, amid the pressure of his
shooting arrangements and his duties as host,
to talk to Ruth.

One day there was cub hunting In the
grey of the early morning, to which she and
Miss Wyndham went with Charles and
others of the party who could bear to getup
betimes. Losing sight of the others after

a time, Ruth and Charles rode back alone
together when the sun was high, walking
their tired horses along the blackberries
lanes, and down the long green rides cut in
the yellowing bracken of the park.

** And so you are going to winter in
Rome ? " said Charles, who had the previous
day, contrary to his wont, accepted an invitation
to Slumberleigh Hall for the middle of
October. " I sometimes go to Rome for a
few weeks when the shooting is over. And
are you glad or sorry at the prospect of
leaving your Cranford ? "

'' Very sorry."

'' Why ? "

I have seen an entirely new phase of life
at Slumberleigh."

I think I can guess what you mean," said
Charles gravely. '' One does not often meet
any one like Mr. Alwynn."

No. I was thinking of him. Until I
came to Slumberleigh the lines had not
fallen to me in very clerical places, so my

experience is limited ; but he seems to me
to be the only clergyman I have known who
does not force on one a form of religion that
has been dead and burled for years."

*' The clergy have much to answer for on
that head," said Charles with bitterness. " I
sometimes like and respect them as Individuals,
but I do not love them as a class.
One ought to make allowance for the fact
that they are tied and bound by the chain
of their Thirty-nine Articles ; that at three-and-twenty
they shut the doors deliberately
on any new and possibly unorthodox idea ;
and it Is consequently unreasonable to expect
from them any genuine freedom or originality
of thought. I can forgive them their assumption
of superiority, their inability to meet
honest scepticism with anything like fairness,
their continual bickering among themselves ;
but I cannot forgive them the harm they are
doing to religion, the discredit they are
bringing upon It by their bigoted views and
obsolete ideas. They busy themselves doing

good — that is the worst of it ; they mean
well, but they do not see that in the meanwhile
their Church is being left unto them
desolate ; though perhaps, after all, the
Church, having come to be what it is, that
is the best thing that can happen."

*' You forget," said Ruth, '' that you are
regarding the Church from the standpoint ot
the cultivated and intellectual class, for whom
the Church has ceased to represent religion.
But there are lots of people neither cultivated
nor intellectual — women even of our own class
are not so as a rule — to whom the Church,
with its ritual and dogma, is a real help and
comfort. If, as you say, it does not suit the
more highly educated, I think you have no
right to demand that it sJwiild suit what is,
after all, a very small minority. It would be
most unfair if it did."

Charles did not answer. He had been
looking at her, and thinking how few women
could have disagreed with him as quietly and
resolutely as this young girl riding at his

side, carefully avoiding chance rabbit holes
as she spoke.

'there is, and there always will be, a
certain number of people, not only among
the clergy," she went on, 'who, as somebody
says, ' put the church clock back,' and are
unable to see that they cannot alter the time
of day for all that ; only they can and do
prevent many well-intentioned people from
trusting to It any longer. But there are
others here and there whom a dogmatic form
of religion has been quite unable to spoil,
whose more simple turn of mind draws out
of the very system that appears to you so
lifeless and effete, a real faith, a personal
possession which no one can take from them."

Her eyes sparkled as she spoke, and
Charles saw that she was thinking of Mr.
Alwynn.

He has got it," he said slowly, " this
something which we all want, and for the
greater part never find. He has got it. To
see and recognize it early is a great thing,"

he continued earnestly. " To disbelieve in
it in early life, and cavil at all the caricatures
and imitations, and only come to find out its
reality comparatively later on is a great misfortune
— a great misfortune."

She felt that he was speaking of himself,
and they rode on in silence, each grave with
a sense of mutual understandings and companionship.
They forded the stream, and
trotted up the little village street, the cottagers
gazing admiringly after them till they
disappeared within the great arched gateway.
And Charles looked at his old house as they
paced up the wide drive, and wondered
whether It were indeed possible that the
lonely years he had spent In It had come to
an end at last — at last.

Ruth had noticed that he lost no opportunity
of talking to her, and when she heard
him conversing with Lady Grace, or plunging
into fashionable slang with Miss Wyndbam,
found herself admiring the facility with which
he adapted himself to different people.

The following afternoon, as. she was writing
in the library, she was amused to see that
he found it incumbent on him to write too,
even going so far as to produce a letter from
Molly, whose correspondence he said he invariably
answered by return.

You seem very fond of giving Molly
pleasure," said Ruth.

'* I am glad to see. Miss Deyncourt, that
you are beginning to estimate me at my true
worth."

You have it in your power just now to
give a great pleasure," said Ruth earnestly,
laying down the pen which she had taken up.

-How?"

*' It seems so absurd when it is put Into
words, but — by asking Mrs. Alwynn sometime
to stay here. She has always longed
to see Stoke Moreton, because — well, because
Mrs. Thursby has ; and real, positive, actual
tears were shed that she could not come
when you asked us."

Is it possible ? " said Charles. '' It is the

first time that any letter of mine has caused
emotion of that description."

Ah ! you don't know how important the
smallest things appear if one lives in a little
corner of the world where nothing ever
happens. If Mrs. Alwynn had been able to
come, her visit would have been an event
which she would have remembered for years.
I assure you, I myself, from having lived at
Slumberleigh eight months, became quite excited
at the prospect of so much dissipation."

And Ruth leaned back in her chair with
a little laugh.

Charles looked narrowly at her, and his
face fell.

'' I am glad you told me," he said, after a
moment's pause. '' People generally mention
these things about ten years afterwards, when
there is probably no possibility of doing anything.
Thank you."

Ruth was disconcerted by the sudden
gravity of his tone, and almost regretted the
impulse that had made her speak. She

forgot it, however, In the tableaux vivants
which they were preparing for the evening,
In which she and Charles illustrated the
syllable mm to enthusiastic applause. Ruth
represented the nun, engaged in conversation,
over the lowest imaginable convent wall,
with Charles, In all the glory of his cocked
hat and deputy-lieutenant's uniform, who,
while he held the nun's hand In one of his,
pointed persuasively with the other towards
an elaborately caparisoned war-horse,
trembling beneath the joint weight of a
yeomanry saddle, and a side saddle attached
behind It, which considerably overlapped the
charger's impromptu fur boa tail.
After the tableaux there was dancing In
acting costume, at which the two men, who
acted the war-horse between them, were the
only persons to protest. Lady Grace being
beautiful as an improvised Aa^ne Boleyn, and
the shy man resplendent in a fancy dress of
Charles's.

When the third morning came, Ruth gave

a genuine sigh at the thought that it was the
last day. Lady Grace, who was also leaving
the following morning, may be presumed to
have echoed it with far more sorrow. The
Wyndham.s were going that day, and disappeared
down the drive, waving handkerchiefs,
and carriage rugs, and hats on sticks,
out of the carriage windows, as is the custom
of really amusing people when taking leave.

In the afternoon, Lady Grace and Charles
went off for a ride alone together, to see
some ruin in which Lady Grace had manifested
a sudden interest, the third horse,
which had been brought round for another of
the men, being sent back to the stables, his
destined rider having decided, at the eleventh
hour, to join the rest of the party in a little
desultory rabbit shooting In the park, which
he proceeded to do with much chuckling
over his extraordinary penetration and
tact.

The elder ladles went out driving, looking,
as seen from an upper window, like four

poached eggs on a dish ; and, the coast
being clear, Ruth, who had no love of
driving, escaped with her paint box to the
garden, where she was making a sketch of
Stoke More ton.

Some houses, like people, have dignity.
Stoke Moreton, with ivy creeping up its
mellow sandstone, and peeping into its long
lines of mullions windows, stood solemn
and stately amid its level gardens ; the low
sun bringing out every line of carved stone
frieze and quaint architrave, firing all the
western windows, and touching the tall heads
of the hollyhocks and sunflowers, that stood
in ordered regiments within their high walls
of clipped box. And Ruth dabbed and
looked, and dabbed again, until she suddenly
found that if she put another stroke she
would spoil all, and also that her hands were
stiff with cold. After a few admiring glances
at her work, she set off on a desultory journey
round the gardens to get warm, and finally,
seeing an oak door in the garden wall open,

wandered through it into the churchyard.
The church door was open, too, and Ruth,
after reading some of the epitaphs on the
tombstones, went in.

It was a common little church enough, with
a large mortuary chapel, where all the
Dangers family reposed ; ancient Dangers
lying in armour with their mailed hands
joined, besides their wives ; more modern
Dangers kneeling in bas-relief in coloured
plaster and execrable taste in recesses. The
last generations were there also ; some of
them anticipating the resurrection and
feathered wings, but for the most part still
asleep. Charles's mother was there, lying in
white marble among her husband's people,
with the child upon her arm which she had
taken away with her.

And in the middle of the chapel was the
last Sir Charles Dangers, whom his brother,
Sir George, the father of the present owner,
had succeeded. The evening sun shone full
on the kneeling soldier figure, leaning on its

VOL. II. 20

sword, and on the grave, clear cut face, which
had a look of Charles. The long, beautifully
modelled hands, clasped over the battered
steel sword hilt, were like Charles's too.
Ruth read the inscription on the low marble
pedestal, relating how he had fallen in the
taking of the Redan, and then looked again.
And gradually a great feeling of pity rose in
her heart for the family which had lived here
for so many generations, and which seemed
now so likely to die out. Providence does
not seem to care much for old families, or to
value lone descent. Rather It seems to
favour the new race, the Browns, and the
Joneses, and the Robinsons, who yesterday
were not, and who to-day elbow the old
county families from the place which has
known them from time Immemorial.

'' I suppose Molly will some day marry a
Smith," said Ruth to herself, " and then it
will be all over. I don't think I will come
and see her here when she is married."

With which reflection she returned to the

house, and. after disturbing ]mr. Alwynn, who
Alas deep in a catalogue of the Dangers'
manuscripts, in which it was his firm conviction
that he should find some mention of
the charters, she went into the library, and
wondered which of the several thousands of
books would interest her till the others
came in.

The library was a large room, the walls of
which were lined with books from the floor
to the ceiling. In order to place the higher
shelves within reach, a light balcony of
polished oak ran round the four walls, about
equi-distant from the floor and the ceiling.
Ruth went up the tiny corkscrew staircase in
the wall, which led to the balcony, and
settling herself comfortably in the low, wide
window seat, took out one volume after
another of those that came within her reach.
These shelves by the window where she was
sitting had somehow a different look to the
rest. Old books and new, white vellum and
cardboard, were herded together without any

apparent order, and with no respect of
bindings. Here a splendid morocco " Novem
Organum " was pushed In beside a cheap and
much worn edition of Marcus Aurelius ; there
Emerson and Plato and Shakespeare jostled
each other on the same shelf, while just below
** Don Quixote " was pressed Into the uncongenial
society of Carlyle on one side, and
Confucius on the other. As she pulled out
one book after another, she noticed that the
greater part of them had Charles's name In
them. Ruth's curiosity was at once aroused.
No doubt this was the little corner in his.
great house In which he chose to read, and
these were his favourite books which he had
arranged so close to his hand. If we can
judge our fellow-creatures at all, which is
doubtful, it Is by the books they read, and
by those which, having read, they read again.
She looked at the various volumes In the
window-seat beside her with new Interest,,
and opened the first one she took up. It
was a collection of translations from the

Persian poets ; gentlemen of the name ot
Jemshid, Sadi, and Hafiz, of whom she had
never heard. As she turned over the pages,
she heard the ringing of horses' hoofs, and
looking out from her point of observation,
saw Charles and Lady Grace cantering up
the short wide approach, and clattering out of
sight again behind the great stone archway.
She turned back to her book, and was reading
an ode here and there, wondering to see
how the same thoughts that work within us
to-day had lived with man so many hundred
years ago, when her eye was caught by some
writing on the margin of a page as she turned
it over. A single sentence on the page was
strongly underlined.

'' Trite self-knowledge is knoiv ledge of God!'
Jemshid was a wise man, Ruth thought, if
he had found out that ; and then she read in
Charles's clear handwriting in the margin,

With this compare 'Look within. Within
is the fountain of good, and it will ever bubble
Zip if thott zoilt ever dig! — Maniacs Aurelius!'

At this moment Charles came into the
library, and looked up to where she was
sitting, half hidden from below by the thickness
of the wall.

'• What ! studying ? " he called gaily. " I
saw you sitting in the window as I rode up.
I might have known that if you were lost
sight of for half an hour you would be found
improving yourself in some exasperating
way." And he ran up the little stairs and
came round the balcony towards her. '' My
own special books, I see. Eve, as usual, surreptitiously
craving for a knowledge of good
and evil. What have you got hold of ? "

The remainder of the window seat was
full of books, so, to obtain a better view of
what she was reading, he knelt down by
her, and looked at the open book on her
knee.

Ruth did not attempt to close it. She felt
guilty she hardly knew of what. After a
moment's pause she said —

'* I plead guilty. I was curious. I saw

these were your own particular shelves ; but
I never can resist looking at the books people
read."

'' Will you be pleased to remember, in
future, that In contemplating my character,
Miss Deyncourt — a subject not unworthy of
your attention — you are on private property.
You are requested to keep on the gravel
paths, and to look at the grounds I am disposed
to show you. If, as is very possible,
admiration seizes you, you are at liberty to
express it. But there must be no going
round to the back premises, no prying into
corners, no trespassing where I have written
up ' No road! "

Ruth smiled, and there was a gleam in her
eyes which Charles well knew heralded a
retort, when suddenly through the half-open
door a silken rustle came, and Lady Hope
Acton slowly entered the room, as if about
to pass through it on her way to the hall.

Now, kneeling is by no means an attitude
to be despised. In church, or in the moment

of presentation to majesty, it is appropriate,
even essential ; but it is dependent, like most
things, upon circumstances and environment.
No attitude, for instance, could be more
suitable and natural to any one wishing to
read the page on which a sitting fellow-creature
was eno^aored. Charles had found
it so. But as Lady Hope Acton sailed into
the room he felt that, however conducive to
study, it was not the attitude in which he
would at that moment have chosen to be
found. Ruth felt the same. It had seemed
so natural a moment before, so hideously
suggestive now.

Perhaps Lady Hope Acton would pass
on through the other door, so widely, so
invitingly open. Neither stirred, in the hope
that she might do so. But in the centre of
the room she stopped, and sighed ; the slow
crackling sio^h of a stout woman in a too well-fitting
silk gown.

Charles suddenly felt as if his muddy boots
and cords were trying to catch her eye, as if

every book on the shelves were calling to her
to look up.

For a second Ruth and Charles gazed
down upon the top of Lady Hope Acton's
head, the bald place on which showed dimly
through her semi-transparent cap. She
moved slightly, as If to go ; but no, another
step was drawing near. In another moment
Lady Grace came in through the opposite
door in her riding habit.

Ruth felt that it was now or never for a
warning cough ; but, as she glanced at Charles
kneeling beside her, she could not give it.
Surely they would pass out in another second.
The thought of the two pairs of eyes which
would be raised, and the expression in them,
was intolerable.

Grace," said Lady Hope Acton with
dreadful distinctness, advancing to meet her
daughter, " has he spoken ? "

No'' said Lady Grace, with a little sob,
'rand" — with a sudden burst of tears — ''oh,
mamma, I don't think he ever will."

Oh, to have coughed, to have sneezed, to
have choked a moment sadler ! Anything"
would have been better than this.

Run upstairs this moment, then, and
change your habit and bathe your eyes," said
Lady Hope Acton sharply. '' You need not
come down till dinner time. I will say you
are tired."

And then, to the overwhelming relief of
those two miserable spectators, the mother
and daughter left the room.

But to the momentary sensation of relief
in Ruth's mind a rush of pity succeeded for
the childlike grief and tears ; and with and
behind it, like one hurrying wave overtopping"
and bearing down its predecessor, came a
burning indignation against the cause of that
picturesque emotion.

It is indeed a lamentable peculiarity of our
fallen nature that the moment of relief from
the smart of anxiety is seldom marked by so
complete a mental calmness and moderation
as could be wished.

Ruth rose slowly, with the book still in her
hand, and Charles got off his knees as best
he could, and stood with one hand on the
railing of the balcony, as if to steady himself.
His usually pale face was crimson.

Ruth closed the book in silence, and with
a dreadful precision put it back in its accustomed
place. Then she turned and faced
him, with the western light full upon her stern,
face, and another light of contempt and indignation
burning in her direct eyes.

*' Poor little girl," she said, in a low distinct
voice. '' What a triumph to have succeeded
in making her unhappy ! She is very young,
and she did not understand the rules of the
game. Poor, foolish little girl ! "

If he had been red before, he was pale
enough now. He drew himself up, and met
her direct gaze without flinching. He did
not speak, and she left him standing in the
window, and went slowly along the balcony
and down the little staircase into the room
below.

As she was about to leave the room he
moved forward suddenly, and said —

Miss Deyncourt."

Involuntarily she stopped short In obedience
to the stern authority of the tone.

You are unjust."

She did not answer, and left the room.

CHAPTER 11.

*' Uncle John," said Ruth next morning,
taking Mr. Alwynn aside after breakfast,
*' we are leaving by the early train, are we
not ? "

No, my love, it is quite impossible. I
have several papers to identify and rearrange."


*' We have stayed a day longer than we
intended as it is. Most of the others go
early. Do let us go too."

*' It is most natural, I am sure, my dear,
that you should wish to get home," said Mr.
Alwynn, looking with sympathetic concern
at his niece ; '' and why your aunt has not
forwarded your letters I can't imagine. But
still, if we return by the midday train, Ruth,

you will have plenty of time to answer any
letters that — ahem ! seem to require immediate
attention before the post goes ; and I don't
see my way to being ready earlier."

Ruth had not even been thinking of Dare
and his letters ; but she saw that by the early
train she was not destined to depart, and
watched the other guests take leave with an
envious sigh. She was anxious to be gone.
The last evening, after the episode in the
library, had been interminably long. Already
the morning, though breakfast was hardly
over, seemed to have dragged Itself out to
days in length. A sense of constraint
between two people who understand and
amuse each other Is very galling. Ruth had
felt It so. All the previous evening Charles had
hardly spoken to her, and had talked mainly
to Lady Hope Acton, who was somewhat
depressed, and another elder lady. A goodnight
and a flat candlestick can be presented
in a very distant manner, and as Ruth received
hers from Charles that evenings, and

met the grave, steady glance that was
directed at her, she perceived that he had
not forgiven her for what she had said.

She felt angry again at the idea that he
should venture to treat her with a coldness
which seemed to imply that she had been in
the wrongs. The worst of it was that she
felt she was to blame ; that she had no right
whatever to criticise Charles and his actions.
What concern were they of hers ? How
much more suitable, how much more eloquent
a denied silence would have been. She
could not imagine now, as she thought it
over, why she had been so unreasonably
annoyed at the moment as to say what she
had done. Yet the reason was not far to
seek, if she had only known where to lay her
hand on it. She was uneasy, Impatient ; she
longed to oft out of the house, x^nd It was
still early ; only eleven. Eleven till twelve.
Twelve till one. One till half-past. Two
whole hours and a half to be o-ot through
before the Stoke Moreton omnibus would

bear her away. She looked round for a
refuge during that weary age, and found it
nearer than many poor souls do in time of
need, namely, at her elbow, in the shape, the
welcome shape of the shy man, almost the
only remnant of the large party whose dispersion
she had just been watching. Whenever
Ruth thought of that shy man afterwards,
which was not often, it was with a sincere
hope that he had forgotten the forwardness
of her behaviour on that particular morning.
She wished to see the picture-gallery. She
would of all things like a walk afterwards.
No, she had not been as far as the beech
avenue ; but she would like to go. Should
they look at the pictures first — now — no
time like the present ? How pleased he was 1
How proud ! He felt that his shyness had
gone for ever, that Miss Deyncourt would
no doubt like to hear a few anecdotes of his
college life, that a quiet man, who does not
make himself cheap to start with, often wins
in the end, that Miss Deyncourt had unusual

appreciation, not only for pictures, but for
reserved and intricate characters that yet
(here he ventured on a little joke, and
laughed at it himself) had their lighter side.
And in the long picture-gallery Ruth and he
studied the old Masters, as they had seldom
been studied before, with an intense and
ignorant interest on the one hand, and an
entire absence of mind on the other.

Charles, who had done a good deal of
pacing up and down his room the night
before, and had arrived at certain conclusions,
passed through the gallery once, but
did not stop. He looked grave and preoccupied,
and hardly answered a question of
Mr. Conway's about one of the pictures.

Half-past eleven at last. A tall inlaid
clock in the gallery mentioned the hour by
one sedate stroke ; the church clock told the
village the time of day a second later. They
had nearly finished the pictures. Never
mind. She could take half an hour to put
on her hat, and surely any beech avenue,

VOL. II. 21

even on a dull day like this, might serve to
while av^ay the remaining hour before
luncheon.

They had come to the last picture of the
Dangers' collection, and Ruth was dwelling
fondly on a very well-developed cow by
Cuyp, as if she could hardly tear herself
away from it, when she heard a step coming
up the staircase from the hall, and presently
Charles pushed open the carved folding
doors which shut off the gallery from the
rest of the house, and looked in. She was
conscious that he was standing in the doorway,
but new beauties in the cow, which had
hitherto escaped her, engaged her whole
attention at the moment, and no one can
attend to two things at once.

Charles did not come any further ; but
standing in the doorway, he called to the
shy man, who went to him, and the two
talked together for a few moments. Ruth
gazed upon the cow until it became so fixed
upon the retina of her eye that when she

tried to admire an old Florentine cabinet
near it, she still saw its portrait, and when in
desperation she turned away to look out of
the window, across the sky and sloping park
the shadow of the cow hung like a portent.

A moment later Mr. Conway came hurrying
back to her much perturbed, to say he
had quite forgotten till this moment, had not
in the least understood, in fact, etc., etc.
Dangers' grey cob, that he had thoughts of
buying, was waiting at the door for him to
try — in fact, had been waiting some time.
No idea upon his soul

Ruth cut his apology short before he had
done more than flounder well into it.

*you must go and try it at once," she
said with decision ; and then she added, as
Charles drew near, " I have changed my
mind about going out. It looks as if it might
turn to rain. I shall get through some
arrears of letter-writing instead."

Mr. Conway stammered and repeated
himself, and finally rushed out of the gallery.

Ruth expected that Charles would accompany
him, but he remained standing near the
window, apparently engaged like herself in
admiring the view.

It struck me," he said slowly, with his
eyes half shut, " that Conway proved rather
a broken reed just now."

'' He did," said Ruth. She suddenly felt
that she could understand what it was in
Charles that exasperated Lady Mary so much.

He came a step nearer, and his manner
altered.

'' I sent him away," he said, looking gravely
at her, '' because I wished to speak to
you."

Ruth did not answer or turn her head,
though she felt he was watching her. Her
eyes absently followed two* young fallow deer
in the park, cantering away in a series of
hops on their long stiff legs.

*' I cannot speak to you here," said Charles
after a pause.

Ruth turned round.

Silence is golden sometimes. I think
quite enough has been said already."

"Not by me. You expressed yourself
with considerable frankness. I wish to follow
your example."

You said I was unjust at the time.
Surely that was sufficient."

'' So insufficient, that I am going to repeat
it. I tell you again that you are unjust in
not being willing to hear what I have to say.
I have seen a good deal of harm done by
misunderstandings, Miss Deyncourt. Pride
is generally at the bottom of them. We are
both suffering from a slight attack of that
malady now. But I value your good opinion
too much to hesitate if by any little sacrifice
of my own pride I can still retain it. If,
after your remarks yesterday, I can make the
effort (and it is an effort) to ask you to hear
something I wish to say, you, on your side,
ought not to refuse to listen. It is not a
question of liking ; you hight not to refuse."

He spoke in an authoritative tone, which

gave weight to his words, and in spite of
herself she saw the truth of what he said.
She was one of those rare women who, being
convinced against their will, are 7io^ of the
same opinion still. It was ignominious to
have to give way ; but after a moment's
struQrorle with herself she surmounted her
dislike to being overruled, together with a
certain unreasoning tenacity of opinion natural
to her sex, and said quietly —

What do you wish me to do ? "

Charles saw the momentary struggle, and
honoured her for a quality which women
seldom i^ive men occasion to honour them for. '

Do you dislike walking ? "

'' No."

Then, if you will come out of doors,
where there is less likelihood of interruption
than in the house, I will wait for you here."

She went silently down the picture-gallery,
half astonished to find herself doing his
bidding. She put on her walking things
mechanically, and came back in a few

minutes to find him standing where she had
left him. In silence they went downstairs,
and through the piazza with its flowering
orange trees, out into the gardens, where, on
the stone balustrade, the peacocks were
attitudinizing and conversing in the high key
in which they always proclaim a change of
weather and their innate vulgarity to the
world. Charles led the way towards a little
rushing brook which divided the gardens
from the park.

I think you must have had a very low
opinion of me beforehand, to say what you
did yesterday," he remarked suddenly.

'' I was angry," said Ruth. " However
true what I said may have been, I had no
right to say it to — a comparative stranger.
That is why I repeat that it would be better
not to make matters worse by mentioning
the subject again. It is sure to annoy us
both. Let it rest."

"Not yet," said Charles dryly. 'ras a
comparative stranger I want to know " —

Stopping and facing her — " exactly what you
mean by saying that she, Lady Grace, did
not understand the rules of the game."

*' I cannot put it in other Avoids," said
Ruth, her courage rising as she felt that a
battle was imminent.

Perhaps I can for you. Perhaps you
meant to say that you believed I was in the
habit of amusing myself at other people's
expense; that — I see your difficulty in finding
the right words —-that it was my evil sport
and pastime to — shall we say — raise expectations
which it was not my intention to
fulfil."

'' It is disagreeably put," said Ruth, reddening
a little; "but possibly I did mean
something of that kind."

And how have you arrived at such an
uncharitable opinion of a comparative
stranger ? " asked Charles, quietly enough,
but his light eyes flashing.

She did not answer.

'' You are not a child, to echo the opinion

of Others," he went on. '' You look as if you
judged for yourself. What have I done
since I met you first, three months ago, to
justify you in holding me in contempt ? "

I did not say I held you in contempt."

'' You must do, though, if you think me
capable of such meanness."

Silence again.

You have pushed me into saying more
than I meant," said Ruth at last ; '' at least
you have said I mean a great deal more
than I really do. To be honest, I think you
have thoughtlessly given a good deal of pain.
I dare say you did it unconsciously."

'' Thank you. You are very charitable,
but I cannot shield myself under the supposition
that at eight and thirty I am a creature
of impulse, unconscious of the meaning of
my own actions."

If that is the case," thought Ruth, '' your
behaviour to me has been inexcusable,
especially the last few days ; though, fortunately
for myself, I was not deceived by it."

If you persist in keeping silence," said
Charles, after waiting for her to speak, " any
possibility of conversation is at an end."

'* I did not come out here for conversation,"
replied Ruth. " I came, not by my own
wish, to hear something you said you particularly
desired to say. Do you not think
the simplest thing, under the circumstances,
would be — to say it ? "

He eave a short lauch, and looked at her
in sheer desperation. Did she know what
she was pushing him into ?

*' I had not forgotten," he said. '' It was
in my mind all the time ; but now you have
made it easy for me indeed by coming to my
assistance in this way. I will make a fresh
start."

He compressed his lips, and seemed to
pull himself together. Then he said, in a
very level voice — •

'' Kindly give me your whole attention,
Miss Deyncourt, so that I shall not be
obliged to repeat anything. The deer are

charming, I know ; but you have seen deer
before, and will no doubt again. I am sorry
that I am obliged to speak to you about
myself, but a little autobiography is unavoidable.
Perhaps you know that about three
years ago I succeeded my father. From
being penniless, and head over ears in debt,
I became suddenly a rich man ; not by my
father's will, who entailed every acre of the
estates here and elsewhere on Ralph, and
left everything he could to him. I had
thought of telling you what my best friends
have never known, why I am not still
crippled by debt. I had thought of telling
you why at five and thirty I was still unmarried,
for my debts were not the reason ;
but I will not trouble you with that now.
It Is enough to say that I found myself in a
position which, had I been a little younger,
with rather a different past, I should have
enjoyed more than I did. I was well
received in English society when, after a
lapse of several years, and a change of

fortune, I returned to it. If I had thought
I was well received for myself, I should have
been a fool. But I came back disillusioned.
I saw the machinery. When you reflect on
the vast and intricate machinery employed
by mothers with grown-up daughters, you
may imagine what I saw. In all honesty
and sincerity I wished to marry ; but in the
ease with which I saw I could do so lay my
chief difficulty. I did not want a new toy,
but a companion. I suppose I still clung to
one last illusion, that I might meet a woman
whom I could love, and who would love me,
and not my name or income. I could not
find her, but I still believed in her. I went
everywhere in the hope of meeting her, and
if others have ever been disappointed in
me, they have never known how disappointed
I have been in them. For three years I
looked for her everywhere ; but I could not
find her, and at last I gave her up. And
then — I met Lady Grace Lawrence, and liked
her. I had reason to believe she could be

disinterested. She came of good people — all
Lawrence are good ; she was simple and
unspoilt, and she seemed to like me. When
I look back I believe that I had decided to
ask her to marry me, and that it was only
by the merest chance that I left London
without speaking to her. What prevented
me I hardly know, unless it was a reluctance
at the last moment to cast the die. I came
down to Atherstone, harassed and anxious,
tired of everything and everybody, and
there," said Charles, with sudden passion,
turning and looking full at Ruth, " there I

The blood rushed to her face, and she
hastily interposed.

I don't see any necessity to bring my
name in."

Perhaps not," he returned, recovering
himself instantly ; *' unfortunately, I do."

'' You expect too much of my vanity,"
said Ruth, her voice trembling a little ; " butin
this instance I don't think you can turn it

to account. I beg you will leave me out of
the question."

I am sorry I cannot oblige you," he said
grimly ; " but you can't be left out. I only
regret that you dislike being mentioned,
because that is a mere nothing to what is
coming."

She trusted that he did not perceive that
the reason she made no reply was because
she suddenly felt herself unable to articulate.
Her heart was beating wildly, as that gentle,
well-conducted organ had never beaten
before. What was coming ? Could this
stern determined man be the same apathetic,
sarcastic behoof whom she had hitherto
known ?

'' From that time," he continued, " I became
surer and surer, of what at first I hardly
dared to hope, what it seemed presumption
in me to hope, namely, that at last I had
found what I had looked for in vain so long.
I had to keep my engagement with the Hope
Actons in Scotland ; but I regretted it. I

Stayed as short a time as I could. I did not
ask them to come here. They offered themselves.
I think, if I have been to blame, it
has not been in so heartless a manner as you
supposed ; and it appears to me Lady Hope
Acton should not have come. This is my
explanation. You can add the rest for yourself.
Have I said enough to soften your
harsh judgment of yesterday ? "

Ruth could not speak. The trees were
behaving in the most curious manner, were
whirling round, were swaying up and down.
The beeches close in front were dancing
quadrilles ; now ranged in two long rows,
now setting to partners, now hurrying back
to their places as she drew near.

Sit down," said Charles's voice gently ;
'' you look tired."

The trunk of a fallen tree suddenly appeared
rising up to meet her out of a slight
mist, and she sat down on it more precipitately
than she could have wished. In a few
seconds the trees returned to their places,

and the mist, which appeared to be very
local, cleared away.

Charles was sitting on the trunk beside
her, looking at her intently. The anger had
gone out of his face, and had given place to
a look of deep anxiety and suspense.

*' I have not finished yet," he said, and his
voice had changed as much as his face,
*' There is still something more."

"No, no," said Ruth. 'eat least, if there
is, don't say it."

*' I think I would rather say it. You wish
to save me pain, I see ; but I am quite prepared
for what you are going to say. I did
not intend to speak to you on the subject
for a long time to come, but yesterday's event
has forced my hand. There must be no
more misunderstandings between us. You
intend to refuse me, I can see. All the same,
I wish to tell you that I love you, and to ask
you to be my wife."

I am afraid I cannot," said Ruth almost
inaudibly.

No," said Charles, looking straight before
him, " I have asked you too soon. You are
quite right. I did not expect anything
different ; I only wished you to know. But
perhaps, some day '

Don't ! " said Ruth, clasping her hands
tightly together. "You don't know what
you are saying. Nothing can make any
difference, because — I am engaged."

She dared not look at his face, but she saw
his hand clench suddenly.

For an age neither spoke.

Then he turned his head slowly and looked
at her. His face was grey even to the lips.
With a strange swift pang at the heart, she
saw how her few vv^ords had changed it.

To whom ? " he said at last, hardly above
a whisper.

'' To Mr. Dare."

*' Not that man who has come to live at
Vandon ? "

'^ Yes."

Another honos silence.

VOL. II. 22

When was It ? "

Ten days ago."

'' Ten clays ago," repeated Charles mechanically,
and his face worked. '' Ten days
aeo ! "

It Is not given out yet," said Ruth, hesitating,
'because Mr. Alwynn does not wish
it during Lord Polesworth's absence. I never
thought of any mistake being caused by not
mentioning it. I would not have come here
if I had had the least idea that "

"You cannot mean to say that you had
never seen that I — what I — felt for you ? "

'' Indeed I never thought of such a thing,
until two minutes before you said it. I am
very sorry I did not, but I imagined "

Let me hear what you imagined."

** I noticed you talked to me a good deal ;
but I thought you did exactly the same to
Lady Grace, and others."

'' You could not imagine that I talked to
others — to any other woman in the world —
as I did to you."

*' I supposed," said Ruth simply, 'that you
talked gaily to Lady Grace because it suited
her ; and more gravely to me, because I am
naturally grave. I thought at the time you
were rather clever in adapting yourself to
different people so easily ; and I was glad
that I understood your manner better than
some of the others."

'' Better ! " said Charles bitterly. '' Better,
when you thought that of me ! No, you
need not say anything. I was in fault, not
you. I don't know what right I had to
imagine you understood me — you seemed to
understand me — to fancy that we had anything
in common, that in time " He

broke into a low wretched lauofh. '' And all
the while you were engaged to another man.
Good God ! what a farce ; what a miserable
mistake from first to last ! "

Ruth said nothing. It was indeed a
miserable mistake.

He rose wearily to his feet.

'' I was foro-ettino-," he said ; '' it is time to

LIBRARY

mmRsny of \imois

go home." And they went back together In
silence, which was more bearable than speech
just then.

The peacocks were still pirouetting and
minueting on the stone balustrade as they
came back to the gardens. The gong began
to sound as they entered the piazza.

To Ruth it was a dreadful meal. She
tried to listen to Mr. Conway's account of
the grey cob, or to the placid conversation of
Mr. Alwynn about the beloved manuscripts.
Fortunately the morning papers were full of
a recent forgery in America, and a murder In
London, which furnished topics when these
were exhausted, and Charles used them to
the utmost.

At last the carriage came. Mr. Alwynn
and Mr. Conway simultaneously broke into
incoherent ejaculations respecting the pleasure
of their visit ; Ruth's hand met Charles's for
an embarrassed second ; and a moment later
they were whirling down the straight wide
approach, between the columns of fantastically

clipped hollies, leaving Charles standing
in the doorway. He was still standing there
when the carriage rolled under the arched
gateway with its rampant stone lions. Ruth
glanced back once as they turned into the
road, at the stately old house, with its pointed
gables and forests of chimneys cutting the
grey sky line. She saw the owner turn
slowly and go up the steps, and looked hastily
away again.

Poor Dangers!" said Mr. Alwynn cheerfully,
also looking and putting Ruth's thoughts
into words. " He must be desperately lonely
in that house all by himself; but I suppose
he is not often there."

And Mr. Alwynn, whose mind had been
entirely relieved since Ruth's engagement
from the dark suspicion he had once harboured
respecting Charles, proceeded to
dilate upon the merits of the charters, and
of the owner of the charters, until he began
to think Ruth had a headache ; and finding
it to be the case, talked no more till they

reached, at the end of their little journey, the
door of Slumberleigh Rectory.

Is it very bad ?" he asked kindly, as he
helped her out of the carriage.

Ruth assented, fortunately with some faint
vestige of truth, for her hat hurt her forehead.


Then run up straight to your own room,
and I will tell your aunt that you will come
and have a chat with her later on ; perhaps
after tea, when the post will be gone."
Mr. Alwynn spoke in the whisper of
stratagem.

Ruth was only too thankful to be allowed
to slip on tiptoe to her own room, but she
had not been there many minutes when a tap
came to the door.

There, my dear," said Mr. Alwynn,
putting his head in, and holding some letters
towards her. " Your aunt ought to have
forwarded them. I brought them up at
once. And there is nearly an hour to post
time, and she won't expect you to comedown

till then. I think the headache will be
better now, eh ? "

He nodded kindly at her, and closed the
door again. Ruth sat down mechanically,
and began to sort the packet he had put into
her hands. The first three letters were in
the same handwriting, Dare's large v^eue
handwriting that ran from one end of the
envelope to the other, and partly hid itself
under the stamp.

She looked at them, but did not open
them. A feeling of intense lassitude and
fatigue had succeeded to the unconscious
excitement of the morning. She could not
read them now. They must wait with the
others. Presently she could feel an interest
in them ; not now

She leaned her head upon her hand, and a
rush of pity swept away every other feeling
as she recalled that last look at Stoke
Moreton, and how Charles had turned so
slowly and wearily to go indoors. There
was an ache at her heart as she thought of

him, a sense of regret and loss. And he had
loved her all the time !

"If I had only known ? " she said to
herself, pressing her hands against her forehead.
'' But how could I tell — how could I
tell ! "

She raised her head with a sudden movement,
and began with nervous fingers to open
Dare's letters, and read them carefully.

CHAPTER III.

Ix the long evening that followed Ruth's
departure from Stoke Moreton, Charles was
alone for once in his own home. He was
leaving again early on the morrow, but for
the time he was alone, and heavy at heart.
He sat for hours without stirring, looking
into the fire. He had no power or will to
control his thoughts. They wandered hither
and thither, and up and down, never for a
moment easing the dull miserable pain that
lay beneath them all.

Fool ! fool that he had been !

To have found her after all these years,
and to have lost her without a stroke ! To
have let another take her, and such a man as
Dare ! To have such a fool's manner that
he was thought to be in earnest when he

was least so ; that now, when his whole
future hung in the balance, retribution had
overtaken him, and with bitter Irony had
mocked at his earnestness and made it of
none effect. She had thought It was his
natural manner to all ! His cursed folly had
lost her to him. If she had known, surely it
would have been, it must have been different.
At heart Charles was a very humble man,
though it was not to be expected many
would think so ; but nevertheless he had a
deep, ever deepening consciousness (common
to the experience of the humblest once In a
lifetime), that between him and Ruth that
mysterious link of mutual understanding and
sympathy existed, which cannot be accounted
for, which eludes analysis, which yet makes,
when the sex happens to be identical, the
indissoluble friendship of a David and a
Jonathan, a Carlos and a Posa ; and where
there is a difference of sex, brings about that
rarest wonder of the world— a happy marriage.
Like cleaves to like. He knew she would

have loved him. She was his by right.
The same law of attraction which had lifted
them at once out of the dreary flats of ordinary
acquaintanceship, would have drawn them
ever close and closer together till they were
knit in one. He knew, with a certainty that
nothing could shake, that he could have
made her love him, even as he loved her ;
unconsciously at first, slowly perhaps, for the
current of strong natures, like that of deep
rivers, is sometimes slow. Still the end
would have been the same.

And he had lost her by his own act, by his
own heedless folly ; her want of vanity having
lent a hand the while to put her beyond his
reach for ever.

It was a bitter hour.

And as he sat late into the night beside
the fire, that died down to dust and ashes
before his absent eyes, ghosts of other heavy
hours, ghosts of the past which he had long
since buried out of his sight, came back and
would not be denied.

To live much in the past is a want of faith
in the Power that gives the present. Comparatively
few men walk through their lives
looking backwards. Women more frequently
do so from a false estimate of life, fostered
by romantic feeling in youth, which leads
them, if the life of the affections is ended,
resolutely to refuse to regard existence in
any other maturer aspect, and to persist in
wandering aimlessly forward, with eyes turned
ever on the dim flowery paths of former
days.

Let the dead past bury its dead."

But there comes a time, when the grass
has grown over those graves, when we may
do well to go and look at them once more ;
to stand once again in that solitary burial
ground, '' where," as an earnest man has said,
'' are buried broken vows, worn-out hopes,
joys blind and deaf, faiths betrayed or gone
astray, lost, lost love ; silent spaces where only
one mourner ever comes."

And to the least retrospective of us our

dead past yet speaks at times, and speaks as
one having authority.

Such a time had come for Charles now.
From the open grave of his love for Ruth
he turned to look at others by which he had
stood long ago, in grief as sharp, but which
yet in all its bitterness had never struck as
deep as this.

Memory pointed back to a time twenty
years ago, when he had hurried home through
a long summer night to arrive at Stoke
Moreton too late ; to find only the solemn
shadow of the mother whom he had loved,
and whom he had grieved ; too late to ask for
forgiveness ; too late for anything but a wild
passion of grief and remorse, and frantic self-accusation.


The scene shifted to ten years later. It
was a sultry July evening, the evening of the
day on which the woman whom he had loved
for years had married his brother. He was
standing on the deck of the steamer which
was taking him from England, looking back

at the grey town dwindling against the tawny-curtain
of the sunset. In his brain was a
wild clamour of wedding bells, and across
the water, marking the pulse of the sea, came
to his outward ears the slow tolling of a bell
on a sunken rock near the harbour mouth.

It seemed to be tolling for the death of all
that remained of o-ood in him. In losing
Evelyn, whom he had loved with all the
idealism and reverence of a reckless man fora
good woman, he believed, in the bitterness
of his spirit, that he had lost all ; that he had
been cut adrift from the last mooring to a
better future, that nothing could hold him
back now. And for a time it had been so,
and he had drowned his trouble in a sea in
which he well-nigh drowned himself as well.

Once more Memory pointed; pointed
across five dark years to an evening when he
had sat as he was sitting now, alone by the
wide stone hearth in the hall at Stoke Moreton,
after his father's death, and after the reading
of the will. He was the possessor of the old

home, which he had always passionately loved,
from which he had been virtually banished so
long. His father, who had never liked him,
but who of late years had hated him, as men
only hate their eldest sons, had left all in his
power to his second son, had entailed every
acre of the Stoke Moreton and other family
properties upon him and his children.
Charles could touch nothing, and over him
hung a millstone of debt, from which there
was now no escape. He sat with his head
in his hands, the man whom his friends were
envying on his accession to supposed wealth
and position — ruined.

A few days later he was summoned to
London by a man whom he had known for
many years. He remembered well that last
meeting with the stern old man whom he
had found sitting in his armchair with death
in his face. He had once or twice remonstrated
with Charles in earlier days, and ashe
came into his presence now for the last
time, and met his severe glance, he supposed,

with the callousness that comes from suffering
which has reached its lowest depths, that he
was about to rebuke him again.

'rand so," said General Marston sternly,
'' you have come into your kingdom ; into
wdiat you deserve."

Yes," said Charles. '' If It Is any pleasure
to you to know that what you prophesied on
several occasions has come true, you can
enjoy It. I am ruined."

You fool !" said the sick man slowly. '' To
have come to five and thirty, and to have
used up everything which makes life worth
having. I am not speaking only of money.
There Is a bankruptcy in your face that
money will never pay. And you had talent,
and a good heart, and the making of a man
in you once ! I saw that when your father
turned you adrift. I saw that when you were
at your worst after your brother s marriage.
Yes, you need not start. I knew your secret,
and kept it as well as you did yourself. I tried
to stop you ; but you went your own way."

Charles was silent. It was true, and he
knew It.

'rand so you thought, I suppose, that if
your father had made a just will you could
have retrieved yourself ? "

'' I know I could," said Charles firmly ;
'' but he left the — ■ — shire property to Ralph,
and every shilling of his capital ; and Ralph
had my mother's fortune already. I have
Stoke Moreton and the place in Surrey,
which he could not take from me, but everything
is entailed, down to the trees In the
park. I have nominally a large income ; but
I am In the hands of the Jews. I can't
settle with them as I expected, and they will
squeeze me to the uttermost. However, as
you say, I have the consolation of knowing I
brought In on myself."

'' And If your father had acted justly, as
you would call It, which I knew he never
would, you would have run through everything
In five years' time."

*' No, I should not. I know I have been

VOL. II. 23

a fool ; but there are two kinds of fools — the
kind that sticks to folly all its life, and the
kind that has Its fling, and has done with it.
I belong to the second kind. My father had
no right to take my last chance from me. If
he had left It me I should have used it."

You look tired of your fling," said the
elder man. '' Very tired. And you think
money would set you right, do you ? " He
looked critically at the worn, desperate face
opposite him. " I made my will the other
day," he went on, his eyes still fixed on
Charles. '' I had not much to leave, and I
have no near relations, so I divided it among
various charitable institutions. I see no
reason to alter my will. If one leaves money,
however small the sum may be, one likes to
think It has been left to some purpose, with
some prospect of doing good. A few days
ago I had a surprise. I fancy it was to be
my last surprise in this world. I inherited
from a distant relation, who died intestate, a
large fortune. After being a poor man all

my days, wealth comes to me when I am on
the point of going where money won't follow.
Curious, isn't it ? I am oroinof to leave this
second sum in the same spirit as the first, butin
rather a different manner. I like to know
what I am doing, so I sent for you. I am of
opinion that the best thing I can do with it,
is to set you on your legs again. What do
you owe ? "

Charles turned very red, and then very
white.

What do you owe ? " repeated the sick
man testily. '' I am getting tired. How
much is it ? " He got out a cheque-book,
and began filling it in. " Have you no
tongue ? " he said angrily, looking up. " Tell
me the exact figure. Well ? Keep nothing
back."

I won't be given the whole," said Charles
with an oath. '' Give me enough to settle
the Jews, and I will do the rest out of my
income. I won't o^et off scot free."

Well, then, have your own way as usual,

and name the sum you want. There, take It,"
he said feebly, when Charles had mentioned
with shame a certain hideous figure, '' and
go. I shall never know what you do with it,
so you can play ducks and drakes with it if
you like. But you won't like. You have
burned your fingers too severely to play with
fire again. You have turned over so many
new leaves that now you have come to the
last in the book. I have given you another
chance, Charles ; but one man can't do much
to help another. The only person who can
really help you is yourself. Give yourself a
chance, too."

How memory brought back every word of
that strange interview. Charles saw again
the face of the dying man ; heard again the
stern, feeble voice, '' Give yourself a chance."

He had even himself a chance. " Some
natures, like comets, make strange orbits,
and return from far." Charles had returned
at last. The old man's investment had been
a wise one. But as Charles looked back,

after three years, he saw that his friend had
been right. His money debts had been the
least part of what he owed. There were
other lone-standing accounts which he had
paid in full during these three years, paid in
the restless weariness and disappointment
that underlay his life, in the loneliness in
which he lived, in his contempt for all his
former pursuits, which had left him at first
devoid of any pursuits at all.

He had had, as was natural, very little
happiness in his life, but all the bitterness of
all his bitter past seemed as nothing to the
agony of this moment. He had loved
Evelyn with his imagination, but he loved
Ruth with his whole heart and soul, and — he
had lost her.

The nio^ht was far advanced. The dawn
was already making faint bars over the tops
of the shutters, was looking in at him as he
sat motionless by his dim lamp and his dead
fire. And, in spite of the growing dawn, it
was a dark hour.

CHAPTER IV.

Dare returned to Vaudois in the highest
spirits, with an enormous emerald engagement
ring in an inner waistcoat pocket. He
put it on Ruth's third finger a few days later,
under the ancient cedar on the terrace at
Vandon, a spot which, he informed her (for
he was not without poetic flights at times),
his inner consciousness associated with all
the love scenes of his ancestors that were no
more.

He was stricken to the heart when, after
duly admiring it, Ruth gently explained to
him that she could not wear his ring at
present, until her engagement was given
out.

*' Let it then be given out," he said impetuously.

''Ah! why already Is It not
given out ? "

She explained again, but It was difficult to
make him understand, and she felt conscious
that If he would have allowed her the
temporary use of one hand to release a fly,
which was loslne all self-control Inside her
veil, she might have been more lucid. As It
was, she at last made him realize the fact
that until Lord Polesworth's return from
America in November, no further step was
to be taken.

But all Is right," he urged with pride.
I have seen my lawyer ; I make a settlement.
I raise money on the property to
make a settlement. There is nothing I will
not do. I care for nothing only to marry
you.

Ruth led him to talk of other things. She
was very gentle with him, always attentive,
always ready to be interested ; but any one
less self-centred than Dare would have had
a miselvinof about her feeling for him. He

had none. Half his \i(q he had spent in
Paris, and, embued with French ideas of
betrothal and marriage, he thought her
manner at once exceedingly becoming and
natural. She was reserved, but reserve was
charming. She did not care for him very
much perhaps, as yet, but as much as she
could care for any one. Most men think
that if a woman does not attach herself to
them she is by nature cold. Dare was no
exception to the rule ; and though he would
have preferred that there should be less constraint
in their present intercourse, that she
would be a little more shy, and a little less
calm, still he was supremely happy and
proud, and only longed to proclaim the
fortunate state of his affairs to the world.

One thing about Ruth puzzled him very
much, and with a strange misgiving she saw
it did so. Her interest in the Vandon
cottages, and the schools, and the new pump,
had been most natural up to this time. It
had served to bring them together. But

now the use of these things was past, and
yet he observed, with incredulity at first and
astonishment afterwards, that she clung to
them more than ever.

What mattered it for the moment whether
the pump was put up or not, or whether the
cottages by the river were protected from
the floods ? Of course in time, for he had
promised, a vague something would be done ;
but why in the golden season of love and
plighted faith revert to prosaic subjects such
as these ?

Some men are quite unable to believe in
any act of a woman being genuine. They
always find out that it has something to do
with them. If an angel came down from
heaven to warn a man of this kind of wrath
to come, he would think the real object of
her journey was to make his acquaintance.

Ruth saw the incredulity in Dare's face
when she questioned him, and her heart sank
within her. It sank yet lower when she told
him one day, with a faint smile, that she

knew he was not rich, and that she wanted
him to let her help in the rebuilding of certain
cottages, the plans of which he had brought
over in the summer, but which had not
yet been begun, apparently for want of
funds.

** What you cannot do alone we can do
together," she said.

He agreed with effusion. He was surprised,
flattered, delighted ; but entirely
puzzled.

The cottages were begun immediately.
They were near the river, which divided the
Slumberleigh and Vandon properties. Ruth
often went to look at them. It did her good
to see them rising, strong and firm, though
hideous to behold, on higher ground than the
poor dilapidated hovels at the water s edge,
where fever was always breaking out, which
yet made, as they supported each other in
their crookedness, and leant over their own
wavering reflections, such a picturesque
sketch that it seemed a shame to supplant

them by such brand new red brick, such blue
tiling, such dreadful little porches.

Ruth drew the old condemned cottages,
With the long lines of pollarded marshy
meadow, and the distant bridge and mill in
the background, but it was a sketch she
never cared to look at afterwards. She was
constantly drawiuQf now. There was a
vaofue restlessness in her at this time that
made her take refuge in the world of nature,
where the mind can withdraw itself from
itself for a time into a stronghold where misgiving
and anxiety cannot corrupt, nor self
break through and steal. In these days she
shut out self steadfastly, and fixed her eyes
firmly on the future, as she herself had made
it with her own hands.

She had grown very grave of late. Dare's
high spirits had the effect of depressing her
more than she would allow, even to herself.
She liked him. She told herself so everyday,
and it was a pleasure to her to see him
so happy. But when she had accepted him

he was so diffident, so quiet, so anxious, that
she had not realized that he would return
to his previous happy self-confidence, his
volubility, his grey hats, in fact his former
gay self directly his mind was at ease and
he had got what he wanted. She saw at
once that the chancre was natural, but she
found it difficult to keep pace with, and the
effort to do so was a constant strain.

She had yet to learn that it is hard to
live for those who live for self. Between
a nature which struggles, however feebly,
towards a higher life, and one whose sole
object is gracefully and good-naturedly, but
persistently to enjoy itself, there is a great
gulf fixed, of which often neither are aware,
until they attempt a close relationship with
each other, when the chasm reveals itself
with appalling clearness to the higher nature
of the two.

Ruth was glad when a long-standing
engagement to sing at a private concert in
one place, and sell modern knickknacks in old

English costume at another, took her from
Slumberlelgh for a week. She looked forward
to the dreary dissipation in store for her with
positive gladness ; and when the week had
passed, and she was returning once more,
she wished the stations would not fly so
quickly past, that the train would not hurry
itself so unnecessarily to bring her back to
Slumberleigh.

As the little local line passed Stoke
Moreton station she looked out for a
moment, but leaned back hurriedly as she
caught a glimpse of the Dangers' omnibus in
the background, with its great black horses,
and a footman with a bag standing on the
platform. In another moment Mrs. Alwynn,
followed by the footman, made a dart at
Ruth's carriage, jumped in, seized the bag,
repeated voluble thanks, pressed half her
gaily dressed person out again through the
window to ascertain that her boxes were put
in the van, caught her veil in the ventilator
as the train started, and finally precipitated

herself Into a seat on her bag, as the motion
destroyed her equilibrium.

'' Well, Aunt Fanny ! " said Ruth.

Why, goodness gracious, my dear, if it
Isn't you ! And, now I think of it, you were
to come home to-day. Well, how oddly
things fall out to be sure, me getting into
your carriage like that. And you'll never
guess, Ruth, though for that matter there's
nothing so very astonishing about It, as I
told Mrs. Thursby, you'll never guess where
Tzjc been visiting."

Ruth remembered seeing the Dangers'
omnibus at the station, and suddenly remembered
too, a certain request which she had
once made of Charles.

*' Where can It have been ? " she said, with
a great show of curiosity.

You will never guess," said Mrs. Alwynn,
in high glee. '' I shall have to help you.
You remember my sprained ankle ? There !
Now I have as good as told you."

But Ruth would not spoil her aunt's

pleasure ; and after numerous guesses, Mrs.
Alwynn had the delight of taking her completely
by surprise, when at last she leaned
forward and said, with a rustle of pride,
emphasizing each word with a pat on Ruth's
knee —

I've been to Stoke Moreton."

How delightful ! " ejaculated Ruth. '' How
astonished I am ! Stoke Moreton ! "

*' You may well say that," said Mrs.
Alwynn, nodding to her. '' Mrs. Thursby
would not believe it at first, and afterwards
she said she was afraid there would not be
any party ; but there was, Ruth. There was a
married couple, very nice people, of the name
of Reynolds. I dare say, being London
people, you may have known them. She had
quite the London look about her, though not
dressed low of an evening ; and he was a
clergyman, who had overworked himself, and
had come down to Stoke Moreton to rest,
and had soup at luncheon. And there was
another person besides, a Colonel Middleton,

a very clever man, who wrote a book that
was printed, and had been in India, and was
altogether most superior. We were three
gentlemen and two ladies, but we had ices
each night, Ruth, two kinds of Ices ; and the
second night I wore my ruby satin, and the
clergyman at Stoke Moreton, that nice young
Mr. Brown, who comes to your uncle's
chapter meetings, dined, with his sister, a
very pleasing person Indeed, Ruth, In black.
In fact, it was a very pleasant little gathering,
so nice and informal, and the footmen did not
wait at luncheon, just put the pudding and
the hot plates down to the fire ; and Sir
Charles so chatty and so full of his jokes, and
I always like to hear him, though my scent
of humour is not quite the same as his. Sir
Charles has a feeling heart, Ruth. You
should have heard Mr. Reynolds talk about
him. But he looked very thin and pale, my
dear, and he seemed to be always so tired,
but still as pleasant as could be. And I told
him he wanted a wife to look after him, and

I advised him to have an egg beaten up in
ever such a Httle drop of brandy at eleven
o'clock, and he said he would think about it,
he did indeed, Ruth ; so I just went quietly
to the housekeeper and asked her to see
about it, and a very sensible person she was,
Ruth, been in the family twenty years, and
thinks all the world of Sir Charles, and
showed me the damask table cloths that
were used for the prince's visit, and the
white satin coverlet, embroidered with gold
thistles, quite an heirloom, which had been
worked by the ladies of the house when
James I. slept there. Think of that, my
dear ! "

And so Mrs. Alwynn rambled on, recounting
how Charles had shown her all the
pictures himself, and the piazza where the
orange and myrtle trees were, and how she
and Mrs. Reynolds had gone for a drive
together, " in a beautiful landau," etc., etc.,
till they reached home.

As a rule Ruth rather shrank from travel-vol.

II. 24

ling with Mrs. Alwynn, who always journeyed
in her best clothes, "because you never know
whom you may not meet." To stand on a
platform with her was to be made conspicuous,
and Ruth generally found herself unconsciously
going into half mourning for the day,
when she went anywhere by rail with her
aunt. To-day Mrs. Alwynn was more gaily
dressed than ever, but as Ruth looked at her
beaming face she felt nothing but a strange
pleasure in the fact that Charles had not forgotten
the little request which later events
had completely effaced from her own memory.
He, it seemed, had remembered, and in spite
of what had passed, had done what she asked
him. She wished that she could have told
him she was grateful. Alas ! There were
other things that she wished she could have
told him ; that she was sorry she had misjudged
him ; that she understood him better
now. But what did it matter ! What did
it matter ! She was going to marry Dare,
and he was the person whom she must

try to understand for the remainder of
her natural Hfe. She thought a little wearily
that she could understand Jiiin without
trying.

CHAPTER V.

The 1 8th of October had arrived. Slumber-leigh
Hall was filling. The pheasants,
reprieved till then, supposed it was only for
partridge shooting, and thinking no evil, ate
Indian corn, and took no thought for the
annual St. Bartholomew of their race.

Mabel Thursby had met Ruth out walking
that day, and had informed her that Charles
was to be one of the guns, also Dare, though,
as she remembered to add, suspecting Dare
admired Ruth, the latter was a bad shot, and
was only asked out of neighbourly feeling.

After parting with Mabel, Ruth met, almost
at her own gate, Ralph Dangers, who passed
her on horseback, and then turned on recognizing
her. Ralph conversational powers

were not great, and though he walked his
horse beside her, he chiefly contented himself
with assenting Ruth's remarks until
< >

she asked after iNIoUy.

He at once whistled, and flicked a fly off
his horse's neck.

Sad business with ]wholly," he said ; '' and
mother out for the day. Great grief in the
nursery. \^ic's dead ! "

Oh, poor wholly ! "

Died this morning. Fits. I say," with
a sudden inspiration, '* you wouldn't go over
and cheer her up, would you ? ]^I other's
out. I'm out. magistrates' meeting at
D ."

Ruth said she had nothing to do, and
would go over at once, and Ralph nodded
kindly at her, and rode on. He liked her,
and it never occurred to him that it could be
anything but a privilege to minister to any
need of Molly's. He jogged on more happily
after his meeting with Ruth, and only remembered
half an hour later that he had completely

forgotten to order the dog-cart to
meet Charles, who was coming to Atherton
for a night before he went on to kill
the Slumberleigh pheasants the following
morning.

Ruth set out at once over the pale stubble
fields, glad of an object for a walk.

Deep distress reigned meanwhile in the
nursery at Atherstone. Vic, the much-beloved,
the stoat pursuer, the would-be
church goer, Vic was dead, and Molly's soul
refused comfort. In vain nurse conveyed a
palpitating guinea pig into the nursery in a
bird cage, on the narrow door of which
remains of fur showed an unwilling entrance ;
Molly could derive no comfort from guinea
pigs.

In vain was the new horse, with leather
hoofs, with real hair, and a horsehair tail —
in vain was that token of esteem from Uncle
Charles brought out of its stable, and unevenly
yoked with a dappled pony planted
on a green oval lawn, into Molly's own hay

cart. Molly's woe was beyond the reach of
hay carts, or horsehair tails, however realistic.
Like Hezekiah, she turned her face to the
nursery wall, on which trains and railroads
were depicted ; and even when cook herself
rose up out of her kitchen to comfort
her with material consolations, she refused
the mockery of a gingerbread nut, which
could not restore the friend with whom
previous gingerbread nuts had always been
divided.

Presently a step came along the passage,
and Charles, who had found no one in the
drawing-room, came in tired and dusty, and
inclined to be annoyed at having had to walk
up from the station.

Molly flew to him, and flung her arms
tightly round his neck.

'' Oh, Uncle Charles ! Uncle Charles !
Vic is dead ! "

'' I am so sorry, Molly," taking her on his
knee.

Nurse and the nursery maid and cook

withdrew, leaving the two mourners alone
together.

''He is dead. Uncle Charles. He was
quite well, and eating Albert biscuits with

the dolls this morning, and now " The

rest was too dreadful, and Molly burst into a
flood of tears, and burrowed with her head
against the faithful waistcoat of Uncle
Charles — Uncle Charles, the friend, the consoler
of all the ills that Molly had so far
been heir to.

'vic had a very happy life, Molly," said
Charles, pressing the little brown head
against his cheek, and vaguely wondering
what it would be like to have any one to turn
to in time of trouble.

I always kept trouble from him, except
that time I shut him in the door," gasped
Molly. " I never took him out in a string, and
he only wore his collar — that collar you gave
him, that made him scratch so — on Sundays."

And he was not ill a long time. He did
not suffer any pain."

No, Uncle Charles, not much ; but though
he did not say anything, his face looked
worse than screaming, and he passed away
very stiff in his hind legs. Oh ! " (with a fresh
outburst), " when cook told me that her sister
that was in a decline had gone, I never
thought," (sob, sob !) " poor Vic would be the
next.

A step came along the passage, a firm
light step that Charles knew, that made his
heart beat violently.

The door opened and a familiar voice said —

'' Molly ! My poor Molly ! I met father,
and "

Ruth stood in the doorway, and stopped
short. A wave of colour passed over her
face, and left it paler than usual.

Charles looked at her over the mop of
Molly's brown head against his breast. Their
grave eyes met, and each thought how ill
the other looked.

I did not know — I thought you were
going to Slumberleigh to-day," said Ruth.

** I go tomorrow morning," replied Charles.
I came here first."

There was an awkward silence ; but Molly
came to their relief by a sudden rush at
Ruth, and a repetition of the details of the
death-bed scene of poor Vic for her benefit,
for which both were grateful.

You ouQ^ht to be thlnkinof where he Is to
be burled, Molly," suggested Charles, when
she had finished. " Let us go into the
garden and find a place."

Molly revived somewhat at the prospect of
a funeral, and, though Ruth was anxious to
leave her with her uncle, Insisted on her
remaining for the ceremony. They went
out together, Molly holding a hand of each,
to choose a suitable spot In the garden. By
the time the grave had been dug by Charles,
Molly was sufficiently recovered to take a
lively Interest In the proceedings, and to
insist on the attendance of the stable cat, in
deep mourning, when the remains of poor
Vic, arrayed In his best collar, were lowered
into their long home.

By the time the last duties to the dead had
been performed, and Charles, under Molly's
direction, had planted a rose tree on the
grave, while Ruth surrounded the little
mound with white pebbles, Molly's tea-time
had arrived, and that young lady allowed
herself to be led away b}^ the nursery maid,
with the stable cat in a close embrace,
resigned, and even cheerful at the remembrance
of those creature comforts of cook's,
which earlier in the day she had refused so
peremptorily.

When wholly left them, Ruth and Charles
walked together in silence to the garden
gate which led to the footpath over the fields
by which she had come. Neither had a
word to say, who formerly had so much.

'' Good-bye," she said, without looking at
him.

He seemed Intent on the hasp of the gate.

There was a moment's pause.

I should like," said Ruth, hating herself
for the formality of her tone, '' to thank you

before I go for giving Mrs. Alwynn so much
pleasure. She still talks of her visit to you.
It was kind of you to remember it. So
much seems to have happened since then,
that I had not thought of it again."

At her last words Charles raised his eyes
and looked at her with strange wistful intentness,
but when Ruth had finished speaking
he had no remark to make in answer ;
and as he stood bareheaded by the gate,
twirling the hasp and looking, as a hasty
glance told her, so worn and jaded in the
sunshine, she said '' Good-bye " again, and
turned hastily away.

And all along the empty harvested fields,
and all along the lanes, where the hips and
haws grew red and stiff among the ruddy
hedgerows, Ruth still saw Charles's grave
worn face.

That night she saw it still, as she sat in
her own room, and listened to the whisper
of the rain upon the roof, and the touch of
its myriad fingers on the window-panes.

'' I cannot bear to see him look like that.
I cannot bear it," she said suddenly, and the
Storm which had been catherine so lone, the
clouds of which had darkened the sky for so
many days, broke at last, with a strong and
mighty wind of swift emotion which carried
all before it.

It was a relief to give way, to let the
tempest do its worst, and remain passive.
But when its force was spent at last, and it
died away in gusts and flying showers, it left
flood and wreckage and desolation behind.
When Ruth raised her head and looked
about her, all her landmarks were gone.
There was a streaming glory in the heavens,
but It shone on the ruin of all her little world
below. She loved Charles, and she knew it.
It seemed to her now as if. though she had
not realized it, she must have loved him
from the first ; and with the knowledge came
an overwhelming sense of utter misery that
struck terror to her heart. She understood
at last the meaning of the weariness and the

restless misgivings of these last weeks. If
heretofore they had spoken in riddles, they
spoke plainly now. Every other feeling in
the world seemed to have been swept away
by a passion, the overwhelming strength of
which she regarded panic-stricken. She
seemed to have been asleep all her life, to
have stirred restlessly once or twice of late,
and now to have waked to consciousness and
ao-ony. Love, with women like Ruth, is a
great happiness or a great calamity. It is
with them indeed for better, for worse.

Those whose feelings lie below the surface
escape the hundred rubs and scratches which
superficial natures are heir to ; but it is the
nerve which is not easily reached which when
touched gives forth the sharpest pang. Nature,
when she gives intensity of feeling, mercifully
covers it well with a certain superficial coldness.
Ruth had sometimes wondered why
the incidents, the books, which called forth
emotion in others, passed her by. The
vehement passion which once or twice in her

life she had involuntarily awakened in others
had met with no response from herself. The
sight of the fire she had unwittingly kindled
only made her shiver with cold. She believed
herself to be cold — always a dangerous assumption
on the part of a woman, and apt
to prove a broken reed in emergency.

Charles knew her better than she knew
herself. Her pride and unconscious humble-mindedness,
her frankness with its underlying
reserve, spoke of a strong nature, slow,
perhaps, but earnest, constant, and, once
roused, capable of deep attachment.

And now the common lot had befallen her,
the common lot of man and womankind since
Adam first met Eve in the Garden of Eden.
Ruth was not exempt.

She loved Charles.

When the dawn came up pale and tearful
to wake the birds, it found her still sitting
by her window, sitting where she had sat all
night, looking with blank eyes at nothing.

Creep Into bed, Ruth, for already the sparrows
are all waking, and their cheerful greetings
to the new day add weariness to your weariness.
Creep into bed, for soon the servants
will be stirring, and before long Martha, who
has slept all night, and thinks your lines have
fallen to you in pleasant places and late hours,
will bring the hot water.

CHAPTER VI.

Reserved people pay dear for their reserve
when they are in trouble, when the iron
enters into their soul, and their eyes meet
the eyes of the world tearless, unflinching,
making no sign.

Enviable are those whose sorrows are only
pen and ink deep, who take every one into
their confidence, who are comforted by sympathy,
and fly to those who will weep with
them. There is an utter solitude, a silence
in the grief of a proud, reserved nature which
adds a frightful weight to its intensity ; and
when the night comes, and the chamber door
is shut, who shall say what agonies of prayers
and tears, what prostrations of despair pass
like waves over the soul, to make the balance
even ?
VOL. II. . 25

As a rule, the kindest and best of people
seldom notice any alteration of appearance
or manner in one of their own family. A
stranger points it out, if it ever is pointed
out, which happily is not often, unless, of
course, in cases where advice has been disregarded,
and the first symptom of ill-health
is jealously watched for, and triumphantly
hailed, by those whose mission in life it is
to say, " I told you so."

Mrs. Alwynn, whose own complaints were
of so slight a nature that they had to be
constantly referred to to give them any importance
at all, was not likely to notice that
Ruth's naturally pale complexion had become
several degrees too pale during the last two
days, or that she had dark rings under her
eyes. Besides, only the day before, had not
Mrs. Alwynn, in cutting out a child's shirt,
cut out at the same time her best drawing-room
table cloth as well, which calamity had
naturally driven out of her mind every other
subject for the time.

Ruth had proved unsympathetic, and Mrs.
Alwynn had felt her to be so. The next
day, also, when Mrs. Alwynn had begun to
talk over what she and Ruth were to wear
that evening at a dinner-party at Slumber-leigh
Hall, Ruth had again shown a decided
want of interest, and was not even to be
roused by the various conjectures of her aunt,
though repeated over and over again, as to
who would most probably take her in to
dinner, who would be assigned to Mr. Alwynn,
and whether Ruth would be taken in by a
married man or a single one. As it was
quite impossible absolutely to settle these
interesting points beforehand, Mrs. Alwynn's
mind had a vast field for conjecture opened
to her, in which she disported herself at will,
varying the entertainment for herself and
Ruth by speculating as to who would sit on
the other side of each of them ; " for," as she
justly observed, " everybody has two sides,
my dear ; and though, for my part, I can talk
to anybody — Members of Parliament, or

bishops, or any one — still it is difficult for a
young person ; and if you feel dull, Ruth,
you can always turn to the person on the
other side with some easy little remark."

Ruth rose and went to the window. It
had rained all yesterday ; it had been raining
all the morning to-day, but it was fair now ;
nay, the sun was sending out long burnished
shafts from the broken grey and blue of the
sky. She was possessed by an unreasoning
longing to get out of the house into the open
air — anywhere, no matter where, beyond the
reach of Mrs. Alwynn's voice. She had
been fairly patient with her for many months,
but during these two last wet days a sense of
sudden miserable irritation would seize heron
the slightest provocation, which filled her
with remorse and compunction, but into
which she would relapse at a moment's notice.
Every morning since her arrival, nine months
ago, had Mrs. Alwynn returned from her
housekeeping with the same cheerful bustle,
the same piece of information — " Well, Ruth,

I've ordered dinner, my dear. First one
duty, and then another ! "

Why had that innocent and not unfamiliar
phrase become so intolerable when she heard
it again this morning ? And when Mrs.
Alwynn wound up the musical-box, and the
'' Buffalo Girls " tinkled on the ear to relieve
the monotony of a wet morning, why should
Ruth have struggled wildly for a moment
with a sudden inclination to laugh and cry
at the same time, which resulted in two large
tears falling unexpectedly, to her surprise
and shame, upon her book ?

She shut the book, and recovering herself
with an effort, listened patiently to Mrs.
Alwynn's remarks, until, early in the afternoon,
the sky cleared. Making some excuse
about going to see her old nurse at the lodge
at Arleigh, who was still ill, she at last
effected her escape out of the room, and out
of the house.

The air was fresh and clear, though cold.
The familiar fields and beaded hedgerows,

the red land, new ploughed, where the plovers
hovered, the grey broken sky above, soothed
Ruth like the presence of a friend, as Nature,
even in her commonest moods, has ministered
to many an one who has loved her before
Ruth's time.

Our human loves partake always of the
nature of speculations. We have no security
for our capital (which, fortunately, is seldom
so large as we suppose), but the love of
Nature is a sure investment, which she
repays a thousandfold, which she repays
most prodigally when the heart is bankrupt
and full of bitterness, as Ruth's heart was
that day. For in Nature, as Wordsworth
says, '' there is no bitterness," that worst
sting of human grief. And as Ruth walked
among the quiet fields, and up the yellow
aisles of the autumn glades to Arleigh, Nature
spoke of peace to her — not of joy or of
happiness as in old days, for she never lies,
as human comforters do, and these had gone
out of her life ; but of the peace that duty

Steadfastly adhered to will bring at last ; the
peace that after much turmoil will come in
the end to those who, amid a babel of louder
tongues, hear and obey the low-pitched voices
of conscience and of principle.

For it never occurred to Ruth for a
moment to throw over Dare and marry
Charles. She had given her word to Dare,
and her word was her bond. It was as
much a matter of being true to herself as
to him. It was very simple. There were
no two ways about it in her mind. The
idea of breaking off her engagement was
not to be thought of. It would be dishonourable.


We often think that if we had been placed
in the same difficulties which we see overwhelm
others, we could have got out of them.
Just so ; we might have squeezed, or wriggled,
or crept out of a position from which another
who would not stoop could not have escaped.
People are differently constituted. Most
persons with common sense can sink their

principles temporarily at a pinch ; but others
there are who go through life prisoners on
parole to their sense of honour or duty. If
escape takes the form of a temptation, they
do not escape. And Ruth, walking with
bent head beneath the swaying trees, dreamed
of no escape.

She soon reached the little lodge, the rusty
gates of which barred the grass-grown drive
to the shuttered, tenantless old house at a
little distance. It was a small grey stonehouse
of many gables, and low lines of
windows, that if inhabited would have
possessed but little charm, but which in its
deserted state had a certain pathetic interest.
The place had been to let for years, but no
one had taken it ; no one was likely to take
it in the disrepair which was now fast sliding
into ruin.

The garden beds were almost grown over
with weeds, but blots of nasturtium colour
showed here and there among the ragged
green, and a Virginia creeper had done its

gorgeous red-and-yellow best to cheer the
grey stone walls. But the place had a dreary
appearance even in the present sunshine ;
and, after looking at it for a moment, Ruth
went indoors to see her old nurse. After
sitting with her, and reading the usual
favourite chapter in the big Bible, and
answering the usual question of '' any news
of Master Raymond " in the usual way, Ruth
got up to go, and the old woman asked her
if she wanted the drawing-block which she
had left with her some time ago, with an
unfinished sketch on it of the stables. She
got it out, and Ruth looked at it. It was a
slight sketch of an octagonal building with
wide arches all round it, roofing in a paved
path, on which, in days gone by, it had
evidently been the pernicious custom to exercise
the horses, whose stalls and loose boxes
formed the centre of the building. The
stable had a certain quaintness, and the
sketch was at that delightful point when no
random stroke has as yet falsified the promise

that a finished drawing, however clever, so
seldom fulfils.

Ruth took It up, and looked out of the
window. The sun was blazing out, ashamed
of his absence for so long. She might as
well finish it now. She was glad to be out
of the way of meeting any one, especially the
shooters, whose guns she had heard in the
nearer Slumberleigh coverts several times
that afternoon. The Arleigh woods she
knew were to be kept till later in the month.
She took her block and paint-box, and picking
her way along the choked gravel walk
and down the side drive to the stables, sat
down on the bench for chopping wood which
had been left in the place to which she had
previously dragged it, and set to work. She
was sitting under one of the arches out of
the wind, and an obsequious yellow cat came
out of the door of one of the nearest horse-boxes
in which wood was evidently stacked,
and rubbed Itself against her dress, with a
reckless expenditure of hair.

As Ruth Stopped a moment, bored but
courteous, to return its well-meant attentions
by friction behind the ears, she heard
a slight crackling among the wood in the
stable. Rats abounded in the place, and
she was just about to recall the cat to its
professional duties, when her own attention
was also distracted. She started violently,
and grasped the drawing-block in
both hands.

Clear over the gravel, muffled but still distinct
across the long wet grass, she could
hear a firm step coming. Then it rang out
sharply on the stone pavement. A tall man
came suddenly round the corner, under the
archway, and stood before her. It was
Charles.

The yellow cat, which had a leaning
towards the aristocracy, left Ruth, and picking
its way daintily over the round stones towards
him, rubbed off some more of its wardrobe
against his heather shooting stockings.

I hardly think it is worth while to say

anything except the truth," said Charles at
last. " I have followed you here."

As Ruth could say nothing in reply, it was
fortunate that at the moment she had nothing
to say. She continued to mix a little pool
of Prussian blue and Italian pink without
looking up.

I hurt my gun hand after luncheon, and
had to stop shooting at Croton corner. As
I went back to Slumberleigh, across the
fields below the Rectory, I thought I saw
you in the distance, and followed you."

Is your hand much hurt ? " — with sudden
anxiety.

No," said Charles, reddening a little.
'rit will stop my shooting for a day or two,
but that is all."

The colours were mixed again. Ruth,
contrary to all previous conviction, added
light red to the Italian pink. The sketch
had gone rapidly from bad to worse, but the
light red finished it off. It never, so to
speak, held up its head again ; but I believe

she has it still somewhere, put away in a
locked drawer in tissue paper, as if it were
very valuable.

I did not come without a reason," said
Charles, after a long pause, speaking with
difficulty. " It is no good beating about the
bush. I want to speak to you again about
what I told you three weeks ago. Have you
forgotten what that was ? "

Ruth shook her head. Sie had not forgotten.
Her hand began to tremble, and he
sat down beside her on the bench, and taking
the brush out of her hand, laid it in its box.

Ruth," he said gently, " I have not been
very happy during the last three weeks, but
two days ago, when I saw you again, I
thought you did not look as if you had been
very happy either. Am I right ? Are you

happy in your engagement with ? Quite

content ? Quite satisfied ? Still silent. Am
I to have no answer ? "

*' Some questions have no answers," said
Ruth steadily, looking away from him. '' At

least, the questions that ought not to be
asked have none."

I will not ask any more, then. Perhaps,
as you say, I have no right. You won't tell
me whether you are unhappy, but your face
tells me so in spite of you. It told me so
two days ago, and I have thought of it every
hour of the day and night since."

She gathered herself together for a final
effort to stop what she knew was coming,
and said desperately —

*' I don't know how it is. I don't mean it,
and yet everything I say to you seems so
harsh and unkind ; but I think it would have
been better not to come here, and I think it
would be better, better for us both, if you
would go away now."

Charles's face became set and very white.
Then he put his fortune to the touch.

'' You are right," he said. " I will go away
for good ; I will never trouble you again,
when you have told me that you do not
love me."

The colour rushed Into her face, and then
died slowly away again, even out of the
tightly compressed lips.

There was a long silence, in which he
waited for a reply that did not come. At
last she turned and looked him in the face.
Who has said that light eyes cannot be impassioned
? Her deep eyes, dark with the
utter blankness of despair, fell before the
intensity of his. He leant towards her, and
with gentle strength put his arm round her,
and drew her to him. His voice came ina
broken whisper of passionate entreaty close
to her ear.

'* Ruth, I love you, and you love me. We
behoof to each other. We were made for
each other. Life is not possible apart. It
must be together, Ruth, always together,

always " and his voice broke down

entirely.

Surely he was right. A love such as theirs
overrode all petty barriers of every-day right
and wrong, and was a law unto Itself. Surely

It was vain to struggle against Fate, against
the soft yet mighty current which was sweeping
her away beyond all landmarks, beyond
the sight of land itself, out towards an infinite
sea.

And the eyes she loved looked into hers
with an agony of entreaty, and the voice she
loved spoke of love, spoke brokenly of unworthiness,
and an unhappy past, and of a
brighter future, a future with her.

Her brain reeled. Her reason had gone.
Let her yield now. Surely, if only she could
think, if the power to think had not deserted
her, it was right to yield. The current was
taking her ever swifter whither she knew
not. A moment more and there would be
no going back.

She began to tremble, and wrenching her
hands out of his, pressed them before her
eyes to shut out the sight of the earnest face
so near her own. But she could not shut
out his voice, and Charles's voice could be
very gentle, very urgent.

But at the eleventh hour another voice
broke In on his, and spoke as one having
authority. Conscience, if accustomed to be
disregarded on common occasions, will rarely
come to the fore with any decision in emergency
; but the weakest do not put him ina
place of command all their lives without
at least one result, that he has got the habit
of speaking up and making himself attended
to in time of need. He spoke now, urgently,
imperatively. Her judgment, her reason
were alike gone for the time, but when she
had paced the solemn aisles of the woods an
hour ago in possession of them, had she then
even thought of doing what she was on the
verge of doing now ? What had happened
during that hour to reverse the steadfast
resolve which she had made then ? What
she had thought right an hour ago remained
right now. What she would have put far
from her as dishonourable then, remained
dishonourable now, though she might be too
insane to see it.

VOL. II. 26

Terror seized her, as of one In a dream
who is conscious of impending danger, and
struggles to awake before it is too late.
She started to her feet, and putting forcibly
aside the hands that would have held her
back, walked unsteadily towards the nearest
pillar, and leaned against it, trembling
violently.

*' Do not tempt me," she said hoarsely.
'' I cannot bear it."

He came and stood beside her.
I do not tempt you," he said. *' I want
to save you and myself from a great calamity
before It Is too late."

*' It Is too late already."
** No' said Charles, in a low voice of
intense determination. "It Is not — yet. It
will be soon. It Is still possible to go back.
You are not married to him, and It Is no
longer right that you should marry him. You
must give him up. There is no other
way."

*' Yes," said Ruth with vehemence.

There Is another way. You have made
me forget It ; but before you came I saw It
clearly. I can't think It out as I did then ;
but I know It Is there. There Is another
way," and her voice faltered ; '' to do what Is
right, and let everything else go."

Charles saw for the first time, with a
sudden frightful contraction of the heart, that
her will was as strong as his own. He had
staked everything on one desperate appeal to
her feelings ; he had carried the outworks,
and now another adversary — her conscience
rose up between him and her.

A marriage without love Is a sin," he
said quietly. " If you had lived In the world
as long as I have, and had seen what marriage
without love means, and what It generally
comes to In the end, you would know that
I am speaking the truth. You have no right
to marry Dare If you care for me. Hesitate,
and It will be too late ! Break off your
engagement now. Do you suppose," with
sudden fire, " that we shall cease to love each

Other, that I shall be able to cease to love
you for the rest of my life because you are
Dare's wife ? What is clone can't be undone.
Our love for each other can't. It is no good
shutting your eyes to that. Look the facts
in the face, and don't deceive yourself into
thinking that the most difficult course is
necessarily the right one."

He turned from her, and sat down on the
bench again, his chin in his hands, his
haggard eyes fastened on her face. He had
said his last word, and she felt that when she
spoke it would be her last word too. Neither
could bear much more.

"All you say sounds right — at first,' she
said, after a long silence, and as she spoke
Charles's hands dropped from his face and
clenched themselves together ; " but I cannot
go by what any one thinks unless I think so
myself as well. I can't take other people's
judgments. When God gave us our own, He
did not mean us to shirk using it. What you
say is right, but there is something which

after a little bit seems more rio^ht — at least,
which seems so to me. I cannot look at the
future. I can only see one thing distinctly,
now in the present, and that is that I cannot
break my word. I never have been able to
see that a woman's word is less binding thana
man's. When I said I would marry him, it
was of my own free will. I knew what I
was doing, and it was not only for his sake
I did it. It is not as if he believed I cared
for him very much. Then, perhaps — but he
knows I don't, and — he is different from
other men — he does not seem to mind. I
knew at the time that I accepted him for the
sake of other things, which are just the same
now as they were then ; because he was poor
and I had money ; because I felt sure he
would never do much by himself, and I
thought I could help him, and my money
would help too ; because the people at
Vandon are so wretched, and their cottages
are tumbling down, and there is no one who
lives among them and cares about them. I

can't make it clear, and I did hesitate ; but at
the time it seemed wrong to hesitate. If it
seemed so right then, it cannot be all wrong
now, even if it has become hard. I cannot
give it all up. He is building cottages that
I am to pay for, that I asked to pay for. He
cannot. And he has promised so many
people their houses shall be put in order, and
they all believe him. And he can't do it. If
I don't, it will not be done ; and some of
them are very old — and — and the winter is
coming." Ruth's voice had become almost

o

inaudible. " Oh, Charles ! Charles ! " she
said brokenly. " I cannot bear to hurt you.
God knows I love you. I think I shall
always love you, though I shall try not.
But I cannot go back now from what I have
undertaken. I cannot break my word. I
cannot do what is wrong, even for you. Oh,
God ! not even for you ! "

She knelt down beside him, and took his
clenched hands between her own ; but he did
not stir.

'' Not even for you," she whispered, while
two hot tears fell upon his hands. In another
moment she had risen swiftly to her feet, and
had left him.

CHAPTER VII.

Charles sat quite still where Ruth had left
him, looking straight in front of him. He
had not thought for a moment of following
her, of speaking to her again. Her decision
was final, and he knew it. And now he also
knew how much he had built upon the wild
new hope of the last two days.

Presently a slight discreet cough broke
upon his ear, apparently close at hand.

He started up, and wheeling round in the
direction of the sound, called out in sudden
anger, " Who is there ? "

If there is a time when we feel that a
fellow-creature is entirely out of harmony
with ourselves, it is when we discover that he
has overheard or overseen us at a moment

when we imagined we were alone, or — almost
alone.

Charles was furious.

Come out ! " he said in a tone that would
have made any ordinary creature stay as far
in as it could. And hearing a slight crackling
in the nearest horse-box, of which the door
stood open, he shook the door violently.

'come out," he repeated, "this instant!"

Stop that noise, then," said a voice
sharply from the inside, " and keep quiet.

By , a violent temper, what a thing it

is ; always raising a dust, and kicking up a
row, just when it's least wanted."

The voice made Charles start.

Great God ! " he said, " it's not ? "

"Yes, it is," was the reply; "and when
you have taken a seat on the further end of
that bench, and recovered your temper, I'll
show, but not before."

Charles walked to the bench and sat
down.

You can come out," he said in a carefully

lowered voice, in which there was contempt
as well as anger.

Accordingly there was a little more
crackling among the faggots, and a slight,
shabbily dressed man came to the door, and
peered warily out, shading his blinking eyes
with his hand.

If there is a things I hate," he said with
a curious mixture of recklessness and anxiety,
'' it is a noise. Sit so that you face the left,
will you, and I'll look after the right, and if
you see any one coming you may as well
mention it. I am only at home to old
friends."

He took his hand from his eyes as they
became more accustomed to the light, and
showed a shrewd, dissipated face, that yet
had a kind of ruined good look about it,
and, what was more hateful to Charles than
anything else, a decided resemblance to Ruth.
Though he was shabby in the extreme, his
clothes sat upon him as they always and only
do sit upon a gentleman ; and though his face

and voice showed that he had severed himself
effectually from the class in which he had
been born, a certain unsuitability remained
between his appearance and his evidently
disreputable circumstances. When Charles
looked at him he was somehow reminded of

a broken-down thoroughbred in a hansom

< >

cab.

It is a quiet spot," remarked Raymond
Deyncourt, for he it was, standing in the
doorway, his watchful eyes scanning the deserted
courtyard and strip of green. " A
retired and a peaceful spot. I'm sorry if my
cough annoyed you, coming when it did, but
I thought you seemed before to be engaged
in conversation, which I felt a certain diffidence
in interrupting."

'' So you listened, I suppose ? "

Yes, I listened. I did not hear as much
as I could have wished, but it was your best
manner, Dangers. You certainly have a
gift, though you dropped your voice unnecessarily
once or twice, I thought. If I had had

your talents I should not be here now. Eh ?
Dear me ! you can swear still, can you ?
How refreshing. I fancied you had quite
reformed."

Why are you here now ? " asked Charles
sternly.

Raymond shrugged his shoulders.

Why are you here ? " continued Charles
bitterly, "when you swore to me in July that
if I would pay your passage out again to
America you would let her alone in future ?
Why are you here, when I wrote to tell you
that she had promised me she would never
give you money again without advice ? But
I might have known you could break a
promise as easily as make one. I might
have known you would only keep it as long
as it suited yourself."

'well, now, I'm glad to hear you say
that," said Raymond airily, " because it takes
off any feeling of surprise I was afraid you
might feel at seeing me back here. There's
nothing like a brood understanding: between

friends. I'm precious hard up, I can tell
you, or I should not have come ; and when
a fellow has got into as tight a place as I
have, he has got to think of other things
besides keeping promises. Have you seen
to-day s papers ? " — with sudden eagerness.

'' Yes."

'' Any news about the Frisco forgery
case ? " and Raymond leaned forward through
the door, and spoke in a whisper.

Nothing much," said Charles, trying to
recollect. " Nothing new to-day, I think.
You know they got one of them two days
ago, followed him down to Birmingham, and
took him in the train."

Raymond drew in his breath.

I don't hold with trains," he said after a
pause ; '' at least, not with passengers. I
told him as much at the time. And the —
the other one — Stephens ? Any news of
him ? "

** Nothing more about him, as far as I can
remember. They were both traced together

from Boston to London, but there they parted
company. Stephens is at large still."

Is he ? " said Raymond. " By George,
Fm glad to hear it. I hope he'll keep so,
that's all. I'm glad I left that fool. He'd
not my notions at all. We split two days
ago, and I made tracks for the old diggings ;
got down as far as Carbury under a tarpaulin
in a goods train — there's some sense in a
goods train — and then lay close by a weir of
the canal, and got aboard a barge after dark.
Nothing breaks a scent like a barge. And
it went the right way for my business too,
and travelled all night. I kept close all next
day, and then struck across country for this
place at night. If I hadn't known the lie of
the land from a boy, when I used to spend
the holidays with old Alwynn, I couldn't
have done it, or if I'd been as doo: lame as I
was in July ; but I was pushed for a time,
and I footed it up here, and got in just before
dawn. And not too soon either, for I'm
cleaned out, and food is precious hard to

come by if you don't care to go shopping for
it. I am only waiting till it's dark to go and
feet something from the old woman at the
lodge. She looked after me before, but it
wasn't so serious then as it is now."

'' It will be penal servitude for life this
time for — Stephens," said Charles.

'* Yes," said Raymond thoughtfully. " It's
playing deuced high. I knew that at the time,
but I thought it was worth it. It was a
beautiful thiuQ^, and there was a mint of
money in it, if it had gone straight — a mint
of money ; " and he shook his head regretfully.
'' But the luck is bound to change in
the end," he went on, after a moment of
mournful retrospection. " You'll see, I shall
make my pile yet, Dangers. One can't goon
turning up tails all the time."

You will turn them up once too often,"
said Charles, '' and get your affairs wound up
for you some day in a way you won't like.
But I suppose it's no earthly use my saying
anything."

'' Not much," replied the other. '' I guess
I've heard it all before. Don't you remember
how you held forth that night in the wood ?
You came out strong. I felt as if I were in
church ; but you forked out handsomely at
the collection afterwards. I will say that for
you."

'' And what are you going to do now you've
got here ? " interrupted Charles sharply.

Lie by."

How long ? "

'' Perhaps a week, perhaps ten days. Can't

'J
say.

'rand after that?"

'' After that, some one, I don't say who,
but some one will have to provide me with
the ' ready ' to nip across to France. I have
friends in Paris where I can manage to
scratch along for a bit till things have blown
over."

Charles considered for a few moments, and
then said —

'' Are you going to dun your sister for

money again, or give her another fright by
lying in wait for her ? Of course, if you
broke your word about coming back, you
might break it about trying to get money out
of her."

I might," assented Raymond ; " in fact, I
was on the point of making my presence
known to her, and suggesting a pecuniary
advance, when you came up. I don't know
at present what I shall do, as I let that
opportunity slip. It just depends."

Charles considered again.

It's a pity to trouble her, isn't it ? " said
Raymond, his shrewd eyes watching him,
and women are best out of money matters.
Besides, if she has promised you she won't
pay up without advice she'll stick to it.
Nothings will turn her when she once settles
on anything, if she is at all like what she
used to be. She has grot dollars of her own.
You had better settle with me, and pay yourself
back when you are married. Dear me !
There's no occasion to look so murderous.

VOL. n. 27

I suppose I'm at liberty to draw my own
conclusions."

You had better draw them a little more
carefully in future," said Charles savagely.
Your sister is engaged to be married to a
man without a sixpence."

** By George," said Raymond, '' that won't
suit my book at all. I'd rather" — with
another glance at Charles — '' I'd rather she'd
marry a man with money."

If Charles was of the same opinion he did
not express it. He remained silent for a
few minutes, to give weight to his last
remark, and then said slowly —

'' So you see you won't get anything more
from that quarter. You had better make the
most you can out of me."

Raymond nodded.

The most you will get, in fact, I may say
all you will get from me, is enough ready
money to carry you to Paris, and a cheque
for twenty pounds to follow, when I hear you
have arrived there."

It's mean," said Raymond ; " it's cursed
mean ; and from a man like you too, whom I
feel for as a brother. I'd rather try my luck
with Ruth. She's not married yet, anyway."

You will do as you like," said Charles,
getting up. '' If I find you have been trying
your luck with her, as you call it, you won't
get a farthing from me afterwards. And
you may remember, she can't help you without
consulting her friends. And your complaint
is one that requires absolute quiet, or I'm
very much mistaken."

Raymond bit his finger, and looked irresolute.


'' To-day is Wednesday," said Charles ;
on Saturday I shall come back here in the
afternoon, and if you have come to my terms
by that time you can cough after I do. I
shall have the money on me. If you make
any attempt to write or speak to your sister,
I shall take care to hear of it, and you need
not expect me on Saturday. That is the
last remark I have to make, so good afternoon

; " and, without waiting for a reply,
Charles walked away, conscious that Raymond
would not dare either to call or run
after him.

He walked slowly along the grass-grown
road that led into the carriage-drive, and was
about to let himself out of the grounds by a
crazy gate, which rather took away from the
usefulness of the arose iron locked ones at
the lodge, when he perceived an old man
with a pail of water fumbling at it. He did
not turn as Charles drew near, and even
when the latter came up with him, and said
'' Good afternoon," he made no sign. Charles
watched him groping for the hasp, and, when
he had got the gate open, feel about for the
pail of water, which when he found he struck
against the gate post as he carried it through.
Charles looked after the old man as he
shambled off in the direction of the lodge.

'blind and deaf! He'll tell no tales, at
any rate," he said to himself '' Raymond is
in luck there."

It had turned very cold ; and, suddenly
remembering that his absence might be
noticed, he set off through the woods to
Slumberleigh at a good pace. His nearest
way took him through the churchyard and
across the adjoining high-road, on the further
side of which stood the little red-faced
lodge, which belonged to the great new
red-faced seat of the Thursbys at a short
distance. He came rapidly round the corner
of the old church tower, and was already
swinging down the worn sandstone steps
which led into the road, when he saw below
him at the foot of the steps a little group of
people standing talking. It was Mr. Alwynn,
and Ruth, and Dare, who had evidently met
them on his return from shooting, and who,
standing at ease with one elegantly gartered
leg on the lowest step, and a cartridge-bag
slung over his shoulder in a way that had
aroused Charles's indignation earlier in the
day, was recounting to them, with vivid
action of the hands on an imaginary gun, his

own performances to right and left at some
particularly hot corner.

Mr. Alwynn was listening with a benignant
smile. Charles saw that Ruth was leaning
heavily against the low stone wall. Before
he had time to turn back, Mr. Alwynn had
seen him, and had gone forward a step to
meet him, holding out a welcoming hand.
Charles was obliged to stop a moment while
his hand was inquired after, and a new treatment,
which Mr. Alwynn had found useful
on a similar occasion, was enjoined upon
him. As they stood together on the church
steps, a fly, heavily laden with luggage, came
slowly up the road towards them.

"What," said Mr. Alwynn, '' more visitors !
I thought all the Slumberleigh party arrived
yesterday."

The fly plodded past the Slumberleigh
lodge however, and as it reached the steps
a shrill voice suddenly called to the driver
to stop. As it came grinding to a standstill,
the glass was hastily put down, and a little

woman with a very bold pair of black eyes,
and a somewhat laced-in figure, got out and
came towards them.

"Well, Mr. Dare!" she said, in a high
distinct voice, with a strong American accent.
'' I guess you did not expect to see me riding
up this way, or you'd have sent the carriage
to bring your wife up from the station. But
I'm not one to bear malice ; so if you want
a lift home to — what's the name of your fine
new place '^. — you can get in, and ride up
alone with me."

Dare looked straight in front of him. No
one spoke. Her quick eye glanced from one
to another of the little group, and she gave a
short constrained laugh.

'' Well," she said, '' if you ain't coming,
you can stop with your friends. I've had a
deal of travelling one way and another, and
I'll go on without you." And, turning
quickly away, she told the driver in the same
distinct high key to go on to Vandon, and
got into the fly again.

The grinning man chucked at the horse's
bridle, and the fly rattled heavily away.

No one spoke as it drove away. Charles
glanced once at Ruth ; but her set white face
told him nothing. As the fly disappeared up
the road, Dare moved a step forward. His
face under his brown skin was ashen grey.
He took off his cap, and extending it at arm's
length, not towards the sky, but, like a good
churchman, towards the church, outside of
which, as he knew, his Maker was not to be
found, he said solemnly —

I swear before God what she says is one
■ — great — lie!'

CHAPTER Viii.

If conformity to type Is indeed the one great
mark towards which humanity should press,
]airs. Thursby may honestly be said to have
attained to it. Everything she said or did
had been said or done before, or she would
never have thought of saying or doing it.
Her whole life was a feeble imitation of the
imitative lives of others ; in short, it was the
life of the ordinary country gentlewoman,
who lives on her husband's property, and
who, as augustus Hare says, '' has never
looked over the garden wall."

We do not mean to insinuate for a moment
that the utmost energy and culture are not
occasionally to be met with in the female
portion of that interesting mass of our fellow-creatures

who swell the large volumes of the
'' Landed Gentry." Among their ranks are
those who come boldly forward into the full
glare of public life ; and, conscious of a genius
for enterprise, to which an unmarried condition
perhaps affords ampler scope, and
which a local paper is ready to immortalize,
become secretaries of ladies' societies,
patronesses of flower shows, breeders of
choice poultry, or even associates of floral
leagues of the highest political importance.
That such women should and do exist among
us, the conscious salt-cellars of otherwise
flavourless communities, is a fact for which
we cannot be too thankful ; and if Mrs.
Thursby was not one of these aspiring
spirits, with a yearning after "the mystical
better things," which one of the above pursuits
alone can adequately satisfy, it was her
misfortune and not her fault.

It was her nature, as we have said, servilely
to copy others. Her conversation was all
that she could remember of what she had

heard from others, her present dinner party,
as regards food, was a cross between the two
last dinner parties she had been to. The
dessert, however, conspicuous by its absence,
conformed strictly to a type which she had
seen in a London house in June.

Her dinner party gave her complete satisfaction,
which was fortunate, for to the
greater number of the eighteen or twenty
people who had been indiscriminately herded
together to form it, it was (with the exception
of Mrs. Alwynn) a dreary or at best an uninteresting
ordeal ; while to four people
amonor the number, the four who had met
last on the church steps, it was a period of
slow torture, endured with varying degrees
of patience by each, from the two soups in
the beginning to the peaches and grapes at
the long delayed and bitter end.

Ruth, whose self-possession never wholly
deserted her, had reached a depth of exhausted
stupor, in which the mind is perfectly
oblivious of the impression It Is producing on

Others. By an unceasing effort she listened,
and answered, and smiled at intervals, and
looked exceedingly distinguished in the pale
red gown which she had put on to please her
aunt ; but the colour of which only intensified
the unnatural pallor of her complexion. The
two men whom she sat between found her a
disappointing companion, cold and formal in
manner. At any other time she would have
been humiliated and astonished to hear herself
make such cut-and-drled remarks, such
little trite observations. She was sitting opposite
Charles, and she vaguely wondered once
or twice, when she saw him making others
laugh, and heard snatches of the flippant
talk which was with him, as she knew now,
a sort of defensive armour, how he could
manage to produce it ; while Charles, half
Avild with a mad surging hope that would
not be kept down by any word of Dare's,
looked across at her as often as he dared,
and wondered, in his turn, at the tranquil
dignity, the quiet ordered smile of the face

which a few hours ago he had seen shaken
with emotion.

Her eyes met his for a moment. Were
they the same eyes that but now had met
his, half blend with tears ? He felt still the
touch of those tears upon his hand. He
hastily looked away again, and plunged headlong
into an answer to something Mabel was

o o

saying to him on her favourite subject of
evolution. All well-brought-up young ladies
have a subject nowadays, which makes their
conversation the delightful thine it is ; and
Mabel, of course, was not behind the fashion.
Yes," Ruth heard Charles reply, " I
believe with you we go through many lives,
each being a higher state than the last, and
nearer perfection. So a man passes gradually
through all the various grades of the nobility,
soaring from the lowly honourable upwards
into the duke, and thence by an easy transition
into an angel. Courtesy titles, of course,
present a difficulty to the more thoughtful ;
but, as I am sure you will have found, to be

thoughtful always Implies difficulty of some
kind."

It does, Indeed," said Mabel, puzzled but
not a little flattered. '' I sometimes think
one reads too much ; one longs so for deep
books — Koran, and things. I must confess "
with a sigh — " I can't Interest myself in
the usual young lady's library that other
girls read."

Can't you ? " replied Charles. " Now, I
can. I study that department of literature
whenever I have the chance, and I have
generally found that the most Interesting
part of a young lady's library is to be found
in that portion of the bookshelf which lies
between the rows of books and the wall.
Don't you think so. Lady Carmian ? " (to the
lady on his other side). " I assure you I
have made the most delightful discoveries of
this description. Cheap editions of Ould,
Balzac's works, yellow backs of the most
advanced order, will, as a rule, reward the
Inquirer, who otherwise might have had to

content himself with " The Heir of Red-differ,"
the Lily Series, and Miss Strickland's
Queens of England.' "

Charles's last speech had been made in a
momentary silence, and directly it was finished
every woman, old and young, except Lady
Carmian and Ruth, simultaneously raised a
disclaiming voice, which by its vehemence at
once showed what an unfounded assertion
Charles had made. Lady Carmian, a handsome
young married woman, only smiled
languidly, and, turning the bracelet on her
arm, told Charles he was a cynic, and that
for her own part, when in robust health, she
liked what little she read '' strong ; " but in
illness, or when Lord Carmian had been
unusually trying, she always fell back on a
milk-and-water diet. Mrs. Thursby, however,
felt that Charles had struck a blow at
the sanctity of home life, and (for she was
one of those persons whose single talent is
that of giving a personal turn to any remark)
been a lone monotonous recital of the books

she allowed her own daughters to read, and
how they Averse kept, which proved the
extensive range of her library, not in bookshelves,
but in a sliding book stand, which
contracted or expanded at will.

Lone before she had finished, however,
the conversation at the other end of the table
had drifted away to the topic of the season
among sporting men, namely, the poachers,
who, since their raid on Dare's property, had
kept fairly quiet, but who were sure to start
afresh now that the pheasant shooting had
beofun ; and from thence to the recent
forgery case in America, which was exciting
every day greater attention in England,
especially since one of the accomplices had
been arrested the day before in Birmingham
station, and the principal offender, though
still at large, was, according to the papers,
being traced " by means of a clue in the
possession of the police."

Charles knew how little that sentence
meant, but he found that it required an effort

to listen unmoved to the various conjectures
as to the whereabouts of Stephens, in which
Ruth, as the conversation became general,
also joined, volunteering a suggestion that
perhaps he might be lurking somewhere in
the Slumberleigh woods, which were certainly
very lonely in places, and Adhere, as she said,
she had been very much alarmed by a tramp
in the summer.

Mrs. Thursby, like an echo, began from
the other end of the table something vao^ue
about girls being allowed to walk alone, her
own daughters, etc., and so the long dinner
wore itself out. Dare was the only one of
the little party who had met on the church
steps who succumbed entirely. Mr. Alwynn,
who looked at him and Ruth with pathetic
interest from time to time, made laudable
efforts, but Dare made none. He had taken
in to dinner the younger Thursby girl, a
meek creature, without form and void, not
yet out, but trembling in a high muslin, on
the verge, who kept her large and burning

VOL. II. 28

hands clutched together under the tablecloth,
and whose conversation was upon bees.
Dare pleaded a gun headache, and hardly
spoke. His eyes constantly wandered to
the other end of the table, where, far away
on the opposite side, half hidden by ferns
and flowers, he could catch a glimpse of
Ruth. After dinner he did not come Into
the drawing-room, but went off to the
smoking-room, where he paced by himself,
up and down, up and down, writhing under
the torment of a horrible suspense.

Outside the moon shone clear and high,
making a long picturesque shadow of the
great prosaic house, upon the wide gravel
drive. Dare leaned against the window sill
and looked out. "Would she give him up?"
he asked himself. Would she believe this
vile calumny ? Would she give him up ?
And as he stood the Alwynns' brougham
came with two gleaming eyes along the drive
and drew up before the door. He resolved
to learn his fate at once. There had been

no possibility of a word with Ruth on the
church steps. Before he had known where
he was, he and Charles had been walking upto
the Hall together, Charles discoursing
lengthily on the impropriety of wire fencing
in a hunting country. But now he must and
would see her. He rushed downstairs into
the hall, where young Thursby was wrapping
Ruth in her white furs, while Mr. Thursby
senior was encasing jNIrs. Alwynn in a species
of glorified ulster of red plush which she had
lately acquired. Dare hastily drew Mr.
Alwynn aside and spoke a few words to him.
]mr. Alwynn turned • to his wife, after one
rueful glance at his thin shoes, and said —

'' I will walk up. It is a fine night, and
quite dry under foot."

And a very pleasant party it has been,"
said ]airs. Alwynn as she and Ruth drove
away together, "though Mrs. Thursby has
not such a knack with her table as some.
Not that I did not think the chrysanthenums
and white china swans were nice, very nice;

but, you see, as I told her, I had just been
to Stoke Moreton, where things were very
different. And you looked very well, my
dear, though not so bright and chatty as
Mabel ; and Mrs. Thursby said she only
hoped your waist was natural. The idea !
And I saw Lady Carmian notice your gown
particularly, and I heard her ask who you
were, and Mrs. Thursby said— so like her —
you were their clergyman's niece. And so,
my dear, I was not going to have you spoken
of like that, and a little later on I just went
and sat down by Lady Carmian, just went
across the room you know, as if I wanted to
be nearer the music, and we got talking, and
she was rather silent at first, but presently,
when I began to tell her all about you, and
who you were, she became quite interested,
and asked such funny questions, and laughed,
and we had quite a nice talk."

And so Mrs. Alwynn chatted on, and
Ruth, happily hearing nothing, leaned back
in her corner, and wondered whether the

evening were ever going to end. Even when
she had bidden her aunt " Good night," and
having previously told her maid not to sit up
for her, found herself alone in her own room
at last, even then it seemed that this interminable
day was not quite over. She was
standing by the dim hire, trying to gather up
sufficient energy to undress, when a quiet
step came cautiously along the passage,
followed by a low tap at her door. She
opened it noiselessly, and found Mr. Alwynn
standing without.

'' Ruth," he said, " Dare has walked up
with me. He is in the most dreadful state.
I am sure I don't know what to think. He
has said nothing further to me, but he is
bent on seeing you for a moment. It's very
late, but still — could you ? He's in the
drawing-room now. My poor child, how ill
you look ! Shall I tell him you are too tired
to-night to see any one ? "

I would rather see him," said Ruth, her
voice trembling a little, and they went downstairs

together. In the hall she hesitated
a moment. She was going to learn her fate.
Had her release come ? Had It come at the
eleventh hour ? Her uncle looked at her
with kind compassionate eyes, and hers fell
before his as she thought how different her-suspense
was to what he imagined. Suddenly,
and such demonstrations where very
rare with her, she put her arms round his
neck, and pressed her cheek against his.

''Oh, Uncle John, Uncle John!" she gasped,
'' it Is not what you think."

'' I pray God it may not be what I suppose,"
he said sadly, stroking her head.
*' One is too ready to think evil, I know.
God forgive me If I have judged him harshly.
But go in, my dear ; " and he pushed her
gently towards the drawing-room.

She went in and closed the door quietly
behind her.

Dare was leaning against the mantelpiece,
which was draped in Mrs. Alwynn's best
manner, with oriental hangings having bits

of oflass woven In them. He was looking
the curtained fire, and did not turn when
she entered. Even at that moment she
noticed, as she went towards him, that his
elbow had displaced the little family of china
hares on a plush stand, which Mrs. Alwynn
had lately added to her other treasures.

I think you wished to see me," she said
as calmly as she could.

He faced suddenly round, his eyes wild,
his face quivering, and, coming close up to
her, caught her hand, and grasped it so
tightly that the pain was almost more than
she could bear.

'' Are you going to give me up ? " he asked
hoarsely.

'' I don't know," she said ; " it depends on
yourself, on what you are, and what you
have been. You say she is not your wife ? "

*' I swear it."

You need not do so. Your word is
enough."

'' I swear she is not my wife."

One question remains," said Ruth firmly,
a flame of colour mounting to her neck and
face. '' You say she Is not your wife.
Ought you to make her so ? "

'' No," said Dare passionately. " I owe
her nothing. She has no claim upon me. I
swear "

'' Don't swear. I said your word was
enough."

But Dare preferred to embellish his speech
with divers weighty expressions, feeling that
a simple affirmation would never carry so
much conviction to his own mind, or consequently
to another, as an oath.

A momentary silence followed.

*' You believe what I say, Ruth ? "

'' Yes," with an effort.

"And you won't give me up because evil
is spoken against me ? "

No."

'' And all is the same as before between
us ? "

'^ Yes."

Dare burst Into a torrent of gratitude, but
she broke suddenly away from him, and went
swiftly upstairs again to her own room.

The release had not come. She laid her
head down upon the table, and Hope, which
had ventured back to her for one moment,
took his lamp and went quite away, leaving
the world very dark.

There are turning points In life when a
natural Instinct Is a surer guide than noble
motive or high aspiration, and consequently
the more thoughtful and Introspective nature
will sometimes fall just where a commonplace
one would have passed In safety. Ruth had
acted for the best. When for the first time
In her life she had been brought Into close
contact with a life spent for others. Its beauty
had appealed to her with Irresistible force,
and she had willingly sacrificed herself to an
ideal life of devotion to others.

But we are punished for our purest deeds,
And chasten'd for our holiest thoughts."

And she saw now that If she had obeyed

that simple law of human nature which forbids
a marriage in which love is not the primary
consideration, if she had followed that simple
humble path, she would never have reached
the arid wilderness towards which her own
guidance had led her.

For her wilful self-sacrifice had suddenly
paled and dwindled down before her eyes
into a hideous mistake — a mistake which yet
had its roots so firmly knit into the past, that
it was hopeless to think of pulling it up now.
To abide by a mistake is sometimes all that
an impetuous youth leaves an honourable
middle age to do. Poor middle age, with its
clear vision, that might do and be so much if
it were not for the heavy burdens, grievous
to be borne, which youth has bound upon its
shoulders.

And worse than the dreary weight of personal
unhappiness, harder to bear than the
pang of disappointed love, was the aching
sense of failure, of having misunderstood
God's intention, and broken the purpose of

her life. For some natures the cup of Beholds
no bitterer drop than this.

Ruth dimly saw the future, the future
which she had chosen, stretching out waste
and barren before her. The dry air of the
desert was on her face. Her feet were
already on its sandy verge. And the iron of
a great despair entered into her soul.

CHAPTER IX.

Dare left Slumberleigh Hall early the following
morning, and drove up to the Rectory on
his way to Vandon. After being closeted
with Mr. Alwynn in the study for a short
time, they both came out and drove away
together. Ruth, Invisible In her own room
with a headache, her only means of defence
against Mrs. Alwynn's society, heard the
coming and the going, and was not far
wrong in her surmise that Dare had come to
beg Mr. Alwynn to accompany him to
Vandon, being afraid to face alone the
mysterious enemy intrenched there.

No conversation was possible in the dogcart,
with the groom on the back seat thirsting
to hear any particulars of the news which

had spread like wildfire from Abandon throughout
the whole village the previous afternoon,
and which was already miraculously flying
from house to house in Slumberleigh this
morning, as things discreditable do fly among
a Christian population, which perhaps '' thinks
no evil," but repeats it nevertheless.

There was not a servant In Dare's modest
establishment who was not on the look out
for him on his return. The gardener happened
to be tying up a plant near the front
door; the housemaids were watching unobserved
from an upper casement ; the portly
form of Mrs. Smith, the housekeeper, was
seen to elide from one of the unused bedroom
windows ; the butler must have been
waiting in the hall, so prompt was his appearance
when the dog-cart drew up before
the door.

Another pair of keen black eyes was
watching too, peering out through the chinks
between the lowered Venetian blinds in the
drawing-room ; was observing Dare intently

as he got out, and then resting anxiously on
his companion. Then the owner of the eyes
sipped away from the window, and went
back noiselessly to the fire.

Dare ordered the dog-cart to remain at
the door, flung down his hat on the hall
table, and, turning to the servant who was
busying himself in folding his coat, said
sharply —

'' Where is the — the person who arrived
here yesterday ? "

The man replied that '' she " was in the
drawing-room. The drawing-room opened
into the hall. Dare led the way, suppressed
fury in his face, looking back to see whether
Mr. Alwynn was following him. The two
men went In together, and shut the door.

The enemy was Intrenched and prepared
for action.

Mrs. Dare, as we must perforce call her
for lack of any other designation rather
than for any right of hers to the title, was
seated on a yellow brocade ottoman, drawn

Up beside a roaring fire, her two smart little
feet resting on the edge of the low brass
fender, and a small work-table at her side,
on which an elaborate medley of silks and
Avools was displayed. Her attitude was that
of a person at home, aggressively at home.
She was in the act of threading a needle
Ashen Dare and Mr. Alwynn came in, and
she put down her work at once, carefully
replacing the needle in safety, as she rose to
receive them, and held out her hand, with a
manner the assurance of which, if both men
had not been too much frightened to notice
it, was a little overdone.

Dare disregarded her gesture of welcome,
and she sat down again, and returned to her
work, with a laugh that was also a little overdone.


'' What do you mean by coming here ? "
he said, his voice hoarse with a furious anger,
which the sight of her seemed to have
increased a hundredfold.

Because it is my proper place," she

replied, tossing her head, and drawing out a
long thread of green silk ; '' because I have
a right to come."

'' You He ! " said Dare fiercely, showing
his teeth.

Lord, Alfred ! " said Mrs. Dare contemptuously,
'' don't make a scene before
strangers. We've had our tiffs before now,
and shall have again, I suppose. It's the
nature' of married people to fall out ; but
there's no call to carry on before friends.
Push up that lounge nearer the fire. Won't
the other gentleman," turning to Mr. Alwynn,
*come and warm himself? I'm sure it's cold
enough."

Mr. Alwynn, who was a man of peace,
devoutly wished he were at home again In
his own study.

It is a cold morning," he said; 'but weare
not here to discuss the weather."

He stopped short. He had been hurried
here so much against his will, and so entirely
without an explanation, that he was not quite

sure what he had come to discuss, or how he
could best support his friend.

'what do you want?" said Dare, in the
same suppressed voice, without looking at
her.

"My rights," she said incisively; "and,
what's more, I mean to have 'em. I've not
come over from America for nothing, I can
tell you that ; and I've not come on a visit
neither. I've come to stay."

What are these rights you talk of ? "
asked Mr. Alwynn, signing to Dare to
restrain himself.

As his wife, sir. I am his wife, as I can
prove. I didn't come without my lines to
show. I didn't come on a speculation, to see
if he'd a fancy to have me back. No, afore
I set my foot down anywheres I look to see
as it's solid walking."

Show your proof," said Mr. Alwynn.

The woman ostentatiously got out a red
morocco letter case, and produced a paper
which she handed to Mr. Alwynn.

VOL, II. 29

It was an authorized copy of a marriage
register, drawn out in the usual manner,
between Alfred Dare, bachelor, English
subject, and Ellen, widow of the late Jasper
Carroll, of Neosho City, Kansas, U.S.A.
The marriage was dated seven years back.

The names of Dare and Carroll swam
before Mr. Alwynn's eyes. He glanced at
the paper, but he could not read it.

'ris this a forgery, Dare ? " he asked,
holdlnof it towards him.

'' No," said Dare, without looking at it ;
*rit is right. But that is not all. Now,"
turning to the woman, who was watching him
triumphantly, " show the other paper — the
divorce."

I made inquiries about that," she replied
composedly. " I wasn't going to be fooled
by that 'ere, so I made inquiries from one as
knows. The divorce is all very well in
America; but it don't count in England."

Dare's face turned livid. Mr. Alwynn's
flushed a deep red. He sat with his eyes on

J

the ground, the paper in his hand trembling
a Httle. Indignation against Dare, pity for
him, anxiety not to judge him harshly,
struggled for precedence in his kind heart,
still beating tumultuously with the shock of
Dare's first admission. He felt rather than
saw him take the paper out of his hand.

I shall keep this," Dare said, putting it
in his pocket-book ; and then, turning to the
woman again, he said, with an oath, "Will
you go, or will you wait till you are turned
out ? "

I'll wait," she replied undauntedly. " I
like the place well enough."

She laughed and took up her work, and
after looking at her for a moment, he flung
out of the room, followed by Mr. Alwynn.
The defeat was complete ; nay, it was a
rout.

The dog-cart was still standing at the
door. The butler was talking to the groom ;
the gardener was training some new shoots
of ivy against the stone balustrade.

Dare caught up his hat and gloves, and
ordered that his portmanteau, which had been
taken into the hall, should be put back into
the door-cart. As it was being carried down
he looked at his watch.

I can catch the midday express for
London," he said. '' I can do it easily."

Mr. Alwynn made no reply.

Get in," continued Dare feverishly ; " the
portmanteau is in."

I think I will walk home," said Mr.
Alwynn slowly. It gave him excruciating
pain to say anything so severe as this ; but
he o^ot out the words nevertheless.

Dare looked at him in astonishment.

'get in," he said again quickly. " I must
speak to you. I will drive you home. I
have something to say."

Mr. Alwynn never refused to hear what
any one had to say. He went slowly down
the steps, and got into the cart, looking
straight in front of him, as his custom was
when disturbed in mind. Dare followed.

I shall not want you, James," he said to
the groom, his foot on the step.

At this moment the form of Mrs. Smith,
the housekeeper, appeared through the hall
door, clothed in all the awful majesty of an
upper servant whose dignity has been
outraged.

Sir," she said, in a clear not to say a
high voice, " asking your pardon, sir, but am
I, or am I not, to take my orders from "

Goaded to frenzy. Dare poured forth a
volley of horrible oaths, French and English,
and seizing up the reins drove off at a furious
rate.

The servants remained standing about the
steps, watching the dog-cart whirl rapidly
away.

He's been to church with her," said the
gardener at last. " I said all alone she'd
never have come, unless she had her lines to
show. I can't cut them white grapes she
ordered yet ; but I may as well go and do it."

*well," said Mrs. Smith, "grapes or no

grapes, I'll never give up the keys of the
linen cupboards to the likes of her, and I'm
not going to have any one poking about
among my china. I've not been here twenty
years to be asked for my lists in that way, and
the winter curtains ordered out unbeknownst
to me ; " and Mrs. Smith retreated to the fastnesses
of the housekeeper's room, whither
even the audacious enemy had not yet
ventured to follow her.

Meanwhile, Mr. Alwynn and Dare drove at
moderated speed along the road to Slumber-leigh.
For some time neither spoke.

*' I beg your pardon," said Dare at last.
'' I lost my head. I became enraged. Before
a clergyman and a lady, I know well, it is not
permitted to swear."

'' I can overlook that," said Mr. Alwynn ;
but," turning very red again, '' other things
I can't."

Dare began to flourish his whip, and
become excited again.

'* I will tell you all," he said with effusion

'every word. You have a kind heart. I
will confide in you."

I don't want confidences," said Mr.
Alwynn. " I want straightforward answers
to a few simple questions."

I will give them, these answers. I keep
nothing back from a friend."

*' Then, first. Did you marry that
woman ? "

'' Yes," said Dare, shrugging his shoulders.
^' I married her, and often afterwards, almost
at once, I regretted it ; but sue voulez-vous
I was young. I had no experience. I was
but twenty-one."

Mr. Alwynn stared at him in astonishment
at the ease with which [the admission was
made.

"How long afterwards was it that you
were divorced from her ? "

Two years. Two long years."

For what reason ? "

Temper. Ah ! what a temper. Also
because I left her for one year. It was in

Kansas, and In Kansas it is very easy to
marry, and also to be divorced."

*' It is a disgraceful story," said Mr. Alwynn
in great indignation.

"Disgraceful!" echoed Dare excitedly.
"It is more than disgraceful. It Is abominable.
You do not know all yet. I will tell you. I
was young ; I was but a boy. I go to
America when I am twenty-one, to travel, to
see the world. I make acquaintances. I
get into a bad set, what you call undesirable.
I fall in love. I walk into a net. She was
pretty, a pretty widow, all love, all soul ;
without friends. I protect her. I marry
her. I have a little money. I have five
thousand pounds. She knew that. She
spent it. I was a fool. In a year it was
gone." Dare's face had become white with
rage. " And then she told me why she
married me. I became enraged. There
was a quarrel, and I left her. I had no more
money. She left me alone, and a year after
we are divorced. I never see her or hear of

her again. I return to Europe. I live by
my voice in Paris. It is five years ago. I
have bought my experience. I put it from
my mind. And now" — his hands trembled
with anger — 'now that she thinks I have
money again, now, when in some way she
hears how I have come to Vandon, she dares
to come back and say she is my wife."

'' Dare," said Mr. Alwynn sternly, " what
excuse have you for never mentioning this
before — before you became engaged to
Ruth?"

*' What ! " burst out Dare, " tell Ruth !
Tell /ie7^/ Quelle idle. I would never
speak to her of what might give her pain. I
would keep all from her that would cause her
one moment's grief. Besides," he added
conclusively, " it is not always well to talk of
what has gone before. It is not for her
happiness or mine. She has been, one sees
it well, brought up since a young child very
strictly. About some things she has fixed
ideas. If I had told her of these things

which are passed away and gone, she might
not" — and Dare looked gravely at Mr.
Alwynn — "she might not think so well of
me."

This view of the case was quite a new one
to Mr. Alwynn. He looked back at Dare
with hopeless perplexity In his pained eyes.
To one who throughout life has regarded the
supremacy of certain truths and principles of
action as fixed and recognized as a matter of
course by all the world, however Imperfectly
obeyed by Individuals, the discovery comes
as a shock, which is at the moment overwhelming,
when these same truths and
principles are seen to be entirely set aside,
and their very existence Ignored by others.

Where there is no common ground on
which to meet, speech is unavailing and mere
waste of time. It Is like shouting to a
person at a distance whom it Is Impossible to
approach. If he notices anything It will only
be that, for some reasons of your own, you
are making a disagreeable noise.

As Mr. Alwynn looked back at Dare his
anger died away within him, and a dull pain
of deep disappointment and sense of sudden
loneliness took its place. Dare and he seemed
many miles apart. He felt that it would be
of no use to say anything ; and so, being a
man, he held his peace.

Dare continued talking volubly of how he
would get a lawyer's opinion at once In
London ; of his certainty that the American
wife had no claim upon him ; of how he
would go over to America, if necessary, to
establish the validity of his divorce ; but Mr.
Alwynn heard little or nothing of what he
said. He was thinking of Ruth with distress
and self-upbraiding. He had been much to
blame of course.

Dare's mention of her name recalled his
attention.

She Is all goodness," he was saying. " She
believes In me. She has promised again
that she will marry me — since yesterday. I
trust her as myself ; but it Is a grief which as

little as possible must trouble her. You will
not say anything to her till I come back, till
I return with proof that I am free, as I told
her ? You will say nothing ? "

Dare had pulled up at the bottom of the
drive to the Rectory.

Very well," said Mr. Alwynn absently,
getting slowly out. He seemed much shaken.

I will be back perhaps to-night, perhaps
tomorrow morning," called Dare after him.

But Mr. Alwynn did not answer.

Dare's business took him a shorter time
than he expected, and the same night found
him hurrying back by the last train to
Slumberleio^h. It was a wild nio^ht. He
had watched the evening close in lurid and
stormy across the chimney wastes of the
black country, until the darkness covered
all the land, and wiped out even the last
memory of the dead day from the western sky.

Who, travelling alone at night, has not
watched the glimmer of light through cottage

Windows as he hurries past ; has not followed
with keenest interest for one brief second
the shadow of one who moves within, and,
imagination picturing a mysterious universal
happiness gathered round those twinkling
points of light, has not experienced a strange
feeling of homelessness and loneliness ?

Dare sat very still in the solitude of the
empty railway carriage, and watched the little
fleeting, mocking lights with a heavy heart.
They meant homes, and he should never have
a home now. Once he saw a door open ina
squalid line of low houses, and the figure
of a man with a child in his arms stand outlined
in the doorway against the ruddy light
within. Dare felt an unreasoning interest in
that man. He found himself thinking of him
as the train hurried on, wondering whether
his wife was there waiting for him, and
whether he had other children besides the
one he was carrying. And all the time,
through his idle musings, he could hear one
sentence ringing in his ears, the last that his

lawyer had said to him after the long consultation
o( the afternoon.

I am sorry to tell you that you are incontestably
a married man."

Everything repeated it. The hoofs of the
cab horse that took him to the station had
hammered it out remorselessly all the way.
The engine had caught it up, and repeated
it with unvarying, endless iteration. The
newspapers were full of it. When Dare
turned to them in desperation he saw it
written in large letters across the sham
columns. There was nothing but that anywhere.
It was the news of the day. Sick
at heart, and giddy from want of food, he
sat crouched up in the corner of his empty
carriage, and vaguely wished the train would
journey on for ever and ever, nervously
dreading the time when he should have to
get out and collect his wandering faculties

to

once more*

The old lawyer had been very kind to the
agitated, incoherent young man whose settlements

he was already engaged in drawing
up. At first, indeed, it had seemed that the
marriage would not be legally binding — the
marriage and divorce having both taken
place in Kansas, where the marriage laws
are particularly lax — and he seemed inclined
to be hopeful ; but as he informed himself
about the particulars of the divorce, his face
became grave and graver. When at last
Dare produced the copy of the marriage
register, he shook his head.

* Alfred Dare, bachelor and English
subject,' " he said. " That ' English subject'
makes a difficulty to start with. You had
never, I believe, any intention of acquiring
what in law we call an American domicil ?
and although the technicalities of this subject
are somewhat complicated, I am afraid that
in your case there is little, if any, doubt.
The English courts are very jealous of any
interference by foreigners with the status of
an Englishman ; and though a divorce legally
granted by a competent tribunal for an

adequate cause might — I will not say would
be held binding everywhere, there can be
no doubt that where in the eyes of our law
the cause is not adequate, our courts would
refuse to recognize it. Have you a copy of
the register of divorce as well ? "

'' No."

It is unfortunate ; but no doubt you can
remember the grounds on which it was
granted."

Incompatibility of temper, and she said
I had deserted her. I had left her the year
before. We both agreed to separate."

The lawyer shook his head.

"What's incompatibility?" he said. "What's
a year's absence ? Nothing in the eyes of an
Englishman. Nothing in the law of this
country."

But the divorce was granted. It was
legal. There was no question," said Dare
eagerly. " I was divorced In the same
State as where I married. I had lived there
more than a year, which was all that was

necessary. No difficulty was made at the
time."

No. Marriage is slipped into and slipped
out of again with gratifying facility in America,
and Kansas is notorious for the laxity prevailing
there as regards marriage and divorce.
It will be advisable to take the opinion of
counsel on the matter, but I can hold out
very little hope that your divorce would hold
good, even in America. You see, you are
entered as a British subject on the marriage
register, and I imagine these words must
have been omitted in the divorce proceedings,
or some difficulty would have been
raised at the time, unless your residence in
Kansas made it unnecessary. But even supposing
by American law you are free, that
will be of no avail in England, for by the
law of England, which alone concerns you,
I regret to be obliged to tell you that you
are incontestably a married man."

And in spite of frantic reiterations, of wild
protests on the part of Dare, as if the com-vol.

n. 30

passionate old man represented the English
law, and could mould it at his pleasure, the
lawyer's last word remained in substance the
same, though repeated many times.

Whether you are at liberty or not to
marry again in America, I am hardly prepared
to say. I will look into the subject
and let you know ; but in England I regret
to repeat that you are a married man."

Dare groaned in body and in spirit as the
words came back to him ; and his thoughts,
shrinking from the despair and misery at
home, wandered aimlessly away, anywhere,
hither and thither, afraid to go back, afraid
to face again the desolation that sat so grim
and stern in solitary possession.

The train arrived at Slumberleigh at last,
and he got out, and shivered as the driving
wind swept across the platform. It surprised
him that there was a wind, although at every
station down the line he had seen people
straining against it. He gave up his ticket
mechanically, and walked aimlessly away

into the darkness, turning with momentary
curiosity to watch the train hurry on again,
a pillar of fire by night, as it had been a
pillar of smoke by day.

He passed the blinking station inn, forgetting
that he had put up his dog-cart there to
await his return, and hardly knowing what he
did, took from long habit the turn for Vandon.

It was a wild night. The wind was driving
the clouds across the moon at a tremendous
rate, and sweeping at each gust flights of
spectre leaves from the swaying trees. It
caught him in the open of the bare high-road,
and would not let him go. It opposed him,
and buffeted him at every turn ; but he held
listlessly on his way. His feet took him,
and he let them take him whither they would.
They led him stumbling along the dim road,
the dust of which was just visible like a grey
mist before him, until he reached the bridge
by the mill. There his feet stopped of their
own accord, and he went and leaned against
the low stone wall, looking down at the

sudden glimpses of pale hurried water and
trembling reed.

The moon came out full and strong in
temporary victory, and made black shadows
behind the idle mill wheel and open mill race,
and black shadows, black as death, under
the bridge itself. Dare leaned over the wall
to watch the mysterious water and shadow
run beneath. As he looked, he saw the
reflection of a man in the water watching
him. He shook his fist savagely at it, and
it shook its fist amid a wavering of broken
light and shadow back at him. But it did
not go away ; it remained watching him.
There was something strange and unfamiliar
about the river to-night. It had a voice,
too, which allured and repelled him — a voice
at the sound of which the grim despair within
him stirred ominously at first, and then began
slowly to rise up gaunt and terrible ; began
to move stealthily, but with ever-increasing
swiftness through the deserted chambers of
his heart.

No Strong abiding principle was there todo
battle with the enemy. The minor feelings,
sensibilities, emotions, amiable impulses,
those courtiers of our prosperous days, had
all forsaken him and fled. Dare's house in
his hour of need was left unto him desolate.

And the river spoke in a guilty whisper,
which yet the quarrel of the wind and the
trees could not drown, of deep places further
down, where people were never found, people

who But there were shallows, too, he

remembered, shallow places among the stones
where the trout were. If anybody were
drowned. Dare thought, gazing down at the
pale shifting moon in the water, he would
be found there, perhaps, or at any rate, his
hat — he took his hat off, and held it tightly
clenched in both his hands — his hat would
tell the tale.

CHAPTER X.

Charles left Slumberleigh Hall a few hours
later than Dare had done, but only to go
back to Atherstone. He could not leave the
neighbourhood. This burning fever of suspense
would be unbearable at any other
place, and in any case he must return by
Saturday, the day on which he had promised
to meet Raymond. His hand was really
slightly Injured, and he made the most of it.
He kept it bound up, telegraphed to put off
his next shooting engagement on the strength
of It, and returned to Atherstone, even though
he was aware that Lady Mary had arrived
there the day before, on her way home to
her house in London.

Ralph and Evelyn were accustomed to

sudden and erratic movements on the part
of Charles, and to Molly he was a sort of
archangel, who might arrive out of space at
any moment, untrammelled by such details
as distance, trains, time, or tide. But to
Lady Mary his arrival was a significant fact,
and his impatient refusal to have his hand
investigated was another. Her cold grey
eyes watched him narrowly, and, conscious
that they did so, he kept out of her way as
much as possible, and devoted himself to
Molly more than ever.

He was sailing a mixed fleet of tin ducks
and fishes across the tank by the tool shed,
under her supervision, on the afternoon of
the day he had arrived, when Ralph came to
find him in great excitement. His keeper
had just received private notice from the
Thursbys' keeper that a raid on the part of
a large gang of poachers was expected that
night In the parts of the Slumberleigh coverts
that had not yet been shot over, and which
adjoined Ralph s own land.

Whereabout will that be ? " said Charles
inattentively, drawing his magnet slowly in
front of the fleet.

'' Where ? " said Ralph excitedly, *' why
round by the old house, round by Arleigh,
of course. Thursby and I have turned down
hundreds of pheasants there. Don't you
remember the hot corner by the coppice last
year, below the house, where we got forty
at one place, and how the wind took them
as they came over ? "

'' Near A r/ez£-A f repeated Charles, with
sudden interest.

*' Uncle Charles," interposed Molly reproachfully,
'' don't let all the ducks stick onto
the magnet like that. I told you not
before. Make It go on in front."

But Charles's attention had wandered from
the ducks.

Yes," continued Ralph, " near Harleigh.
There was a gang of poachers there last
year, and the keepers dared not attack
them they were so strong, though they

were shooting right and left. But we'll
be even with them this year. My men are
going, and I shall go with them. You had
better come too, and see the fun. The more
the better."

** Why should I go ? " said Charles listlessly.
'' Am I my brother's keeper, or even
his under keeper ? Molly, don't splash your
uncle's wardrobe. Besides, I expect it is a
false alarm or a blind."

False alarm ! " retorted Ralph. " I tell
you Thursby's head keeper, Shaw — you
know Shaw — saw a man himself only last
night in the Arleigh coverts ; came upon
him suddenly, reconnoitering, of course, for
to-night, and would have collared him too if
the moon had not gone in, and when it came
out again he was gone."

'' Of course, and he will warn off the rest
to-night."

'not a bit of it. He never saw Shaw.
Shaw takes his oath he didn't see him. I'll
lay any odds they will beat those coverts

to-night, and, by George ! we'll nail some of
them, if we have an ounce of luck."

Ralph's sporting instinct, to which even
the fleeting vision of a chance weasel never
appealed in vain, was now thoroughly
aroused, and even Charles shared somewhat
in his excitement.

How could he warn Raymond to lie close ?
The more he thought of it the more impossible
it seemed. It was already late in
the afternoon. He could not, for Raymond's
sake, risk being seen hanging about in the
woods near Arleigh for no apparent reason,
and Raymond was not expecting to see him
in any case for two days to come, and would
probably be impossible to find. He could
do nothing but wait till the evening came,
when he might have some opportunity, if the
night were only dark enough, of helping or
warning him.

The night was dark enough when it came ;
but it was unreliable. A tearing autumn
wind drove armies of clouds across the moon,

only to sweep them away again at a moment's
notice. The wind itself rose and fell,
dropped and struggled up again like a furious
wounded animal.

'' It will drop at midnight," said Ralph to
Charles below his breath, as they walked in
the darkness along the road towards Slumber-leigh
; '' and the moon will come out when
the wind goes. I have told Evans and
Brooks to go by the fields, and meet us at
the cross roads in the low woods. It is a
good night for us. We don't want light yet
awhile ; and the more row the wind kicks up
till we are in our places ready for them the
better."

They walked on in silence, nearly missing
in the dark the turn for Slumberleigh, where
the road branched off to Vandon.

'' We must be close upon the river by this
time," said Ralph ; " but I can't hear it for
the wind."

The moon came out suddenly, and showed
close on their right the mill blocking out the

sky, and the dark sweep of the river below,
between pale wastes of flooded meadow.
Upon the bridge, leaning over the wall, stood
the figure of a man, bareheaded, with his hat
in his hands.

He could not see his face, but something
in his attitude struck Charles with a sudden
chill.

By ," he said below his breath,

plucking Ralph's arm, " there's mischief going
on there ! "

Ralph did not hear, and in another moment
Charles was thankful he had not done so.

The man raised himself a little, and the
light fell full on his white desperate face.
He was feeling up and down the edge of the
stone parapet with his hands. As he moved,
Charles recognized him, and drew in his
breath sharply.

'' Who is that ? " said Ralph, his obtuser
faculties perceiving the man for the first
time.

Charles made no answer, but began to

whistle loudly one of the tunes of the day.
He saw Dare give a guilty start, and catching
at the wall for support, lean heavily
against it as he looked wildly down the road,
where the shadow of the trees had so far
served to screen the approach of Charles and
Ralph, who now emerged into the light, or
at least would have done so, if the moonlight
had not been snatched away at that moment.

*' Hullo, Dare ! " said Ralph cheerfully
through the darkness. " I saw you. What
are you up to, standing on the bridge at
midnight, with the clock striking the hour,
and all that sort of thing ; and what have
you done with your hat ? Dropped it into
the water ? "

Dare muttered something unintelligible,
and peered suspiciously through the darkness
at Charles.

The moon made a feint of coming out
again, which came to nothing, but which
gave Charles a moment's glimpse of Dare's
convulsed face. And the grave penetrating

glance that met his own [so fixedly told Dare
in that moment that Charles had guessed his
business on the bridge. Both men were
glad of the returning darkness, and of the
presence of Ralph.

** Come along with us," the latter was saying
to Dare, explaining the errand on which they
were bound ; and Dare, stupefied with past
emotion, and careless of what he did or
where he went, agreed.

It was less trouble to agree than to find a
reason for refusing. He mechanically put
on his hat, which he had unconsciously
crushed together a few minutes before, in a
dreadful dream from which even now he had
not thoroughly awaked. And still walking
like a man in a dream, he set off with the
other two.

There was suicide in his face," thought
Charles, as he swung along beside his brother.
"He would have done it if we had not come
up. Good God ! can it be that it is all over
between him and Ruth ! " The blood rushed

to his head, and his heart began to beat
wildly. He walked on in silence, seeing
nothing, hearing nothing. Raymond and the
poachers were alike forgotten.

It was not until a couple of men joined
them silently in the woods, and others
presently rose up out of the darkness to
whisper directions and sink down again, that
Charles came to himself with a start, and
pulled himself together.

The party had halted. It was pitch dark,
but he was conscious of something towering
up above him, black and lowering. It was
the ruined house of Arleigh.

You and Brooks wait here, and keep well
under the lea of the house," said Ralph in a
whisper. " If the moon comes out get into
the shadow of the wall. Don't shout till
you're sure of them. Shaw is down by the
stables. Dare and Evans, you both come on
with me. Shaw's got two men at the end of
the glade, but it's the nearest coverts he is
keenest on, because they can get a horse and

cart up close to take the game, and get off
sharp if they are surprised. They did last
year. Don't stir if you hear wheels. Wait
for them." And with this parting injunction
Ralph disappeared noiselessly with Dare and
the other keeper in the direction of the
stables.

Ralph had been right. The wind was
dropping. It came and went fitfully, returning
as if from great distances, and hurrying
past weak and impotent, leaving sudden
silences behind. Charles and his companion,
a strapping young under keeper, evidently
anxious to distinguish himself, waited, listening
intently in the intervals of silence. The
ivy on the old house shivered and whispered
over their heads, and against one of the
shuttered windows near the ground some
climbing plant, torn loose by the wind, tapped
incessantly, as if calling to the ghosts within.
Charles glanced ever and anon at the sky.
It showed no trace of clearing — as yet. He
was getting cramped with standing. He

wished he had gone on to the stables. His
anxiety for Raymond was sharpened by this
long inaction. He seemed to have been
standing for ages. What were the others
done ? Not a sound reached him between
the lengthening pauses of the wind. His
companion stood drawn up motionless beside
him ; and so they waited, straining eye and
ear into the darkness, conscious that others
were waiting and listening also.

At last in the distance came a faint sound
of wheels. Charles and Brooks instinctively
drew a long breath ; and Charles for the
first time believed the alarm of poachers
had not been a false one after all. It was
the faintest possible sound of wheels. It
would hardly have been heard at all but
for some newly broken stones over which
it passed. Then, without coming nearer, it
stopped.

Charles listened intently. The wind had
dropped down dead at last, and in the
stillness he felt as if he could have heard a

VOL. II. 31

mouse stir miles away. But all was quiet.
There was no sound but the tremulous
whisper of the ivy. The spray near the
window had ceased its tapping against the
shutter, and was listening too. Slowly the
moon came out, and looked on.

And then suddenly, from the direction of
the stables, came a roar of men's voices, a
sound of bursting and crashing through the
underwood, a thundering of heavy feet,
followed by a whirring of frightened birds
into the air. Brooks leaned forward breathing
hard, and tightening his newly moistened
grip on his heavy knotted stick.

Another moment and a man's figure darted
across the open, followed by a chorus of
shouts, and Charles's heart turned sick within
him. It was Raymond.

Cut him off at the gate, Charles," roared
Ralph from behind; 'down to the left."

There was not a second for reflection. As
Brooks rushed headlong forwards, Charles
hurriedly interposed his stick between his.

legs, and, leaving him to flounder, started off
in pursuit.

Down to your left," cried a chorus
of voices from behind, as he shot out of
the shadow of the house ; for Charles was
some way ahead of the rest owing to his
position.

He could hear Raymond crashing in front,
then he saw him again for a moment in a
strip of open, running as a man does who
runs for his life, with a furious recklessness
of all obstacles. Charles saw he was making
for the rocky thickets below the house, where
the uneven ground and the bracken would
olive him a better chance. Did he remember
the deep sunken wall which, broken down in
places, still separated the wilderness of the
garden from the wilderness outside ? Charles
was lean and active, and he soon out-distanced
the other pursuers, but a man Is hard
to overtake who has such reasons for not
being overtaken as Raymond, and do what
he would he could not get near him. He

bore down to the left, but Raymond seemed
to know it, and edging away again, held for
the woods a little higher up. Charles tacked,
and then as he ran he saw that Raymond
was making with headlong blindness through
the shrubbery direct for the deep sunk wall
which bounded the Arleigh grounds. Would
he see it in the uncertain light ? He must
be close upon it now. He was running like
a madman. As Charles looked he saw him
pitch suddenly forward out of sight, and heard
a heavy fall. If Charles ever ran in his life
it was then. As he swift let himself drop
over the wall, lower than Raymond had
taken it, he saw Ralph and Dare, followed
by the others, come streaming down the slope
in the moonlight, spreading as they came.
It was now or never. He rushed up the
fosse under cover of the wall, and almost
stumbled over a prostrate figure, which was
helplessly trying to raise itself on its hands
and knees.

Dangers, it's me," gasped Raymond,

turning a white tortured face feebly towards
him. '' Don't let those devils Q-Qt me."

'' Keep still," panted Charles, pushing him
down among the bracken. '' Lie close under
the wall, and make for the house ao^ain when
its quiet ; " and darting back under cover of
the wall, to the place where he had dropped
over it, he found Dare almost upon him, and
rushed headlong down the steep rocky
descent, roaring at the top of his voice, and
calling wildly to the others. The pursuit
swept away through the wood, down the hill,
and up the sandy ascent on the other side ;
swept almost over the top of Charles, who
had flung himself down, dead-beat and gasping
for breath, at the bottom of the gully.

He heard the last of the heavy lumbering
feet crash past him, and heard the shouting
die away before he stiffly dragged himself
Lip again, and began to struggle painfully
back up the slippery hill-side, down which
he had rushed with a whole regiment of loose
and hopping stones ten minutes before. He

regained the wall at last, and crept back to
the place where he had left Raymond. It
was with a slsfh of relief that he found that
he was one. No doubt he had trot into
safety somewhere, perhaps in the cottage
itself, where no one would dream of looking
for him. He stumbled along among the
loose stones by the wall till he came to the
place by the gate where it was broken down,
and clambering up, for the gate was locked,
made his way back through the shrubberies,
and desolate remains of garden, towards the
point near the house where Raymond had
first broken covert. As he came round a
clump of bushes his heart gave a great leap,
and then sank within him.

Three men were standing in the middle of
the lawn in the moonlight, gathered round
something on the ground. Seized by a
horrible misgiving, he hurried towards them.
At a little distance a dog-cart was being
slowly led over the grass-grown drive towards
the house.

What Is it ? Any one hurt ? " he asked
hoarsely, joining the little group ; but as he
looked he needed no answer. One glance
told him that the prostrate, unconscious
figure on the ground, with blood slowly
oozing from the open mouth, was Raymond
Deyncourt.

Great God ! the man's dying," he said,
dropping on his knees beside him.

"He's all right, sir; he'll come to," said
a little brisk man in a complacent, peremptory
tone. " It's only the young chap" — pointing
to the bashful but gratified Brooks — "as
crocked him over the head a bit sharper
than needful. Here, Esp" — to the grinning
Slumberleigh policeman, whom Charles now
recognized, " tell the lad to bring up the 'horse
and trap over the grass. We shall have a
business to shift him as It Is."

Is he a poacher ? " asked Charles. "He
doesn't look like It."

Lord ! no, sir," replied the little man, and
Charles's heart went straight down Into his

boots and stayed there. '' Fm come down
from Birmingham after him. He's no
poacher. The police have wanted him very
special for some time for the Francisco
forgery case."

CHAPTER XL

Charles watched the detective and the
policeman hoist Raymond into the dog-cart
and drive away, supporting him between
them. No doubt it had been the wheels of
that dog-cart which they had heard in the
distance. Then he turned to Brooks.

How is it you remained behind } " he
asked sharply.

Brooks's face fell, and he explained that
just as he was starting in the pursuit he had
caught his legs on " Sir Charles sir's" stick,
and '' barked himself."

*' I remember," said Charles. " You got
in my way. You should look out where you
are going. You may as well go and find mystick."


The poor victim of duplicity departed
rather crestfallen, and at this moment Dare
came up.

We have lost him," he said, wiping his
forehead. *' I don't know what has become
of him."

'* He doubled back here," said Charles.
*' I followed, but you all went on. The police
have got him. He was not a poacher after
all, so they said."

Ah ! " said Dare. " They have him ? I
regret it. He ran well. I could wish he
had escaped. I was in the doorway of a
stable watching a long time, and all in a
moment he rushed past me out of the door.
The policeman was seeking within when he
came out, but though he touched me I could
not stop him. And now," with sudden
weariness as his excitement evaporated,
*' all is then over for the night ? And the
others ? Where are they ? Do we wait for
them here ? "

'' We should wait some time if we did,"

replied Charles. " Ralph Is certain to go onto
the other coverts. He has poachers on
the brain. Probably the rumour that they
were coming here was only a blind, and they
are doings a good business somewhere else.
I am eine home. I have had enough
enjoyment for one evening. I should advise
you to do the same."

Dare winced, and did not answer, and
Charles suddenly remembered that there
were circumstances which might make it
difficult for him to q-q back to Vandon.

They walked away together in silence.
Dare, who had been wildly excited, was
beo-inninor to feel the reaction. He was

o o

becoming giddy and faint with exhaustion
and want of food. He had eaten nothing all
day. They had not gone far when Charles
saw that he stumbled at every other step.

'' Look out," he said once, as Dare stumbled
more heavily than usual, " you'll twist your
ankle on these loose stones if you're not
more careful."

*' It is SO dark," said Dare faintly.

The moon was shining brightly at the
moment, and as Charles turned to look at
him in surprise, Dare staggered forward, and
would have collapsed altogether if he had
not caught him by the arm.

Sit down," he said authoritatively. " Here,
not on me, man, on the bank. Always sit
down when you can't stand. You have had
too much excitement. I felt the same after
my first Christmas tree. You will be better
directly."

Charles spoke lightly, but he knew from
what he had seen that Dare must have
passed a miserable day. He had never
liked him. It was impossible that he should
have done so. But even his more active
dislike of the last few months gave way to
pity for him now, and he felt almost ashamed
at the thought that his own happiness was
only to be built on the ruin of poor Dare's.

He made him swallow the contents of his
flask, and as Dare choked and gasped himself

back into the fuller possession of his faculties,
and experienced the benign influences of
whisky, entertained at first unawares, his
heart, always easily touched, warmed to the
owner of the silver flask, and of the strong
arm that was supporting him with an unwillingness
he little dreamed of. His
momentary jealousy of Charles In the summer
had long since been forgotten. He felt
towards him now, as Charles helped him up,
and he proceeded slowly on his arm, as a
friend and a brother.

Charles, entirely unconscious of the noble
sentiments which he and his flask had Inspired,
looked narrowly at his companion, as they
neared the turn for Atherstone, and said with
some anxiety —

Where are you going to-night ? "

Dare made no answer. He had no Idea
where he was going.

Charles hesitated. He could not let him
walk back alone to Vandon — over the bridge.
It was long past midnight. Dare's evident

Inability to think where to turn touched
him.

*' Can I be of any use to you ? " he said
earnestly. '' Is there anything I can do ?
Perhaps, at present, you would rather not goto
Vandon."

"No, no," said Dare, shuddering; ''I will
not go there."

Charles felt more certain than ever that It
would not be safe to leave him to his own
devices, and his anxiety not to lose sight of
him in his present state gave a kindness to
his manner of which he was hardly aware.

Come back to Atherstone with me," he
said. " I will explain it to Ralph when he
comes in. It will be all right."

Dare accepted the proposition with gratitude.
It relieved him for the moment from
coming to any decision. He thanked Charles
with effusion, and then — his natural impulsiveness
quickened by the quantity of raw spirits
he had swallowed, by this mark of sympathy,
by the moonlight, by Heaven knows what

that loosens the facile tongue of reticence
then suddenly, without a moment's preparation,
he began to pour forth his troubles
into Charles's astonished and reluctant ears.
It was vain to try to stop him, and, after the
first moment of instinctive recoil, Charles
was seized by a burning curiosity to know all
where he already knew so much, to put an
end to this racking suspense.

And that is not the worst," said Dare,
when he had recounted how the woman he
had seen on the church steps was in very
deed the wife she claimed to be. '' That is
not the worst. I love another. We are
affianced. We are as one. I bring sorrow
upon her I love."

*' She knows, then?" asked Charles
hoarsely, hating himself for being such a
hypocrite, but unable to refrain from putting
a leading question.

She knows that some one — a person — is
at Vandon," replied Dare, *' who calls herself
my wife, but I tell her it is not true, and she,

all goodness, all heavenly calm, she trusts me,
and once again she promises to marry me if I
am free, as I tell her, as I swear to her."

Charles listened in astonishment. He saw
Dare was speaking the truth, but that Ruth
could have given such a promise was difficult
to believe. He did not know, what Dare
even had not at all realized, that she had
given it In the belief that Dare, from his
answers to her questions, had never been
married to the woman at all, In the belief
that she was a mere adventuress seeking to
make money out of him by threatening a
scandalous libel, and without the faintest
suspicion that she was his divorced wife,
whether legally or Illegally divorced.

Dare had understood the promise to
depend on the legality or illegality of that
divorce, and told Charles so in all good faith.
With an extraordinary effort of reticence he
withheld the name of his affianced, and pressing
Charles's arm, begged him to ask no
more. And Charles, half sorry, half contemptuous,

wholly ashamed of having allowed
such a confidence to be forced upon him,
marched on in silence, now divided between
mortal anxiety for Raymond and pity for
Dare, now striving to keep down a certain
climbing rapturous emotion which would not
be suppressed.

One of the servants had waited up for
their return, and after eettlnof Dare something
to eat, Charles took him up to the
room which had been prepared for himself,
and then feeling he had done his duty by
him, and that he was safe for the present,
went back to smoke by the smoking-room
fire till Ralph came In, which was not till
several hours later. When he did at last
return It was In triumph. He was dead-beat,
voiceless, and footsore ; but a sense of
glory sustained him. Four poachers had
been taken red-handed in the coverts furthest
from Arleigh. The rumour about Arleigh
had, of course, been a blind ; but he, Ralph,
thank Heaven, was not to be taken In In

VOL. II. 32

such a hurry as all that ! He could look
after his Interests as well as most men. In
short, he was full of glorification to the brim,
and It was only after hearing a hoarse and
full account of the whole transaction several
times over that Charles was able In a pause
for breath to tell him that he had offered
Dare a bed, as he was quite tired out, and
was some distance from Vandon.

'all right. Quite right," said Ralph, unheeding
; " but you and he missed the best
part of the whole thing. Great Scot ! when
I saw them come dodging round under the

Black Rock and " He was off again;

and Charles doubted afterwards as he fell
asleep In his armchair by the fire, whether
Ralph, already slumbering peacefully opposite
him, had paid the least attention to what he
had told him, and would not have entirely
forgotten it In the morning. And, In fact, he
did, and It was not until Evelyn desired with
dignity on the morrow, that another time
unsuitable persons should not be brought at

midnight to her house, that he remembered
what had happened.

Charles, who was present, immediately
took the blame upon himself, but Evelyn was
not to be appeased. By this time the whole
neighbourhood was crinoline with the news of
the arrival of a foreign wife at Vandon, and
Evelyn felt that Dare's presence in her blue
bedroom, with crockery and crewel-work
curtains to match, compromised that apartment
and herself, and that he must incontinently
depart out of it. It was in vain that
Ralph and even Charles expostulated. She
remained unmoved. It was not, she said, as
if she had been unwilling to receive him in
the first instance, as a possible Roman
Catholic, though many might have blamed
her for that, and perhaps she had been to
blame ; but she had never, no, never, had
any one to stay that anybody could say anything
about. (This was a solemn fact which
it was impossible to deny.) Ralph might
remember her own cousin, Willie Best, and

she had always Heed Wile, had never been
asked again after that tune — Ralph chuckled
that time he knew of. She was very sorry,
and she quite understood all Charles meant,
and she quite saw the force of what he said ;
but she could not allow people to stay in the
house who had foreign wives that had been
kept secret. What was poor Willie, who
had only — Ralph need not laugh ; there was
nothing to laugh at — what was Willie to
this ? She must be consistent. She could
see Charles was very angry with her, but she
could not encourage what was wrong, even
if he was angry. In short, Dare must go.

But when it came to the point, it was
found that Dare could not 2:0. Nothing
short of force would have turned the unwelcome
guest out of the bed in the blue bedroom,
from which he made no attempt to rise,
and on which he lay worn out and feverish,
In a stupor of sheer mental and physical
exhaustion.

Charles and Ralph went and looked at

him rather ruefully, with masculine helplessness,
and the end of it was that Evelyn, in
no wise softened, for she was a good woman,
had to give way, and a doctor was sent for.

Send for the man in D . Don't have

the Slumberleigh man," said Charles ; " it
will only make more talk ; " and the doctor
from D was accordingly sent for.

He did not arrive till the afternoon, and
after he had seen Dare, and given him a
sleeping draught, and had talked reassuringly
of a mental shock and a feverish temperament,
he apologized for his delay in coming.
He had been kept, he said, drawing on his
gloves as he spoke, by a very serious case in

the police-station at D . A man had

been arrested on suspicion the previous
night, and he seemed to have sustained some
fatal internal injury. He ought to have been
taken to the infirmary at once ; but it had
been thought he was only shamming when
first arrested, and once in the police-station
he could not be moved, and — the doctor took

up his hat — he would probably hardly outlive
the day.

By the way," he added, turning at the
door, "he asked over and over again while
I was with him to see you or Mr. Dangers.
Vm sure I forget which, but I promised him
I would mention it. Nearly slipped my
memory, all the same. He said one of you
had known him in his better days, at — Oxford,
was it ? "

'' What name ? " asked Charles.

Stephens," replied the doctor. "He
seemed to think you would remember him."

*' Stephens," said Charles reflectively.
Stephens ! I once had a valet of that
name, and a very good one he was, who left
my service rather abruptly, taking v/ith him
numerous portable memorials of myself, including
a set of diamond studs. I endeavoured
at the time to keep up my acquaintance with
him ; but he took measures effectually to
close it. In fact, I have never heard of him
from that day to this."

'' That's the man, no doubt," replied the
doctor. "He has — er — a sort of look about
him as if he might have been in a gentleman's
service once ; seen-better-days-sort of look,
you know."

Charles said he should be at D in

the course of the afternoon, and would make
a point of looking in at the police-station j
and a quarter of an hour later he was driving
as hard as he could tear in Ralph's high dogcart
alone the road to D . It was a six-mile

drive, and he slackened as he reached
the straggling suburbs of the little town,
lying before him in a dim mist of fine rain
and smoke.

Arrived at the dismal building which he
knew to be the police-station, he was shown
into a small room hung round with papers,
where the warden was writing, and desired,
with an authority so evidently accustomed
to obedience that it invariably insured it. to
see the prisoner. The prisoner he said, at
whose arrest he had been present, had expressed

a wish to see him through the doctor ;
and as the warden demurred for the space of
one second, Charles mentioned that he was
a magistrate and justice of the peace, and
sternly desired the confused official to show
him the way at once. That functionary,
awed by the stately manner which none knew
better than Charles when to assume, led the
way down a narrow stone passage, past
numerous doors behind one of which a
banging sound, accompanied by alcoholic
oaths, suggested the presence of a free-born
Briton chafing under restraint.

I had him put upstairs, sir," said the
warden humbly. " We didn't know when he
came in as it was a case for the infirmary ;
but seeing he was wanted for a big thing,
and poorly in his 'earth, I giv' him one of the
superior cells, with a mattress and piller
complete."

The man was evidently afraid that Charles
had come as a magistrate to give him a
reprimand of some kind, for, as he led the

way up a narrow stone staircase, he continued
to expatiate on the luxury of the " mattress
and piller," on the superiority of the cell, and
how a nurse had been sent for at once from
the infirmary, when, owing to his own
shrewdness, the prisoner was found to be " a
hospital case."

'' The doctor wouldn't have him moved,"
he said, opening a closed door in a long
passage full of doors, the rest of which stood
open. '' It's not regular to have him in here,
sir, I know ; but the doctor wouldn't have
him moved."

Charles passed through the door, and
found himself in a narrow whitewashed cell,
with a bed at one side, over which an old
woman in the dress of a hospital nurse was
bending.

You can come out, Martha," said the
warden. '' The gentleman's come to see 'im."

As the old woman disappeared curtseying,
he lingered to say in a whisper.

Do you know him, sir ? "

Yes," said Charles, looking fixedly at the
figure on the bed. '' I remember him. I
knew him years ago, in his better days.
I dare say he will have something to tell
me."

*' If it should be anything as requires a
witness," continued the man — ''he's said a
deal already, and it's all down in proper form
but if there's anything more "

*' I will let you know," said Charles, looking
towards the door, and the warden took
the hint and went out of It, closing it quietly.

Charles crossed the little room, and sitting
down in the crazy chair beside the bed, laid
his hand gently on the listless hand lying
palm upwards on the rough grey counterpane.


Raymond," he said ; " it is I, Dangers."

The hand trembled a little, and made a
faint attempt to clasp his. Charles took the
cold lifeless hand, and held it in his strong
gentle grasp.

It is Dangers," he said again.

The sick man turned his head slowly on
the pillow, and looked fixedly at him.
Death's own colour, which imitation can
never imitate, nor ignorance mistake, was
stamped upon that rigid face.

*' I'm done for," he said with a faint smile,
which touched the lips but did not reach the
solemn far-reaching eyes.

Charles could not speak.

'' You said I should turn up tails once too
often," continued Raymond, with slow halting
utterance, " and I've done it. I knew it was
all up when I pitched over that damned wallon
to the stones. I felt I'd killed myself."

How did they get you ? " said Charles.

'' I don't know," replied Raymond, closing
his eyes wearily, as if the subject had ceased
to interest him. " I think I tried to creep
along under the wall towards the place where
it is broken down, when I fancy some one
came over long after the others, and knocked
me on the head."

Charles reflected with sudden wrath that

Brooks no doubt had been the man, and how
much worse than useless his manoeuvre with
the stick had been.

** I did my best," he said humbly.

Yes," replied the other ; '' and I would
not have forgotten it either if — if there had
been any time to remember it in ; but there
won't be. I've owned up," he continued in a
laboured whisper. " Stephens has made a full
confession. You'll have it in all the papers
tomorrow. And while I was at it I piled
on some more I never did, which will get
friends over the water out of trouble. Tom
Lovell did me a good turn once, and he's
been in hiding these two years for — well, it
don't much matter what, but I've shoved
that in with the rest, though it was never in my
line — never. He'll be able to go home now."

Have not you confessed under your own
name ? "

No," replied Raymond, with a curious
remnant of that pride of race at which it is
the undisputed privilege of low birth and a

plebeian temperament to sneer. " I won't
have my own name dragged In. I dropped
it years ago. I've confessed as Stephens,
and I'll die and be burled as Stephens. I'm
not going to disgrace the family."

There was a constrained silence of some
minutes.

Would you like to see your sister ? "
asked Charles ; but Raymond shook his head
with feeble decision.

That man ! " he said suddenly after a
long pause. *' That man in the doorway !
How did he come there ? "

There Is no man In the doorway"' said
Charles reassuringly. '' There is no one here
but me."

'' Last night," continued Raymond, " last
night in the stables. I watched him stand in
the doorway."

Charles remembered how Dare had said
Raymond had bolted out past him.

That was Dare," he said ; " the man who
was to have been your brother-in-law."

Ah ! " said Raymond with evident unconcern.
" I thought I'd seen him before. But
he's altered. He's grown into a man. So
he is to marry Ruth, is he ? "

Not now. He was to have done, but a
divorced wife from America has turned up.
She arrived at Vandon the day before yesterday.
It seems the divorce in America does
not hold In England."

Raymond started.

The old fox," he said with feeble energy.
*' Tracked him out, has she ? We used to
call them fox and o^oose when she married

him. By , she squeezed every dollar

out of him before she let him go, and now
she's got him again, has she ? She always
was a cool hand. The old fox," he continued
with contempt and admiration In his voice.
*' She's playing a bold game, and the luck is
on her side, but she's no more his wife than
I am, and she knows that perfectly well."

Do you mean that the divorce was ? "

*' Divorce, bosh ! " said Raymond, working

himself up into a state of feeble excitement
frightful to see. " I tell you she was
never married to him legally. She called
herself a widow when she married Dare, but
she had a husband living, Jasper Carroll,
serving his time at Baton Rouge jail, down
South, all the time. He died there a year
afterwards, but hardly a soul knows It to this
day ; and those that do don't care about
bringing themselves into public notice.
They'll prefer hush-money, if they find out
what she's up to now. The prison register
would prove it directly. But Dare will never
find it out. How should he ? "

Raymond sank back speechless and panting.
A strong shudder passed over him, and
his breath seemed to fail.

'' It's coming," he whispered hoarsely.
That lying doctor said I had several hours,
and I feel it coming already."

'' Dangers," he continued hurriedly, " are
you still there ? " Then, as Charles bent
over him, '* Closer ; bend down. I want to

see your face. Keep your own counsel
about Dare. There's no one to tell if you
don't. He's not fit for Ruth. You can
marry her now. I saw what I saw. She'll
take you. And some day — some day, when
you have been married a long time, tell her
I'm dead ; and tell her — about Lovell, and
how I owned to it — but that I did not do it.
I never sank so low as that." His voice had
dropped to a whisper which died imperceptibly
away.

*' I will tell her," said Charles; and Raymond
turned his face to the wall, and spoke
no more.

The struggle had passed, and for the
moment death held aloof, but his shadow
was there, lying heavy on the deepening
twilight, and darkening all the little room.
Raymond seemed to have sunk into a stupor,
and at last Charles rose silently and went out.

He was dimly conscious of meeting someone
in the passage, of answering some question
in the negative, and then he found himself

gathering up the reins, and driving

through the narrow Halted streets of D

in the dusk, and so away down the long flat
high-road to Atherstone.

A white mist had risen up to meet the
darkness, and had shrouded all the land. In
sweeps and curves along the fields a gleaming
pallor lay of heavy dew upon the grass, and
on the road the honor lines of dim water in
the ruts reflected the dim sky.

Carts lumbered past him in the darkness
once or twice, the men in them peering back
at his reckless driving ; and once a carriage
with lamps came swiftly up the road towards
him, and passed him with a flash, grazing his
wheel. But he took no heed. Drive as
quickly as he would through mist and darkness,
a voice followed him, the voice of a
pursuing devil close at his ear, whispering in
the halting, feeble utterance of a dying man — ■

*' Keep your own counsel about Dare.
There is no one to tell if you don't."

Charles shivered and set his teeth. High

VOL. II. Son

the hill among the trees the distant
lights of Slumberleigh shone like glowworms
through the mist. He looked at them with
wild eyes. She was there, the woman who
loved him, and whom he passionately loved.
He could stretch forth his hand to take her
if he would. His breath came hard and
thick. A hand seemed clutching and tearing
at his heart. And close at his ear the
whisper came —

*' There is no one to tell if yon dont

CHAPTER XII.

It was close on dressing time when Charles
came into the drawing-room, where Evelyn
and Molly were building castles on the
hearth rug in the ruddy firelight. After
changing his damp clothes, he had gone to
the smoking-room, but he had found Dare
sitting there • in a vast dressing-gown of
Ralph's, in a state of such utter dejection,
with his head in his hands, that he had
silently retreated again before he had been
perceived. He did not want to see Dare
just now. He wished he were not in the
house.

Quite oblivious of the fact that he was not
in Evelyn's good graces, he went and sat by
the drawing-room fire, and absently watched

Molly playing with her bricks. Presently,
when the dressing-bell rang, Evelyn went
away to dress, and Molly, tired of her castles,
suggested that she might sit on his knee.

He let her climb up and wriggle and
finally settle herself as it seemed good to
her, but he did not speak ; and so they satin
the firelight together, Molly's hand lovingly
stroking his black velvet coat. But her
talents lay in conversation, not in silence,
and she soon broke it.

'' You do look beautiful to-night, Uncle
Charles."

'' Do I ?" without elation.

'' Do you know. Uncle Charles, Ninny's
sister, with the wart on her cheek, has been
to tea ? She's in the nursery now. Ninny
says she's to have a bite of supper before
she goes."

'' You don't say so."

'' And we had buttered toast to tea, and
she said you were the most splendid gentleman
she ever saw."

Charles did not answer. He did not even
seem to have heard this Interesting tribute

<z>

to his personal appearance. INIolly felt that
something must be gravely amiss, and laying
her soft cheek against his she whispered
confidentially —

Uncle Charles, are you uncomfortable
inside ?"

There was a long pause.

Yes, Molly," at last, pressing her to him.

'ris it there ?" said Molly sympathetically,
laying her hand on the front portion of her
amber sash.

''No, INIolly; I only wish it were."

It's not the little green pears, then," said
Molly with a sigh of experience, " because
it's always jilt there, always, with them. It
was again yesterday. They're nasty little
pears " — with a touch of personal resentment.

Uncle Charles smiled at last, but it was
not quite his usual smile.

Miss Molly," said a voice from the door,
your mamma has sent for you."

It's not bedtime yet."

'your mamma says you are to come at
once," was the reply.

Molly, knowing from experience that an
appeal to Charles was useless on these occasions,
wriggled down from her perch rather
reluctantly, and bade her uncle "Good night."

Perhaps it will be better tomorrow," she
said consolingly.

Perhaps," he said, nodding at her ; and
he took her little head between his hands,
and kissed her. She rubbed his kiss off
again, and walked gravely away. She could
not be merry and ride in triumph upstairs on
kind surveying Sarah's willing back, while
her friend was " uncomfortable inside." There
was no galloping down the passage that
night, no pleasantries with the sponge in
Molly's tub, no last capering in light attire.
Molly went silently to bed, and as on a
previous occasion when in great anxiety
about Vic, who had thoughtlessly gone out
in the twilight for a stroll, and had forgotten

the lapse of time, she added a whispered
clause to her little petitions which the ear of
'' Ninny " failed to catch.

Charles recognized, in the way Evelyn had
taken Molly from him, that she was not yet
appeased. It should be remembered, in order
to do her justice, that a good woman's means
of showing a proper resentment are so
straitened and circumscribed by her conscience
that she is obliged, from actual want
of material, to resort occasionally to little acts
of domestic tyranny, small in themselves as
midge bites, but, fortunately for the cause of
virtue, equally exasperating. Indeed, it Is
improbable that any really good woman
would ever so far forget herself as to lose
her temper, if she were once thoroughly
aware how much more irritating in the long
run a judicious course of those small persecutions
may be made, which the tenderest
conscience need not scruple to Inflict.

Charles was unreasonably annoyed at
having Molly taken from him. As he sat

by the fire alone, tired in mind and body, a
hovering sense of cold, and an Intense weariness
of life took him ; and a great longing
came over him like a thirst — a lonoinor for a
little of the personal happiness which seemed
to be the common lot of so many round him ;
for a home where he had now only a house ;
for love and warmth and companionship, and
possibly some day a little Molly of his own,
who would not be taken from him at the
caprice of another.

The only barrier to the fulfilment of such
a dream had been a conscientious scruple of
Ruth's, to which at the time he had urged
upon her that she did wrong to yield. That
barrier was now broken down ; but It ought
never to have existed. Ruth and he belonged
to each other by divine law, and she
had no right to give herself to any one else
to satisfy her own conscience. And now —
all would be well. She was absolved from
her promise. She had been wrong to persist
in keeping it in his opinion ; but at any rate

she was honourably released from it now.
And she would marry him.

And that second promise, which she had
made to Dare, that she would still marry him
if he were free to marry ?

Charles moved impatiently in his chair.
From what exaggerated sense of duty she
had made that promise he knew not ; but he
would save her from the effects of her own
perverted judgment. He knew what Ruth's
word meant, since he had tried to make her
break it. He knew that she had promised to
marry Dare if he were free. He knew that,
having made that promise, she would keep it.

It would be mere sentimental folly on his
part to say the word that would set Dare
free. Even if the American woman were
not his wife in the eye of the law, she had a
moral claim upon him. The possibility of
Ruth's still marrying Dare was too hideous
to be thought of. If her judgment was so
entirely perverted by a morbid conscientious
fear of following her own inclination that she

could actually give Dare that promise, directly
after the arrival of the adventuress, Charles
would take the decision out of her hands.
As she could not judge fairly for herself, he
would judge for her, and save her from
herself.

For her sake as much as for his own he
resolved to say nothing. He had only to
keep silence.

There s no one to tell if you dont

The door opened, and Charles gave a start
as Dare came into the room. He was taken
aback by the sudden rush of hatred that
surged up within him at his appearance. It
angered and shamed him, and Dare, much
shattered but feebly cordial, found him very
irresponsive and silent for the few minutes
that remained before the dinner bell rang
and the others came down.

It was not a pleasant meal. If Dare had
been a shade less ill, he must have noticed
the marked coldness of Evelyn's manner, and
how Ralph good-naturedly endeavoured to

make up for it by double helpings of soup
and fish, which he was quite unable to eat.
Charles and Lady Mary were never congenial
spirits at the best of times, and to-night was
not the best. That lady, after feebly provoking
the attack as usual, sustained some
crushing defeats, mainly couched In the
language of Scripture, which was, as she felt
with Christian indignation, turning her own
favourite weapon against herself, as possibly
Charles thought she deserved, for putting
such a weapon to so despicable a use.

I really don't know," she said tremulously
afterwards in the drawing-room, " what
Charles will come to If he goes on like this.
I don't mind," venomously, '' his tone towards
myself. That I do not regard ; but his entire
want of reverence for the Church and
apostolic succession ; his profane remarks
about vestments ; in short, his entire attitude
towards religion gives me the gravest
anxiety."

In the dining-room the conversation

flagged, and Charles was beginning to
wonder whether he could make some excuse
and bolt, when a servant came in with a
note for him. It was from the doctor in
D , and ran as follows : —

Dear Sir,

I have just seen {6.30 p.m.)
Stephens again. I found him in a state of
the wildest excitement, and he implored me
to send you word that he wanted to see you
again. He seemed so sure that you would
go if you knew he wished it, that I have
commissioned Sergeant Brown's boy to take
this. He wished me to say ' there was
something more.' If there is any further
confession he desires to make, he has not
much time to do it in. I did not expect he
would have lasted till now. As it is, he is
going fast. Indeed, I hardly think you will
be in time to see him ; but I promised to give

you this message.

*' Yours faithfully,

'' R. White."

I must go," Charles said, throwing the
note across to Ralph; 'give the boy half a
crown, will you ? I suppose I may take
Othello ? " and before Ralph had mastered the
contents of the note, and begun to fumble fora
half-crown, Charles was saddling Othello
himself, without waiting for the groom, and.
in a few minutes was clattering over the
stones out of the yard.

There was just light enough to ride by,
and he rode hard. What was it ; what could
it be that Raymond had still to tell him ?
He felt certain it had something to do with
Ruth, and probably Dare. Should he arrive
in time to hear it ? There at last were the

lichts of D in front of him. Should he

arrive in time ? As he pulled up his steaming
horse before the police-station his heart
misgave him.

*' Am I too late ? " he asked of the man
who came to the door.

He looked bewildered.

Stephens ? Is he dead ? "

The man shook his head.

'' They say he's almost gone."

Charles threw the rein to him, and hurried
indoors. He met some one coming out, the
doctor probably he thought afterwards, who
took him upstairs, and sent away the old
woman who was in attendance.

*' I can't do anything more," he said, opening
the door for him. " Wanted elsewhere.
Very good of you, I'm sure. Not much use,
I'm afraid. Good night. I'll tell the old
woman to be about."

A dim lamp was burning on the little
corner cupboard near the door, and as
Charles bent over the bed, he saw in a
moment, even by that pale light, that he was
too late.

Life was still there, if that feeble tossing
could be called life ; but all else was gone.
Raymond's feet were already on the boundary
of the land where all things are forgotten ;
and at the sight of that dim country, memory,
affrighted, had slipped away and left him.

Was It possible to recall him to himself
even yet ?

*' Raymond," he said, In a low distinct
voice, " what is it you wish to say ? Tell
me quickly what it is."

But the long agony of farewell between
body and soul had begun, and the eyes that
seemed to meet his with momentary recognition,
only looked at him In anguish, seeking
help and finding none, and wandered away
again, vainly searching for that which was
not to be found.

Charles could do nothing, but he had not
the heart to leave him to struggle with death
entirely alone, and so, in awed and helpless
compassion, he sat by him through one long
hour after another, waiting for the end which
still delayed, his eyes wandering ever and
anon from the bed to the high grated window,
or idly spelling out the different names and
disparaging remarks that previous occupants
had scratched and scrawled over the whitewashed
walls.

And so the hours passed.

At last, all in a moment, the struggle
ceased. The dying man vainly tried to raise
himself to meet what was coming, and
Charles put his strong arm round him and
held him up. He knew that consciousness
sometimes returns at the moment of death.

'' Raymond," he whispered earnestly.
Raymond."

A tremor passed over the face. The lips
moved. The homeless, lingering soul came
back, and looked for the last time fixedly and
searchingly at him out of the dying eyes, and
then — seeing no help for it — went hurriedly
on its way, leaving the lips parted to speak,
leaving the deserted eyes vacant and terrible,
until after a time Charles closed them.

He had gone without speaking. Whatever
he had wished to say would remain unsaid
for ever. Charles laid him down, and stood
a long time looking at the set face. The
likeness to Raymond seemed to be fading
away under the touch of the Mighty Hand,

but the look of Ruth, the better look,
remained.

At last he turned away and went out,
stopping to wake the old nurse, heavily asleep
in the passage. His horse was brought
round for him from somewhere, and he
mounted and rode away. He had no idea
how long he had been there. It must have
been many hours, but he had quite lost
sight of time. It was still dark, but the
morning could not be far off. He rode
mechanically his horse, which knev/ the road,
taking him at its own pace. The night was
cold, but he did not feel it. All power of
feeling anything seemed dried up within him.
The last two days and nights of suspense
and hio^h strung emotion seemed to have left
him incapable of any further sensation at
present beyond that of an intense fatigue.

He rode slowly, and put up his horse
with careful absence of mind. The eastern
horizon was already growing pale and distinct
as he found his way indoors through the

VOL. II. 34

drawing-room window, the shutter of which
had been left unhinged for him by Ralph,
according to custom when either of them was
out late. He went noiselessly up to his
room, and sat down. After a time he started
to find himself still sitting there ; but he
remained without stirring, too tired to move,
his elbows on the table, his chin in his hands.
He felt he could not sleep if he were to
drag himself into bed. He might just as
well stay where he was.

And as he sat watching the dawn his
mind began to stir, to shake off its lethargy
and stupor, to struggle into keener and keener
consciousness.

There are times, often accompanying great
physical prostration, when a veil seems to
be lifted from our mental vision. As in the
Mediterranean one may glance down suddenly
on a calm day, and see in the blue depths
with a strange surprise the seaweed and the
rocks and the fretted sands below, so also in
rare hours we see the hidden depths of thei



soul, over which we have floated in heedless
unconsciousness so long, and catch a glimpse
of the hills and the valleys of those untravelled
regions.

Charles sat very still with his chin in his
hands. His mind did not work. It looked
right down to the heart of things.

There is, perhaps, no time when mental
vision is so clear, when the mind is so sane,
as when death has come very near to us.
There is a light which he brings with him,
which he holds before the eyes of the dying,
the stern light seldom seen, of reality, before
which self-deception, and meanness, and that
which maketh a lie, cower in their native
deformity and slip away.

And death sheds at times a strange gleam
from that same light upon the souls of those
who stand within his shadow, and watch his
kingdom coming. In an awful transfiguration,
all things stand for what they are. Evil
is seen to be evil, and good to be good.
Right and wrong sunder more far apart,

and we cannot mistake them as we do at
other times. The debateable land stretching
between them — that favourite resort of undecided
natures — disappears for a season, and
offers no longer its false refuge. The mind
is taken away from all artificial supports,
and the knowledge comes home to the soul
afresh, with strong conviction, that " truth is
our only armour in all passages of life," as
with awed hearts we see it is the only armour
in the hour of death, the only shield that we
may bear away with us into the unknown
country.

Charles shuddered involuntarily. His decision
of the afternoon to keep secret what
Raymond had told him was gradually but
surely assuming a different aspect. What
was it, after all, but a suppression of truth,
a kind of lie ? What was it but doing evil
that good mio^ht come ?

It was no use harping on the old string
of consequences. He saw that he had resolved
to commit a deliberate sin, to be false

to that great principle of life — right for the
sake of right, truth for the love of truth — by
which of late he had been trying to live. Sofar,
it had not been difficult, for his nature
was not one to do things by halves, but
now

Old voices out of the past, which he had
thought long dead, rose out of forgotten graves
to free him on. What was he that he should
stick at such a trifle ? Why should a man
with his past begin to split hairs ?

And conscience said nothing, only pointed,
only showed with a clearness that allowed of
no mistake, that he had come to a place
where two roads met.

Charles's heart suffered then " the nature
of an insurrection." The old lawless powers
that had once held sway, and had been forced
back into servitude under the new rule of the
last few years of responsibility and honour,
broke loose, and spread like wildfire throughout
the kingdom of his heart.

The struggle deepened to a battle fierce

and furious. His soul was rent with a frenzy
of tumult, of victory and defeat ever changing
sides, ever returning to the attack.

Can a kingdom divided against itself
stand ?

He sat motionless, gazing with absent eyes
in front of him.

And across the shock of battle, and above
the turmoil of conflicting passions, Ruth's
voice came to him. He saw the pale
spiritual face, the deep eyes so full of love
and anguish, and yet so steadfast with a
great resolve. He heard again her last
words, " I cannot do what is wrong, even for
you."

He stretched out his hands suddenly.

'' You would not, Ruth," he said half aloud ;
'you would not. Neither will I do what I
know to be wrong for you, so help me God !
not even for you."

The dawn was breaking, was breaking
clear and cold, and infinitely far away ; was
coming up through unfathomable depths and

distances, through gleaming caverns and
fastnesses of light, like a new revelation fresh
from God. But Charles did not see it, for
his head was down on the table, and he was
crying like a child.

CHAPTER XIII.

Dare was down early the following horning,
much too early for the convenience of the
housemaids, who were dusting the drawing-room
when he appeared there. He was
usually as late as any of the young and gilded
unemployed who feel it incumbent on themselves
to show by these public demonstrations
their superiority to the rules and fixed
hours of the working and thinking world,
with whoni, however, their fear of being
identified is a groundless apprehension.
But to-day Dare experienced a mournful
satisfaction in being down so early. He felt
the underlying pathos of such a marked
departure from his usual habits. It was
obvious that nothing but deep affliction or

cub-hunting could have been the cause, and
the cub-hunting was over. The inference
was not one that could be missed by the
meanest capacity.

He took up the newspaper with a sigh,
and settled himself in front of the blazing
fire, which was still young and leaping, with
the enthusiasm of dry sticks not quite gone
out of it.

Charles heard Dare go down just as he
finished dressing, for he was early too that
morning. There was more than half an
hour before breakfast time. He considered a
moment, and then went downstairs. Some
resolutions, once made, cannot be carried out
too quickly.

As he passed through the hall he looked
out. The mist of the niofht before had
sought out every twig and leaflet, and had
silvered it to meet the sun. The rime on
the grass looked cool and tempting. Charles's
head ached, and he went out for a moment
and stood in the crisp still air. The rooks

were cawing high up. The face of the earth
had not altered during the night. It
shimmered and was glad, and smiled at his
grave careworn face.

Hallo ! " called a voice ; and Ralph's
head, with his hair sticking straight out on
every side, was thrust out of a window. " I
say, Charles, early bird you are ! "

*' Yes," said Charles, looking up and
leisurely going indoors again ; " you are the
first worm I have seen."

He found Dare, as he expected, in the
drawing-room, and proceeded at once to the
business he had in hand.

I am glad you are down early," he said.
*' You are the very man I want."

*' Ah ! " replied Dare, shaking his head,
when the heart is troubled there is no
sleep, none. All the clocks are heard."

*' Possibly. I should not wonder if you
heard another in the course of half an hour,
which will mean breakfast. In the meantime
"

I want no breakfast. A sole cup of "

'' In the mean time," continued Charles, '' I
have some news for you." And disregarding
another interruption, he related as shortly ashe
could the story of Stephens's recognition
of him in the doorway, and the subsequent
revelations in the prison concerning Dare's
marriage.

Where is this man, this Stephens ? " said
Dare, jumping up. " I will go to him. I
will hear from his own mouth. Where is he ? "

I don't know," replied Charles curtly,
It Is a matter of opinion. He is dead,"

Dare looked bewildered, and then sank
back with a gasp of disappointment into his
chair.

Charles, whose temper was singularly
irritable this morning, repeated with suppressed
annoyance the greater part of what
he had just said, and proved to Dare that
the fact that Stephens was dead would in noway
prevent the illegality of his marriage
being proved.

When Dare had grasped the full significance
of that fact he was quite overcome.

*ram I then," he gasped — "is it true? —
ani I free — to marry ? "

'' Quite free."

Dare burst into tears, and partially veiling
with one hand the manly emotion that had
overtaken him, he extended the other to
Charles, who did not know what to do with
it when he had got it, and dropped it as soon
as he could. But Dare, like many people
whose feelings are all on the surface, and
who are rather proud of displaying them,
was slow to notice what was passing in the
minds of others.

He sprang to his feet, and began to pace
rapidly up and down.

** I will go after breakfast — at once — immediately
after breakfast, to Slumberleigh
Rectory."

I suppose, in that case, Miss Deyncourt
is the person whose name you would not
mention the other day ? "

'' She is," said Dare, " You are riQ^ht. It
is she. We are betrothed. I will fly to her
after breakfast."

*you know your own affairs best," said
Charles, whose temper had not been improved
by the free display of Dare's finer feelings,
*' but I am not sure you would not do well to
fly to Vandon first. It is best to be off with
the old love, I believe, before you are on with
the new."

'' She must at once go away from Vandon,"
said Dare, stopping short. '' She is a scandal,
the — the old one. But how to make her o-q
away ? "

It was in vain for Charles to repeat that
Dare must turn her out. Dare had premonitory
feelings that he was quite unequal
to the task.

I may tell her to go," he said, raising his
eyebrows. *' I may be firm as the rock, but
I know her well ; she is more obstinate than
me. She will not go."

She must," said Charles with anger.

** Her presence compromises Miss Deyncourt.
Can't you see that ? "

Dare raised his eyebrows. A light seemed
to break in on him.

"Any fool can see that," said Charles,
losing his temper.

Dare saw a great deal, many things beside
that. He saw that if a friend, a trusted
friend, were to manage her dismissal, it would
be more easy for that friend than for one
whose feelings at the moment might carry
him away. In short, Charles was the friend
who was evidently pointed out by Providence
for that mission.

Charles considered a moment. He began
to see that it would not be done without
further delays and scandal unless he did it.

*' She must and shall go at once, even if I
have to do it," he said at last, looking at
Dare with unconcealed contempt. 'rit is
not my affair, but I will go, and you Avill be
so good as to put off the flying over to
Slumberleigh till I come back. I shall not

return until she has left the house." And
Charles marched out of the room, too indignant
to trust himself a moment longer with
the profusely grateful Dare.

'' That man must go to-day," said Evelyn
after breakfast to her husband, in the presence
of Lady Mary and Charles. " While
he was ill I overlooked his being in the
house ; but I will not suffer him to remain
now he is well."

You remove him from all chances of
improvement," said Charles, *' if you take
him away from Aunt Mary, who can snatch
brands from the burning as we all know ; but
I am going over to Vandon this morning,
and if you wish it I will ask him if he would
like me to order his dog-cart to come for
him. I don't suppose he is very happy here,
without so much as a tooth brush that he
can call his own."

You are going to Vandon ? " asked both
ladies in one voice.

Yes. I am going on purpose to dislodge

an Impostor who has arrived there, who Is
actually believed by some people (who are
not such exemplary Christians as ourselves,
and ready to suppose the worst) to be his
wife."

Lady Mary and Evelyn looked at each
other In consternation, and Charles went off
to see how Othello was after his night's
work, and to order the dog-cart, Ralph
calling after him In perfect good humour
that '' a fellow's brother got more out of a
fellow's horses than a fellow did himself"

Dare waylaid Charles on his return from
the stables, and linked his arm in his. He
felt the most enthusiastic admiration for the
tall reserved Englishman who had done him
such signal service. He longed for an
opportunity of showing his gratitude to him.
It was perhaps just as well that he was not
aware how very differently Charles regarded
himself

You are just going ? " Dare asked.

'* In five minutes."

Charles let his arm hang straight down,
but Dare kept it.

Tell me, my friend, one thing." Dare had
evidently been turning over something in
his mind. " This poor unfortunate, this
Stephens, why did he not tell you all this
the first time you went to see him in the
afternoon ? "

'' He did."

What ? " said Dare, looking hard at him.
''He did, and you only tell me this morning !
You let me eo all through the niQ:ht first.
Why was this .^ "

Charles did not answer.

I ask one thing more," continued Dare.
Did you divine two nights ago, from what
I said in a moment of confidence, that Miss
Deyncourt was the — the "

'' Of course I did," said Charles sharply.
*' You made it sufficiently obvious."

''Ah!" said Dare. "Ah!" and he shut
his eyes and nodded his head several times.

Anything more you would like to know ? "

VOL. II. 35

asked Charles, inattentive and impatient,
mainly occupied in trying to hide the nameless
exasperation which invariably seized
him when he looked at Dare, and to stifle
the contemptuous voice which always
whispered as he did so, " And you have given
up Ruth to him — to him ! "

** No, no, no," said Dare, shaking his head
gently, and regarding him the while with
infinite interest through his half-closed eyelids.


The door-cart was comines round, and
Charles hastily turned from him, and, getting
in, drove quickly away. Whatever Dare
said or did seemed to set his teeth on edge,
and he lashed up the horse till he was out of
sight of the house.

Dare, with arms picturesquely folded, stood
looking after him with mixed feelings of
emotion and admiration.

One sees it well," he said to himself.
One sees now the reason of many things.
He kept silent at first, but he was too good.

too noble. In the night he considered ; in
the morning he told all. I wondered that he
went to Vandon ; but he did it not for me.
It was for her sake."

Dare's feelings were touched to the quick.

How beautiful ! how pathetic was this
denoicejueiit I His former admiration for
Charles was increased a thousandfold. He
also loved ! Ah ! (Dare felt he was becoming
agitated). How sublime, how touching was
his self-sacrifice in the cause of honour. He
had been gradually working himself up to
the highest pitch of pleasurable excitement
and emotion ; and now, seeing Ralph the
prosaic approaching, he fled precipitately
into the house, caught up his hat and stick,
hardly glancing at himself in the hall glass,
and entirely forgetting his promise to Charles
to remain at Atherstone till the latter returned
from Vandon, followed the impulse of
the moment, and struck across the fields in
the direction of Slumberleigh.

Charles, meanwhile, drove on to Vandon.

The stable clock, still partially paralyzed
from long disuse, was laboriously striking
eleven as he drew up before the door. His
resounding peal at the bell startled the household,
and put the servants into a flutter of
anxious expectation, while the sound made
some one else, breakfasting late in the diningroom,
pause with her cup midway to her lips
and listen.

"There is a train which leaves Slumberleigh
station for London, a little after twelve, is
not there ? " asked Charles with great distinctness
of the butler as he entered the hall.
He had observed as he came in that the
dining-room door was ajar.

'* There is, Sir Charles. Twelve fifteen."
replied the man, who recognized him instantly,
for everybody knew Charles.

** I am here as Mr. Dare's friend, at his
wish. Tell Mr. Dare's coachman to bring
round his dog-cart to the door in good time
to catch that train. Will it take luggage ? "

'' Yes, Sir Charles," with respectful alacrity.

Good. And when the dog-cart appears,
you will see that the boxes are brought down
belonging to the person who is staying here,
who will leave by that train."

'* Yes, Sir Charles."

If the policeman from Slumberleigh
should arrive while I am here, ask him to
wait."

'' I will, Sir Charles."

"I don't suppose," thought Charles, ''he
will arrive, as I have not sent for him, but as
the dining-room door happens to be ajar, it is
just as well to add a few artistic touches."

'' Is this person in the drawing-room ? " he
continued aloud.

The man replied that she was in .the
dining-room, and Charles walked in unannounced,
and closed the door behind
him.

He had at times, when any action of
importance was on hand, a certain cool
decision of manner that seemed absolutely to
ignore the possibility of opposition, which

formed a curious contrast with his usual careless
demeanour.

*' Good morning," he said, advancing to
the fire. '' I have no doubt that my appearance
at this early hour cannot be a surprise
to you. You have, of course, anticipated
some visit of this kind for the last few days.
Pray finish your coffee. I am Sir Charles
Dangers. I need hardly add that I am
justice of the peace In this county, and that
I am here officially on behalf of my friend,
Mr. Dare."

The little woman, who had risen, and had
then sat down again at his entrance, eyed
him steadily. There was a look In her dark
bead-like eyes which showed Charles why
Dare had been unable to face her. The
look, determined, cunning, watchful, put him
on his guard, and his manner became a shade
more unconcerned.

"Any friend of my husband's is welcome,"
she said.

There is no question for the moment

about your husband, though no doubt a
subject of peculiar Interest to yourself. I
was speaking of Mr. Dare."

She rose to her feet, as If unable to sit
while he was standing.

"Mr. Dare is my husband," she said, with
a little gesture of defiance, tapping sharply
on the table with the teaspoon she held in
her hand.

Charles smiled blandly, and looked out of
the window.

There is evidently some misapprehension
on that point," he observed, "which I am
here to remove. Mr. Dare Is at present
unmarried."

I am his wife," reiterated the woman,
her colour rising under her rouge. " I am,
and I won't go. He dared not come himself,
a poor coward that he Is, to turn his wife out
of doors. He sent you ; but it's no manner
of use, so you may as well know It first as
last. I tell you nothing shall induce me to
stir from this house, from my 'one, and you

needn't think you can come it over me with
fine talk. I don't care a red cent what you
say. I'll have my rights."

I am here," said Charles, '' to see that
you get them, Mrs. — Cari^olir

There was a pause. He did not look at
her. He was occupied in taking a white
thread off his coat.

'' Carroll's dead," she said sharply.

"He Is. And your regret at his loss was
no doubt deepened by the unhappy circumstances
in which it took place. He died in
jail."

- Well, and If he did "

'' Died," continued Charles, suddenly fixing
his keen glance upon her, " nearly a year
after your so-called marriage with Mr. Dare."

'' It's a lie," she said faintly, but she had
turned very white.

"No, I think not. My information is on
reliable authority. A slight exertion of
memory on your part will no doubt recall the
date of your bereavement."

You can't prove It."

Excuse me. You have yourself kindly
furnished us with a copy of the marriage
register, with the date attached, without which
I must own we might have been momentarily
at a loss. I need now only apply for a copy
of the register of the decease of Jasper
Carroll, who, as you do not deny, died under
personal restraint in jail ; in Baton Rouge
jail, in Louisiana, I have no doubt you
intended to add."

She glared at him in silence.

Some dates acquire a peculiar interest
when compared," continued Charles, 'but I
will not detain you any longer with business
details of this kind, as I have no doubt that
you will wish to superintend your packing."

I won't go."

'eon the contrary, you will leave this
house in half an hour. The dog-cart is
ordered to take you to the station."

What if I refuse to go ? "

Extreme measures are always to be

regretted, especially with a lady," said Charles.
** Nothing, in short, would be more repugnant
to me ; but I fear, as a magistrate, it would

be my duty to " And he shrugged his

shoulders, wondering what on earth could be
done for the moment if she persisted. '' But,"
he continued, " motives of self-interest suggest
the advisability of withdrawing, even if I were
not here to enforce it. When I take into
consideration the trouble and expense you
have incurred in coming here, and the subsequent
disappointment of the affections, a
widow's affections, I feel justified in offering,
though without my friend's permission, to
pay your journey back to America, an offer
which any further unpleasantness or delay
would of course oblige me to retract."

She hesitated, and he saw his advantage
and kept it.

'you have not much time to lose," he
said, laying his watch on the table, '' unless
you would prefer the housekeeper to do your
packing for you. No ? I agree with you.

On a sea voyage especially one likes to know
where one's things are. If I give you a
cheque for your return journey, I shall of
course expect you to sign a paper to the
effect that you have no claim on I\Ir. Dare,
that you never were his legal wife, and that
you will not trouble him in future. You
would like a few moments for reflection ?
Good. I will write out the form while you
consider, as there is no time to be lost."

He looked about for writing materials, and
finding only an ancient inkstand and pen,
took a note from his pocket-book and tore
a blank half sheet off it. His quiet deliberate
movements awed her as he intended they
should. She glanced first at him writing,
then at the gold watch on the table between
them., the hours of which were marked on
the half hunting face by alternate diamonds
and rubies, each stone being the memorial of
a past success in shooting matches. The
watch impressed her ; to her practised eye it
meant a very large sum of money, and she

knew the power of money ; but the cool
unconcerned manner of this tall, keen-eyed
Englishman impressed her still more. As
she looked at him he ceased writing, got out
a cheque, and began to fill it in.

*' What Christian name ? " he asked suddenly.


*' Ellen," she replied, taken aback.

'' Payable to order or bearer ? "

Bearer," she said, confused by the way
he took her decision for granted.

Now," he said authoritatively, " sign your
name there ; " and he pushed the form he
had drawn up towards her. '' I am sorry I
cannot offer you a better pen."

She took the pen mechanically and signed
her name — Ellen Carroll. Charles's light
eyes gave a flash as she did it.

'' Manner is everything," he said to himself.
'* I believe the mention of that
imaginary policeman may have helped, buta
little stage effect did the business."

'' Thank you," he said, taking the paper

and, after glancing at the signature, putting
It in his pocket-book. '' Allow me to give
you this " — handing her the cheque. '' And
now I will ring for the housekeeper, for you
will barely have time to make the arrangements
for your journey. I can only allow
you twenty minutes." He rang the bell ashe
spoke.

She started up, as if unaware how far she
had yielded. A rush of angry colour flooded
her face.

I won't have that impertinent woman
touching my things."

'' That is as you like," said Charles,
shrugging his shoulders ; '' but she will be in
the room when you pack. It is my wish
that she should be present." Then turning
to the butler, who had already answered the
bell, " Desire the housekeeper to go to Mrs.
Carroll's rooms at once, and to give Mrs.
Carroll any help she may require."

Mrs. Carroll looked from the butler to
Charles with baffled hatred In her eyes. But

she knew the game was lost, and she walked
out of the room and upstairs without another
word, but with a bitter consciousness in her
heart that she had not played her cards well,
that though her downfall was unavoidable,
she might have stood out for better terms
for her departure. She hated Dare, as she
threw her clothes together into her trunks,
and she hated Mrs. Smith, who watched her
do so with folded hands and with a lofty-smile
; but most of all she hated Charles,
whose voice came up to the open window ashe
talked to Dare's coachman, already at the
door, about splints and sore backs.

Charles felt a momentary pity for the little
woman when she came down at last with
compressed lips, casting lightning glances at
the grinning servants in the background,
whom she had bullied and hectored over in
the manner of people unaccustomed to
servants, and who were rejoicing in the
ignominy of her downfall.

Her boxes were put in — not carefully.

Charles came forward and lifted his cap,
but she would not look at him. Grasping
a little hand-bag convulsively, she went down
the steps, and got up unassisted into the
dog-cart.

You have left nothing behind, I hope ? "
said Charles civilly, for the sake of saying
something.

She have left nothing," said Mrs. Smith,
swimming forward with dignity, *' and she
have also took nothing. I have seen to that,
Sir Charles."

Good-bye, then," said Charles. ** Right,
coachman."

Mrs. Carroll's eyes had been wandering
upwards to the old house rising above her
with its sunny windows and its pointed
gables. Perhaps, after all the sordid shifts
and schemes of her previous existence, she
had imagined she might lead an easier and
a more respectable life within those walls.
Then she looked towards the long green
terraces, the valley, and the forest beyond.

Her lip trembled, and turning suddenly she
fixed her eyes with burning hatred on the
man who had ousted her from this pleasant
place.

Then the coachman whipped up his horse,
the dog-cart spun over the smooth gravel
between the lines of stiff, clipped yews, and
she was gone.

CHAPTER XIV.

Mr. Alwynn had returned from his eventful
morning call at Vandon very grave and
silent. He shook his head when Ruth came
to him in the study to ask what the result
had been, and said Dare would tell her himself
on his return from London, whither he
had gone on business.

Ruth went back to the drawing-room.
She had not strength or energy to try to
escape from Mrs. Alwynn. Indeed, it was
a relief not to be alone with her own thoughts,
and to allow her exhausted mind to be towed
along by Mrs. Alwynn's, the bent of whose
mind resembled one of those mechanical toy
animals which when wound up will run very
fast in any direction, but if adroitly turned,

VOL. II. 36

will hurry equally fast the opposite way.
Ruth turned the toy at Intervals, and the
morning was dragged through, Mrs. Alwynn
in the course of it exploring every realm —
known to her — of human thought, now
dipping Into the future, and speculating on
spring fashions, now commenting on the
present, now dwelling fondly on the past, the
gaily dressed, officer-adorned past of her
youth.

There was a meal, and after that it was the
afternoon. Ruth supposed that some time
there would be another meal, and then it
would be evening, but It was no good thinking
of what was so far away. She brought
her mind back to the present. Mrs. Alwynn
had just finished a detailed account of a
difference of opinion between herself and the
curate's wife on the previous day.

*' And she had not a word to say, my dear
not a word, quite Jiors de combat so I let
the matter drop. And you remember that
beautiful pig we killed last week ? You

should have gone to look at It hanging up,
Ruth, rolling In fat, It was. Well, It Is better
to give than to receive, so I shall send her
one of the pork pies. And if you will get
me one of those round baskets which I took
the dolls down to the school-feast In — they
are In the lowest shelf of the oak chest In the
hall — I'll send It down to her at once."

Ruth fetched the basket and put It down
by her aunt. Reminiscences of the school-feast
still remained in it, In the shape of ends
of ribbon and lace, and Mrs. Alwynn began
to empty them out, talking all the time, when
she suddenly stopped short with an exclamation
of surprise.

*' Goodness ! Well, now ! I'm sure.
Ruth ! "

*' What Is It, Aunt Fanny ? "

"Why, my dear, if there isn't a letter for
you under the odds and ends," holding it up
and gazing resentfully at it ; " and now I
remember, a letter came for you on the
morning of the school-feast, and I said to

John, * I shan't forward It, because I shall see
Ruth this afternoon and, dear me ! I just
popped It Into the basket, for I thought you
would like to have it, and, you know how
busy I was, Ruth, that day, first one thing
and then another, so much to think of —
and — there it is!'

I dare say it is of no importance," said
Ruth, taking it from her, while Mrs. Alwynn,
repeatedly wondering how such a thing could
have happened to a person so careful as herself,
went off with her basket to the cook.

When she returned in a few minutes, she
found Ruth standing by the window, the
letter open in her hand, her face without a
vestige of colour.

"Why, Ruth," she said, actually noticing
the alteration in her appearance ; " is your
head bad again ? "

Ruth started violently.

Yes — no. I mean — I think I will go
out. The fresh air "

She could not finish the sentence.

^'And that tiresome letter? Did it want
an answer ? "

'' None," said Ruth, crushing it up unconsciously.


'' Well, now," said Mrs. Alwynn, '' that's a
good thine, for I'm sure I shall never forget
the way your uncle was In once, when I put
a letter of his in my pocket to give him (it
was a plum-coloured silk, Ruth, done with
gold beads in front), and then — I went into
mourning for my poor dear Uncle James,
such an out of the common person he was,
Ruth, and such a beautiful talker, and it was
not till six months later, niece's mourning
you know, that I had the dress on again, and
a business I had to meet it, for all my gowns
seem to shrink when they are put by, and I
put my hand In the pocket, and "

But Ruth had disappeared.

Mrs. Alwynn was perfectly certain at last
that something must be wrong with her
niece. Earlier in the day she had had a
headache. Reasoning by analogy, she decided

that Ruth must have eaten something at Mrs.
Thursby's dinner-party which had disagreed
with her. If any one was ill she always
attributed It to indigestion. If Mr. Alwynn
coughed, or if she read in the papers that
royalty had been unavoidably prevented
attending some function at which Its presence
had been expected, she Instantly put down
both mishaps to the same cause, and when
Mrs. Alwynn had come to a conclusion it
was not her habit to keep It to herself.

She told Lady Mary the exact state In
which, reasoning always by analogy, she knew
Ruth's health must be, when that lady drove
over that afternoon in the hope of seeing
Ruth, partly from curiosity, or rather a
Christian anxiety respecting the welfare of
others, and partly too from a real feeling of
affection for Ruth herself. Mrs. Alwynn
bored her Intensely, but she sat on and on In
the hope of Ruth's return, who had gone out,
Mrs. Alwynn agreeing with every remark
she made, and treating her with that pleased

deference of manner which some middle-class
people, not otherwise vulgar, invariably drop
into in the presence of rank ; a Scylla which
is only one degree better than the Charybdis
of would-be ease of manner into which others
fall. If ever the enormous advantages of
noble birth and ancient family, with all their
attendant heirlooms and hereditary instincts
of refinement, chivalrous feelings, and honour,
become in future years a mark for scorn (as
already they are a mark for the envy that
calls itself scorn), it will be partly the fault of
the vulgar adoration of the middle classes.
Mrs. Alwynn being, as may possibly have
already transpired in the course of this
narrative, a middle-class woman herself, stuck
to the hereditary instincts of kei^ class with a
vengeance, and when Ruth at last came in
Lady Mary vas thankful.

Her cold pale eyes lighted up a little as
she greeted Ruth, and looked searchingly at
her. She saw by the colourless lips and
nervous contraction of the forehead, and by

the bright restless fever of the eyes, that had
formerly been so calm and clear, that something
was amiss — terribly amiss.

I've been telling Lady Mary how poorly
you've been, Ruth, ever since Mrs. Thursby's
dinner-party," said Mrs. Alwynn, by way of
opening the conversation.

But in spite of so auspicious a beginning
the conversation flagged. Lady Mary made
a few conventional remarks to Ruth, which
she answered, and Mrs. Alwynn also ; but
there was a constraint which every moment
threatened a silence. Lady Mary proceeded
to comment on the poaching affray of the
previous night, and the arrest of a man who
had been seriously injured ; but at her mention
of the subject, Ruth became so silent, and
Mrs. Alwynn so voluble, that she felt it was
useless to stay any longer, and had to take
her leave without a word with Ruth.

Something is wrongs with that o:irl," she
said to herself, as she drove back to Atherton.
" I know what it is. Charles has been

behavlno^ In his usual manner, and as there Is
no one else to point out to him how Infamous
such conduct Is, I shall have to do it myself.
Shameful ! That charming, Interesting girl !
And yet, and yet ! There was a look In her
face more like some great anxiety than disappointment.
If she had had a disappointment,
I do not think she would have let anyone
see it. Those Deyncourts are all too
proud to show their feelings, though they
have got them too somewhere. Perhaps on
the whole, considering how excessively disagreeable
and scriptural Charles can be, and
what unexpected turns he can give to things,
I had better say nothing to him at present."

The moment Lady Mary had left the
house, Ruth hurried to her uncle's study.
He was not there. He had not yet come in.
She gave a gesture of despair, and flung
herself down in the old leathern chair opposite
to his own, on which many a one had
sat who had come to him for help or consolation.
All the buttons had been gradually

worn off that chair by restless or heavy
visitors. Some had been lost, but others —
the greater part, I am glad to say — Mr.
Alwynn had found, and had deposited in a
Sevres cup on the mantelpiece, till the wet
afternoon should come when he and his lone
packing needle should restore them to their
home.

The room was very quiet. On the mantelpiece
the little conscientious silver clock
ticked, orderly, gently (till Ruth could hardly
bear the sound), then hesitated, and struck a
soft low tone. She started to her feet, and
paced up and down, up and down. Would
he never come in ? She dared not go out to
look for him for fear of missing him. Why
did not he come back when she wanted him
so terribly ? She sat down again. She tried
to be patient. It was no good. Would he
rever come ?

She heard a sound, rushed out to meet
him in the passage, and pulled him Into the
study.

'' Uncle John," she gasped, holding out a
letter In her shaking hand. " That man who
was taken up last night was — Raymond. He
is in prison. He is ill. Let us go to him,"
and she explained as best she could that a
letter had only just been found written to
her by Raymond in July, warning her he was
in the neighbourhood of Arleigh, near the
old nurse's cottage, and that she mio^ht see
him at any moment, and must have money
in readiness. The instant she had read the
letter she rushed up to Arleigh, to see her
old nurse, and met her coming down in great
agitation to tell her that Raymond, whom
she had shielded once before under promise
of secrecy, had been arrested the night
before.

In a quarter of an hour Mr. Alwynn and
Ruth were driving swiftly through the dusk

in a close carriage in the direction of D .

On their way they met a dog-cart driving as
quickly in the opposite direction, which grazed
their wheel as it passed ; and Ruth, looking

out, caught a glimpse, by the flash of their
lamps, of Charles's face, with a look upon It
so fierce and haggard that she shivered In
nameless foreboding of evil, wondering what
could have happened to make him look like
that.

CHAPTER XV.

It was still early on the following morning
that Dare, forgetting, as we have seen, his
promise to Charles, arrived at Slumberleigh
Rectory — so early, that Mrs. Alwynn was still
ordering dinner, or in other words, was dashing
from larder to scullery, from kitchen to
dairy, with her usual energy. He was shown
into the empty drawing-room, where, after
pacing up and down, he was reduced to the
society of a photograph album, which in his
present excited condition could do little to
soothe the tumult of his mind. Not that any
discredit should be thrown on Mrs. Alwynn's
album, a gorgeous concern with a golden
Fanny embossed on it, which afforded her
infinite satisfaction, inside which her friends'

portraits appeared to the greatest advantage,
surrounded by birds and nests and blossoms
of the most vivid and llfedlke colouring.
Mr. Alwynn was encompassed on every side
by kingfishers and elaborate bone nests,
while Ruth's clear-cut face looked out from
among long-tailed toties, arranged one on
each side of a nest crowded with eggs, on
which a strong liorht had been thrown.

Dare was still looking at Ruth's photograph,
when Mr. Alwynn came in.

'' Do you wish to speak to Ruth ? " he
asked gravely.

*' Now, at once." Dare was surprised that
Mr. Alwynn, with whom he had been so
open, should be so cold and unsympathetic
in manner. The alteration and alienation
of friends Is certainly one of the saddest and
most inexplicable experiences of this vale of
tears.

You will find her In the study," continued
Mr. Alwynn. *she is expecting you. I
have told her nothing, according to your

wish. I hope you will explain everything
to her in full, that you will keep nothing
back."

I will explain," said Dare ; and he went,
trembling with excitement, into the study.
Fired by Charles's example, he had made a
sublime resolve as he skimmed across the
fields, made it in a hurry, in a moment of
ecstasy, as all his resolutions were made.
He felt he had never acted such a noble part
before. He only feared the agitation of the
moment might prevent him doing himself
justice.

Ruth rose as he came in, but did not
speak. A swift spasm passed over her face,
leaving it very stern, very fixed, as he had
never seen it, as he had never thought of
seeing it. An overwhelming suspense burned
in the dark lustreless eyes which met his
own. He felt awed.

Well ? " she said, pressing her hands
together, and speaking in a low voice.

'' Ruth," said Dare solemnly, laying his

outspread hand upon his breast and then
extending It In the air, ** I am free."

Ruth's eyes watched him like one in
torture.

"How?" she said, speaking with difficulty.
'' You said you were free before."

Ah ! " replied Dare, raising his forefinger,
*' I said so, but it was an error. I go to
Vandon, and she will not go away. I go to
London to my lawyer, and he says she is my
wife."

You told me she was not."

'rit was an error," repeated Dare. '' I had
formerly been a husband to her, but wee had
been divorced ; it was finished, wound up,
and I thought she was no more my wife.
There is in the English law something extraordinary
which I do not comprehend, which
makes an American divorce to remain a
marriage in England."

*' Go on," said Ruth, shading her eyes with
her hand.

I come back to Vandon," continued Dare

in a suppressed voice, " I come back overwhelmed,
broken down, crushed under feet ;
and then " — he was becoming dramatic, he
felt the fire kindling — '' I meet a friend, a
noble heart, I confide in him. I tell all to
Sir Charles Dangers " — Ruth's hand was
trembling — " and last night he finds out by
a chance that she was not a true widow when
I marry her, that her first husband was yet
alive, that I am free. This morning he tells
me all, and I am here."

Ruth pressed her hands before her face,
and fairly burst into tears.

He looked at her in astonishment. He
was surprised that she had any feelings.
Never having shown them to the public in
general, like himself, he had supposed she
was entirely devoid of them. She now
appeared quite due. She was sobbing
passionately. Tears came into his own eyes
as he watched her, and then a light dawned
upon him for the second time that da}-.
Those tears were not for him. He folded

VOL. TT. 37

his arms and waited. How suggestive in
itself is a noble attitude !

After a few minutes Ruth overcame her
tears with a great effort, and raising her head,
looked at him, as if she expected him to
speak. The suspense was gone out of her
dimmed eyes, the tension of her face was
relaxed.

*' I am free," repeated Dare, " and I have
your promise that if I am free you will still
marry me."

Ruth looked up with a pained but resolute
expression, and she would have spoken if he
had not stopped her by a gesture.

*' I have your promise," he repeated. *' I
tell my friend. Sir Charles Dangers, I have it.
He also loves. He does not tell me so ; he
is not open with me, as I with him, but I see
his heart. And yet — figure to yourself — he
has but to keep silence, and I must go away,
I must give up all. I am still married — Oi !
while he But he is noble, he is sublime.
He sacrifices love on the altar of

honour, of truth. He tells all to me, his rival.
He shows me I am free. He thinks I do
not know his heart. But it is not only he
who can be noble." (Dare smote himself
upon the breast.) " I also can lay my heart
upon the altar. Ruth " — with great solemnity
" do you love him even as he loves you ? "

There was a moment's pause.

"I do," she said firmly, "with my whole
heart."

'' I knew it. I divined it. I sacrifice
myself. I give you back your promise. I
say farewell, and voyage in the distance.
I return no more to Vandon. There is no
longer a home for me in England. I leave
only behind with you the poor heart you
have possessed so long ! "

Dare was so much affected by the beauty
of this last sentence that he could say no
more, but even at that moment, as he glanced
at Ruth to see what effect his eloquence had
upon her, she looked so pallid and thin (her
beauty was so entirely eclipsed), that the

sacrifice did not seen quite so overwhelming'
after all.

She struggled to speak, but words failed
her.

He took her hands and kissed them,
pressed them to his heart (It was a pity there
was no one there to see), endeavoured to say
something more, and then rushed out of the
room.

She stood like one stunned after he had
left her. She saw him a moment later cross
the garden, and flee away across the fields.
She knew she had seen that grey figure and
jaunty grey hat for the last time ; but she
hardly thought of him. She felt she might
be sorry for him presently, but not now.

The suspense was over. The sense of
relief was too overwhelming to admit of any
other feeling at first. She dropped on her
knees beside the writing-table, and locked
her hands together.

''He told'' she whispered to herself.
'' Thank God ! Thank God 1 "

Two happy tears dropped on to Mr.
Alwynn's old leather blotting-book, that worn
cradle of many sermons.

Was this the same world ? Was this the
same sun which was shining in upon her ?
What new songs were the birds practising
outside ? A strange wonderful joy seemed
to pervade the very air she breathed, to flood
her inmost soul. She had faced her troubles
fairly well, but at this new great happiness
she did not dare to look ; and with a sudden
involuntary gesture she hid her face in her
hands.

It would be rash to speculate too deeply
on the nature of Dare's reflections as he
hurried back to Atherstone ; but perhaps,
under the very real pang of parting with
Ruth, he was sustained by a sense of the
magnanimity of what, had he put it into
words, he would have called his attitude, and
possibly also by a lurking conviction, which
had assisted his determination to resign her,

that life at Vandon, after the episode of the
American wife's arrival, would be a social
impossibility, especially to one anxious and
suited to shine in society. Be that how it
may, whatever had happened to influence
him most of the chance emotion of the
moment, it would be tolerably certain that ina
few hours he would be sorry for what he
had done. He was still, however, in a state
of mental exaltation when he reached Atherton,
and began fumbling nervously with
the garden gate. Charles, who had been
stalking up and down the bowling-green,
went slowly towards him.

*' What on earth do you mean by going off
in that way ? " he asked coldly.

''Ah!" said Dare, perceiving him, "and
she — the — is she gone ? "

Yes, half an hour ago. Your dog-cart
has come back from taking her to the station,
and is here now."

Dare nodded his head several times, and
stood looking at him.

I have been to Slumberleigh," he said.

'eyes, contrary to agreement."

My friend," Dare said, seizing the friend's
limp, unresponsive hand and pressing it, " I
know now why you keep silence last night.
I reason with myself. I see you love her.
Do not turn away. I have seen her. I
have given her back her promise. I give
her up to you whom she loves ; and now —
I go away, not to return."

And then, in the full view of the Atherton
windows, of the butler, and of the dogcart
at the front door. Dare embraced him,
kissing the blushing and disconcerted Charles

o o

on both cheeks. Then, in a moment, before
the latter had recovered his self-possession,
Dare had darted to the dog-cart, and was
driving away.

Charles looked after him in mixed annoyance
and astonishment, until he noticed the
butler's eye upon him, when he hastily
retreated, with a heightened complexion, to
the shrubberies.

CONCLUSION.

It was the last day of October, about a week
after a certain very quiet little funeral had

taken place in the D cemetery. The

death of Raymond Deyncourt had appeared
in the papers a day or two afterwards, without
mention of date or place, and it was generally
supposed that it had taken place some considerable
time previously, without the knowledge
of his friends.

Charles had been sitting for a long time
with Mr. Alwynn, and after he left the
Rectory he took the path over the fields in
the direction of the Slumberleigh woods.

The low sun was shining redly through a
golden haze, was sending long burning shafts
across the glade where Charles was pacing.

He sat down at last upon a fallen tree to
wait for one who should presently come by
that way.

It was a still clear afternoon, with the
solemn stillness that speaks of coming change.
Winter was at hand, and the woods were
transfigured with a passing glory, like the
faces of those who depart in peace when
death draws nigh.

Far and wide in the forest the bracken
was all aflame — aflame beneath the glowing
trees. The great beeches had turned to
bronze and ruddy gold, and had strewed the
path with carpets glorious and rare, which
the first wind would sweep away. Upon the
limes the amber leaves still hung, faint yet
loth to go, but the horse chestnut had already
dropped its garment of green and yellow at
its feet.

A young robin was singing at intervals in
the silence, telling how the secrets of the
nests had been laid bare, singing a requiem
on the dying leaves and the widowed branches,

a song new to him, but with the old plaintive
rapture in it that his fathers had been taught
before him since the world began.

She came towards him down the yellow
glade, through the sunshine and the shadow,
with a spray of briony in her hand. Neither
spoke. She put her hands into the hands
that were held out for them, and their eyes
met, rave and steadfast, with the lio^ht in
them of an unalterable love. So long they
had looked at each other across a gulf. So
long they had stood apart. And now, at last
at last— they were together. He drew
her close and closer yet. They had no words.
There was no need of words. And in the
silence of the hushed woods, and in the
silence of a joy too deep for speech, the
robin's song came sweet and sad.

Charles ! "

- Ruth ! "

^' I should like to tell you something."

"And I should like to hear It."

I know what Raymond told you to
conceal. I went to him just after you did.
We passed you coming back. He did not
know me at first. He thought I was you,
and he kept repeating that you must keep
your own counsel, and that unless you showed
Mr. Dare's marriage was illegal, he would
never find it out. At last, when he suddenly
recognized me, he seemed horror-struck, and
the doctor came in and sent me away."

Charles knew now why Raymond had sent
for him the second time.

There was a long pause.

Ruth, did you think I should tell ? "

'' I hoped and prayed you would, but I
knew it would be hard, because I do believe
you actually thought at the time I should
still consider it my duty to marry Mr. Dare,
I never should have done such a thing after
what had happened. I was just going to tell
him so when he began to give me up, and
it evidently gave him so much pleasure to

renounce me nobly In your favour, that I let
him have it his own way, as the result was
the same. My great dread, until he came,
was that you had not spoken. I had been
expecting him all the previous evening. Oh,
Charles, Charles ! I waited and watched for
his comines I had never done before.

o

Your silence was the only thing I feared,
because it was the only thing that could have
come between us."

God forgive me. I meant at first to say
nothing."

Only at first," said Ruth gently ; and they
walked on in silence.

The sun had set. A slender moon had
climbed unnoticed into the southern sky amid
the shafts of paling fire which stretched out
across the whole heaven from the burning
fiery furnace in the west. Across the grey
dim fields voices were calling the cattle home.

Charles spoke again at last in his usual
tone.

'' You quite understand, Ruth, though I

have not mentioned it so far, that you are
engaged to marry me ? "

"I do. I will make a note of it if you wish."

*' It is unnecessary. I shall be happy,
when I am at leisure, to remind you myself.
Indeed, I may say I shall make a point of
doing so. There does not happen to be anyone
else whom you feel it would be your
duty to marry ? "

I can't think of any one at the moment.
Charles, you never could have believed I
would marry Jim, after all ! "

Indeed I did believe it. Don't I know
the stubbornness of your heart .-^ You see,
you are but young, and I make excuses for
you ; but after you have been the object of
my special and judicious training for a few
years, I quite hope your judgment may
improve considerably."

I trust it will, as I see from your remarks
It will certainly be all we shall have to guide
us both."

Postscript. — Lady Mary would not allow
even Providence any of the credit of Charles's
engagement ; she claimed the whole herself.
She called Evelyn to witness that from the
first it had been her work entirely. She
only allowed Charles himself a very secondary
part in the great event, to which she was apt
to point in later years as the crowning work
of a life devoted — under Church direction —
to the temporal and spiritual welfare of her
fellow-creatures ; and Charles avers that a
mention of it in the long list of her virtues
will some day adorn the tombstone which
she has long since ordered to be In readiness.

Molly was disconsolate for many days, but
work, that panacea of grief, came to the
rescue, and it was not long before she was
secretly and busily engaged on a large kettle
holder, with kettle and motto entwined, for
Charles's exclusive use, without which she
had been led to understand his establishment
would be incomplete. When this work of
art was finished, her feelings had become so

I

far modified towards Ruth that she consented
to begin another very small and Inferior one
- — merely a kettle on a red ground — for that
interloper, but whether It was ever presented
is not on record.

Vandon Is to let. The grass has grownup
again through the niches of the stone
steps. The place looks wild and deserted.
Mr. Alwynn comes sometimes, and looks up
at its shuttered windows and tralllnor, neglected
Ivy, but not often, for it gives him a
strange pang at the heart. And as he goes
home the people come out of the dilapidated
cottages and ask wistfully when the new
squire is coming back.

But Mr. Alwynn does not know.

THE END.

PRINTED BY William Closes AND SONS, LIMITED,

LONDON AND Eccles. G., C. &' Co.

'm*,-

^^^^

x^

,^^

3 0112 041675197

A'

^H •>>

^9*5S3f
