$:m':^

liV

:i:v»;

iHiiiii

m

mmmmmmy

OF THE

U N IVLR5ITY

or ILLINOIS



u/ "

Ijis,- '^^

MARJORY:

A STUDY.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

BY

THE AUTHOR OF "JAMES GORDON'S WIFE."

Do not fear to hope ! Can poet's brain
More than the father's heart rich good invent ?
******

Be bounteous in thy faith, for not misspent
Is confidence unto the Father lent.

George Macdonald.

VOLUME I.

LONDON :

WYMAN «& SONS, 74-75, GREAT QUEEN STREET,
lincoln's-inn fields.

1880.

ALL EIGHTS Reserved.

GREAT Queen Street, LINCOLN'S Ins FIELDS,

London'. W.C.

Market.

CHAPTEH I.

Wheresoe'er I am by night and day,
All earth and air seem only burning fire."

Tennyson.

There lead been no rain for many weeks.
Day after day the sky lay in the same blue
calm — deep blue far above, blue haze near
the horizon. Would it ever rain again, one
might wonder ? Would ever again come a
day or night when soft showers might be
heard soaking down, refreshing the parched
ground, the dusty trees, the flowers, now dry
and drooping ? Still less conceivable, would
wintry tempests ever revisit the earth — the
drenching rains, when all the heavens are
black, when the sun seems angry, — cold rains,
rains pelting against the windows, flooding
the rivers, universalism mud and discomfort?
Would there ever again be anything
but hardness and scorching summer ?

VOL. I. B

Even in the country, among woods and
lanes, existence was burdensome. The cows
stood motionless for hours in the ponds ; the
roads were ankle-deep in dust, dust lay thick
on the hedges, making the honeysuckle dingy,
powdering the wild roses. Even there dogs
panted, and lay about with hanging tongues ;
flies were a weariness to man and beast ;
birds, from sunrise to sunset, ceased to
sing ; the sun embroiled the grass, and
dried the brooks, and reigned with steady
power.

But in towns, far from greenness and freshness,
the heat amounted to suffering. Doors
and windows, open to their utmost extent,
admitted no breath of air ; the sun beat on
the white pavements, on the roofs ; even the
shady side of the street was hardly bearable.
And still above all, above the chimneys, the
smoke, the wearied and oppressed men and
women the calm sky stretched and smiled, like
some vast existence of strength and beauty,
which cannot sympathise with pain, because toit
pain is unknown. There was no relief, no
escaping from the eternal glare. One felt
this especially in the outskirts at the new end
of the town, among roads no less dusty than
the country roads, but bordered by red brick

instead of trees. Here no shelter of any kind
was possible, unless one's own umbrella.

Eyed-brick: rows of small houses, cottages
rather — only nothing in their appearance suggested
that picturesque name. Row after
row, facing, at right angles, back to back ;
little shops, hucksters, small grocers' and the
like ; public-houses ; a Baptist chapel with a
bare-faced gable, containing one plain window
like a great inquisitive eye ; " Laburnum,"
Arbutus," and other " Villas," standing in
little gardens, each with a straight path leading
to an uninteresting green door ; genteel
Academies for young ladies, an Educational
Establishment for young gentlemen — all of
red brick, without embellishment or disguise,
staring, glaring, baking in the sun ; a stunted
lilac or laburnum tree here and there ; a
pillar-post; rows of windows, wherein crochet
antimacassars drooped elegantly from the
backs of looking-glasses ; a church innocent
of architecture, with a large round clock
gazing from a triangular edifice, founded on
the idea of a steeple. Branksome, this growing
offshoot of the cathedral city of Alton,
formed as strange a contrast to the opposite
end of the town as existed between the clock-faced
church and the glorious cathedral itself.

One might almost wonder that the clock

in question, presenting so unsheltered a front

to the sun, should have strength to remain

at its post, still less, with a harsh voice, to

send forth twelve strokes into the broiling

atmosphere. This, however, it had just

done ; and as the last stroke died away in

clanging vibration, an open fly, driven by a

red-faced man, apparently on the point of

solution, went at a foot's pace past the church,

and turned into one of the new streets in

front of a little house, standing in a little

garden. The red-faced man climbed slowly

from his box, walked slowly up the short

pathway, and rang the bell. The door was

open ; and as he waited, mopping his red

face with a yellow handkerchief, he could see

a tiny hall floored with oilcloth, and a steep

little staircase, similarly covered, mounting

to the upper story. Presently footsteps and

a bumping were heard, and a female voice

shrieked, " Here, young man ! lend a hand

to this, if you please." At the same momenta

travelling-box, neatly corded, appeared

with a sudden thump on the topmost stair —

held back from precipitate descent by the

brawny hands of an elderly woman in a blackcap

trimmed with corn-flowers.

The driver deposited his handkerchief in
the crown of his hat, and went to her assistance.
As he did so, he saw in the background
a little girl, carrying — flushed and
panting with the effort — a heavy carpet-bag.
There must have been something in her face
certainly there was nothing in her dress —
which caused the red-faced man to touch
his hat to this child ; and, the box deposited
in the fly, he hurried back, despite that process
of solution, to relieve her. She had just
laboriously reached the foot of the stairs ;
when the man, touching his hat again, proceeded
to shoulder the bag, the child thanked
him by a smile which made her whole face
shine — then turned and ran upstairs again,
as quickly as if it were November instead
of July, and the little house heated through
and through.

The driver returned to the gate, passing
the black-capped woman. During her absence
a baby had been screaming in some obscure
background ; the woman hurried in, and the
screams ceased ; all was silence. The man
sat down upon the floor of his vehicle, his
feet on the step, and waited. The patient
horse stood spiritless, while the flies buzzed
round his downcast head. A man with a

barrel-organ care round the corner, and
paused in the road beside the flj, and played
a droning air ; a baker's boy, with an empty
basket on his shoulder, stopped to listen ;
the blue vault rose above — the road baked
visibly — the red-brick houses with their open
windows stood and stared; the driver was
on the point of a doze, and started when
some one spoke to him.

It was the little girl, an old straw hat
upon her head, her arms full of wraps and
loose luggage.

"Please, driver," she said in an old-fashioned
manner, '' can you put up the hood
of your carriage ? Aunt Lucy has been very
ill, and the sun might be too much for her.
And you'd better do it at once, please,
because they are late, and I'm afraid of their
missing the train."

The driver rose forthwith ; the child's
energy was infectious. While he put up the
hood, she mounted into the fly, and arranged
her load — a light shawl, a cushion, a ,
a book, a parcel. Then, jumping
down with an evident pleasure in the action,
which proved her still a child, despite her
thoughtful ways, she ran back to the house,
crying, '' Uncle John ! Uncle John ! come,
or you'll miss the train ! "

A minute later a gentleman and lady came
slowly down the path. The gentleman was
about forty years of age, thin, and of an
anxious countenance, his hair sprinkled with
gray. The best days of his clerical black
were evidently long over, yet no one could
doubt him to be a gentleman in reality as in
name. And the lady, leaning on his arm,
looked "every inch" a lady, although her
garments also were well worn and not of the
newest fashion. She was some years younger
than her husband, and had the remains of
great beauty, but sickness and anxiety had
stamped their traces on cheek and brow —
the one was too thin, the other had lost its
smoothness. Nevertheless, she was lovely
still, and the tender care with which her
husband assisted her to the humble vehicle
at the gate had in it something of masculine
homage to beauty, as well as of unselfish
devotion to a sick wife. She seemed to
depend upon him as a child upon a parent ;
she was a little helpless, accustomed to be
waited on, shielded, cherished. Her husband
half lifted her into the fly, holding a
large umbrella over her head the while ; and
the little girl sprang after to make her comfortable,
to cover her muslin dress with

the shawl, and adjust the cushion at her
back.

Good-bye, darling, I hope you will not
feel lonely," said the invalid, drawing the
child's face down to hers, and kissing it
anxiously.

Aunt Lucy, may I go some nice long
walks ? " whispered the little girl, winking
hard to keep back two troublesome tears.

My darling, I don't see — Mrs. Hammond
couldn't spare time to take you," said Aunt
Lucy, irresolute and perplexed, glancing
questioningly at her husband.

What's that ? Marjory pining for walks ?
in this weather ? " said the clergyman.

*rit's cooler sometimes. Please let me.
By myself, I mean ; I won't do anything
naughty. There's such a nice road past the
church, leading into the country. Do let
me ! I'll be so good, indeed."

Well, I know we can trust you ; I see
no objection to some country walks, now and
then. Not in the town, mind ; I can't have
you go alone into the town."

Oh, no. Uncle John, I'm tired of the
town, I want the country. Thank you.
Good-bye."

She raised her face for a final kiss, and

sprang out once more ; the driver mounted
to his box, and away rolled the fly. Marjory
stood on the pathway, watching, till it had
disappeared. Then she walked slowly back
into the little house, and turned into a small
sitting-room on the ground-floor, the door of
which stood open.

She was winking harder than before ; the
tears were coming back, and she must not
give way to them. At any minute Mrs.
Hammond, the black capped landlady, might
enter, and she would not for the world be
seen crying. She went to the window, facing
the road, and stood there, looking out. The
little sitting-room was furnished with sordid
plainness. It had a horsehair sofa, an armchair
of American leather, a portrait of the
Queen in a black frame, a square centre-table
adorned by a pink cotton cloth, bearing
just now the remains of an early luncheon —
a tray, with remnants of cold beef which had
formed the clergyman's repast, and a bone,
sole relic of a mutton chop, cooked for the
invalid. A penny ink-bottle also stood on
the table, with a steel pen and a piece of well-used
blotting-paper, hastily brought by Mrs.
Hammond from her private parlour for the
receipt of her week's account. The child in

the window felt a sudden impatience, child
ttougli she was, of the surroundings of her
life ; she would have had them so different,
could she have chosen ; were they always to
be such as this ?

The barrel-organ was still droning its
melancholy air ; there was a certain sweetness
in it too ; it seemed somehow to have
caught a notion of the sadness yet the beauty
of life, and to be trying, falteringly, to tell
them to the world. As Marjory listened,
feeling lonely and deserted, she longed to flyaway,
to escape from this stifling little house,
the staring road, the endless red brick. She
was a country-bred child; until within the
last six months her home had been in a
retired village, where Mr. Stanhope, her uncle
and guardian, had a curacy, a sole charge.
Now, as the barrel-organ played, she was
thinking of fields and lanes, of peaceful
brooks rippling among them, of green woods
thick and cool. If only she could turn into
a water-baby like the water-babies in the
story, and lie down in one of those brooks,
under the shadow of one of those great trees,
she would be perfectly happy ! She shut her
eyes, and tried to fancy that so she was.
lying now, but the bare imagination made

the reality of closeness, and town, and shadeless
heat, seem almost maddening.

Ai this moment the babe in the background
burst into fresh screams, and Mrs.
Hammond appeared, with a worried face,
to remove the luncheon tray.

'' These schools ! " she said — " schools !
schools ! schools ! what's the good of 'em ?
What do children want with so much education
? We never had it in our time, and
we're as much use in the world as ever
they'll be ! And there was parson, always
a-teasing about my Martha being at home,
and setting 'Ammond on the same — and that
was worse : so there is she gone off this
blessed Monday morning, and here am I
with not a soul to nurse the baby, and he
a-screaming fit to craze one, if I do but turn
my back."

I'll nurse him, if you like," said Marjory,
in her old-fashioned voice.

'' No, thank you, miss, he's too much for
you ; you're tired out, and no wonder —
waiting on your poor aunt as you've been,
week after week. ISTo, let him scream a bit
it'll do him good — exercise the lungs of
him ; and the children will be home directly
ought to, however ! and if Martha dawdles.

she shall catch it — leaving me to slave while
she's at her books like a lady ! What will
you please to have for your dinner, my
dear ? " said Mrs. Hammond, with a sudden
change of tone. She felt a mother's compassion
for the solitary child.

"I don't want any dinner, thank you — I'm
too hot. I wish I could have some strawberries
— or ginger-beer ! "

Ginger-beer, my dear, you could have if
there was anybody to fetch it. Mrs. Judge,
she sell it uncommon good at twopence the
bottle."

But I haven't got twopence," said the
child, old-fashioned no longer.

'' Oh, as to that, miss, I'd advance the
money out of my own pocket."

^'No, I mustn't cause extra expense to
Uncle John," said Marjory, relapsing into
womanhood.

Well, then, my dear, still less could you
have strawberries," said Mrs. Hammond;
'* They're a shilling a quart in the market;
and, when you have 'em, where' s the pleasure?
gone in a moment — no substance in 'em
whatever. Give me a good beefsteak, say I ! "

*' Please, I'd like a glass of water," said
Marjory ; " I'll come to the kitchen and

fetch it ; and then I am going for a
walk."

"A walk in this heat, my dear! and no
dinner ! Couldn't you fancy a morsel of
tripe ? There's some, beautiful, cooking this
minute for 'Ammond, and you're welcome to
a plateful, I'm sure, if you'll only say the
word."

Thank you, I'm not hungry — only
thirsty," said Marjory, repressing her shudder
from regard to Mrs. Hammond's feelings
; '^ I'll go and try to find a cool place."

"You'll have to go to another world then,
I fear," said Mrs. Hammond, lifting the tray ;
such weather I never saw since the summer
before 'Ammond and me was married, when
he used to come courting to Thorne, and
Mrs. Bell's — that was my lady's own maid
—used to say : ' Well, Martha, you can never
deny that he's risked his life for you ; for, if
he hasn't a fit before you've done with him, it's
not the sun's fault, nor his.' For 'Ammond
he was out of work just then, so he'd come
all hours of the day — too often, however,"
said Mrs. Hammond, disappearing tray foremost.


Marjory followed her to the little oven of
a kitchen, where the baby, tied in his chair.

was still screaming, and the dish of tripe was
simmering with savoury odours. The child
turned her back to it, and drank her glass of
water ; she would then have endeavoured to
comfort the afflicted baby, but at this moment
the other little Hammondss returned ina
flock from school, and Martha was at once
summoned to her post. There was now no
room for Marjory in the little kitchen ; and,
full of her craving for the country, she was
glad to sHp away, only pausing to tell Mrs.
Hammond that she should not be at home
before tea-time.

Don't you go and get into any mischief,
my dear," said the landlady, anxiously. " I
wish you could a-made yourself happy here !
Tommy and Grace should keep you company
in the parlour."

''I want to get into the fields," said the
little one, plaintively; 'i'm so hot, I can't
bear it any longer."

Mrs. Hammond was too busy, and too much
absorbed in the tripe, to expostulate further ;
and Marjory was a mile or more away before
the good woman thought again of her.

Chapter II.

A burning sky is o'er me,

The sands beneath me glove,
As onward, onward, wearily,
In the sultry morn I go.

From the dusty path there opens,
Eastward, an unknown way ;
Above its windings, pleasantly,

The woodland branches play." — Bryant.

In her shabby brown hat and holland jacket,
with cotton gloves, extensively darned, on her
shapely little hands, Marjory passed through
the iron wicket, and turned into the road
towards the church. The sun beat down
upon her; walking was hard work, in such
weather, to such weary young limbs ; but she
was dreaming of green fields, and lanes where
trees met overhead, and the vision lured heron.


There was pleasure, too, and excitement,
in the mere fact of this solitary adventure.
After living the unfettered life of a wild bird
until she was ten years old, the last six
months had been sadly burdensome to her,

shut up in the narrow little house; and of
late her aunt's illness had increased her imprisonment,
confining her in a close bed-room
for long hours of the burning summer days.
She was a most innocent and childlike child ;
yet cares naturally antipodal to childhood,
were to her strangely familiar. That poverty
of all kinds most suffering — that of gentle.
life — had formed the atmosphere of her home.
Calculations as to how sixpence might do the
work of sentence-halfpenny ; altercations
with servants concerning cinders and candle-ends
; care-worn faces when letters in blue
envelopes arrived, were matters of every day
to her. She knew what it is to see a beloved
one pining for something which a little,
only a little money could supply, and not to
have that little. She knew what it is to feel
rich in all generous impulses, to be ready and
longing to give, and yet to lack the power ;
further, for that lack to be called '^ mean " by
some apparently poorer than one's self —
thought hard or even heartless by others for
whom one's sympathies are painfully alive.
She knew how the dread of bankruptcy, of
disgrace worse than death, can shadow all lifelike
a cloud, day by day, night by night, yet
of necessity be kept secret, hidden from the

world. All these things she had been long
accustomed to see daily in her home ; and the
sight had grafted upon her childishness a
certain old-fashioned gravity which, could
she be heard and not seen, might well imply
her to be at least a hundred years of age.

In the country, when she was spending
most of every day in the open air, finding
among flowers, birds, and insects, friends to
whom care was unknown, the burden of this
did not weigh upon her to any hurtful extent.
But of late, when to anxiety within
was added a world of red brick without, that
burden had been altogether too heavy for
the child, undermining her healthy young
life. Mr. Stanhope, absorbed in other things,
observed no change in her. His wife was
less blind ; but she felt too much oppressed
by poverty and ill health, to imagine the possibility
of relief for Marjory, more than for
herself. Sometimes, indeed, when she was
alone, crying quietly over their difficulties,
a few extra tears would roll down her faded
cheek, as she thought of the child brought
face to face, thus early, with all the weariness
of life; but she mentioned this to no
one upon earth — where were the use, she
thought ?

VOL. I. c

Had either lie or her husband, however,
imagined the little one's danger of that catastrophe
commonly called " breaking down'*
they would have been of one mind, that,
come what might of the extravagance, Marjory
must share in the sea-side week pronounced
by the doctor to be positively, vitally,
necessary for Mrs. Stanhope herself. As it
was, every penny, nay, every farthing, being
of terrible importance to the poor clergyman,
Marjory, albeit with great reluctance on their
part, had been left in the suburban lodging,
under charge of Mrs. Hammond — alone for
the first time in her short life.

It was not, however, the first, by many a
time, that she had gone on a solitary walk.
In their country home, when her short lessons
were over, she had been free to wander as
she would. Mr. and Mrs. Stanhope were so
entirely absorbed in one another, that a third
person, even of Marjory's minute proportions,
was sure to be at times in the way. Of this
fact Marjory herself was childishly unconscious
; but it made them the more indulgent
to her in point of liberty ; moreover, her
pedestrian powers far exceeded those of her
delicate aunt. To-day — only that she was
so strangely tired — she felt as if old times

were come again. Away from all red brick ;
this was her first object, as with dogged
patience she threaded her way through the
suburban streets.

At length the semi-detached villas began
to give place to stray houses, here and there,
very new — one or two still in the hands of
much-enduring masons, whose escape from
sunstroke seemed a miracle. A little later,
she came to a hedge, a real hedge, rich in
wild roses. Wild roses were among the things
for which she was hungering ; she scrambled
up the bank, resolved to fill her hands while
she could. Some were too fully blown, too
much injured by the dust, to repay the encounter
with their thorns; but others bloomed
beyond, and, regardless of time or of distance,
she strayed along, seeking the best.
She took no account of the road or its numerous
turnings. Her eyes fixed constantly
upon the hedges, — crossing from one to the
other, as attractions varied, — she wandered
on until checked by sheer exhaustion.

The sun was still high in the heavens ; it
was about the meridian of the burning afternoon.
A sycamore tree rose from the hedgerow
; beneath lay a patch of shade. Marjory
sat down in its midst, and arranged her
c 2

glorious nosegay. Carefully her little hands
blended, in harmonious conjunction, pink,
white, and delicate green, binding the whole
together with blades of grass to make her
treasure secure. Then she rested her head
against the tree ; and looked about her.

She seemed to have got verily into the
heart of the country ; not a human creature
was to be seen, not a human sound to be
heard. The quiet road stretched before her ;
fields lay around, some with grazing flocks,
some with the young wheat springing, — begun
already, in places, to be a little golden ; some
with hay spread, newly mown, or in cocks
ready to be carried. The scent of the hay
came to her, borne on no breeze — for breeze
there was none — but as it were a part of the
atmosphere, mingled with the sweetness of
the sycamore flowers — among which a multitude
of bees stirred with continual murmur,
Marjory listened and looked, and enjoyed the
rest, and the sweet odours, and the dreamy
hum. Branksome, with its ugliness and newness
and glare, seemed a hundred miles away.
Here was altogether another existence ; here,
if the blazing heat still made life more or
less oppressive, yet all was free and fresh —
Nature seemed bountiful, and God seemed

good. The child felt this, although she could
not have expressed the feeling ; she sat on,
not thinking of return, conscious merely of
the relief of her escape. No officious clock
was here to remind her of the time ; only
the sycamore shadow lengthened a very little,
as the silent minutes went by.

Presently she began to grow thirsty again ;
and the rippling brook for which she had
craved recurred to her fancy. The desire to
find such a brook became as keen as her
previous desire for the flowers. Slowly she
rose, and dragged her little feet to the highest
point of the bank. Far away — or so it
seemed to her — she saw the low gray tower
of a church — a village tower, just visible
above a clump of trees. Then, as her eyes
gained strength in scanning the radiant atmosphere,
she discerned a cottage roof or
two, gleaming in the sun ; last of all, a mass
of chimneys, as of some large house, and
even a part of the house itself, standing out
against the background of foliage. Somehow
that house attracted her ; why, she did
not know — unless for a vague fancy that
near it she should find the brook ; its music
seemed already in her ears, calling her to
come.

She took up her bunch of roses, and
crossed the road to a stile leading to a footpath
which wound away through the meadows.
The stile was high and clumsy ; Marjory had
to creep under the lowest bar, and emerged
covered with dust. She brushed it off, however,
thinking that ere long she would bathe
her face in the cool, clear brook. Her landmarks
were the gray church-tower, and the
gleam of house-front ; the ground soon rose,
and hid them from her sight ; but, her face
turned steadily in their direction, she journeyed
on. There were cows in the meadow ;
but Marjory was not afraid of cows; she
had had dear friends among them in her
country life. When one or two stopped
grazing, and eyed her with some mistrust,
she said " Coop, Coop," and stretched out
her hand in token of amity, and went on,
fearing nothing. A locked gate, five-barred,
divided this meadow from the next. Marjory
clambered over it, regardless of consequences,
and was calmly making her way through the
long grass, when she was startled by a red
face, rising like Jack in the box from behind
a neighbouring hedge.

'* Hullo!" said a rough voice, " what are you
doing there? You go back this minute, or "

The threat, whatever it might be, was
suddenly suspended, cut short by the
startled expression of the great blue eyes
turned in wonder upon the speaker. The
little slight figure in its shabby cotton frock,
yet dominated by that inherent look of " ladyhood
" — the tired child, with that strange
expression of premature anxiety, plodding
so patiently through the long, thick grass —
the sight of her seemed to touch the man ;
perhaps he had a little girl of his own.

'' Beg pardon, miss," he said, touching his
hat, " I thought it was one of them school
children. This field's put up for hay — no
thoroughfare at present. Where did you
please to be going ? "

'^ The church and the great house," said
Marjory, pointing in the desired direction ;
I want to go there."

Is it Thorne you mean, miss ?" said the
man.

'' I don't know ; but I want to go there,"
repeated Marjory.

The man looked dubious for an instant,
then made up his mind.

'' You just please to turn, miss, and go
back into the meadow where the cows be.
It's all for the best, for there's no way

through these 'ere fields to Thorne, and
you'd a-come to a good stiff hedge before
long ; though I'm sorry if I scared you.
You keep along the hedge to the left, till
you comes to the turnstile ; and then follow
the footpath, and it '11 lead you to Thorne,
straight as the crow flies. It be precious
hot, however, and you're but a little 'un to
be travelling on a day like this."

Thank you," said Marjory, " I can rest
when I get there. I'm sorry I came through
the grass. I'll go back as fast as I can."

Then the patient little thing turned without
a murmur, and plodded her way back to
the great gate. The man surveyed her,
half pitying, half amused, until she was out
of sight : after which, with a chuckle of
'her's a rum 'un," he refreshed his spirits
from a minute barrel of cider, and resumed
his occupation of cutting thistles.

CHAPTER III.

*^ When all the world is young, lad,

And all the trees are green,
And every goose a swan, lad,

And every lass a queen :
Then hey for boot and horse, lad !

And round the world away !
Young blood must have its course, lad,

And every dog his day." — Charles Kingsley.

Meanwhile Marjory, although her legs were
fast becoming rebellious, exerted all her pertinacity
to attain her object before giving
way. Through the turnstile to another wide
meadow, the great blue sky beaming unshaded
upon the foot-path ; through a wicket gate,
across a turnip-field, under a second stile,
across a bean-field ; through a turnstile once
more, along a meadow where hay was being
carried, and some slight dread of the haymakers
lent impetus to her speed ; through
another five-barred gate, open in this case ;
out into a shady lane.

Here she paused. On one side the lane
was bordered by young plantations, shut off
by low iron palings ; on the other by a hedge

at the summit of a high bank, where elm-trees,
growing at regular intervals, cast a
continuous shade. Should she turn to the
left or to the right ? Each way seemed the
same to little Marjory, as she stood irresolute,
weary and puzzled. Her goal was no longer
in view ; the dilemma was strong upon her :
when she heard the sound of a horse's hoofs
coming slowly up the lane from the left.
She turned, half curious, half timid ; but
neither horse nor man was to be seen. The
clear atmosphere rendered every sound doubly
manifest to-day ; that treading of invisible
hoofs coming nearer, nearer, seemed to the
child almost supernaturally tardy.

She thought of a wild tale which she had
read, of a phantom horseman. This lonely
lane, with the thick plantations stretching
out as far as she could see, was just the place
for such a being, if such there were, to haunt.
The hay-field, to be sure, was behind her, and
she could hear the voices of the haymakers ;
but her nerves were overstrained, her physical
powers almost exhausted, and she could not
control a tremor as the sound still steadily
advanced. What if it should come close upto
her and pass, like that phantom of the
story, invisible all the while ? As she stood

spell-bound yet fascinated by the fancy, a
sudden rustle in the plantation made her
start ; she looked fearfully in that direction,
and saw, not a spectre, but a young girl,
who, emerging from behind a cluster of shrubs,
knelt down on the mossy ground. She had
a rustic basket on her arm, a trowel in her
hand ; and, after peering for a second or so
among the plants with which the ground was
thickly covered, she proceeded, singing all the
while to herself, to dig vigorously at certain
of their roots.

She was a very pretty girl, fair and delicate-looking,
with a brilliant complexion of red
and white, and a profusion of auburn hair.
Every movement of her figure, as she worked
the trowel, was graceful ; and her clear young
voice, not silenced, like the birds, by the heat,
rang like a silver bell across the road.

He will return," it sang ; " 1 know he will ;
He will not leave me here to die.
He will not — will not — leave me here to "

Only, as it appeared, at this instant, she
became aware of the approaching hoofs. Her
song broke off suddenly ; she glanced quickly
from behind a bush at the horseman, who
now at length was turning the corner of the

lane. In the same moment, as if instinctively,
she dropped the trowel, smoothed her hair
rapidly with one hand, and with the other
twitched into prominence a blue ribbon hitherto
almost hidden by the collar of her jacket.

It was a neat little jacket of plain black ;
her dress too was merely a clean print with
an innocent blue sprig ; and her hat was of
brown straw, like Marjory's own, shady,
featherless, with a plain ribbon quilling. Yet
in all these sternly simple things lurked somehow
an element the reverse of simple. What
was it — something in her face, or in her
general manner, which gave her more the
air of an all-fascinating princess of fashion,
than of the unsophisticated village maiden
implied by her dress ?

The above minute arrangements instantaneously
completed, she snatched up her trowel
again, and resumed her work, with a diligence
which even Marjory's childish eyes
perceived to be now a little studied. Meanwhile,
though still very slowly, the hoofs were
advancing close upon them. Marjory turned
from the plantation to inspect the new comers,
heralded so long.

The horse, a beautiful chestnut, thoroughbred,
with bright eye, sensitive nostrils, ears

ever alert, was groomed to perfection, his
coat shining, his tail of strictly orthodox
proportions, — the bits, stirrup-irons, and all
other appointments, in character. His rider
was quite a young man — perhaps some
months over twenty ; about five foot ten in
height, lightly but strongly built, of soldierlike
deportment ; dark-haired, dark-eyed, his
brown skin made browner by sunburn — his
features somewhat strongly defined, but
marked by a certain carelessness, not to say
recklessness, of expression. He came slowly
on, whistling a merry tune, — a bright, lighthearted
young fellow as ever the world saw ;
looking as if he had been born in the saddle,
holding in the spirited chestnut with a light
yet masterly hand, thinking of anything and
nothing, as he rode through the quiet lane.
He wore a light straw hat, and a suit of
summer tweed — common enough, yet of an
unmistakable cut, such as Mr. Hammond,
Marjory's landlord, who was considered a
very fair tailor, would have given half that
he possessed to acquire ! But Mr. Hammond,
fortunately perhaps for his own peace of
mind, was not present ; — only Marjory, looking
not with tailors' eyes, gazed admiringly,
as at a pleasant spectacle, thinking how much

nicer " this young horseman looked — she
could not have told why— than any of the
young men whom she was accustomed to
see in the half streets, half roads of Brank-some.


He was passing the plantation with the
careless glance which seemed habitual to him,
and which had lighted for a moment upon
Marjory, lighting off again as quickly, when
a cough from the young horticulturist
attracted his attention. He looked again —
stopped with sudden animation, — and reined
in his horse.

Hollo, Jessie ! " he said, laughing,
What are you about ? I'm always finding
you in unexpected places ! "

I might say the same of you, Mr. Hugh,
I think," said the girl, with a quick upward
glance : "I'm sure I was never in my life
so startled as I have been lately by you ! "

Did I startle you just now ? " asked the
young man, laughing again, and looking full
at her all the while, with a mixture of admiration
and amusement ; "I don't believe it."

Thank you, Mr. Hugh ; you needn't,
unless you like. If you won't believe me, I
can find a plenty that will," returned the girl,
tossing her head.

You could make any man believe that
black was white," said Mr. Hugh, the admiration
increasing in his dark eyes as he
watched her graceful manipulations with the
trowel. '' And I'll believe you now : to prove
it, I apologise for the startling."

'' Thank you, sir. I think you'd better be
moving on ; your horse is impatient, and you
hinder me."

Let me come and help you. What are
you about?"

'' Getting burdock roots for her ladyship,
sir ; but I want none of your help, I'm much
obliged to you."

'' I tell you what, Jessie — you inspire me
to alter the old fairy-tale. Toads and vipers
come from your mouth — for me, at least —
when you speak ; but the mouth transforms
them into pearls and diamonds on the way,
and so they do me no harm."

'' What nonsense you do talk, Mr. Hugh,
to be sure ! Mr. Brown, he declares that he
never saw what a favourite you seem with
the young ladies when he's waiting at table ;
but, if that's true, I can only say I wonder
at their taste. Or, perhaps, as I'm not a
young lady, you think any rubbish will do
for me."

By George, you're fifty thousand times
more of a lady than half the girls I meet !
The prettiest I know would give half she
had for the shadow of such a face as yours."

'' I should like to hear you tell her so.
You needn't think to take me in, Mr. Hugh;
I know your ways. Please go on ; I can't
work while you sit there staring ; and in
half an hour I have to meet her ladyship at
the lodge."

You'll never do that, Jessie, unless I
come and help you. Only say the word, and
I'll be with you in one instant."

"I dare say; and a fine lecture I should
get from mother. She'd be sure to find it
out, and perhaps tell her ladyship. If you
mean half you say to me, sir, you'll leave me
to work in peace."

What is to be done with those burdocks,
Jessie ? If the dear old lady is meditating
a sanitary soup, pray tell me; forewarned
is forearmed."

Indeed, I wouldn't tell you ! 'No such
thing. You gentlemen think so much of
your dinners ! But, unfortunately, they're
not for soup; they're for medicine — for Mary
at the lodge."

Take care you don't poison her ! If one

root is hard to get up, I wouldn't warrant
you not to take the next at hand, whether
burdock or hemlock."

Thank you, Mr. Hugh ; after that, it's
time I left you, since you won't leave me,"
said Jessie, springing to her feet.

*'I do like to take a rise out of you,
Jessie," laughed the young man. '' You look
so bewitching when you're angry."

'' Good afternoon, sir. If I'm late for my
lady, I must tell her how it is," said the girl,
sweeping her chattels together, and flitting
away through the trees.

The young man remained stationary, looking
after her until the last flutter of her light
dress had vanished ; then he allowed his
horse, which had long been pawing and
fidgeting, to have its way, and rode on
down the lane at a quick pace. Marjory
looked after him, as he had looked after the
girl, until he was out of sight. Her indecision
as to her route was at an end ; a vague impulse
prompted that she should follow where
the rider had disappeared.

And still without break the plantations
went on, and the lane, hot though shady,
went on, and little patient, toiling Marjory
went on, for full ten minutes longer.

VOL. I, D

CHAPTER TV.

With many a curve my banks I fret
By many a field and fallow.
And many a fairy foreland set
With willow-weed and mallow.

I chatter, chatter as I flow,
To join the brimming river,
Eor men may come and men may go,
But I go on for ever." — Tennyson.

At last a change came. The plantation
ceased to border the lane ; in its stead, still
shut off by iron palings, stretched the undulating
swards of a park. Marjory crossed
the road to a low white gate by which the
paling was presently divided. I*^o house was
visible, but the ground was evidently well
cared for. Alderney cows, black and white,
and sheep of some strange foreign breed,
were feeding here and there on grass like the
rich turf of a garden ; around them rose
massive cedars, dark in shade, ancient elms,
more ancient oaks, interspersed by a choice
variety of young trees, each with its wooden
fencing. Half a mile or so beyond the gate,

the view was bounded by a rookery. Marjory
could hear the cawing, softened by distance,
and see the dark nests like blots in the
heights of the trees, and the black-birds
wheeling to and fro against the hot blue
sky. But in another direction, somewhere
to the right, she heard a different sound,
which stirred her tired little frame with a
new impulse of life and energy. That sound,
not very far away among the slopes of the
park, was the ripple of a brook.

The low white gate opened at a touch ;
the child entered, timidly at first, glancing at
every tree as if some one might be expected
to break from ambush and rebuke her intrusion.
But penetrating further among the
grassy slopes, now up a height, now down
into a hollow, she soon lost all sense of fear.
Rippling and singing, nearer every minute,
rang the music that lured her on. Presently,
on the summit of a slight elevation, appeared
a simple bridge, a couple of hand-rails, and a
plank. Marjory walked faster, and was soon
looking down upon the desired object.

The majority of brooks had long been

dry, but this particular stream must have its

rise in some fountain not easily exhausted.

It was very low, however ; only enough red

2

gained to ripple over the stones, and bear
testimony, as it were, of the brook as it had
been and would be yet again. The shallow
water was transparent as glass. Marjory,
looking over the hand-rail, could see every
indentation in the brown soil at the bottom,
every little pebble ; she saw water-cress also,
and other green plants, and little long-tailed
tadpoles darting about as if possessed by
some spirit of quicksilver. She wished that
she were small enough to float like them on
the water, that the brook were a river, and
she could lie down in it and sleep. It was
very hot, even here ; the hand-rail burnt her
arms. On the opposite bank a great lime-tree
spread its boughs, as if offering protection
to all weak and helpless creatures.
Marjory crossed the plank, and at the foot of
the friendly tree stretched her weary little
frame full length upon a bed of moss.

Only now, for the first time, did she discover
the full extent of her fatigue. She had
never in her life felt so tired ; the aching was
almost pain. She could no longer see the
brook at the foot of its steep banks, but its
music blended dreamily with the hum of
insects and the far-away cawing of the rooks.
Little yellow-eyed daisies were looking up

from the soft grass ; golden trefoil, purple
orchis blossoms, tiny speedwells, clustered
about the roots of the tree. All around was
a manifold luxuriance of ferns, of grasses, of
leafy plants, sorrel, white clover, dandelion
clocks, which there was no breeze to scatter.
It was a silent, solitary world, far more congenial
to Marjory than that in which she had
lived of late.

But presently the thought of her long homeward
walk came with sudden recollection upon
her. Slowly rousing herself, she rose to her
feet, but was driven back by a strange numb
faintness ; her head swam, a mist came before
her eyes, a singing in her ears. A second trial,
after a little more rest, was followed by a
like result. There was nothing for it but to
resign herself, and lie still as before. But
what would happen at Branksome if she could
not return ? Hammond would certainly write
perhaps telegraph — to her uncle. What a
disappointment for him, when he was counting
upon a quiet week of rest ! And the
anxiety would make her aunt ill again. '' It
would be dreadful — I couldn't bear to vex
them so," thought Marjory.

A sense of desolation swelled her childish
heart until it felt ready to break. She thought

of lier father and mother, long in Paradise,
and wondered if they could see her, and if
they pitied their little girl, so tired and so
helpless. She thought of the angels, of their
flights from heaven to earth to minister toman
; oh, that an angel would come to her,
and give her strength to go home ! She
thought of stories she had heard of children
found dead in lonely places, and wondered
whether she also would be found dead when
morning came. The notion terrified her ; as
she thought of it, tears fell thick and fast,
and her little client was shaken by convulsive
sobs. Then she felt the need of a living
presence in nature. The tree stretched its
protecting shade above her as before, the
bees hummed on, the brook sang, but nothing
spoke ; there was no voice, nor any that answered,
nor any that regarded. For the first
time little Marjory learned the meaning of
the word loneliness, learned it in such a
manner as she could never forget.

At length, when her tears were spent, she
sank into an exhausted sleep. How long
that sleep lasted she could not tell, nor how
it was finally broken. Suddenly she opened
her great blue eyes, and looked up — not now
into the silent boughs, but into a human face.

It was the face of an old lady, who was
bending over her, scrutinising her through a
gold eyeglass in a short-sighted way, and
poking her gently the while with the point of
an open umbrella — a little old lady, thin
and slight, with a trim waist like that of a
girl, dressed very plainly, in mourning, a large
black mushroom hat tied with broad ribbons
under her chin. Her hair was iron-gray,
intermixed with threads of silver, parted
simply across her forehead, which was marked
by many a furrow of bygone care ; she had
gray eyes, a little dim, but still full of mental
activity, a large hooked nose, a mouth kind
but grave, plenty of good white teeth, and a
decided chin. All these things Marjory noted,
continuing her upward gaze.

'^ Is this a little girl ? " asked the old lady,
peering a trifle more closely.

'' Yes, please," said Marjory, trembling.
Despite the old lady's small stature and the
plainness of her dress, she had a dignity of
deportment which awed the child, who was,
moreover, in secret fear of some mysterious
punishment for her trespass.

And why do you not get up when I speak
to you ? " inquired the old lady.

Please, I can't," said Marjory, humbly ;

'* At least, I can't stay up. I tried
twice."

*' What is your name ? " was the next question,
after a moment's pause.

Marjory Stanhope."

Stanhope— Stanhope ! " The old lady
stooped yet lower, and contemplated the
child with more attention. A little further
questioning elicited other particulars : after
which a new light appeared to break upon
the old lady's mind.

I have heard of your uncle through Mrs.
Hammond, the clerk's wife. And are you
there in those lodgings alone ? "

'' They couldn't help it — they couldn't take
me ; it was the expense," said the little one,
eager to guard her uncle from any suspicion
of neglect.

I understand," said the little old lady ;
and suddenly Marjory perceived the depth of
kindness veiled by the cold gravity of manner.
And you have walked all the way from
Branksome in this heat ! Now, how are you
to go back ? "

Perhaps I shall soon be better," said
Marjory, sighing helplessly.

'' There is little doubt of that, but not
to-night. You are over-done ; you could not

walk ; and, if I sent you in the pony-carriage,
what comfort would you find when you got
there ? "

The child made no reply at first ; but, finding
that the old lady expected one, she said
I don't know " again, and sighed as before.

'' Would there be any one to put you to
bed, to take care of you a little ? "

There's only Mrs. Hammond. I don't
think she'd have time to put me to
bed."

The old lady meditated.

'* Would your uncle, Mr. Stanhope, be
offended if I took a great liberty ? "

Marjory stared in languid wonder.

I know Mrs. Hammond well, and I know
her menage. That would be my excuse —
that, and you being really unfit to go back
to-night. It would hardly assist Mrs. Stanhope's
recovery to hear that you were ill,
alone in those lodgings ? "

She would want to come back — she hould
come back," said Marjory, hopelessly ; '' and
then she would die ! The doctor said that
a very little might kill her."

Then, perhaps, under all these circumstances,
Mr. Stanhope would pardon me if I
were to carry you home ? "

To Branksome ? "

No, to my own house, close by. You
know him best ; tell me, would lie be greatly
affronted by my taking the law into my own
bands concerning you ? "

'* Oh, I'm sure be would only think you so
very, very kind ! " cried the child, wondering,
in her youthful heart, what this strange old
lady could mean by anticipating anything
but gratitude from the bestowal of a
favour !

''I will send at once to Branksome for
your things, and to tell Martha Hammond
where you are. She must be wondering at
your long absence. You are not afraid, then,
to trust yourself to me ? "

Marjory shook her head with a smile. It
was rest, greater than she could have told in
words, to be cared for in this way. And it
was also an adventure ; she enjoyed it, like
reading a new story ! She would rather
have known the name of her benefactress ;
but she was too shy to ask.

Very well ; I must leave you alone a
little longer, while I see about the pony-carriage
; and then I will come and fetch
you."

Perhaps I could walk now. I'll try,"

said Marjory, loth to give trouble. But
the little old lady said, " No ; lie still ! " ina
commanding tone, and, turning, walked
away over the grass under her black
umbrella.

CHAPTER V.

. . " She lay there . « half traced,
And wished, at intervals of growing sense.
She might be sicker yet, if sickness made
The world so marvellous kind, the air so hushed,
And all her wake time quiet as a sleep."

E. B. Browning.

Marjory was too thoroughly spent to feel
more than a languid excitement in the prospect
before her. Nevertheless, her little
heart did considerably quicken its beating
when she heard wheels approaching with
light swiftness from the direction in which
the old lady had disappeared, and saw a low
basket pony-carriage, drawn by a small white
pony, and driven by the old lady herself, a
trim page in dark livery seated on a minute
perch behind. With great effort, the child
rose to her feet ; she staggered, but the
page's arm was held before her, the old lady's
hand was stretched out from the low carriage;
and with one step Marjory was safe in the
comfortable wide seat, her head supported by
a cushion, which the little old lady, with deft
fingers, had put just in the right place.

The pony trotted along, highly appreciating
the springy softness of the turf; a large
umbrella, screwed into the back of the carriage,
afforded ample shade, beneath which
Marjory rested, shy but happy — observing,
wondering, conjecturing. It was like a fairy
tale; the old lady was a fairy godmother,
taking her away from sordidness and discomfort
to some fairy palace. On they went,
over the grass, passing now and then one of
those strange, long-haired sheep, which sometimes
looked up and calmly eyed them, sometimes,
indifferent, continued to browse. The
great trees cast long shadows upon the
green ; the gnats danced before the carriage ;
the rooks cawed ; the pony tossed his head,
and shook his mane, in high spirits, despite
the heat. Presently another low, white gate
appeared ; it might have been the same by
which Marjory had entered the park, excepting
that beside it stood a picturesque lodge
low, with a deeply thatched roof, the walls
hidden in honeysuckle and roses. Here the
carriage exchanged the turf for a broad road,
which wound its way among the slopes of
the park, and the pony quickened his pace
a little, as if he scented his stable. Beyond
the trees on her right hand, Marjory saw the

summit of the gray cliurcli-tower, espied
from far away. It was quite near now ; the
house in its neighbourhood was the house to
which she was bound. The road turned at
right angles into an avenue. At the end of
the long vista of massive oaks rose a square
old mansion of gray stone, before which the
pony, performing a noble sweep, came of his
own accord to a standstill.

Either the drive, or the excitement, or
both, had dispelled Marjory's faintness. She
found herself, with some assistance from the
old lady's arm, able to walk into the house.
They entered first a great hall, oak-paneled,
dark and cool. Upon the walls were ranged
stuffed birds, heads and skins of beasts, old
oil-paintings of men in armour, with flowing
locks — pieces, perhaps, of that very armour,
shining helmets, huge mail-gloves, a battle-axe,
rapiers of curious make : then again
objects more peaceful — as regards human
peace — stags' antlers, foxes' brushes, fishing-rods,
bows, a large and well-worn target.
A polished oak table stood in the centre
of the hall, and high-backed oaken chair?:
around it ; on each was a coat of arms,
and a crest of a mailed hand raised to
strike.

Can you walk upstairs ? " said the little
old lady.

'' Yes — I think," said Marjory, timidly.
There was in this old hall a grandeur which
impressed her childish mind with indefinable
awe.

We will take our time ; there is no
hurry," said the little old lady. The staircase
and balustrade were all of massive oak,
the steps wide and very shallow, with roomy
landing-places, where large china jars emitted
faint but delicious fragrance. On every
landing the old lady paused, that Marjory
might rest. At the top a carpeted passage,
oak-paneled, like the hall, and hung
with ancient portraits of people long dead,
stretched on either side of the staircase.
The old lady led Marjory some way to the
right, past several doors : one of which at
length she opened.

Within was a large room, with windows
wide open, looking out over an old-fashioned
flower-garden, divided by a sunk fence from
the park. The paper of the room, old-fashioned
also, was the first thing noticed by
Marjory, who thought it beautiful beyond
words. The pattern was of roses, full
blossomed and straggling, with plenty of

green leaves and mossy buds, and brightly-coloured
birds scattered among them. Much
the same pattern, in chintz, adorned the
curtains, valances, and high-backed armchair,
also the fittings of a little tent bed
which stood behind the door, facing the
windows. The windows had deep seats ; on
one of these stood a large work-basket, piled
with calico and holland, and beside it, in the
chintz arm-chair, sat an elderly woman, sewing.
She was dressed, like the old lady, in
mourning, with a white cap, of plain but
delicate texture, tied beneath her chin ; an
inexpressible look of neatness and cleanliness
characterized her appearance; her complexion
was pale, but healthy — for she seemed strong
and active. Her brown hair was as yet
untinged by gray, her clear brown eyes were
bright and observant; and her face had
an honest truthfulness which more than
redeemed the homeliness of its features.
She rose respectfully as the old lady entered,
and, work in hand, looked with some surprise
at Marjory.

'' Bellhouse, will you give up your chair to
this young lady for a few minutes ? I wish
to speak to you in the next room."

Certainly, my lady," said Bellhouse,

quickly placing lier work in the basket, and
straightening the cushion of the arm-chair.
Marjory sat down in it as desired, resting
her weary head against the brightly hued
back. The little old lady and the elderly
woman left the room together; when they
returned, the woman's expression was full of
motherly interest.

Marjory," said the old lady, " this is
my maid, Mrs. Bellhouse. Bellhouse, this is
Miss Marjory Stanhope; you will be good
enough to make her comfortable in every
way."

'^ Certainly, my lady," repeated Bellhouse.
Then the little old lady stroked Marjory's
cheek, with the backs of two fingers upwards ;
and having glanced round the room, specially
at the little tent-bed, and again with gentle
gravity at Marjory, she went away.

"You do look sadly tired, my dear," said
Bellhouse, kneeling down to unbutton the
child's boots. " Just about worn out, aren't
you?"

I'm very hot too," said Marjory ; '' and I
ache all over."

How long is it since you had any
food?"

I had some breakfast, only not much —

VOL. I. E

because the bread was sour. I couldn't eat
any dinner."

'' And you've been walking all day in the
broiling sun, with nothing inside you ! No
wonder you were faint ! We'll mend that
as soon as possible ; but I'll get you into bed
first, for you don't look fit to be sitting up
no, indeed. Her ladyship's as good as a
doctor, any day ; and she says she can see
what ails you. You've been helping to nurse
your sick aunt, I understand, my dear ? "

Yes, Mrs. Hammond is always busy, and
Uncle John was often out ; so the nursing
fell a great deal upon me," said Marjory, in
her quaint manner.

Poor thing ! and you but a baby yourself!
Well, it's been too much for you,
that's plain. But, now, how thoughtful of
the Almighty to send you across her ladyship
! Why, there's not such another lady
anywhere in the land. She won't let you go
till you're well again ; we may be sure
of that."

All this time Bellhouse was busily undressing
the child, with quick but gentle
fingers. She now rose, and from a high
chest of drawers, old-fashioned like the rest,
took a small night-gown of fine linen.

This will fit you nicely, missy ; and I'll
make the bed in a trice. But, first, a bath
might refresh you. Should you like it, my
dear? See!"

She opened a door in the wall, and revealed
a little bath-room, with taps of hot
and cold water, and every convenience for
their use.

'' Oh, I should so enjoy it ! It would cool
me so ! " cried Marjory.

But you must have it rather warm, or
it wouldn't be healthy, and you so thoroughly
heated. I'll turn on the right temperature.
There ! You'd best leave the door ajar ;
then, if you're taken faint and call, I shall
hear you directly."

So Marjory, who, while accustomed from
babyhood to 'rough it," had been brought
up like any princess in the matter of cleanliness,
bathed in the pleasant water, greatly
to her comfort, and came back in the snowy
little night-gown, much refreshed.

'' Here's the bed all ready, my dear ! let
me lift you in. There now, lie down, and
rest to your heart's content. And now I'll
get you some food. Is there anything you
can fancy?"

*' Only — " began Marjory ; and paused,

remembering Mrs. Hammond had said that
strawberries were a shilling the quart.

Only what, my dear ? Please to say. If
it's anything whatever in the house, her
ladyship would be too happy."

If there were one or two strawberries to
spare," said Marjory, hesitatingly. "If not,
never mind ; but, if there were "

One or two ! When you get well, missy,
I'll take you to see the gardens. Why,
we're noted for our strawberries ! Her ladyship
gives baskets and baskets away, and
bushels go to market besides. Yes, you shall
have some strawberries, my dear, and welcome
; but first I must get you something
more solid, after such a day."

So saying, Bellhouse quitted the room,
leaving Marjory alone. Oh, the unutterable
sense of peace which stole over her, as she
stretched her weary little limbs ! How cool,
how restful, how fragrant, was this little
bed ! How kind her ladyship and Bellhouse
were ! How beautiful, through the open
window, the green trees of the park ! She
felt as though she should never again care
to rise — she was so tired, and it was so
dehghtf ul to be nursed ! How soft the
pillow felt beneath her head ; and the mattress

had no hard lumps, like that at Mrs.
Hammond's. She had been trained to think
lightly of bodily discomfort ; but much that
strength may make a joke of, becomes a trial
in weakness. Marjory was a healthy child
enough ; but a burden greater than she could
bear had of late been laid upon her ; beneath
it health and nerves alike might have failed ;
help had come when most it was needed.

Bellhouse returned with a damask-covered
tray, upon which was a little chicken, delicately
minced, and a glass of wine and water,
Marjory had thought eating, strawberries excepted,
impossible a few minutes before ;
but when she saw the dainty chicken, with
its faultless accompaniments — brilliant silver,
shining glass, a little roll, a snowy napkin —
the repulsion passed away. Bellhouse stood
beside her pillow, and fed her in tempting
morsels. Before long both meat and drink
had disappeared, and Marjory felt all the
better.

"And now, Miss Stanhope, my dear, you've
been a good young lady, and you shall have
your strawberries."

Opening the door, she brought in a little
table, left outside until the more solid viands
had been disposed of. Here, heaped upon

a dish of rare old china, was a perfect
pyramid of strawberries, such strawberries
as Marjory had never dreamed of — almost as
large as a green gage, many of them, beautiful
in hues of red and white. There was
a cream-jug too, of the same china, full of
rich cream, and a little basin to match, with
powdered sugar. The child's blue eyes
shone with delight as she looked first at this
tempting spectacle, then at Bellhouse.

*' There, my dear, eat as many as ever you
like. I'll move the table close to the bed ;
you shall help yourself. Her ladyship has a
great opinion of strawberries ; she says that
they have saved lives. And her ladyship's
very learned in all the Almighty sends —
fruits of the earth, herbs, and suchlike. She
doctors many a one, and cures them too, with
nothing else."

*mrs. Bellhouse!" said Marjory, as the
woman moved to and fro, folding the child's
clothes, and putting the room in perfect
order. '' Mrs. Bellhouse ! "

I should be glad, Miss Stanhope, if you
would please to call me Bellhouse. It would
put me in mind of some that are gone ; and
I should much prefer it, my dear."

'every well, I will," said the child; '' 1

was going to ask you — what is her ladyship's
name ?"

'' Her name is Lady Thome, my dear.
To think that you did not know it I"

*' I knew the place was called Thorne ;
but she did not tell me her own name."

'' Yery likely she thought there was no
need, — her ladyship is so widely known. Her
husband was Sir Archibald Thorne ; and this
is Thorne Court. Thorne of Thorne the
family have been for generations on generations
; but that's at an end now, after the
manner of this world's glory, my dear."

'' How do you mean ? " inquired Marjory.

They're all gone, missy — every one ; not
one left so much as to inherit the name. Sir
Archibald, he has been dead ten years ; and
the baronetcy died with him. Her ladyship
has a distant cousin of her own, but Sir
Archibald was the last of his stock. There
were some fine children," said Bellhouse,
lowering her voice, with altered tone. '' But
the Almighty took them, my dear. Ah, yes !
her ladyship has known trouble."

She paused in the act of folding Marjory's
frock, and looked out, up at the sky, through
the open window. Marjory heard her sigh,
and saw her lips move slightly ; she seemed

for a moment to be speaking to some one far
in those heights of blue. As she resumed
her occupation, her lips were compressed,
her face was very grave. Marjory did not
like to say any more to her just now, and
lay back in silence, watching, as, her task
completed, she returned to her seat in
the chintz arm-chair, and went on with her
sewing.

Presently some clock struck a half-hour ;
and immediately afterwards a great bell rang
loud and long. Five minutes later, the door
opened, and a young girl entered, walking
noiselessly, as one who had been so trained
the only sound being the light sweep of her
draperies, as she crossed the room to one of
the deep windows. Here she sat down, resting
her elbow upon the sill, her chin upon
her hand ; and gazed out over the park.
Marjory looked at her with interest, mingled
with wonder, recognising at once the girl
whom she had seen in the plantation. She
looked at the girl, and the girl by-and-by
looked at her — curiously at first, then
intently. Then, on a sudden she turned away,
gazing towards the park, as before.

"Well, Jessie'' said Bellhouse, who had
looked up as she entered, following her

movements with her eye, '' I hope you took
pains with her ladyship ? "

Dear me, mother ! " said Jessie, tossing
her head, '^ you speak as if dressing her
ladyship were a work of art ! I don't know
what room there can be for pains in a plain
black dress, a chemisette, and a cap ! "

'' As to works of art, Jessie, I don't rightly
understand you," said Bellhouse. '' But
there's nothing to be trifled with, neither,
in caps of real lace and dresses of black
satin."

I never said there was, mother ! Only it
does provoke me that you think I can't do that
much by myself. I should just like to show
you what I could do, if I had the chance ! If
I could dress Lady Rose Fairlegh, now, for
her next ball. You don't half know what
I've got in me, mother ! How I do envy that
Davies of hers ; and she has no notion of her
advantages. When Lady Rose went to the
hunt ball from here, I longed — more than I
can tell you, mother — to take off that jessamine
wreath Davies was so proud of, and put
it on again my own way. And her hair too !
They said she was one of the belles ; but, if
I'd had the dressing of her, she'd have been
the belle, and no question about it. She's a

very fine girl. Lady Eose; but a good bit
depends on her dress. She'd make twice the
sensation, I know, if she parted with Davies."

'jessie! I am astonished at you," said
Bellhouse, severely ; '' To speak like that of
high-born ladies ! ' A very fine girl,' indeed.
I'll tell you what, Jessie, I cannot countenance
such disrespect. If her ladyship heard
you, she would be more shocked than I can
bear to think of."

'' Well, but if you come to think of it, Lady
Eose is a girl, as much as I am one. Of
course, I shouldn't call her so in public ; anymore
than I should call my lady a woman.
Nevertheless, facts are facts, whether we speak
of them or not."

Just so ; and it is a fact that we owe
respect to our superiors. How you come to
be my daughter, Jessie, I can't think ; disrespect
I never could abide, let deal in it who
would. But I doubt you've been made too
much of, my dear, and your silly head is
turned. It vexes me a good bit, Jessie, to
hear you talk in this way."

'' Well, mother, I won't, then. I'm sure I
don't want to vex you," said Jessie, putting
out her pretty hand to stroke Eellhouse's
shoulder. '' By-the-by, mother, what nonsense

folks are talking about Lady Rose ! Mr.
Brown says that lie hears, everywhere, thereto
be a match between her and Mr. Hugh. I
don't believe a word of it."

Well, my dear, it don't do to believe all
the gossip one hears, or half ; but still that
seems a likely match enough, and a nice one.
Lady Eose is a very good young lady, and
would make him a good wife, and she's beautiful
too ; and, unless I mistake, Mr. Hugh
is one who will look for beauty in his wife.
If he gets goodness with it, so much the
better."

'' I don't believe, all the same, that he'd
care to marry Lady Rose ; she's not his style.
Mr. Hugh admires fair people."

What have you to do with Mr. Hugh's
admiring ? " said Bellhouse, looking up from
her work to fix her clear eyes upon Jessie's
face. '' Those things are quite out of your
province, Jessie. Mr. Hugh is nothing to
you."

'' I suppose there's no harm in saying that
he likes a fair style," said Jessie, colouring
slightly, as she leant out of the window.
Mother, how sweet that syringa is ! I can
smell it all the way up here, just like orange
flowers."

'' Yes, it has a delicious scent," said Bell-house.
"I often think how good the Almighty
has been to us, in giving us so many scents,
each perfect its own way. Our life would be
very different without them ; there's a deal
in the smell of a flower. I've read somewhere
of their bringing back old days better than
anything, and I've found it true. There's
many and many a time crowds back on me,
without my seeking, as I sit sewing in this
window, and the different scents come up,
some one day and some another, just as the
wind comes."

Well, for me, I've no old times to crowd
back," said Jessie, lightly. " New times are
what I want ! I'm tired of the old."

Then she leant from the window again to
inhale the syringa's fragrance, and to listen
to the wood-pigeons cooing dreamily among
the trees in the park.

I wish I was a lady, mother ! " she said
suddenly, drawing in her head.

Oh, my child ! you shouldn't wish such
things as that," said Bellhouse, sighing.

She looked again at Jessie, with a look
which had something of real pathos ; though
she was biting off a thread the while, in a
matter-of-fact way enough. But matter

of fact and pathos lie sometimes in mournful
proximity.

"Why shouldn't I?" cried Jessie.
Where can be the harm ? What a straitlaced
thing you would make of me ! Not
only mustn't I do this or say that ; I mustn't
even wish."

'' The Almighty knows what's best, my
dear, and we ought not to go against His will."

'' Oh, dear, mother ! you do take life
so seriously, 'tis quite awful. Why should
you bring religion into everything ? I know
nothing about all that, I'm sure ; but this I
do know, there can be no harm in wishing
to be a lady. 'No, and I may be one yet ;
and that '11 be no harm, either."

I don't understand you, Jessie," said
Bellhouse, looking really uneasy — uneasiness
which Marjory's childish mind could not
fathom. " To be sure," she added by an
after thought, " we may all be ladies in
actions, if we try. But a lady in station you
can never be ; so don't you pine after it, my
child," said Bellhouse, pleadingly.

*'Ah, you've not heard of Lady Burleigh,
mother, that's plain," said Jessie, laughing.

Lady Burleigh ! there's no such lady in
these parts," said Bellhouse, puzzled.

No, she's in a poem ; but it is true ; I
read it the other day. She was born plain
Sarah Hodges, a cottage girl ; but Lord
Burleigh married her. To be sure, she died
young, from the burden of her honours, the
poem says ; but I think that was very silly
of her. As for me, I'm more likely to die
young from longing for honours I haven't
got. I wish I could have her chances ; I
wouldn't die young, I know ! "

Hush! " said Bellhouse, glancing towards
the bed ; then, lowering her voice. " You're
talking quite wickedly, Jessie ; hold your
tongue. No Lady Burleigh for me ! "

"Ah, wait till the Lord Burleigh comes ! "
said Jessie, laughing again. '' Such things
have been, mother, so you needn't stare in
that shocked way. Of course, I don't really
expect any such good fortune," she added,
as her mother still looked at her as if petrified.


Such ill fortune, you mean," said Bell-house.
" What would you do as a lady, I'd
like to know ? and your mother a poor
servant. I tell you what, Jessie, you make
me feel very uneasy ; I don't know what's
come to you."

Nonsense, I was only trying to shock

you," said Jessie, with another laugh ; " I've
no business, either, to sit idling ; my vases
must be filled before dark."

She rose, glancing lightly at her mother ;
and, seeing that the troubled look continued,
bent to kiss her, crying, '' Why, mother, can't
you understand a joke ? "

Some jokes are edged tools, my dear,"
said the mother, not satisfied — though evidently
pleased by the kiss.

At this moment some one knocked at the
door, asking to speak with Mrs. Bellhouse.
Bellhouse obeyed the summons; her daughter,
lingering behind, stole noiselessly to Marjory's
bed. Her fair cheek was tinged by
crimson, delicate yet rich, like that of some
hot-house flower ; her eyes were bright, as
from some inward excitement.

'' You'll excuse my chattering so, Miss
Stanhope ? I hope I've not disturbed

you."

Oh, no," cried Marjory, gazing in undisguised
admiration.

But Jessie still lingered, straightening the
coverlet, smoothing the pillow. As a step
sounded in the passage, she suddenly stooped,
and said, in a hurried tone :

I'll be so much obliged, missy, if you

won't mention to mother that you saw me in
the plantation? "

"No, I won't," Marjory innocently replied.


Years later she remembered that promise.


CHAPTER VI.

The old house by the lindens
Stood silent in the shade,
And on the gravelled pathway
The light and shadow played.

I saw the nursery windows
Wide open to the air ;
But the faces of the children,
They were no longer there.

The birds sang in the branches
With sweet, familiar tone ;
But the voices of the children
Will be heard in dreams alone !"

Longfellow.

When Bellliouse returned, she carried with
her a shabby little trunk, which looked
strangely out of keeping with all else in that
room, but which Marjory at once recognised.
It contained the child's modest wardrobe,
already brought from Branksome by the servant
whom Lady Thorne had despatched to
ease Mrs. Hammond's mind. Mrs. Hammond
had also sent a message to the effect that,

VOL. I. F

though grieved to hear of Marjory's illness,
she could not but rejoice at any chance which
had placed her in the hands of 'her ladyship'*

Thus all was peacefully settled ; and the
sense of repose deepened on the weary child,
as she lay watching Bellhouse unpack her
clothes and put them neatly by. The long
day was drawing to its close ; the sky was
luminous with the soft glory of the sunset ;
a wonderful rest was enfolding woods and
fields, and the living creatures that dwelt
among them. The intense heat was lessened
for the time; the western crimson foretold
its return tomorrow ; but meanwhile there
was a respite and a calm. Soft voices sounded
below in the old-fashioned flower-garden ; the
ladies had just left the dining-room, Bellhouse
said, and had come out to breathe the evening
air ; the wood-pigeons were cooing with
gentle melancholy ; Jessie had disappeared ;
Bellhouse sat sewing in her chair ; a peaceful
drowsiness stole over Marjory,— the outer
world faded from her sight.

When she awoke, the sun had quite gone
down. The windows were still open ; she
could see Bellhouse in the dim light sitting
in one of them, her work laid by, looking out.
The sky was overspread by a soft blue, blending

into delicate green ; one star, of silver
covered by transparent gold, was shining in
the west. Bellhouse was resting lier cheek
upon her hand ; her profile showed against
the background of sky : a homely profile,
thickly cut, but good and true, with a certain
sad anxiety of expression, and yet, underlying
this, a calm. Marjory watched it for a longtime
in a kind of dream ; faint perfume from
the syringa was floating in at the window ;
all was very silent. Bellhouse herself looked
like a statue, sitting motionless. Long afterwards
the scent of syringa would bring that
whole scene and its feelings back in a flood
to Marjory.

And there was another, a more prosaic
scent, which brought it back, — that of a cigar.
This also stole in after awhile, and with it
the sound of a footstep below the window
a man's footstep, slow and somewhat sauntering,
pausing now and then, as if its owner
were enjoying the beauty of the night. Presently,
from a neighbouring grove, came a
silver-like note, rising to the stillness ; as
of some heavenly bird which had strayed and
lost its way, and was calling to a companion
in the heights. The footstep stopped
on a sudden ; a young man's voice — the same
F 2

wliicli Marjory had heard in the lane — exclaimed
:

Mrs. Bellhouse ! I took you for a ghost !
Is that a nightingale ? "

No, sir, a thrush," replied Bellhouse ina
cold tone, turning her face outwards.

"I suppose your Thorne thrushes are
better than other people's ? We have no
such notes at Copelandss ! He came to serenade
Jessie, perhaps. Tell her so."

I beg your pardon, sir. I do not understand
you."

Is Jessie there, Mrs. Bellhouse ? Ask
her to come to the window. I'll tell her myself
and save you the trouble."

'' Thank you, sir, Jessie is gone to bed.
I will wish you good night, if you please,
Mr. Hugh. I am afraid of disturbing the
young lady."

Oh, by-the-by, how is the poor little
kid?" said the young man, with careless
good nature.

She will be better, I thank you sir,
when she is rested. I wish you good night,
sir."

You're uncommonly stiff to-night,' Bell-house.
I've offended you in some way; I
must know how, tomorrow. Good night,"

said the light-hearted young voice. The easy
footsteps strolled on out of hearing, the
cigar-perfume passed gradually away.

*' Mrs. Bellhouse ! — Bellhouse, I mean,"
said the child— 'who is Mr. Hugh ? "

Miss Stanhope ! are you awake, my
dear ? " cried Bellhouse, instantly alert. Her
tone, full of warmth and heartiness, was different
indeed from that of two minutes before.
"And how do you feel, missy, after your
nice long sleep ? I thought I would not disturb
you till you woke of yourself; so I
lighted no candle."

I feel much better, thank you," said
Marjory.

"I'm so glad of it, my dear ; I thought
you would. Rest is what you want, and
care, and both of those you shall have. Nowhere's
some nice jelly, ready and waiting ;
and then you shall sleep again till morning."

Who is Mr. Hugh ?" repeated Marjory,
as she passively accepted the jelly.

Why, did you hear me talking, missy ?
I'm afraid we disturbed you."

Oh, no , I was awake ; but I saw him
before. As I was coming here, he passed
me " She paused, blushing scarlet, remembering
her promise to Jessie, and wondering

whether Bellhouse would inquire how
she could know that the young man whom
she had seen in the lane was the same whom
she had heard beneath the window. But
Bellhouse was occupied, unfolding the chair-bed
in which she was to sleep, and no such
question occurred to her.

'' Mr. Hugh Vivian he is by rights, my
dear ; only we always call him Mr. Hugh, by
reason of his father. Mr. Yivian is the
largest squire anywhere about, and a part of
his estate touches her ladyship's. He is
much respected everywhere, is Mr. Yivian.
Mr. Hugh is in the army — a cornet, I think,
they call him. His mother is a particular
friend of her ladyship, and we have known
Mr. Hugh from a baby ; he comes and goes
as he likes, and makes himself at home. He
and Mrs. Yivian are spending a week here
now; Mr. Yivian couldn't leave home, so
Mr. Hugh is escorting his mother. Her
ladyship is very fond of him ; and, as to that,
he's a nice young gentleman enough — in his
own place. Miss Stanhope, my dear."

Marjory did not at all understand what
this latter remark might imply. She was
silent a little while ; then, pursuing her own
train of thought :

*' Does Jessie always live here ?" she
inquired.

Jessie has lived here seventeen years,
my dear — ever since she was two years old.
I have been in her ladyship's service almost
all my life : first as nursery maid, then head
nurse, then lady's maid. It was here that I
married Bellhouse ; he was Sir Archibald's
valet, missy. Three years we lived together
in a home of our own, in Thorne village, and
there Jessie was born : and then my husband
died and I came back here, and Jessie with
me ; and here I shall stay to the end of her
ladyship's life or mine."

But Jessie would like to go away,
wouldn't she ? I thought so from the way
she talked."

You mustn't pay any attention. Miss
Stanhope, my dear, to the way Jessie talks.
She doesn't mean half she says. You see,
Jessie's been a bit spoilt: that's how it is,"
said the mother, apologetically. 'when first
she came here, every one was so glad to see
a child about the place again : and then, as
she grew older, her ladyship would encourage
her to read history and the like, besides all
the good teaching she got in her ladyship's
schools ; and what with her being pretty and

that, and sharp, and having more education
than some, she was always made much of
by visitors. One young lady actually taught
her to play on the piano ! T sometimes think
she's never been the same girl since," said
Bellhouse, sighing : " I take a good bit of
blame to myself too, my dear ; for, being
left a widow, and Jessie all I had, perhaps
I have been too proud of her ; and I only
pray that, if I was, the Almighty may not
humble me in a way that I could not bear,"
she added in an under-tone.

I think Jessie is very pretty, Mrs. Bell-house
— Bellhouse, I mean."

'eyes, say 'Bellhouse' — do, my dear; it
sounds so natural. My husband, being my
cousin, was the same name as myself; so
Bellhouse I've always been, and Bellhouse
I always shall be. And there were some that
lisped the name so pretty ! Your voice is a
little like Miss Vie's, my dear. Yes, Jessie
is pretty, there's no doubt. But I don't
know — I don't know," said Bellhouse. "Perhaps
she'd better be ugly. It's not the outside
the Almighty looks at ; it's the heart."

But I always think that pretty people
must have pretty souls," said Marjory, innocently
; " and Jessie looks very nice too."

"Well, missy, she's a very kind girl — yes,
say it though I should not — and something
very sweet in her disposition ; but she's
proud, my dear. I'm sorry to say it of my
own child, but — I beg pardon. Miss Stanhope,
and I hope you'll excuse me — you,
being young, might think it fine and take
pattern by it, if I didn't warn you. Her
pride is this, my dear — I tell you, that you
mayn't be led astray by her talk — she can't
abide to be put in a low place ; no, that's
gall and wormwood to her, missy. And she
won't submit to be looked down upon ; I
believe she'd sooner die than be slighted.
It's a sad failing, and will have to be humbled,
I doubt," said Bellhouse, sighing.

Bellhouse, I thought Lady Thorne looked
at this little bed so sadly ! — as if some one
who once slept in it were dead."

It was Miss Evie's bed, my dear —the
last who was taken, and the eldest of them
all. She died when she was twelve years
old ; she would have been thirty-five now ;
a married lady, perhaps, with children of her
own. Sir Archibald and her ladyship had
been married years before she was born ; so
they set all the greater store by her. I came
as nurserymaid soon after ; her ladyship was

then as happy as heart could wish, — with a
good husband, and a sweet baby, and all that
this world's wealth could give. Her ladyship
lived in her affections, for all she is so quiet
and grave in her way — and cold-like, some
have called her. But there's no coldness in
her heart ! I tell you what, Miss Stanhope,
my dear, if anyone had told me in those
days that her ladyship could lose all she has
lost, and yet live on, I could not have believed
it ! But there's some of the most faithful
hearts that do live in spite of all, like ivy
clinging to the stones after the wall's fallen,"
'' Which of the children died first ? "
"Miss Jane was the first, missy. She
was but a baby — a pretty baby, as ever anyone
saw. Ah, her ladyship grieved sore over
that ! but she didn't know what was coming.
Then, two or three years after. Master Archly
was killed by a fall ; and, last of all, Miss
Evie went, of something on the brain. She
slept herself away so peaceful, pretty dear !
Ah, I did love her. Miss Stanhope — she was
like my own child, having known her from
the first. I can see it all now, when I look
back : that first evening, — me shy, and a bit
homesick — I was but fifteen — and the nurse
sitting by the fire, and the baby in the basinet

; and I thought it such a lovely darling ;
and her ladyship coming in, and saying,
'' Well, Anne ! how are you ? *' — so quiet, but
kind through all, as I felt directly. It was
in this very room, Miss Stanhope, my dear.
This was the nursery."

This very room ! " repeated Marjory,
under her breath. The spirits of those children
so long dead seemed near, as she looked
round at the bright paper which they had
doubtless admired, at the furniture among
which they had played.

Yes, for eight years it was the nursery ;
and then Miss Evie's room. Her ladyship
thought of Miss Evie, I could see, when she
looked at you, my dear. Miss Evie was just
about your size, for she was small of her age,
and slight — with blue eyes like yours. Twenty-three
years, yesterday, it was since that darling
died ! "

And was this her night-gown ? " said
Marjory, touching the delicate frill that
edged her wrist.

*' One of the last set I made ; there are
children's things of all sizes in those drawers.
I have orders to keep them aired in case they
are wanted ; it's not often an occasion comes,
but her ladyship likes to be prepared. They

are old, but I've kept them free from moths ;
and they were beautiful linen to begin with.
And they bring the dear children back —
quite wonderful. Miss Stanhope, my dear ! "

But how dreadful for all the children to
die ! I wish they hadn't died," said little
Marjory, with an aching heart.

*' Yes, it was dreadful at first, my dear.
There was no doubt of that. But now the
worst has long been over. Ah, they're
better, safe in Heaven."

The yearning tone of this last sentence
struck even Marjory's childish ear with a
sense of pain. She asked no more questions,
but lay back, wondering what it could be
that, at times, sent such a pang through this
quiet woman ; thinking also that it would
be better, no doubt, if she, and such as she —
children who had to live pent up in little
lodging-houses, among relations worn down
by poverty — were safe in Heaven ; but that
it seemed strange, and a pity, for those other
children, surrounded by every comfort, with
such a pleasant nursery, such a happy home,
to have been taken from those who loved them,
thus early.

Vague questionings about the problems of
life floated through Marjory's brain. Why

was Lady Thorne left alone, a widow and
childless, with so much money — so much
more than she could possibly want ; while
her own uncle and aunt were so miserably in
need of money — obliged to keep Marjory,
moreover, when they had barely enough for
themselves ? Why had not she been taken
instead of Miss Evie ? It was only wonder
not complaint — speculative, dreamy wonder.
Why ? What was the reason ? what
was to come of it in the far future of which
her uncle had taught her ? She lay pondering
all these things, and watching Bellhouse,
who was kneeling now, with hidden face, to
say her evening prayer, — until her blue eyes
closed from sheer heaviness, and sleep overcame
her once more.

y

CHAPTER Vir.

I aj0&rm that, since I lost it,

Never bower has seemed so fair ;

Never garden-creeper crossed it
With so deft and brave an air.

Never bird sung in the summer
As I saw and heard them there.

"As Aladdin sought the basements
His fair palace rose upon,
And the four-and-twenty casements
Which gave answers to the sun ;
So in wonderment of gazing,

I looked up and I looked down."

Elizabeth Barrett Browning.

Never, throughout her future life, did Marjory
forget the sensation of opening her eyes
next morning in that nest of a bed, in the
bright, old-fashioned room, with its curious
paper. Only half awake from a dream about
Mrs. Hammond, and forgetting, at first, that
she was not in her own close little chamber,
she gazed towards the window, instinctively
expecting a vision of red-brick backs and
hideous chimney-pots. Instead she saw a

calm expanse of skj, veiled in the soft haze
of early morning, thick masses of foliage
stretching beneath it, heights of great shady
trees which to look upon was rest. The
thrush of the previous night was singing
again, making the most of his time ere the
sun should overpower him. A hush reigned
over nature ; the house was silent ; the roses
on the paper made radiance in the room ; the
bright birds seemed to revel in the joy of the
morning.

Marjory felt perhaps, in infinitesimal degree,
w4iat Eve might have felt when she awoke
from her first sleep in Paradise. This place
seemed verily a paradise to the tired child,
whose town life had been such dire imprisonment.
She was an imaginative child too,
with a keen sense of beauty, and a strange
susceptibility to outward impressions of
every kind. Just as yesterday she had felt
overwhelming oppression from the universal
presence of red bricks, so now the green
world around her seemed to have become a
part of her very being.

She desired nothing but to be still ; and
this, to her joy, the old lady decreed for her.
For she came, the little old lady, later, though
still early, and stood over Marjory's pillow,

and gazed at her, gravely and gently, recalling
to the child what Bellliouse had said
of her having a look of Miss Evie. Before
leaving the room, she inquired whether
Marjory were fond of reading ; and, receiving
an emphatic affirmative, a whole pile of books
was shortly placed upon a table beside the
bed. And now was Marjory more than ever
in Paradise. Like many solitary children
growing up among people of literary tastes,
she had read a great deal in the course of
her short life. Her uncle, despite his poverty,
had gradually collected a small library of
standard works, — second-hand, or in the
cheapest editions ; but Mr. Stanhope was
wont to remark that he had never found the
contents at all affected by their covering ;
and they served equally well as the same in
morocco or Russian leather, to educate Marjory's
youthful mind. They made but a
shabby figure, to look at, upon their humble
shelves of stained deal; but none the less
had they power to stir the souls of men.
Many of them Marjory had read again and
again, unconsciously influenced, though only
half understanding. Few, if any, bond fide
children's books were comprised in this
collection ; only Aunt Lucy possessed some

volumes of old fairy tales, which Marjory
knew almost by heart.

A famine of books had been one of her
Branksome trials. One box alone of these
treasures could be unpacked in the crowded
lodgings ; and they were chiefly theological
works, for Mr. Stanhope's private use. Aunt
Lucy had novels now and then from a circulating
library ; but novels were forbidden to
Marjory. Hence all the more delightful was
the feast now spread in abundance before her.

Evelyn Thorne, from her mother." '' To
Evie, on her birthday." " Evie, with her
father's love." This name, in varying forms,
was inscribed on almost every opening fly-leaf.
The books had evidently been read
again and again ; they had been favourite
books of Miss Evie's. Marjory handled them
with a half reverent, half melancholy feeling,
and wondered whether their owner had been
sorry to leave them behind — and whether she
ever thought in Paradise of these old stories
which had pleased her so much on earth.

All the day through the childlaythus,reading,
resting, dreaming. Only once she sighed, and
said plaintively, turning her face to the wall ;
I wish Gerald were here, Mrs. Bellhouse ! "

*' So do I, missy if you wish it," replied

VOL. I. G

that good woman. " But who is Gerald, my
dear ? "

My brother," answered the child, in
the same plaintive tone. '' He lives with
Grandmamma "Wilton, in Northumberland —
too far for me ever to go. Uncle
John has never any money to spare for
the journey; and grand mamma is very poor
too ; we are all poor : why doesn't God give
us some more money, Bellhouse, I wonder?"
That's best known to the Almighty
himself, my dear. He does know best about
all things, we may be sure — quite sure.
Miss Stanhope, my dear," said Bellhouse
firmly. " Yes," she added, as much to herself
as to Marjory, '' if I didn't feel quite sure
and certain of that, I should have given up
hope, many's the time. But then I do,
thank God ! You and your brother were
left orphans, I suppose, my dear ? "

Yes ; when I was a baby. I can't
remember my father and mother one bit.
Gerald can — he says so, at least ; Aunt Lucy
thinks it must be fancy. He was only a
little past five when they died ; and I have
never seen him since then. But we write to
each other very often; and when we are grownup,
we mean to live together all our lives."

That will be something for you to look
forward to, my dear — to grow up a nice,
good young lady, such as your brother can
take a pride in, and that will keep his house
for him pretty, and make him comfortable.
You must keep aiming on to it, Miss Stanhope,
my dear ; and the thought will bear
you through your troubles," said Bellhouse,
compassionately. Bellhouse had never before
come across such an anomaly as a poor young-lady.
It appeared to her one which could
not be sufficiently pitied.

I don't mean ever to marry, Bellhouse;
I shall live all my life with Gerald. He often
writes about it in his letters. Gerald is so
clever ! He goes to school — it is a grammar-school,
in the town near grand mamma's house;
and he has got a number of prizes. But
what he cares most about is drawing and
painting ; he wants to be an artist. Grand-mamma
says that he mustn't think of any
such nonsense ; but it isn't nonsense, is it,
Bellhouse ? "

' I should have thought, my dear, that it
wasn't quite the trade for a young gentleman.
I don't know, though ; when they're so
poor, I suppose they're obliged to earn their
living as they can, like us humbler folk. Did
G 2

you mean an artist to paint signs for doors,
or take photographs, missy ? "

'' Oh, no — not that ! I mean an artist like
Michael Angelo, or Raphael, or Sir Joshua
Reynolds," cried simple Marjory. " Such
wonderful pictures they painted — such faces,
and such colours ! You would feel as if you
were in heaven, Bellhouse, if you saw them!
I have only seen prints of some of them ;
but I have read about them, and the prints
gave me an idea ; and I have thought
a great deal about them, because of
Gerald."

'* I understand you now, missy. There
are many very fine pictures here ; her ladyship
sets great store by them. But I thought
it was some kind of trade to make them, like
any other trade, such as cabinet-making or
tailoring. It never entered my head that
they had been made by gentry."

"Some were gentlemen by birth, and some
not," said Marjory, in her old-fashioned
mood. '' It could not much have mattered;
those great painters must all have been
gentlemen inside, even when their outside
did not seem so. Such grand thoughts they
must have had ! I have read that, however
beautiful their pictures were, the thought of

the picture — in their own minds — was more
beautiful still."

'' That's a thing I can quite believe," said
Bellhouse ; "I remember, many's the time,
in my younger days, when I was making a
bonnet for her ladyship, I'd such a vision in
my mind of what it should be ! I'd seem to
see it before me, so to speak, like dancing
in the air, with trimmings all so genteel !
but, somehow, I never could make the real
thing turn out like my fancy. Something
seemed always wanting. Jessie, now — she's
always satisfied with her work. But, then,
she's cleverer than I am, a vast deal. Miss
Stanhope, my dear."

'' I should like Gerald to see Jessie. He
would draw her, I know ; and you should
have the picture, Bellhouse. This place
would so delight him; it is so old and so
beautiful. I wish it was really a fairy place,
as it seems to me ; because then I could put
an enchanted ring on my table, and the next
day he would be here. But I shall tell him
all about it in my letters. He says my
letters are like stories. I save up all the
bits of paper I can find for them. Uncle
John calls them scribbles."

'' You ought to take pains with your

writing, tliongli, Missy. Miss Evie's hand,
at your age, was beautiful. I'll show you
her copy-books some day."

But Miss Evie had no brother a long
way off," said Marjory, wistfully. '' If she
had, I do think she would have been obliged
to scribble sometimes. There seem such a
number of things to say. Do you know,
Bellhouse, I mean, some day, to write a
book. IVe got such a plan ! — only it is a
secret ; and no one knows it but I myself,
and Gerald."

With this she subsided into silence, her
face resting upon her hand on the pillow,
and her eyes gazing through the open window
towards the grand, still trees. Bellhouse
wondered, looking up now and then from
her work, what thoughts were making that
childish brain so busy ; but she asked no
questions, and Marjory said nothing more.

As evening approached, she began to wish
to get up and visit the fairy region below.
This desire being reported to Lady Thorne,
permission was given that she should rise
when the bell rang for dinner. Accordingly,
towards eight o'clock, Bellhouse escorted her
to the drawing-room. She was dressed in a
white frock of spotted muslin, taken from the

contents of the shabby little trunk — a frock
scrupulously plain, and bearing traces, to a
practised eye, of having been twice at least
'Met down" since its original construction.
Still it suited the childish form well enough,
and was altogether of secondary importance
to the wavy yellow hair, the blue eyes, bright
but deep, with dark eyebrows and lashes, the
square forehead, childish yet childish,
thoughtful beyond its years. The whole face
was the face of a child, but a child who had
experienced much that belongs usually to a
later growth ; who had already, in a practical
manner, learned the necessity of fortitude, of
endurance, of courageous combat with circumstances.


Left alone on the threshold of the drawing-room,
she stood still at first, then entered on
tiptoe, with a look half of awe, half expectation,
as if exploring some enchanted chamber
in the palace of the White Cat or Beauty's
Beast. The room was empty ; a large room,
thoroughly comfortable, with an abundance of
ottomans, settees, quaintly-shaped chairs, and
footstools. The walls were wainscoted halfway
to the ceiling with oak panels, richly
carved — faces, flowers, leaves, and fruit incurious
combination ; each panel was separately

a study. Above the wainscot a light
paper, bright though delicate, extended to
the ceiling, which was also of oak, carved
and interlarded like the rest. In the papered
space were many pictures — pictures of all
kinds ; some in oil painting, some in watercolour,
some portraits, ancient or modern.
They had been hung at various times, with
small attempt at special arrangement ; but
the whole formed an exquisite contrast to
the solid grandeur of the oak. A row of
latticed windows, with cushioned recesses,
ran along the whole length of the wall facing
the door. They overlooked a broad terrace
walk, descending by a step to a smooth lawn
intersected by beds of many patterns, and
gay with geraniums, cancellaria, and lobelia,
an old sun-dial in the midst of all. Beyond,
standard rose-trees bordered another broad
walk ; and again beyond lay the park, the
gray church-tower rising above the trees.

The row of windows was divided by a
glass door, similarly recessed ; both this and
the lattices were thrown open, admitting perfumed
air from the pleasant garden. Perfume
rose likewise from the depths of the china
jars, for which it was Jessie's glory, every
summer, to prepare a delightful concoction

of damask rose-leaves and other such ingredients.
Marjory thought of the tripe and
onions with which Mrs. Hammond's lodgings
were scented, and revelled in the change.
She sat quietly down on one of the low footstools,
under a window, her yellow head
resting against the oak; and looked about her.

All was very still, except that bees were
humming drowsily among the jessamine which
clustered round the windows — jessamine which
for many a year had clustered there, which
the children long dead had looked upon.
Marjory sat with folded hands, and watched
the bees floating in and out, in and out, of
the old walls, where they had built their
nests for generations. Behind the jessamine
stems were many holes, portals to those nests ;
abundant honey was, doubtless, laid up within
them. It might be that they were rejoicing
over their store ; their hum had a kind of
music. Marjory, listening, felt soothed and
happy, although the heat was still intense,
and, to anyone not fresh from Branksome,
might have seemed hardly bearable.

Presently in the hall a door opened ; voices
approached, and soft skirts swept lightly over
the floor. Marjory turned from the bees to
listen to this new sound, as if she had turned

another leaf in the fairy tale. Lady Thorne,
and another J whom she divined to be Mrs.
Vivian, entered the drawing-room. The
little old lady looked smaller and slighter
than ever, beside her companion, who was
tall and of grand proportions. But no less
stately or dignified did that little old lady
appear, T\'ith her erect carriage and the grave
yet calm expression which characterized her
well-defined features. Marjory remembered
Jessie's speech, as she noticed the dress of
rich black satin, with the soft chemisette, and
the snowy cap upon the smooth gray hair.
A gold watch-chain, long and thin, and a
pearl brooch of delicate workmanship, were
her only ornaments ; but Marjory gazed upon
her with eyes brimful of admiration, with that
instinctive homage which '' serene old age,"
such age as Lady Thome's, unconsciously
inspires.

Mrs. Vivian was much younger than her
hostess, remarkably handsome, with a complexion
of clear white, a Grecian nose, and
heavy eyelids, which, uplifted, revealed dark
eyes like her boy's. Her hair, just beginning
to be streaked with gray, was fashionably
arranged beneath a slight fabric of lace and
ribbon ; a white lace shawl feU gracefully

over lier shoulders, shading without concealing
their beautiful proportions ; she wore a
rich dress of purple moire, with a long train
long enough to have been carried, Marjory
thought, like a queen's, by waiting-maids
behind her. Her ornaments were in the
same grand style — cameos set in gold, earrings,
necklet, brooch and bracelets, all to
match ; and in her hand she carried an exquisite
fan of white feathers. A fine and
well-dressed specimen of a highly-bred
woman she appeared, as she came slowly up
the long room. Marjory rose at the approach
of the ladies ; and her hostess nodded kindly,
saying, " Well, little girl, so you have found
your way downstairs ! "

Is that the little girl ? " said Mrs. Vivian,
with a languid glance, as she sank into a
low chair. " My dear child, do you know
that I regard you as a prodigy ? How you
could walk from Alton in such weather, and
get here alive, is nothing less than a marvel
to me ! "

She was only just alive, I think," said
the little old lady. '^ Don't stand, my dear; go
back to your footstool, and I will find something
to amuse you."

''I wonder you did not melt," observed

Mrs. Vivian, still languidly surveying Marjory :
who shuffled uneasily beneath her gaze, and
coloured, half ashamed of such unwarrantable
stability of constitution ! '' How did
you contrive to avoid melting ? "

Thus questioned, and finding reply expected,
the child shuffled again, and said :

It was the country — I felt suffocated — I
wanted to get away. This place is cool,
compared to Branksome."

Then Branksome must be a fiery furnace,"
said Mrs. Vivian, slowly fanning
herself. '' And I should think the end of it
will be that they will all turn into salamanders."


Whom "they" might signify was not
clear, neither could Marjory recall the definition
of a salamander. Here was a field
for recollection, into which she instantly
plunged, sitting with hands folded in her
lap once more, and blue eyes fixed on Mrs.
Vivian. That lady's own eyes were now
closed ; her head rested upon the back of
her chair; she was still fanning herself
slowly. As she sat thus, the evening light,
falling upon her face, showed lines of anxious
care on brow and lip ; she looked restless,
weary, sad. The peace of Lady Thome's

countenance — that peace all the deeper because
it had followed upon tears — had here
no reflection. Marjory, who could no more
help observing than breathing, forgot her
puzzle, in the involuntary contemplation of
the sudden change upon those handsome
features — the change from seeming repose,
indifferent, a little haughty, to the painful
anxiety habitual to Marjory's Aunt Lucy.
But Aunt Lucy had so'many cares ! and Lady
Thorne, too, had lost all whom she loved.
What cares could this beautiful, rich lady
know, that she should resemble the one, and
seem so much less happy than the other ?

'' How terrible it would be — have you ever
thought of it. Lady Thorne ! — how very terrible,
to live in a provincial town ! " she said,
still with head thrown back and closed eyes,
still gently fanning. " I should feel, as that
child says, suffocated ; I could not endure it.
It would kill me," she added, after a pause.
*' But that might be as well, perhaps, in such
circumstances."

*' It is not the place that matters so much,
I think," said the little old lady, gently.
"Anywhere almost, with one's own family,
one might make a home. And you know it
is not always hot."

'' No ; but one would always feel shut up.
To miss the country freedom, to be cramped
for space — it would be insufferable ! London
one might endure ; but a provincial town ! —
like that Branksome end of Alton, for instance.
Life would not be worth having."

She shuddered gently; and Marjory felt
an inward rush of sympathy, despite the
immeasurable distance from which those
languid eyes had appeared to regard this
insignificant belonging — daughter, or niece,
or what not — no matter ! — of the poor curate
in charge of unfashionable St. Philip's.

But now Lady Thorne had brought out a
portfolio of priceless treasures of beautiful
engravings, the first glimpse of which caused
Marjory's face to glow and her heart to dance.
Bellhouse, in attending upon her mistress,
had repeated some of Marjory's chatter —
which had seemed to the simple woman vastly
clever — of pictures and artists ; and this the
little old lady had not forgotten. The pictures
spread, one by one, upon a chair before
her, the child was soon completely engrossed,
studying their details in anticipation of letters
to Gerald, and delighted to recognise here
and there descriptions over which she had
pored in some old book. Thus occupied, she

heard only as a meaningless undercurrent
the murmur of voices, as the ladies chatted
at some distance ; Lady Thorne netting diligently
the while at a shawl for some old
woman ; Mrs. Vivian also, now and then,
a gold thimble on her finger, adding a
few stitches to a roll of delicate lacework, —
but more often pausing to fan herself, as if
overcome by the heat.

In this manner half an hour had passed,
when some sudden sound in the hall broke
Marjory's trance. She awoke once more to
the outer world, and looked up from her
pictures.

Mrs. Vivian was talking in a low voice,
tone and manner alike listless ; there was in
them something that bordered on the stillness
of despair. When she ceased, she sat
motionless, looking out ; the bees were still
humming over the jessamine ; a rook cawed
far away ; a warm breath, not strong enough
for a breeze, heavy with fragrance, floated
from the garden. Somehow they all seemed
to speak of relentless Fate, of the years rolling,
rolling by, bringing each its own events
in its own time, unmoved by the passions of
mortals.

There is no use in fretting," said Mrs.

Vivian ; this time her languid voice reached
Marjory. " What ernst be must."

"Would it not be better to warn him?"
said Lady Thorne, in the tone of one who
feels her suggestion to be painful, and pities
the pain, but speaks from a sense of duty.

I cannot shadow his bright youthfulness,"
said Mrs. Vivian. " You could not, if
he were your son. No ; let him have what
respite he may ! "

But will it not be all the worse for him
when the respite is over ?" said Lady Thorne.

I am like Mr. Micawber, always hoping
that something may turn up," said Mrs.
Vivian, with a faint smile. " At all events,
he will bear it better when he is older. He
has never yet known what it is to be crossed
in any way."

I would tell him ! I would at least prepare
his mind," said the little old lady, gently.
But Mrs. Vivian only shook her head, moving
restlessly on her chair ; and murmured with
a sigh from the depths of a sick heart, " Oh,
my bright boy ! "

CHAPTER VIII.

*' So, young muser, I sate listening
To my fancy's wildest word :
On a sudden, through the glistening

Leaves around, a little stirred.
Came a sound, a sense of music which was rather
felt than heard.

Softly, finely, it unwound me ;

From the world it shut me in, —
Like a fountain, falling round me,

Which with silver waters thin
Clips a little water Naiad sitting smilingly within."
Elizabeth Barrett Browning.

Well, mother !" said a gay young voice atone
of the windows, with a suddenness which
made Mrs. Vivian start, " There you are,
enjoying the endless charms of conversation,
as usual ! What can ladies find to say so
much about, I wonder ? "

Marjory looked up, and saw Mr. Hugh, in
evening dress, leaning with both arms upon
the window-sill. The light air of careless
grace by which her first view of him had
been characterized, was equally conspicuous
now ; as — half saucy, half affectionate — his

VOL. I. H

bright dark eyes looked in upon his
mother.

'' You are smoking, you disgusting boy !
Do go away. What will Lady Thorne say to
you ? — coming to her drawing-room windows
with a cigar in your hand ! "

'' Lady Thorne is well aware of my iniquities,
and knows that I can't help them," said
Hugh, turning his bright glance upon the
little old lady. '^ Besides, she is very fond
of cigars, and would like to smoke herself.
Now, confess to me, wouldn't you, please
your ladyship ? "

'' I do not object to the smell," said Lady
Thorne, with her gravely gentle smile ; " But
as to smoking myself, that is another matter!"

Yes, Bellhouse might copy the practice,
and that would be awkward ; cost you a mint
of money too — especially if bessie followed
in train ! By-the-by, Lady Thorne, how
pretty Jessie is growing ! "

Rather too pretty, I fear," said the little
old lady.

** Too pretty ! Come, that is rather too
bad," said Hugh, laughing. '^ There are
plenty of young women too ugly, as I know
to my cost ! but too pretty — c'est une chose
impossible ! ^^

From a young man's point of view,
perhaps," said Lady Thorne, intent on her
netting.

'* From anyone's, I should think," cried
Hugh, beginning to take the matter in earnest.
" I could understand such a speech
from certain parties — your estimable Bell-house,
for instance. But you. Lady Thorne
if you will excuse me — who were so pretty
yourself, I should have thought you would
be superior to those prejudices of envious
plainness."

You are unjust, Hugh," said his mother,
languidly; *' Men always are. I never read
a man's novel in which women are not
represented as blind to each other's beauty.
In reality, they appreciate it quite as keenly
as men, and have often no less pleasure in
looking at it. But you know, in that class
of life, it does not do to be too pretty."

"That class of life! Prejudice again,"
said Hugh. ''I hope, mother, that in your
devotions you represent your views to the
Creator of those too pretty women. Your
prayers might be useful in averting the
transmission of the calamity."

'' Don't be profane, Hugh," said Mrs.
Vivian. " As to this special young woman,
H 2

this Jessie, I really have never noticed her
looks, one way or the other. I could not
have said, to tell you the truth, whether she
were pretty or ugly ; neither can I see why
you should think it necessary to act as her
champion."

I do nothing of the sort," said Hugh,
with a slight deepening of colour ; " It is
only my British fancy for fair play. And
you would really oblige me. Lady Thorne, by
mentioning your reason for thinking Jessie
too pretty."

'' My reason is very simple," said Lady
Thorne, ^'andnot worth so much discussion: —
merely, that she is in danger of being spoiled !
She attracts a great deal of admiration, and
I fear that she is too sharp to be unaware of it."

'' You are right there, I suspect," said
Hugh, laughing ; '^ Jessie is about as sharp
as fifty ordinary needles. Why, it is one of
her chief beauties ! that sharpness is quite
bewitching. Now, don't you see, Lady
Thorne, looking candidly at the matter, what
a mercy it is that the cautious prejudice of
the British matron is not allowed full scope ?
If that same prejudice had its way, it would
turn up Jessie's nose, freckle her forehead,
imprint a wart upon the most chiselled

portion of her clin, and, in short, demolish a
very lovely work of Providence."

This is not at all an interesting subject,
Hugh," said Mrs. Vivian; ''I am tired of
it."

"Throw away that end of your cigar — which
has gone out, I see," said Lady Thorne;
And let us have a little music. I want to
hear those duets again."

*^A11 right," said Hugh. "And, by-the-by,
where is the kid ? You told me she was
coming down. Have you sent her upstairs
again, because — as you yourself confessed tome
— her eyes happen to be blue ? "

Lady Thorne pointed with a reproving
gesture towards Marjory ; whereupon Hugh
shagged his shoulders, observing : " ' I ses' to
Maria, Maria, ses' I — praise to the face
is open disgrace: ' " — and stepped through the
glass door into the drawing-room.

Mrs. Vivian possessed a soprano voice of
singular excellence ; and her son had inherited
its rich sweetness, embodied in a masculine
tenor. Exquisite harmony these voices
together made, as they united in that most
lovely and touching of melodies — " I saw thy
form in youthful prime." Marjory, on her
footstool, listened entranced, and wished that

it could go on for ever. Mrs. Vivian played
the accompaniment ; Mr. Hugh stood behind
her, his hand upon her shoulder. There was an
air about these two, of entire mutual devotion;
the haughty woman was not haughty to her
boy : — every tone of her voice, as she spoke to
him, every motion of her eye, as she looked
at him, betrayed the most passionate
motherly love, blended with infinite pride.
Whatever playful affectation to the contrary
she might sometimes assume, he was evidently
in her opinion perfect. Upon this only child
both parents had lavished all the wealth of
affection which, in different circumstances, is
shared among many ; and, in his intercourse
with his mother, he had not yet relinquished
the confiding air of a petted boy. Although
otherwise a manly young fellow enough, he
was still with her a " Mammy's darling,"
caressing and caressed, — and fully proving the
truth of her assertion, that he knew not what
it was to be thwarted.

Lady Thome, sitting quietly in the background,
let her netting lie idle in her lap.
They were together, and she was alone ; yet
pity, not for herself, but for them, saddened
her grave and gentle eyes. Some painful
thought, aroused by her conversation with

Mrs. Vivian, lingered visibly in her mind ;
she sighed softly, once or twice, as she
watched and listened. Presently, remembering
Marjory, she glanced towards her ; and
smiled to herself at the child's intense absorption.
And then a memory of other days
floated back ; there was a dimness, like the
shadow of a tear, in her eyes, as the song
ended:

To live with them is not so sweet,
As to remember thee, Mary."

'' Thank you. That was very nice," she
said ; ''I am always so fond of Moore's
Melodies. But do not stop yet ; we must
have another — two such voices are a treat."

But I want you to hear my mother's
last achievement," said Hugh ; " I took the
liberty of tuning your harp to-day with that
intent. She has made the most delightful
conglomeration of old Scotch airs, running
one into the other — just the thing you will
revel in. Lady Thorne. Now, mother, don't
be unkind — when I tuned the harp on purpose,
in all the heat ! "

'' Your description is certainly tempting!"
said Mrs. Vivian ; " A conglomeration of airs
running one into the other ! Lady Thorne
would rather be excused."

'^ Nonsense — Lady Tliorne is not so foolish.
Now, mother, there's a darling ! "

Marjory had never heard a harp before,
and had seldom thought of one but in connexion
with the Revelation. Now, as the
music of the voices was exchanged for its
silvery notes, she seemed to pass from one
enraptured dream into another. What is it
in those old Scotch airs that goes straight to
the heart ? Why do they possess so powerful
a fascination for every variety of mankind
— from the vagabond who pauses in the
street when '' Auld Lang Syne" drones forth
on a barrel-organ, to the cultivated critic
who pays a high price to hear the same performed,
with every refinement of taste, by a
London orchestra. Some touch of nature
there must be in them, to make the whole
world so akin ; and the charm worked
strongly on little Marjory, as she listened to
Mrs. Yivian. Grand to the last degree, in
Marjory's eyes, did Mrs. Vivian look, her
rich dress falling in majestic folds, her white
fingers moving with easy power over the
harp-strings. An accomplished musician,
she knew well how to lead each fine old air,
through exquisite modulations, into the next;
knew also how, with bell like clearness, to

ring it out above the underplot of accompaniment
: which sometimes rose and fell like
the ripple of a cascade, sometimes swept
hither and thither, as the wind through
summer trees, bearing the air upon its gusts.

Do you like it ? " said a low voice, close
to Marjory. The child started from her
trance, and looked up. Mr. Hugh was
leaning against the open shutter of the window
in which she sat ; she had not observed
his approach, and this was the first time he
had spoken to her ; but her raised eyes met
in his gay young face such kindness of
expression, that her shyness melted in a
moment.

'' I keep fancying that it is a fairy tale,"
she said ; " Not only the music, but everything.
It all seems too good to be true."

'too good to be true ! that phrase is mere
bosh, little Miss Geranium, or Myrtle, or
whatever your name maybe," said the young
man, sitting down and bending towards her
as she gazed from her footstool. ''' Who has
been putting such philosophy into your head?
it is a form of speech, invented by certain
parties who are never happy unless they are
miserable. Don't you believe in it ! There
isn't anything too good to be true 1"

Isn't there ? " said the child, a little
drearily. " Not for you, perhaps," she added,
as an afterthought; 'there are plenty of
things too good to be true for Uncle John,
and Aunt Lucy, and me."

I don't believe a word of it," said Mr.
Hugh, shaking his head with his light smile.
That they may not be true just at present, I
will not deny ; but who knows how soon they
may come ! Don't you go and found your
views of life on the sentiments of codgers,
Miss Myrtle ! According to my experience,
life is very much what one makes it; the
world's a very jolly place to me, and will
be so to you, if you will look at it with your
own eyes : — I'm certain of that, from their
colour."

Why do you call me Miss Myrtle ? " said
Marjory, laughing.

Let's see ! What is your name ? Oh,
to be sure — 'tis the association of ideas :

* She was my myrtle, my geranium,

My daffodil, my daisy, my sweet marjoram.'

Sweet Marjoram, that's it, eh ? I've seen
you before ; where, I wonder ? "

In the lane by the plantation," said
Marjory, under her breath ; " I saw you too,
as you rode by."

"Oh, all, yes — I recollect; you are the
child who was standing by the gate. Poor
little kid ! you must have felt tired to death.
Why didn't you ask me to take you up on
my horse ? And so you came all that way
because you were sick of the town ? I don't
wonder; I get awfully sick of it myself."

Why, do you live in a town, Mr. Hugh ? "

How pat the little thing has got my
name ! My regiment is quartered in one ;
I'm a soldier, Marjoram ; I'm a man of blood ;
I could shoot you, if I chose, scientifically.
I am at home for a holiday — that's all ; I
only hope this heat will be over before I go
back."

«« Why don't you stay and live at home,
instead of being a soldier ? "

One must do something, you know ;
so saith popular prejudice ; and soldiering
is rather less of a nuisance than anything
else. It's a very jolly life, on the whole ;
and when the town bores me — I'm country-bred,
you see. Marjoram, and I share your
partiality for green fields — I jump on my
horse and get out of it. There's nothing like
a good gallop among the lanes to make one
ready for mess. I don't know, though,
whether my fancy for the country would

carry me to the extent of walking myself to
death."

*' Mr. Hugh, have you ever killed anyone?"

What a terrible question ! Oh, you
mean in my capacity of man of blood !' No,
never. I am a fireside soldier, so far, and
have only tasted the fun of it. It's a fine
thing to belong to the military — nothing too
good to be true, in a double sense, for them.
We're feted and danced with, and admired
right and left. But then, you know, we may
half of us be slashed to death, some day ; and
that's why they think us such fine fellows !"

*' Hugh, what nonsense are you talking ^ "
cried his mother, who, in a piano passage
of her music, had overheard these words.
Now mind ! I shall keep firm to what I
have always told you : if your regiment is
ordered abroad, you sell out at once."

'' Lady Thorne, did you ever hear such an
unpatriotic person ? " laughed the young
man. " Mother, ' you fair shame me,* as old
nurse says. It won't be ordered abroad tonight,
at any rate ; so pray go on with your
music."

'' And meanwhile it is time for all tired
little people to be in bed," said Lady Thorne,
nodding kindly at Marjory.

So this strange, Happy evening came to an
end, and the picture faded from before Marjory's
eyes : — the picture of that fine old
drawing-room, and the grave, gentle old
lady, and the light-hearted young soldier, —
and the fond, haughty, handsome mother
playing the Scotch airs upon the harp. Often
in after-years it rose again in her recollection ;
hardly less vividly than now when, in her
little bed, she pondered her experiences,
while downstairs the music still continued,
presently mingling with her dreams.

CHAPTER IX.

Principles in Edmund's mind
Were baseless, vague, and undefined.
His soul, like bark with rudder lost,
On passion's changeful tide was tossed ;
Nor vice nor virtue had the power
Beyond the impression of the hour."

Sir Walter Scott.

Next day the cMldisli mind received a shock.
Strictly trained in her uncle's clerical household,
Marjory's ideas of morality were rigid in
the extreme. She was firmly of opinion that no
one who was " naughty " could be 'nice,"
and vice versa. Not that the child — like
many small persons of her years, in religious
families — was of a priggish tendency, or inclined
to measure the world by a Shibboleth.
But she did imagine that the world consisted
of but two classes — one altogether good, the
other altogether bad ; and she had never
realised the possibility of feeling any strong
interest in a person belonging to the latter.
She had heard her uncle, in his parochial experiences,
condemn some one or another
reprobate for swearing, drinking, or the

like ; and that there could at the same time
be anything lovable or attractive in such
persons, was a notion of which her philosophy
had never dreamed. She thought of all
alike as wicked people ; and wicked people
must be odious people too !

After a night of pleasant dreams, she had
awakened so much refreshed that, her breakfast
over, she begged to go out. A part of
wise old Lady Thome's plan for the recovery
of this child, over weighted by a burden
beyond her years, was entire liberty — to restor
read, or wander, at her will.

She shall do exactly as she likes, Bell-house,"
said that little old lady ; '' she is nota
child to take advantage, I can see, of such
a permission. She shall be perfectly free."

So Bellhouse adjusted the child's straw
hat, and brought her darned cotton gloves
from a drawer ; and, only warning her not to
tire herself, bade her go whither she would.

Yet another page in this most charming of
fairy tales ! Marjory tripped downstairs, eyes
and heart dancing in concert. It was a
glorious summer's day, hot as ever ; but
children can bear a vast amount of heat in
the country. The woods lay dim in haze ;
the Alderney cows browsed languidly, or

stood motionless, under the heavy trees ; the
long slopes of park stretched away, away,
beneath the blue expanse of sky ; the gray
church-tower seemed half asleep, as it rose
above the elms. Innumerable gnats were
dancing their everlasting measures — up and
down, down and up, together and apart —
over and over and over again. All manner
of butterflies floated above the scented flowerbeds
; a long-limbed dragon-fly flourished
his splendid hues, and whirred drowsily —
flitting before Marjory ; a brown spaniel rose
lazily from fitful dozes on the threshold of
the glass door, stretched himself, and followed
her, wagging his feathery tail. A
story-book of Miss Evie's under her arm,
she roamed along, exploring, as two days
before she had explored the hot white roads
between Thorne and Alton. The flower-garden
led ofi* into shady paths, winding
among green lawns, with seats placed here
and there, in some favourable spot for a view.
Marjory rested sometimes, and then went on
in renewed enjoyment.

Presently great walls rose before her ; an
open doorway revealed within wide plots of
highly cultivated vegetables, diversified by
frames and greenhouses, and fruit-trees, carefully

netted, on the walls — where bright red
cherries gleamed, while, rich in promise,
plums, apricots, and nectarines ripened in
the sun. Beyond, another open door revealed
a wondrous vista of strawberry-beds and
raspberry-bushes, whereat the child gazed
with longing eyes, wishing that she could fill
a giant hamper, to be sent by special train to
Aunt Lucy. But an elderly gardener, of
peevish countenance, issued from a greenhouse,
and looked askance, as if preparing to
inquire, '' Who be you ? " Marjory circumvented
this intention by speedy retirement,
still followed by the spaniel — which had remained
at her side in the doorway, evidently
aware that further he must not go.

Eleven strokes resounded in a deep and
musical tone. Looking round in search of
its origin, she saw a gable-ended turret containing
a large clock, rising somewhere in
the rear of the gardens. Away in this
direction she started, spurred on by her
childish fancy that all alike was enchanted
ground, with new wonders round every corner.
The spaniel quickened his pace, and
ran along snuffing the earth, as if he had
found some track which for him also had
allurements. The end of the long walls was

VOL. I. I

reached ; Marjory turned the angle ; and saw
another stretch of wall, divided by two great
gates, enclosing a paved court, with a pump
in the midst, and a row of kennels — beyond
which appeared an array of ancient stables
and coach-houses, all of gray stone, gable-ended,
the central gable bearing the clock.
The spaniel now, still vigorously snuffing,
set off" at a rapid trot, and disappeared within
the gates ; turning, as he entered, to a quarter
of the court not discernible from Marjory's
point of vision.

For Marjory had stopped short, arrested
by sounds in the same direction. Some one
was very angry, — in fact, beside himself with
passion. The child listened half scared, her
cheek turning pale ; ought she to run back
and tell Bellhouse ? Only once before, in her
short life, had she heard such sounds ; and
those had come from a public-house, when
she was walking with her uncle. A woman
had cried from a window that a fight was
going on, and had begged him to step in and
make peace ; Marjory had been sent on alone,
and presently, looking back, had seen a man
covered with blood come out, and stagger
across the road. Such then had been her
terror, that she had set off to run, and had

not stopped till she burst breathless into
Aunt Lucy's room, — terrifying Aunt Lucy
equally. This scene she had never forgotten.
And, now, was such another fight about to
take place ? Her weak little legs trembled ;
she was on the point of starting to find Bell-house
— she might even have implored the
interference of the peevish gardener — when
suddenly she recognised the voice. That
loud, passionate, ungoverned voice — it was
Mr. Hugh's !

The idea of calling assistance vanished
in a second ; some undefined instinct withheld
her from exposing his shame. She
paused, spellbound, her cheeks crimson as
before they had been pale. It appeared that
this burst of fury was expended on a servant ;
once or twice a deprecating murmur, plentifully
interspersed with pitiful " sirs," replied.
The child's generous spirit rose up with all
its might. She felt, as she listened, as though
she hated Mr. Hugh, and would willingly
have engaged with him in single-handed combat
in that poor servant's defence. The
murmur heightened his rage.

And you call yourself a groom ? Confound
your impudence ! " was thundered out
into the still air. " Why, look here, you
I 2

scoundrel ! what do you call this ? and this ?
and this ? "

At each query came a clash upon the
paving, as of some metal article flung down
with all the strength of the speaker; and then
followed a storm of oaths, shuddered at by
Marjory, not merely on their own account,
but from the awful condemnation which she
had heard foretold for those who uttered them.
Moreover, she had never, until this instant,
conceived it possible that such words could
proceed from a gentleman — let alone a 'nice"
gentleman ! She trembled from head to
foot, and stood rooted to the ground in her
horror. And, as she stood, out strode Mr.
Hugh, passing her, but not seeing her, blinded
by his passion— his face and the back of his
neck as red as fire, and his usual careless
lightness exchanged for an expression one
rapid glimpse of which made Marjory shrink
and cower. Behind him slunk the spaniel,
his tail between his legs, his whole attitude
indicative of extreme abjectness — although,
by the way, his master did not appear to be
conscious of so much as his existence. They
were gone in a moment, and out of Marjory's
sight ; but she remained gazing blankly in
the direction in which they had disappeared.

Her meditations were interrupted by more
voices. A young groom in working dress,
bare-headed, bare-armed, and bare-necked,
issued, laughing, from a stable, apparently
in full enjoyment of some excellent joke. As
lie proceeded to wash his hands at the pump,
another groom, similarly attired, came from
the unseen quarter in which the outburst
overheard by Marjory had taken place. To
Marjory's surprise, he also, the evident
victim, was laughing no less heartily than
the other. He approached the pump, extending
some object upon his outspread
palm.

'' Well, he gave yer one for herself, Jack ! "
said the first. '' I was on the watch, ready
to pick up yer 'eat. I thought I should see
it come a-rolling."

'rit's these spurs as has caught it instead,"
said Jack ; '' See how he's served 'em. Why,
this un's broke clean through ! "

"So it be," said the other, examining.
'' Well, to be sure ! and they wasn't polished
to his mind, then ? "

Them and the snaffle," observed Jack,
contemplating the contents of his palm with
ruminative interest. " Not his face to be
seen in 'em with that distinctness as the

Grand Sultan of Eooshia might desire.
There's the long and short as that whole
amount of swearing was about, Bill ! And,
talking of 'eats, it's uncommon fortunate as
we don't live in them days when young
gents could out with their swords and slash
'em off, when they'd a fancy, without ' By
yer leave,' or ' With yer leave.' Mine would
a-gone this long while," he added, rubbing
the article in question.

"Does he often carry on that fashion?"
inquired Bill.

'' I don't know as to often ; but, bless
yer, whenever he's a mind, he's not particular.
I'd back him against any in the troop forswearing
like a Tartar. Bless yer, Mrs.
Yivian — many's the time I've laughed on the
sly when I've seen him with her, as meek
and mild as any lamb, and as innocent as a
baby. She'd go stark staring, that there
lady would, if she was to see him as I sees
him ! He's a wild young dog. Bill," said
Jack, shaking his head.

'' Here's my lady wants another groom,"
observed Bill ; "as peaceable a place as you
could desire. If I was you, I'd try for it.
Just get Mrs. Belles to speak for you, and
'twill be all right."

Ah, but I sees the world where I be
now," said Jack, with dignity ; ''A quiet Lifelike
this wouldn't suit me. I sees the world;
and, after all, he ain't half bad. I don't altogether
lose by them tantrums," he added,
with a wink; "He's uncommon free-handed —
thinks no more of his money than his words,
and his friends is the same. Then he's a
good master enough when nothing puts him
out — a bit high and mighty, but as good-acted
as anybody. All as I've got to do,
when them moods is on him, is to hold my
tongue, and mind that nothing but humility
don't slip out of my mouth. He's for all
the world as the fancy turns him. One
day it's a good fancy, and another day
it's a queer 'un ; but as the fancy, so's he,
and I've just got to take him as I finds
him."

Here Marjory awoke to the conviction that
she was acting the part of an eavesdropper ;
and, turning her back on the stables, she
walked away, unseen as she had come.

In that pleasant territory of lawns and
trees, adjoining the flower-garden, she found
a leafy cage beneath the boughs of a weeping
ash, and crept into it, opening her book.
The grass was very soft, and the murmur

of insects made a musical accompaniment to
the story ; but it was long before their charm
could beguile her mind from all that she had
heard, and from her own thoughts concerning
it.

CHAPTER X.

Kind hearts are here, yet would the tenderest one
Have limits to its mercy. God has none."

Adelaide Anne Procter.

The popular prediction of " Three fine days
and a thunderstorm " had long proved itself,
for this summer at least, a fallacy ; but little
wisdom was needed to foretell that the storm,
when it did come, would make up in force
whatever it might lack in punctuality. Marjory,
as she left the stables, had seen in the
far distance a gathering pile of clouds, of
snowy whiteness, not angry yet — only here
and there were their edges fringed with
faintest amber. When the luncheon-bell
summoned her to the house, she found that
pile magnified and thickened. It now resembled
a range of snow-clad mountains ;
and the amber had acquired a lurid brightness,
as of a fire kindled behind the snow.
The rest of the sky was yet blue; but the
atmosphere was strangely heavy ; the trees,
the shrubs, the flowers, stood all in photographic
stillness. The spirit of electricity

was in his chamber, making ready his weapons
of war; and meanwhile the earth was hushed,
waiting for his coming.

Throughout the afternoon the mighty
forces were silently assembling ; the sultry
heat seemed well-nigh insupportable. Towards
evening a black twilight gathered, enfolding
all the earth as in a shroud. When
Marjory had been dressed in her white
frock, and had come again to her footstool
in the drawing-room, she was obliged to
move it close to the glass door, or she would
not have been able to read.

She had reached the end of her story ;
she laid down the book, and looked out.
Where was the brilliant blue, a week before
so hard, so changeless ? Oh, let earthly
things seem as changeless as they may, it is
only seeming ! A canopy of angry blackness
had overspread that smiling sky ; the clouds
which she had seen in the morning, snowy-white,
stood out against it, copper-coloured
now, fierce, grand, terrible. The trees, with
their massive foliage, stood out also against
a lurid background. It was as if nothing in
nature had power, if anything had courage, to
stir. When the door opened, Marjory started,
and looked round in groundless apprehension.

Lady Tliorne and Mrs. Vivian entered
silently, approaching the open windows.
The little old lady patted Marjory's head,
and smiled with her usual quiet kindness ;
but Mrs. Vivian sank at once, without
observing her, into the chair which she had
occupied on the previous evening.

What a fearful storm we are going to
have !" she said nervously, as she gazed into
the gathering darkness.

*' It will clear the air," said Lady Thome's
serene voice ; " We shall reap the benefit tomorrow."


'' I would rather bear twice the heat than
face it," murmured Mrs. Vivian. As she
spoke, she was fanning herself languidly,
as if her life were a burden; but her
heavy eyes were fixed upon the sky, as by
some fearful fascination.

'' Hark ! " she said suddenly.

A distant thunder-peal rolled over the
heavens, echoing from side to side, then
sinking into angry rumbles. Silence followed
utter silence ; and the darkness deepened.

"Don't be afraid, mother !" said Hugh's
bright young voice at the door ; *' Only
think how jolly it will be to have a little cool
weather ! "

We shall have to pay a terrible price for
it' said Mrs. Vivian, shuddering.

Not at all' said Hugh, cheerfully, seating
himself on the window-sill at her side.
Suppose you lived in the tropics ! An
English thunder-storm would seem a mere
nothing ! "

'but we don't live in the tropics; and
I am confident that I could never survive a
tropical storm. I cannot imagine how it is
possible for anyone whose nerves are not of
iron."

Marjory meanwhile was looking at Mr.
Hugh, and wondering that he should appear
so light-hearted after his conduct of the
morning. In his place, she thought, the
prospect of the lightning would have filled
her with terror — lest, as a fitting punishment,
it should be permitted to strike her dead.
What awful words she had heard from this
young fellow, who sat here so unconcerned,
looking carelessly at the thunder-clouds, and
whistling a merry tune ! Not wonder alone,
but horror, moved her, not untinged by repugnance.
He must be very wicked, she
thought. Yes, in spite of his bright face,
and his handsome eyes, and his look of
youth and gaiety, he must be very wicked !

She was not much afraid of the storm
herself; Lady Thome's presence seemed protection.
Serene, and gentle, and unmoved
as ever was that little old lady, netting away
at her old woman's shawl ; drawing up her
stitches with as much interest as if no awful
forces were at work above her dwelling,
ready, perhaps, to hurl on it destruction.
Marjory shuffled her footstool a little nearer
to the black satin gown, and, surreptitiously
stretching forth her little hand, took fast
hold of one of its soft folds. After this she felt
quite safe and quite happy, come what would.

Oh, what a flash ! " cried Mrs. Vivian,
raising her fan to her eyes. A minute later
came another peal, reverberating long ; and
almost simultaneously a piercing shriek rang
from overhead. The little old lady looked
annoyed, continuing her netting ; but Hugh
sprang to his feet.

'' Did you hear ? " he cried. " Some one
must be hurt ! I'll go and see."

He was out of the room before Lady
Thorne could speak ; and there was a slight
increase of the annoyance upon her face, as
she observed :

'' Jessie, I suppose. She is generally
hysterical in a thunderstorm."

"That boy is absurdly tender-hearted,"
said Mrs. Vivian, with her usual languor.
Who else would trouble himself about a
servant's panics ? Lady Thorne, do you
think that there is any hope of the storm's
passing over ? "

*' Hardly, I fear," said the little old lady,
raising her eyeglass. '' The sky is very black
over Alton ; and, if there be any wind, it is in
this direction."

It is said, though, that a thunderstorm
crosses the wind," returned Mrs. Yivian, as
if feeling for a straw of deliverance. Her
speech was cut short by a flash of fearful
vividness, illuminating the whole room, and
seeming to play around it — followed on the
instant by a crash ,of stupendous thunder.
Mrs. Vivian started from her chair.

'where is Hugh?" she cried wildly;
«« Why does he not come back ? "

She hurried towards the door, stretching
out her hands.

'' My dear Mrs. Vivian, do not distress
yourself," said the little old lady, rising.
«' Pray sit down ; we will have the blinds
drawn and the shutters closed."

*' Where is Hugh ? where is Hugh ? " repeated
Mrs. Vivian, quite losing her self-control.

Apparently he had heard, for he
met her at the door, entering hurriedly, his
colour slightly raised. She flew towards him
and threw herself into his arms.

Oh, Hugh, my dearest boy ! let us at
least die together," Marjory heard her cry.

'' Die ! I don't mean to die yet, I can tell
you," said the light voice. " Nor you either !
Come back to your chair ! Lady Thorne,
might I ring the bell ? If the lightning could
be shut out "

'* I have rung," said the little old lady, returning
to her place. Marjory's small hand
closed once more upon the soft black satin ;
and the flash and the peal came again before
the bell could be answered.

It is the glorious God that maketh the
thunder," said the little old lady's serene
voice, as if the words rose involuntarily to
her lips. Marjory thought of the children in
heaven ; and understood the secret of that
entire calmness. But Mrs. Vivian shuddered
all over ; and her son, sitting upon the arm of
her chair, passed his arm round her, while
she buried her face in his breast.

He had no personal comprehension of her
weakness : yet how tenderly he treated it !

'* What a pity he is so wicked ! " whispered

the child's busy little mind — " So wicked—
and yet so kind ! I never liked a wicked person
before, but I can't help liking him. He
cannot be all wicked, can he ? it must be
good to be like that to his mother. Bit
Uncle John would say that no one who swore
so terribly could get to heaven. Oh, what a
pity it would be if he were shut out from
Heaven ! "

Her childish heart ached with a yearning
pity as she looked at the kind, bright young
face, and the strong young arm supporting his
mother, and remembered those awful words
which she had heard him speak. Somehow
those words seemed burned into her mind ;
she could not forget them.

How cruel of you to go away, Hugh " —
said Mrs. Yivian, without raising her head —
'• and stay out of the room all that time, when
you know what a thunderstorm is to me ! "

Why, mother, I was only gone two or
three minutes. How could we tell that anyone
was not hurt ? "

He spoke laughingly, but with a little embarrassment
: which the old lady, looking up
from her netting, seemed to discern.

It was Jessie who screamed, was it not ? "
she said.

"Yes; Jessie, half beside herself with
fright. She was alone in the passage, upstairs,
crouched down under that long window.
She's a nervous little girl."

"Affected creature!" said Mrs. Vivian.
What extraordinary impertinence to scream
in that way I I'm afraid, Lady Thorne, you
spoil her."

Now, mother, that's a downright shame.
I should have thought that you could not
help pitying her, when you are frightened
to death yourself! "

«« Why am I frightened ? Simply because
I realise the danger in a manner impossible
to the blunt organisation of a servant ? You
speak of servants as if they had feelings like
ourselves. They are creatures of a different
order, and ought so to be treated."

Did you see the form of that flash, Hugh?' '
said Lady Thorne. '' It was a complete
zigzag."

How can you look at it ? " cried Mrs.
Vivian, clinging more tightly to her son. She
did not raise her head until the curtains were
closely drawn, and the cheerful light of candles
had replaced the depressing gloom. The
storm still raged with unwearied vehemence ;
after a while the wind began to rise, and then

VOL. I. K

came rain, heavy, fast-falling, beating passionately
against the windows. In the midst of
this appeared Bellhouse, composed like her
mistress, and full of thoughtful consideration
for the child, to summon her to bed.

Don't you be alarmed, missy," said she,
as they mounted the wide staircase, and a
sudden gleam illuminated the skylight :
** Thorne was never struck yet, so we may
hope it never will be ; it must have weathered
a vast of storms before now. We're all in
the hands of the Almighty, and in some ways
sudden death would be a mercy — many 's the
time I've thought that."

"Is Jessie still frightened?" said Marjory.


Ah, you heard her scream, I doubt ! I
fear her ladyship is sadly annoyed. Well !
we all have our trials. Miss Stanhope."

With these words, of which Marjory did
not perceive the point, they entered the large
old bedroom. Here also candles were lighted,
and curtains drawn ; and Jessie, with an
offended countenance, was sewing at a little
table. Her colour was less radiant than
usual ; her eyes were tear-stained ; and she
held her head with the majestic air of an
insulted princess. As her mother advanced,

she rose, collected the fragments of ribbon
and lace on which she was occupied, and,
closing her work-box with a snap, swept
towards the door.

"Where are you going, Jessie*' said
Bellhouse, in a deprecating tone.

I am going to sit in the housekeeper's
room," quoth Jessie, with dignity ; and
departed without looking back.

Ah, I know what it will end in ! " said
Bellhouse ; " Her ladyship will have to part
with her."

She sighed heavily as she spoke, and
shook her head : while Marjory gazed at her,
half pitying, half perplexed. The child did not
understand, and did not like to ask questions
; she undressed in silence, Bellhouse
attending on her in equal silence, and more
than usually grave. Marjory was soon in bed,
but her mind was too busy for sleep ; her
heart was very full, with an aching pain in
it, thinking of Mr. Hugh. She was a child
to whom, by nature as by training, unseen
things were very real ; and now the thunder
rolling round the house, the awful gleams
which pierced their way among the folds of
the curtains, and glanced upon the wall, and
then were gone, made those things seem
K 2

more than ever vivid. What would become
of Mr. Hugh, if he went on being wicked ?
What would be the end of all that lightness
and brightness ?

And yet he might, if he would, be so
different ! If there were wickedness in him,'
there was also goodness ; no one could doubt
it, who saw him with his mother. The childish
breast heaved, the blue eyes filled with
anxious tears, as she pondered.

At length the storm was dying away ; the
rain was falling more gently ; the thunder
was rolling into far distance, lagging behind
the flashes. But Marjory still turned restlessly
from side to side. That heart-ache
would give her no rest.

'' Bellhouse," she said, suddenly.

Why, I thought you were asleep, Miss
Stanhope, my dear!"

It's near eleven o'clock ?"

*' Yes, my dear," said Bellhouse.

What do you do when you are worried
about Jessie, and feel that you care so much
for her, and yet you cannot help her, or make
her good ?"

What strange things you say, to be sure,
for a child, missy!" said Bellhouse. Then
she paused a moment, her needle in her

hand, and looked straight before her : as
though her homely eyes saw something faraway.
" I pray to the Almighty, my dear,"
she replied, very solemnly and slowly.

'' Almighty ! " It seemed to Marjory as
if only now, for the first time, she understood
that word.

She buried her face in the pillow, and whispered
a little prayer :

Almighty God ! bless Mr. Hugh, and
make him good ! "

Then, in her childish heart, she registered
a vow that she would pray the same every
night, so long as she should live.

CHAPTEH XI.

** Heaven is about us in our infancy ;
Shades of the prison-house begin to close

Upon the growing boy ;
But he beholds the light, and whence it flows,

He sees it in his joy !" — Wordsworth.

A DAT of gentle summer rain followed the
storm, again succeeded bj radiant weather.
Sad histories of disasters caused by the
lightning appeared in the papers ; hay-ricks
had been fired, houses struck, men and
beasts injured or killed. So every revolution
in human affairs brings its share of suffering ;
but it is the few who suffer, the many who
profit ; and, the tempest over, then come
calm and peace. The scorching heat had
vanished, the oppression was gone ; the sky
was once more serene, but soft clouds
tempered the brilliance of the blue ; the coating
of white dust had been washed from the
hedgerows, from the flowers ; green leaves
had risen refreshed from their shower-bath,
new buds on the wild rose-bushes replaced
those scattered bv the storm. The universal

thirst was satisfied ; wild banks and garden-beds
alike breathed fresh perfume; the
birds once more sang in the trees ; a new
vigour stirred the world.

Marjory was out of doors all day, sitting
or lying upon the grass with her book, — roaming
in the park and plantations, picking
flowers, watching the birds and insects, and
singing to herself, — or occasionally driving
with Lady Thorne in her low pony-carriage.
A certain time every morning was spent in
the old lady's private sitting-room, in reading
the Psalms and lessons for the day, and repeating
a portion of the Church catechism.
In these observances the little old lady was
exceedingly exact; but afterwards Marjory
was free to drink in healing influences, in
preparation for her return to privation and
poverty among the red brick of Branksome.

The child could not bear the thought of
such return ; when it occurred to her, she
put it quickly out of her head. Her uncle,
Mr. Stanhope, had written full of gratitude
to Lady Thorne, greatly relieved to hear
of such safe provision for his young niece.
His wife had had a slight relapse, and was
forbidden to move at present. In a private
note to Marjory, he added that a friend of

Aunt Lucy's lead sent an opportune present
of twenty pounds, to prolong her stay at the
sea. This good news increased Marjory's
happiness ; and the happiness benefited her
health. She began to grow rosy, to feel
strong and full of life, as in the days before
she came to Branksome — to run, jump,
dance, instead of slowly walking, in her
rambles through the park ; to play at battledore
and shuttlecock, and skip with an old
rope which Bellhouse had hunted out ; to race
with the brown spaniel, Brush by name, who
had conceived an obsequious affection for
her. Brush's master was still at Thome ;
the sudden illness of a relation had summoned
his parents to a distance ; and Mrs.
Vivian had proposed that meanwhile he
should make himself useful to Lady Thorne,
who was entertaining a succession of visitors.
These visitors were a source of great
amusement to Marjory, who watched them
from afar. They were denizens of a world
of which as yet she had had no experience —
people of fashion, taking Lady Thorne in their
way from London after the season — rich people,
well dressed people, luxurious people, people
who had never known the want of any thing
that money could provide, who had lived all

their lives in high and smooth places, to
whom such words as poverty, toil, pecuniary
care, were empty sounds.

Marjory felt all the fascination of novelty,
as she gazed into their lot — so different a lot
from her own ; so rich in new ideas, in unimagined
delights. It did not occur to her
to desire any share in that lot for herself;
such a notion was too utterly wild to be
entertained for a moment. But these glimpses
of it had for her the marvellous charm of a
pantomime. She gazed, and listened, and
admired, and wove all manner of imaginations
concerning these fine people, who had
no idea of the impression they were producing
upon the blue-eyed child, whom they
met now and then upon the staircase, or
happened to espy sitting alone in some obscure
corner.

There was among them one old gentleman
who took particular notice of her ; but
his stay was short — too short in her opinion,
for she thought him a very nice old gentleman
indeed. Mr. Hugh greatly puzzled herby
remarking that the second '' 1 '' in his
name — his name was Bulkley — must have
crept in by mistake. She supposed that
Mr. Hugh had some genealogical grounds for

the statement. Mr. Bulkley was a very large
old gentleman, tall, and broad, and stout, —
with an enormous nose, especially noticed
by the child, and kind, twinkling eyes — the
only small things about him. Marjory
watched him drive away, with his two
servants ; and thought how very rich he must
be to travel so accompanied : she wondered
whether it were because stoutness prevented
his doing anything for himself. She missed
him when he was gone, and thought of him
for long afterwards ; for she was a grateful
little child, and he had been kind to
her.

Hugh Vivian was of untold service in entertaining
the visitors. Many he already
knew, and with the rest he was speedily at
home. The young soldier well understood
the art of fitting wings to an idle hour. The
majority were a party of butterflies, and he
was the chief butterfly among them ; but in
all his busy idleness he found time to be
exceedingly kind to Marjory. One day he
rode several miles to bring from his home a
number of his own childish story-books for
her amusement ; another day he returned
from Alton with a variety of toys — of much
too juvenile a description, as the child, though

wish grateful compunction, felt. Once He
took her for a drive in his dog-cart ; and it
was well that Marjory was too ignorant to
fear the capers of his steed, which, indeed,
was only half broken. She never discovered
her narrow escape of a broken neck — only
regretting that Lady Thorne, hearing of the
exploit, forbade its repetition. Often afterwards
she came across Hugh in the course
of her solitary rambles ; and sometimes he
would turn and walk with her, or sit down
by her on the grass, amusing her with a
story and himself with the spectacle of her
old-fashioned simplicity.

One serene afternoon she found herself ina
quarter of the park which she had never
before visited. A shady row of elm-trees
bordered a low green paling ; and Marjory
saw that on the other side lay the churchyard,
the eastern end of the gray old church
rising before her like a guardian of the graves.
She had gone to the Church services regularly,
with the little old lady ; but they had
driven by way of the road, mounting, finally,
a flight of wooden steps which led to the
west door — the principal entrance. Thus
she had not known how far this old churchyard
straggled away on the other side, adjoining

the park : from which, indeed, it had
originally been taken.

The child soon clambered over the paling,
and stood among the quiet graves. Long
shadows from the elms slanted across them ;
grass, newly mown and fragrant, was strewn
over the mounds. Southward the ground
sloped gradually to meet a brook — the same
which, a little while before, she had been so
glad to discover. Here it was broad, though
shallow, rippling peacefully over pebbles and
water cress with gentle music, as if to lull the
slumber of the dead. Marjory sat on a little
heap of grass upon the bank, and rested.
Summer insects hummed around her ; now
and then a sparrow or a tomtit hopped over
the graves, and eyed her curiously, its head
on one side. The rustic chancel stood still
and gray in the shade ; beyond the brook
once more the park swards stretched beneath
the ancient trees ; and on the far horizon
rose a vision of dim hills. Sometimes a soft
rustle stirred in the heights of the elms ; but
for long no human sound broke the stillness.

At length heavy steps advanced from the
gate of entrance. A woman, in a black gown
and the cotton hood worn by all the country
people, carrying in her arms a rosy-cheeked

baby of some eighteen montis, came slowly
round the church. She went straight, without
observing Marjory, to a freshly-turfed grave,
and, setting the child upon his feet, remained
for many minutes in silence. Her back was
turned ; but Marjory, half awed, half pitying,
saw that she was continually wiping her eyes,
as she stood looking down upon the grave.
The babe, meanwhile, was at play, highly
pleased with the fragrant grass : which he
gathered together by handfuls, and tossed
into the air, laughing aloud. Presently he
stumbled, and, falling, began to whimper.
The woman turned to pick him up, and, seeing
Marjory, dropped a curtsey.

She was quite a young woman ; but her
cheeks were worn, and her eyes dim, with
crying ; and Marjory, in her pity, began instantly
to feel for a little purse, containing a
florin which her uncle had sent to her from
the twenty pounds.

'' Is that your baby ? " she asked, the
money hidden in her hand.

'* No, miss ; not mine. I've brought him
to see his father's grave."

Then she turned her back again, and
again followed that silent wiping of the eyes.
The baby struggled in her arms, stretching

his hands towards the grass, and crying,
*' Daddy ! Daddy ! " Setting him down,
the woman caught sight of little Marjory's
compassionate face, and said :

He always calls ' Daddy,' miss, whenever
he wants anything. His mother, her
died when he was born ; and his father
brought him up and did for him all his life,
till a fortnight agorie ; and then he was
always for having the baby on his bed, till
eight days agone yesterday, when he died."

*' He was not ill long, then ?" said Marjory.

'* Oh, yes, miss, he'd been ailing a twelvemonth
or more ; only he would not give up
till he was forced. It was a decline, if only
we had known it ; but he was always hopeful
and I'm sure I never thought but what he
would get well when the hot weather was
over. We was twins, miss, he and I ; and
he was my only brother."

She turned her back once more, and wept
again in silence ; and what could Marjory do
but sit in silence also ? Presently the baby
said '' Daddy ! Daddy ! " as before, and
pulled the woman's dress.

You wants your tea," she said, lifting
him. " Poor little chap ! — you knows
nothing. If we could all forget like you, we

should be a deal happier ! Now say ' Night,
night, poor Daddy ! '"

The child raised his head, and looked
round with an expectant smile ; evidently
thinking, from these accustomed words, that
his father was near. But the next momenta
gay butterfly flitted past his eyes ; and he
jumped in the woman's arms, and crowed,
and thought of his father no more.

Good evening, miss," said the woman.

'' Please buy something for the baby with
this," said Marjory, rising in some embarrassment.


She hardly dared to offer her gift, fearing
that even this mighty sum might be regarded
nth scorn, in the face of such a sorrow I
But the woman took the coin greedily,
dropping a lower curtsey; and saying,
'' Thank you, miss, I'm sure," with fervour.
Then she went away down the mossy path ;
and Marjory was once more alone.

How still the new-made grave lay in the
shadow ! The woman's only brother ! And
he would never come out into the sun again,
until the Judgment Day. A nameless apprehension
stirred Marjory's heart ; but it was
gone in a moment.

*' God would never take my Gerald from

me," she said to herself; "I am sure that
He would not. He is too good ! "

But she rose from her seat as she spoke,
and wandered round the church — pausing
here and there to read the rustic inscriptions
on the tombstones : some of which were
curiosities of quaintness, and many mis-spelt.
Steps of a very different order from those of
the woman, quick and light, and accompanied
by a whistle, came up the wooden flight from
the road. Mr. Hugh, followed as usual by
Brush, stopped short with a laugh at sight of
Marjory.

"You everlasting little party ! " he cried ;
Here you are again ! Why, I meet you
every day in some queer place or another.
Are you meditating an edition of village
epitaphs ? "

*' I came here by accident," said Marjory ;
I did not know that the churchyard joined
the park. I should like to see where Lady
Thome's children are buried ; but I cannot
find their names."

'' Not here. Did you not notice their
monuments on Sunday ? The family vault
is under the chancel."

'* The family vault ! " echoed Marjory, in
an awestruck tone. " Were they there ? —

Bellhouse's Miss Evie, and Master Archie,
and that *' beautiful baby," Miss Jane ! She
thought of the birds and flowers upon the
nursery walls, the littk .'^oft bed, the charming
story-books ; and .n of the contrast.

Oh, why were t ^ put into that cold,
dark place ? " she cried ; " I cannot bear to
think of it."

' Noblesse obliges you see," said Mr.
Hugh, with a half smile.

'* Nobleness obliges — what does that
mean ?" said Marjory. — '* It is so delightful
out here, with the green grass and the brook,
and the blue sky, and the fresh air ; I
shouldn't mind it here," she added to herself.

*' Yes, if one must be buried, I don't know
a pleasant spot for the unpleasant necessity,"
said Hugh : 'but come ! it is bad
enough anywhere. Never mind! I have been
to see the old parson, who was once my
tutor ; and I am going back across the park.
You come with me, and I'll tell you a fairy
tale. One should never think of disagreeable
things before the time. That's my
maxim ; and you'd better make it yours."

But this need not be disagreeable," said
little Marjory ; " I was forgetting ! They are
not in the vault ; and they would not have

VOL. I. L

been here. And it is always summer weather
in Paradise."

Then the child turned contentedly, smiling
to herself as she followed Mr. Hugh along
the shadow-bathed grass.

CHAPTER XTT.

The form, the form alone is eloquent !
A nobler yearning never broke her rest
Than but to dance and sing, be gaily drest,
And win all eyes with all accomplishment."

Tennyson.

It was late when they reached the house,
and Mr. Hugh ran quickly up the shallow
stairs, three at a time, to dress for dinner.
Marjory, who was tired, followed more slowly,
and was glad to find her tea prepared upon
the round, old-fashioned table devoted of
late to her use. Bellhouse was not in the
room, although her work-basket stood in its
usual place, and her chair was pushed slightly
on one side as if only recently vacated. The
child had finished her meal, and was curled
up in the window-seat with a book, before
her solitude was invaded ; and then it was
Jessie who entered — Jessie excited and
flushed, with sparkling eyes.

*' Come and cool yourself," said Marjory,
making room in the window. " There's such
a nice, soft little breeze ! it comes on my
cheek like a fan."

L 2

Thank you, missy, but I feel too restless
to sit still. I've heard such news ! What
do you think, Miss Stanhope ? I'm going
away."

*' Going away ! " repeated Marjory, in a
pitying tone : '' Oh, Jessie, how sorry I
am ! "

"You needn't be sorry, missy, — not forme.
Poor mother will fret a bit, I dare say ;
but she'll soon get used to it, and I'll write
to her regularly. I feel as if I could jump
over the moon when I think of it ! To get
away from this stupid old hole — off ' on my
own hook,' as the saying is — excuse me,
miss, for being so vulgar ! I shall hardly
know myself ! "

"Why, Jessie!" said Marjory, reproachfully
: "I should have thought it would break
your heart. This dear, beautiful place !
How can you call it stupid ? "

To my mind, missy, it is beyond stupid ;
the very essence of dullness. And I've lived
here all my life — never seen but this one
corner of the world. To think of that, at
my age I Nineteen ! Why, lots are married
at nineteen ; and here am I, shut up here.
Miss Stanhope, it is beyond my utmost hopes.
Just now, when her ladyship told me, I felt

as if I could fall on my knees to thank her.
As to looking sorry, or crying — that would
have been slider hypocrisy. Poor mother
cried, and I'm sorry for her : I dare say, when
I've a child of my own, I shall feel it hard
when she wants to go off and leave me. But
it's the way of the world," said Jessie, who
was versed in modern fiction.

"Why are you going?" inquired the
child : " Is Lady Thorne sending you
away ? "

Jessie bridled ; this plain speaking touched
her pride.

'' Lady Thorne thinks it better, for my
own good, Miss Stanhope. It was Mr.
Hugh's doing. Yes, I owe eternal gratitude
to Mr. Hugh ! "

'what do you mean?" asked curious
Marjory. Jessie was in a talkative mood,
and rattled on, regardless of consequences.

"You remember the night of the storm,
missy? I was frightened, and I screamed.
I suppose it is no sin to scream ; at least it's
not brought home to my conscience ! If
Mr. Hugh chose to be officious, and come
upstairs, how could I help it ? Neither could
I help his taking it upon him to cheer me
up. I didn't ask it, and I didn't desire it ;

and I didn't care whether or no mother
heard what he said. None of it was of any
consequence to me ; though, all the same, I do
not approve of mother repeating it to her
ladyship. But it's an ill wind that blows
nobody any good ; and I shall have cause all
my life to bless that storm."

But Lady Thorne is so very kind ! I
should have thought that she would be glad
for Mr. Hugh to comfort you."

*' Yes, so you would, wouldn't you ? " said
Jessie, laughing. " But no, she regarded
my fright as forwardness ! and the best cure
for this, she considers, is to send me away
from this place, where I am so spoiled, and
made to forget my humble station, missy."

And where are you going ? "

To Miss Bulkley, Mr. Bulkley's sister, —
a very rich lady in Hampshire. I'm to behalf
maid and half companion, read to her,
attend to her birds and flowers, and go everywhere
with her; she travels a great deal.
Think of all I shall see ! and this is the best
of it, — when I'm once launched, started on
my adventures, like Whittington, I can please
myself about staying with Miss Bulkley. If
I don't like that situation, I shall easily find
another to suit me better. The world will

be before me, to pick and choose, when once
I am off, Miss Stanhope."

The girl was looking into the glass as she
uttered these words — an old-fashioned oval
glass framed in oak, wherein her graceful
head, with its crown of chestnut hair, and her
fair young face, appeared like some exquisite
picture. Joy and exultation danced in her
eyes as she noted —-who that saw could help
noting? — how bright and clear they were,
how lovely was the roseate tinting of the
cheeks, how daintily chiselled every feature.
Beneath that picture might well have been
inscribed the motto, '' My face is my fortune."
That such was actually the case, she
evidently felt : the words of the old song
seemed hovering on her lips as she stood
there in her glowing youth and beauty. Marjory
gazed at her in innocent admiration, —
mingled with a no less innocent wonder, as
she saw that no touch of doubt or regret
shaded that brilliant gladness.

Shan't you be homesick, Jessie ? " she
said, after a meditative pause.

Homesick ! " repeated Jessie, with a
quiet chuckle, as if the notion amused her :
I think I see myself homesick, after getting
the first step of all I've wished for so long ! "

'but, Jessie, suppose you could not help it*'

In that case I must put up with it," said
Jessie, laughing : " But I cannot suppose
anything so foolish, missy."

At this moment the door was slowly
opened, and Bellhouse came in, paler than
Marjory had ever seen her. She sat down
with forced composure, and drew her work-basket
nearer to her chair; but, meeting
from Jessie a glance half pitying, half apprehensive
of an outburst, all self-restraint
seemed suddenly to forsake her. Burying
her face in her hands, she broke into passionate
weeping.

While Marjory looked in alarm from
mother to daughter, her colour rising, her
blue eyes filling with responsive tears, Jessie
for an instant stood irresolute, then knelt
beside the chair.

'' Now come, mother, don't take on so !
don't, mother dear," she said, as soothingly
as in her lay. " Why, mother, you've often
said that all you cared for was my good ; and
only think how much for my good this will
be. Why, I'm going to make my fortune,
mother. Perhaps, when you see me again,
I shall be a lady, and you'll feel so proud of
me ! Dear mother, do stop fretting."

Oh, Jessie ! oh, my Jessie ! " sobbed
Bellhouse, '' Oh, that it should come to this !
And I had hoped you would have gone on to
take my place here, and be an honoured servant,
loved and respected, — like your father
and me, thank God. Oh, what a disappointment
! And now I must part from you —
you that I've never had out of my sight fora
day since you were born ! and that's nineteen
years ago, my Jessie."

'' Bellhouse, Jessie will try to be good ;
she will, indeed," said little Marjory, from
the window.

Yes, mother ; you won't have any cause
to be ashamed of me," said Jessie, proudly.
Even from your own way of looking at it,
the change will be for my good : because, asher
ladyship says, I've been made too much
of; and where I'm going I shall be kept in
my own place. So you can comfort yourself
with that ; and I'll comfort myself bv looking
forward to the future, when I shall come
back to you as a lady, and take you to live
with me ; and then you shall have everything
you could wish for, and you'll be glad I left
Thorne ; you see if that doesn't come true."

Bellhouse lifted her tear-stained face, and
looked solemnly into the radiant eyes.

"Jessie," she said, '* don't you buoy yourself
up with any such a thought. You strive todo
your duty in that state of life in which
the Almighty has set you, and put all them
foolish fancies out of your head : — however
they got in there, I can't imagine ! Yes,
her ladyship is right : you've been the
spoiled child of this house ; where you're
going you'll be treated as what you are — a
hired servant; and that will be the best
sobering you can have. But, oh that it
wasn't needed, my Jessie ! oh, how I shall
miss you ! "

Once more the woman, usually so calm,
hid her face in uncontrolled wretchedness.

Mother, you'll soon get used to it ; it
will be only at first. I shall be so happy !
and I'll write every week. Dear mother,
indeed — you'll soon get used to being without
me."

I shall never get used to it," said Bell-house,
suddenly drying her eyes with resolute
self-mastery ; "But I must look to the
Almighty to strengthen me ; as He strengthened
her ladyship."

After this, although circumstances connected
with Jessie's approaching departure
were often discussed, Bellhouse displayed

no emotion ; and, but for the above incident,
that departure might have seemed a
matter of indifference to Jessie's mother.
Only, now and then, Marjory, awaking in the
night, saw in the half-obscurity of the lamplight
a quiet figure kneeling at the great
armchair ; and wondered, as she turned
sleepily to her rest again, at the length of
Bellhouse's prayers.

Meanwhile the child's happy visit had been
extended to a month, and the harvest was
growing golden in the fields around Thorne.
She had begun to think with regret that she
must soon be banished from this Eden
Her aunt and uncle were coming back ; and
Mr. Stanhope had written to fix the day on
which Marjory should rejoin them.

CHAPTER XIII.

The stately homes of England,

How beautiful they stand
Amidst their tall ancestral trees,

O'er all the pleasant land !
The deer across their greensward bound

Through shade and sunny gleam,
And the swan glides past them with the sound

Of some rejoicing stream." — Mrs. Hemans.

You look altogether a different child, missy,
since you came to us. Your aunt will be
quite pleased when she sees what a pretty
colour you bring back on your cheeks," said
Bellhouse.

Marjory smiled — a somewhat doubtful
smile ; and sighed in the same breath.

At this moment came a message to summon
her to Lady Thome's private room.
The little old lady sat at her writing-table,
an open letter before her.

Marjory," she said, '* I have lately had
some correspondence with your uncle, which
I have purposely postponed mentioning to
you until the matter was settled. How

should you like to return to a home in the
country ? "

There was no doubt about Marjory's
answer to this inquiry. It cause was
quickly made plain. A small benefice in
the patronage of a friend of Lady Thorne,
had lately fallen vacant; and the patron,
being abroad at the time, and having a high
opinion of the old lady's judgment, had
invited her to recommend a fitting candidate
for the ofl&ce. Lady Thorne had gladly
availed herself of the opportunity to assist
Marjory's uncle ; and, due inquiries having
proved his character and parochial abilities
to be alike beyond praise, she had received
from her friend authority to osier to him the
living. It need hardly be said that this offer, —
with such thankfulness as a conventional note
could ill convey — had been accepted.

And now the child, in gladness too great
for speech, listened to such particulars as
Lady Thorne could give concerning her
future home. It was not '' a good living ; "
they would still be poor : though almost rich
in comparison with the past. But it comprised
a comfortable house, a garden and an
orchard : which in themselves seemed wealth
enough to Marjory after all that had gone

before. Then the parish was agricultural,
in a beautiful country, the air healthy, the
church close to the house. There would be
fields and lanes in which she might roam to
her heart's content ; the books would be
unpacked; there would be no more redbrick
: it would be home — a real home.

"Oh, how delightful! how delightful''
cried Marjory, finding words at length. The
mere sight of that happy little face was more
than recompense to the old lady, looking on
with her grave smile.

Then away, with a hop, skip, and jump,
darted the child, to pour out her heart to
Bellhouse, and after Bellhouse to Mr. Hugh,
for whom she searched high and low until
she found him. Afterwards, in her favourite
hiding-place under the weeping ash, she
scribbled, with a lead pencil and three sheets
of straw paper, an exuberant letter to Gerald.
She would hardly have been known for the
same child as the worn and weary little
Marjory who had stolen in through that
white park-gate, and laid herself down beside
the brook. Her last week at Thorne was
the happiest of all that happy time ; for with
present enjoyment were blended a whole
multitude of plans and prospects for the future.

Towards the end of this week Mr. Hugh
returned to his home; and Lady Thorne,
with little Marjory, accompanied him, to
spend a long day at Copelandss. They started
soon after breakfast, in the open carriage,
the staid old coachman and butler upon the
box, Hugh Vivian on his beautiful chestnut
riding by their side. It was one of those
halcyon days in late summer, when the earth
seems overladen with bounty; when the
orchards are full of ripening fruit, the fields
of gardening corn, the hedges rich in promise
of nuts and blackberries, the woods
heavy with foliage at its prime, its early
freshness replaced by luxuriance of colour.
As Marjory looked around her, her young
heart bounded with joy in the beauty and
the glory; she sat silent, but the light in
her blue eyes was more eloquent than words.

The road wound with the windings of the
river, among orchards and hoards, with a
background of hill and wood. From the
remarks which at times passed between Lady
Thorne and the attendant horseman, Marjory
gathered that this fruitful landscape was a
part of Mr. Vivian's territory — one day to become
his son's. The child, nurtured in poverty,
looked at Mr. Hugh, riding along with his

usual careless grace; and thought how strange
it must be to feel oneself the lord, or at least
the future lord, of such an expanse. Mr.
Hugh himself seemed to have no particular
feeling on the subject ! He rode on, taking
life as he found it, his look and manner those
of one who has begun with existence to command,
to find circumstances and people bow
before him, and form to his wishes : to whom
this condition is too much, of course, to give
occasion for pride, — his natural inheritance,
which neither himself nor any other had
imagined it possible to be otherwise.

'' Lady Thorne, there's one thing I wish
you would scold my father about ! He will
wage war on the timber. Why, my own
peculiar oak in the south shrubbery, the first
and the last I ever climbed, — even that, when
I came home this time, was gone. It is quite
a mania with him. Do tell him of it."

''My dear Hugh! how can you, suggest
such an impertinence ? What right have I to
tell him of anything of the kind ? "

'' Oh, he is always crying up your wisdom.
And I should have thought this was a point
to interest you ; you take such religious care
of your own trees."

'' Yes, they seem to me like old friends,"

said the little old lady. " But your father
and I are two I Besides, lie has enough and
to spare."

He will not, soon, if the present havoc
goes on. I mean to beg him, as a particular
favour, before I go back, to curb his pruning
propensities. That fellow of ours, that bailiff,
is such a slasher ! Perhaps he has some
relation in the timber trade who gets our
wood cheap ; I'll give my father a hint of it,"
said Hugh, with his careless laugh, — "There !
I always think that this is the finest view of
the house."

They had rounded a sweep, and at some
distance, flanked by extensive shrubberies,
rose on the summit of a series of terraces,
descending by steps to the river, the battlemented
front of a grand old mansion — which
no one driving along this part of the road
could fail to observe, or, observing, admire,
as one of England's most '' stately homes."
Hugh looked pardonably proud of it, as,
sitting lightly on his saddle, he drank in the
prospect.

'' It's a jolly old place, isn't it ? " he said,
laughing again from mere gaiety of heart. " I
think I may say in a double sense, ' There's
no place like home.' You forgive me. Lady

VOL. I. M

Thorne ? If Thorne were mj home, I should
feel the same for that."

They are both goodly heritages," said the
little old lady, with her grave smile. Then
she was silent, — thinking perhaps that to her
therewas*'no place like" another Home, where
her husband and her children were waiting.
Meanwhile Hugh's chestnut was growing impatient,
in anticipation of his own stable ;
his master, raising his hat in adieu to the
carriage, gave him his way, and was quickly
out of sight. The sober old equipage followed
at a pace more suitable to its appearance ;
and Hugh was standing with his mother on
the upper terrace, when it rolled at length to
the door.

Mrs. Yivian looked as handsome and as
haughty as ever, but in better spirits than at
Thorne. She was rejoiced to have her son
with her once more ; and, in her gladness of
heart, gave for the first time her whole hand,
instead of two fingers, to Marjory, as the
child followed Lady Thorne. Otherwise, she
as usual ignored the existence of this protege
of Lady Thorne — who had a hobby for taking
up nameless individuals. Marjory, not having
yet arrived at the comprehension of slights,
enjoyed herself none the less ; and wandered

about as at Thorne, exploring, imagining,
living her own life, and making mental notes
on all that she saw. She was not ignored by
her friend Mr. Hugh, whom she accompanied
on the round of his accustomed haunts ; to
the stables, which, with the horses, he sharply
inspected; the kennels, where, with the eye of a
connoisseur, he criticised a litter of pups ; the
head keeper's cottage, where she saw a nursery
of young pheasants ; finally to the river, the
condition of which he examined with a view
to fishing. Everywhere he had the aspect,
the eye and tone, of a master ; a master good-natured,
but imperious, whose birthright it
was to rule, possess, enjoy. Everywhere the
various orders of that quick, bright young
voice were received with deferential homage ;
everywhere he seemed to Marjory as a prince,
admired and adored.

The elder Mr. Vivian did not appear until
the party were assembled at luncheon, when
he entered the room by a side-door, shaking
hands hurriedly with Lady Thorne, and excusing
his lateness on the plea of important
letters. He was a small, spare man, of
middle height, shortened by an habitual
stoop. Marjory gazed in wonder at the
wrinkles that furrowed his brow, which was
M 2

scantily shaded by thin brown hair sprinkled
with gray. He looked ill and full of care,
and, to the child's eyes, peevish. Still, even
his face brightened as it turned towards his
son ; his voice, somewhat harsh and dry in
general, seemed to soften when he spoke to
Hugh, — who, in his turn, treated his father
with a respectful deference pleasant to behold.
All that was best and worthiest in
him rose to the surface in his intercourse
with his parents. If he were spoiled, they
did not suffer by it. To them he was always
unselfish and considerate; and no one who
observed him now could wonder that in their
eyes he was a paragon among sons.

After luncheon, Marjory stole out of doors
again, escorted by Brush, who, on finding
himself once more in his own domains, had
assumed an air of lordly importance. When
she was tired, she sat by the river side, and
revelled in a fresh heap of books : with which
Mr. Hugh, on her departure, presented
her, to her intense delight. Altogether this
was a day to which Marjory long looked
back as a bright spot in her childhood. For
the first time in her life she was present at
the late dinner, all eyes and ears. Soon
afterwards, the carriage rolled again to the

door; and she set forth alone with Lady
Thorne.

She felt very sorry to say good-bye to the
kind young soldier, so often her companion
of late ; but she was too happy, too full of
pleasure in the gift of books, for any poignant
sadness. As the carriage drove away, she
looked back upon a picture which she carried
away in her mind. The old mansion, all its
windows shining in the light of the setting
sun ; the same light slanting peacefully upon
the group gathered on the terrace — Mr.
Vivian, standing motionless, very small and
shrunken in his black evening dress ; Mrs.
Vivian, waving her fine white hand with
languid grace; Brush, wagging a deprecating
tail, as to apologise for remaining ; and, in
the midst of this circle, Mr. Hugh, as usual
brimful of life— light-hearted, easy-goinglife —
making some laughing remark to his mother,
and nodding a gay farewell to the child, asher
blue eyes gazed back at him. So the
carriage rolled down the slope, and away;
and Copelandss and its inhabitants passed from
Marjory's sight. The air was full o£ sweet
scents, and the sky of crimson glories; when
these faded, a golden harvest moon arose, and
lighted the travellers home.

Two days later, Marjory returned to Brank-some.
Her little heart ached sorely when it
was time to say good-bye ; she looked all
round the dear old-fashioned room where she
had found such sweet rest, then clasped her
arms tightly about Bellhouse's neck, and
cried upon her shoulder.

Good-bye, my dear — good-bye, my little
missy. May the Almighty bless you wherever
you go ! " said Bellhouse, kissing her tenderly.

Marjory could find no reply but a sob;
and the carriage was waiting.

Downstairs she tried to thank Lady Thorne
for her great kindness ; but, with the effort,
forth afresh welled choking tears. The little
old lady patted her on the shoulder, saying
gently, " Never mind, my child ; I know."
And Marjory's last look met her serene eyes
watching from the window in kindly regret.
Then the child opened a little envelope which
the old lady had left in her hand, and found
within a five-pound note — riches too wonderful
to be realised at present.

Leaning back among those luxurious
cushions, Marjory retraced the way which,
five weeks before, she had travelled slowly
and painfully through the burning sun upon
her own little feet. She noticed every turn

in the road; the sycamore beneath which she
had sat — the last glimpse of Thorne, which
had been her first, a gleam among distant
trees. Thenceforth the way seemed sadly
short until red brick began to reappear : the
same houses in process of erection, the same
suburban villas. Behold the Baptist chapel —
still staring ! and the clock-faced church ;
finally, the slated roof of Mrs. Hammond's
lodgings. A moment later, the two fat horses
had paused before the little gate ; in several
adjacent windows surprised spectators admired
the unwonted vicinity of a carriage and pair.
The footman opened the door for Marjory,
and carried her little box up the narrow path.

So here you are at last. Miss Marjory !"
said Mrs. Hammond's well-known voice.
Aunt Lucy's delicate face appeared in the
background, lighted by a greeting smile.
"Is she come?" said Uncle John from an
upper room.

The child's conscience smote her for her
sadness ; she ran to meet them.

Meanwhile the footman had already resumed
his station on the box ; the coachman
turned with ponderous care ; the carriage
rolled away : and this episode in Marjory's
life was over.

CHAPTER Xii.

He had felt the power
Of Nature, and already was prepared,
By his intense conceptions, to receive
Deeply the lesson deep of love which he
Whom Nature, by whatever means, has taught
To feel intensely, cannot but receive." — Wordsworth.

Afternoon lessons were over in Miss Somerville's
school; and the flock of girls, of all
ages and sizes, were turned loose to disport
themselves in the playground. Hither and
thither over the grass-plats, up and down the
gravel paths, they ran, racing, — skipping, singing,
enjoying to the utmost their freedom.

Lina, Lina, demandez si nous pouvons
parler Anglais ! " cried one of the merry
creatures, all arms and legs, in the early stage
of teens : " Nous ne pouvons pas enjoin
votre compagnie dans cet horrible Francis !
Demandez vite ! Miss Somerville ne pent pas
vous refuser ! "

'' She would certainly prefer English to
such French as that," said the person

addressed, smiling with a touch of conscious
superiority.

You lui demander, n'est-ce pas ? vous
chere, tres-chere Lina ! " cried the female
hobbledehoy, clinging round her friend. The
young lady gently disengaged herself, with
the same quiet smile, and proceeded to grant
the request ; returning shortly with a favourable
answer.

Oh, be joyful ! friends and compatriots,
listen ! English ! English ! our blessed mother-tongue!"
cried the girl, running wild: 'come,
every one, and thank Lina. We may talk
English for a whole hour ! come, every one
of you!"

The girls collected in a flock, installing the
visitor upon a garden-seat beneath a sunny
wall. Five crowded with her into the seat ;
the rest sat about, some on the grass, some
on a wheelbarrow left by accident in the
path : while all, with greater or less admiration,
gazed upon Lina, their centre.

You are not to speak, miss ! not even to
come near her," shouted the wild girl to a
schoolfellow who had been detained in the
house, and who now approached, running
eagerly over the turf: " You are going to
take her away, and keep her all to yourself

for hours ; but you shall not rob us of this
brief interlude of bliss."

Yery well, I'll sit here, and say not a
word ; only I suppose I may listen," said the
new comer, laughing, as she paused in the
background of the group.

'' You may listen if you keep your condition,
— not one word, mind ! " cried the girl,
shaking her finger. *' Now, Lina, begin !
tell us everything you can think of, about all
that you have done and seen, since we saw
you last."

A tumult of chatter followed ; the young
lady, indeed, always self-possessed, quiet,
and dignified, but her quondam schoolfellows
vying with one another in ejaculations, comments,
and questions. These last the visitor
would have found too numerous for reply,
had she not evidently resolved to notice only
such as she deemed sensible enough to deserve
it.

Meanwhile, the girl in the background
faithfully fulfilled her promise ; sitting absorbed
and meditative, her eyes fixed upon
the principal figure of the group, as if comparing
it with preconceived notions. No
one who had watched the ways of little
Marjory could fail to recognise, in this

seventeen-year-old schoolgirl, the observant
interest, the absorption in things without
herself, which had characterised that child
of the past. Yes, it was the same face, not
very much older, and hardly less simple, than
of yore; and the thoughtfulness which had
sat strangely on the brow of the child, seemed
only a foreshadowing charm of womanhood
in the maiden. The thought had deepened
with the years ; the steadfastness had intensified.
Something there was in that young
face of well-nigh inspiration, which stirred,
or might stir, those who looked upon it ;
something which spoke, though silent, of
work, of life, of power. But it was unconscious
power, free from any taint of egotism
or conceit. Childlike as of old, the blue eyes
gazed upon Lina, much as they had gazed
on Mr. Hugh, on Jessie, on the visitors at
Thorne. The square brow was still clear
and open, the bright hair shone in certain
lights with the old yellow gleam. Was it a
pretty face ? — one could hardly tell ; but it
was beautiful with the highest order of
beauty — such as could never spring from
physical charms alone.

For the rest, Marjory was still '' a growing
girl," somewhat thin, though perfectly

healthy, — long in limb, slight and supple in
figure. Her dress was but slightly altered
from the cotton frocks of old ; in fact, she
wore a cotton frock at this moment, differing
only in its long skirts from that in which
little Marjory had travelled from Alton to
Thorne. Moreover, she had still a holland
jacket and an old straw hat ; and still looked
as thorough-bred a lady, despite the plain
attire, as she had looked at ten years old,
when the cabman had touched his hat to her.
The girl who formed the centre of the admiring
crowd, was two years older than
Marjory. She had left Miss Somerville's
school a year ago, and was now only here fora
flying visit en route to some further destination.
The blue eyes fixed upon her beheld
a face and form worthy of a princess ; a
Spanish princess she might have been, only
that her hazel eyes lacked the fire usually
attributed to southern beauty. They were
undoubtedly fine eyes, but steady and calm,
according well with the dispassionate cast of
features : which, but for their glowing olive,
might have been carved in marble, — so still
they were, so unvarying in expression. It
was a classical face, in some degree a noble
face, only the forehead was a little too narrow,

and the smile, when it came, too cold ; but
these deficiencies were seldom noticed in the
admiration excited by the rare beauty and
dignified grace.

In figure, Lina was finely developed, erect,
and of faultless proportions ; her dress also
was perfect, fashionable without showiness,
the colours well assorted, the materials good.
The young schoolgirls evidently regarded her
with lavish admiration. Always an oracle,
she had now returned to them rich in experiences
from the great outer world; and
found herself on a higher pinnacle than
before. It was clear that she accepted this
position as a matter of course, using it to
exert a salutary influence over her youthful
friends. Her conversation was like her face, —
calm, superior, all that it ought to be. How
good she was ! what a pattern ! an angel
almost, thought the schoolgirl mind.

Meanwhile, Marjory was still deep in
observation. Time was when she also had
thought thus of Lina ; when Lina had been
to her a standard of excellence, her actions
perfect, her opinions infallible. Ever since
leaving Branksome, nearly seven years ago,
Marjory had lived with her uncle and aunt in
their rural parsonage. Eight miles from the

nearest town, three from the nearest station
no squire, no society — a population of
agricultural labourers, with three or four
middle-class farmers : such was the nature
of the parish, Rockswold by name. The
beauty of hill and dale, of wood and sky,
compassed the place about. Day and night,
spring and summer, autumn and winter, in
their accustomed round, made each fresh
loveliness. Surely the earth is beautiful no
less for God than for man ! At this moment
still places lie in multitudes, unnumbered and
unknown, — on Alpine heights, in tropical
wilds, in ocean depths, — exquisite beyond
man's conception ; and year by year, though
man knows nought of them, they are renewed
with the renewing of the spring.

Rockswold itself, for any human appreciation,
might almost have been one of these
spots. To the farmers the sky was but a
vehicle to weather, and the land to crops
and cattle. The labourers plodded year by
year through their accustomed routine, their
minds apparently only one degree less dense
than the clay in which they toiled. The
mistress of the village shop dispensed her
goods at usurious prices, and gossiped with
the rustic women who came to buy. The

blacksmith, her neighbour, gossiped likewise
and that of the most vulgar and petty concerns,
despite the poetic rhythm of his anvil.
Meanwhile, around them, the sun rose and
set in glory unutterable ; the woods stretched
along the sides of the hills in ever-changing
beauty ; daily these people beheld scenes
which, by faithful copying alone, might immortalise
an artist ; but their eyes were closed
that they could not see, and their perceptions
that they could not comprehend. So at least
it appeared — one cannot say more ; — a painful
mystery to Marjory.

For to Marjory the things of nature were
a mighty influence. She had grown up
among them as their pupil, learning perpetually,
catching yearly a more vivid
reflection of their simplicity, their freedom,
their freshness. She had watched the
changes in earth and sky until she had become
as '' weather-wise " as any farmer ; she
could tell each wild bird's note and nest,
each flower's favourite haunt; the ways of
the wild bees and ants ; the special characteristics
of countless insects, whose names
in science were unknown to her. Her solitude,
and her limited range of books, had left her
thoughts free, — original at least, so far as that

they were her own thoughts, many of which
had come to her when alone in the woods or
fields, and not second-hand from others. But
therewith her respect for her uncle's teaching
kept her safe " in the old paths." So far,
young Marjory had been shielded from any
knowledge of those doubts with which the
minds who live in a cluster are in these days
so busy. Her simple faith in the Almighty
Father and his Son, " by Whom He made
the worlds " — made all this beauty amid
which she lived — had never been tried or
shaken. There was not even any dissent in
the place ; the church, with its ivy-covered
tower, and its bells, of which the parish was
proud, stood like a friend beside her home ;
and she could have sooner imagined, or, if
put to the test, desired, that home altogether
closed to her than her, affections to that old
church and the forms of its worship. Her
reverence for these things had become a
part of her life — unspoken, but deep beyond
speech.

Of romance, commonly so called, the child
knew nothing. She had mixed little with
other girls ; and, until she was sixteen, not at
all. She had her own thoughts, now and
then, — very rarely, — upon the subject of love.

She regarded it much in the same light as
some beautiful but mysterious poem, some
strain of music, intricate, but solemn and
sweet : much, in fact, as she regarded the
stars in her beloved sky — those shining
worlds, so far, so full of wonder. As concerned
herself personally, she had never
dreamed of the possibility of marrying ; or of
spending her life in any way but as a companion
to Gerald. Life with Gerald, and
for Gerald — keeping his house, soothing his
cares, sharing his pursuits, working for him
and for them — this was her dream.

Her uncle had taught her all that she knew
of solid subjects, supplemented by French and
music from her aunt, until, about eighteen
months before the present date, she became
a day-boarder at Miss Somerville's school :
which fever and deficient drainage in the
county town had driven to take refuge, withall
its staff, in this fresh and healthy spot.
For some time before joining their lists, Marjory
had felt keen interest in the colony thus
imported. Girls — creatures like herself! —
when she could not see them, she thought of
them, weaving stories and building castles
concerning them, in her active brain. When
she met them in their daily promenade,

VOL. I. N

two and two, along the lanes, she would
stand aside to watch them pass, taking note
of every face, and forming her own ideas of
its character. But it was the face of their
leader which specially bewitched her, working
as a charm upon her beauty-loving imagination.


By degrees an ideal halo transformed that
image into " a vision bright with something of
an angel light." Una in the " Faery Queene,"
Verona in " Intra," every pure and sweet
and lovely female character of which she had
read, was by turns personified for Marjory in
this maiden, to whom as yet she had never
spoken. She dreamed of her by night, and
moved by day in an inspired atmosphere
created by her vicinity. All the capacity
for romance which in many girls is less innocently
expended, was thus devoted by
Marjory. At church the school occupied a
small transept opposite Marjory's seat ; and,
as her blue eyes rested upon that calm and
finely chiselled face, it seemed to her that
her spirit of devotion was deepened, her
power to praise and to pray intensified by its
presence.

It was with trembling delight that Marjory
entered upon a closer acquaintance with this

object of adoration. She found that the
young lady's name was Caroline, otherwise
Lina, Peele ; and that governesses and girls
alike regarded her as a mysteriously perfect
character. A few confided to Marjory, who
was soon at home among all, an opinion that
she was indeed too perfect ! but the majority
viewed her with unquestioning esteem. She
was not slow to discover Marjory's feelings ;
and regarded them with favour. Few of the
girls were high in social status ; and, although
well educated, they lacked that air of breeding
which prominently distinguished Marjory.
Lina, though merely the daughter of a provincial
bank-manager, was herself of fastidious
refinement ; and found Marjory's
society more congenial than any other in her
school-life. A close intimacy was quickly
established. Mr. and Mrs. Stanhope were
glad to find so excellent a friend for their
niece ; and it became a weekly institution for
Lina to spend the Wednesday's half holiday
at the vicarage.

The two girls walked backwards and forwards
through the quiet field-paths, discussing
many subjects which to Marjory had
hitherto been only food for solitary cogitation.
The younger girl heard with enthusi-
N 2

asm Lina's views, receiving them as gospel ;
read with avidity Lina's favourite books ;
and sought upon every doubtful matter
Lina's advice. This advice was always prompt,
always decided : that it could err was as yet
undreamt of by Marjory. She unfolded to
this acquaintance of a month or two her
secret visions concerning Gerald ; and much
else never before breathed to any human
being. Whether her own enthusiasm were
equally shared by Lina, she never questioned ;
or, rather, she took the fact for granted : and
thus the first half-year of her schooling
passed away. Lina did not return after the
holidays ; her education was said by Miss
Somerville to be satisfactorily completed.
She had gone forth, to be to the school a
lasting credit.

Marjory mourned her sorely, and could
hardly realise that it was not a year since her
first vision of that idealised face, not five
months since their first personal acquaintance.
No one among her schoolfellows
could supply to her Lina's place; she soon
resumed that independent life which had
been of late suspended. She had seen with
Lina's eyes, and heard with Lina's ears,
during that infatuated dream of friendship :

now, by degrees, she found herself questioning
whether, on all points, she agreed with
Lina so utterly as she had supposed. Thence
arose varied perplexities, to satisfy which she
searched right hand and left ; and began for
the first time to perceive how wide is the
world, how many phases life contains, how
many sides exist to every subject. After a
while she began, moreover, to wonder that
Lina's opinions should be so decided, on
points so numerous and weighty — points on
which older and greater minds could only
plead their craving for enlightenment. It
was less than a year since she and Lina had
parted, but during this time Marjory had
gained far more than an ordinary year in
thought and feeling.

And now '' the merry month of May "
had come again ; another month would bring
the midsummer holidays : and then Marjory
herself was to leave school. She had climbed
to the head, and knew all that Miss Somerville
could teach ; but Marjory did not feel
her education to be finished : far, very far,
from that ! It seemed to her she had but
just found out how much she had to learn.
She would only exchange one school for
another : that of daily life and of the world.

CHAPTER XV.

*' The Past and Present here unite
Beneath Time's flowing tide,
Like footprints hidden by a brook,

But seen on either side." — Longfellow.

Lena had come, as we have said, on a flying
visit to her former governess : whom Marjory
had begged to spare her for the evening,
as in old times, to the vicarage. And now,
while the soft spring day declined, and amber
lights began to gather in the west, Marjory,
waiting, gazed intently upon her quondam
idol — comparing the present with the past,
and, in fact, studying Lina. She was aware
of having previously seen her through an
imaginary medium ; now she desired to see
her as she was — to know how much or how
little the true Lina resembled the Lina of
those dreams. Somehow the enchantment
had faded. Here was the same face, — only
a little older, a little more dignified, and
immovable in expression ; but these were
not the same eyes that looked upon it.
Marjory blamed her own fickleness, as she

acknowledged the change ; yet lie was forced
to acknowledge it.

Are you ready, Marjory ? I think we
ought to start," said Lina, looking at her
watch. Marjory coloured to and above her
blue eyes, as if Lina could divine her thoughts;
and started from the grass. The other girls
endeavoured to detain their friend ; but she
was firm ; and, as she withdrew her hand
from the last imploring clasp, the bell rang
loudly in the doorway.

*' Bother the bell," cried the wild girl,
stamping on the ground : " Now for washy
tea and bread-landscape and that wicked
French ! while Marjory goes off and enjoys
herself Mind you send Lina back in proper
time, Marjory, or I'll — I'll — I don't know
what, to you ! "

Marjory returned a laughing reply over
her shoulder, as she walked to the entrance-gate
by Lina's side ; but Lina observed :

How boisterous that Mary Carr has
grown ! she is really quite unladylike."

*' Not in her mind," said Marjory ; *' only a
little in her manners ; and she is so much
devoted to you, that your coming turns her
head. She has counted the days to this
visit."

"It is fortunate that I shall not be here
long ; I might fall in her favour ! I could
not long resist telling her my opinion. Well,
Marjory ! how have you been getting on ?
Your letters have been hurried lately."

I have been very busy ; and I knew that
I should see you soon. There is so much I
have been storing up to say when we met, —
and now we shall have so little time ! I wish
you could stay a little longer."

'' It is impossible. I am due at Dover, at
my sister's, the day after tomorrow ; and
even there my visit will be limited. I must
be at home to help mamma in the moving."

You are going to move ? " exclaimed
Marjory : "You never told me that ! "

It was not finally decided until last week.
Yes, ever since my father's death, we have
disliked Bellingham ; but circumstances made
it desirable to remain there for a time. Now
this seems no longer necessary ; and mamma
thinks that she may as well live in, as let, the
house which has been left to her."

Oh, yes ! you told me of that house ; but
you did not mention the place, Lina. Where
is it?"

It is at Alton ; in a pretty square, at the
opposite end, I regret to say, to the cathedral,

— but near a very nice cliurcli. I went
with mamma to see the place. I said nothing
to you, because our plans were then so unsettled."


And the house is at Alton ! "

Back seven years into the past was Marjory
in a moment. She saw again the redbrick
suburb, the clock-faced church, Mrs.
Hammond's hot little rooms : a white road
stretched before her, the sky was blue, there
was a scent of wild roses and sycamore
flowers ; she was a child again, travelling
wearily along the road to Thorne.

Well, Marjory, what have I said to drive
you into an absent fit ? "

*' Alton ! It was the thought of Alton.
Oh, Lina, don't you remember all that I told
you about our time there, and my adventure,
and Thorne ? "

Yes, by-the-by, I do remember something
; but not distinctly. I did not realise
that you were at Alton itself. You called
the place Branksome."

'' Branksome was the suburb where we
lodged. It joined Alton ; but in some ways
it was like a separate place. The cathedral
seemed miles away to me ; it was really a
mile and a half, and Uncle John had only

once time to take me there ; lie would not let
me walk alone in the town."

'' Stay a moment," said Lina : " Let me
recollect ! Yes, I am sure of it ; our square
must be close to that Branksome. The
woman in charge of our house spoke of
Branksome Church ; I did not know why, —
for its real name is St. Philip's."

'' St. Philip's ! That was the very church
where Uncle John did duty ! Oh, Lina, how
curious ; how it all comes back ! To think
that you are going to live there. Only, you
said it was a nice church. Now I am sure
you would not call St. Philip's nice."

It was hideous outside "

A great clock stuck in the face ? "

*' Yes, a most ugly clock."

Oh, then, it is our very own St. Philip's ! "
cried Marjory, clapping her hands : " How
wonderfully things come round."

I cannot say that I see anything wonderful
in this. It is merely a coincidence.
As to the church, it has been restored, —
inside, at least. The old vicar died three
years ago, and the new one has changed
everything. The seats are all free ; there
are all the proper services, a staff of priests,
who live in a clergy-house — a sisterhood, and

everything correct. That is one of the chief
attractions to me. I would far rather be
near a church of that kind than the
cathedraL"

"It must be changed, indeed," said Marjory,
dreamily. " There were pews with doors, I
remember, in those old days. And service
only on Sundays, and Thursday evenings.
Uncle John did wish that he could have one
on Saints' days ; but he was told that it
would not do."

The present vicar, Mr. Throckmorton,
is not one who considers whether a thing
will or will not ' do,' " said Lina : " He has
what is right, without consulting anybody's
opinion."

"Uncle John was only a locum tenens, you
see. He could not manage things as if he
been the vicar."

** I feel sure that Mr. Throckmorton would
not accept a locum tenency where he could
not obey his conscience," said Lina, decidedly.
At another time Marjory might have fired
in her uncle's defence ; but now, full of her
own reminiscences, she did not observe the
comparison.

Perhaps you will see Lady Thorne, Lina?
If you should, I hope you will tell me. I

have so often longed to hear of her. Her
friend, the old patron of this living, died the
year after we came here ; so I have had no
opportunity of asking about her, or Bellhouse,
or any of them. Oh, I do wonder how they
all are — Lady Thorne, Bellhouse, Jessie, Mr.
Hugh ! Perhaps you will see Mr. Hugh too.
He told me that he was often in Alton. I
suppose he is a grand country gentleman
now, — married to Lady Rose Fairlegh, very
likely."

As these last words were spoken, a slight
change of expression — a shadow, touched by
repugnance — flitted over Lina's face. It
passed instantly, replaced by the usual calm;
but Marjory remembered to have seen it
before. Her curiosity was awakened.

'' Lina, why do you dislike my speaking of
Mr. Hugh ? "

How can you tell that I dislike it ? "
asked Lina, quickly.

I saw it in your face — not only now ; the
very first time I mentioned him, long ago at
school, you had that same look, as if his
name were hateful to you."

I must command my face better," said
Lina, smiling : 'but you are right, Marjory.
His name is hateful to me — only his name,

of course. It reminds me of another Hugh
Vivian, who once did us a great wrong — a
wrong I can never forget."

And he had the same name ! I wonder
if they were related."

Oh, no, impossible ! The person whom
I mean was in a very different position. He
was a clerk in the bank at Bellingham."

And BuUingham is in Hampshire, too —
far away from Alton. I am sorry the name
is so disagreeable to you, though. If you
get to know my Mr. Hugh, perhaps he will
make you like it."

'' I think not," said Lina, quietly; '' I could
never like it. Besides, there is no probability
of my knowing him ; we shall not
expect to be in the county society."

*' Is the Hugh Vivian who did the wrong
still at BuUingham ? " said Marjory,

*' 'No, he disappeared, no one knew where ^
he was altogether * a black sheep.' I spoke
incorrectly just now, Marjory, when I said
that I could never forget that wrong; I
meant, the fact of his having committed it.
The particulars of it, I never knew : only
their consequences."

Poor Lina ! I am so sorry," said Marjory,
in vague pity. As she spoke, with a caressing

movement, lie passed her arm through
her friend's ; for a look of real pain had fallen
upon Lina's beautiful face.

Never mind," replied Lina, ignoring the
movement : " There is no use in recalling the
past. I will only say that it was something
connected with my brother."

Marjory ventured no further questioning.
Lina, like herself, had had one beloved
brother: whose relations with her — so Marjory
fancied — had resembled her own with Gerald.
Lina had occasionally spoken of him, as of
one whom she unutterably revered, but who
had been involved in some unfortunate
mystery ; he had suffered in some way, sadly
not through his own fault. This was all
that Marjory had gathered concerning him :
excepting that he was dead.

*' I won't mention Mr. Hugh again,
Lina."

Impetuous as ever, Marjory," said Lina,
smiling. '' Pray mention him as much as
you please ; it can make no difference to me.
My feeling about the name is a mere weakness,
which I do not wish to indulge."

But Marjory hastened to change the subject,
dreading to pain her friend, from whatever
cause that pain might proceed ; and the

conversation had soon wandered far from
Thorne or Alton. Soon, also, the two companions,
climbing the last stile, found themselves
in the orchard, now gay with blossom,
which adjoined the shady garden of the
vicarage.

CHAPTER XVI.

Viewless things his eyes can view,
Drifting of his dream do light
All the skies by day and night,
And the seas that deepest roll
Carry murmurs of his soul."

Elizabeth Barrett Browning.

While the quiet days rolled by in the old
country vicarage, and Marjory grew with
steady growth, reading, observing, thinking,
her brother Gerald had already taken his
post in life's great battle.

His childish dream of becoming an artist,
had intensified until it consumed him as a
fire. Visions of ideal beauty constantly
haunted him, craving painfully for development.
Often at night, when the house was
still, he would sit long at his window, looking
out towards the heights of space and the
sleeping world below, and feeling within him
something that throbbed and struggled towards
the Infinite, whence it came. At such
times, in his earlier boyhood, tears would roll
unconsciously down his cheeks ; he could
not have told why. As years went on, the

tears ceased ; he grew too manly for such
relief; but none the less powerful was that bj
which they had been excited. Bereft of even
such outlet, it became restless and passionate
with the force of a pent-up existence.

His small stock of pocket-money was jealously
hoarded for drawing-paper, paints, and
pencils ; his spare minutes, sadly limited,
were all devoted to their use. He copied
again and again, with unwearied patience,
every picture that he could find worth the
pains ; sketched again and again, at different
seasons and in different lights, the same views
around his home ; he made also many original
efforts, but he was never satisfied with anything
that he did. He saw with almost too
keen an eye his faults of drawing and colouring
: he had no such eye for their virtues.
Something of hope he did indeed feel, when
he found his progress, such as it was,
unquestionable. But his discouragements
far exceeded his comforts. How could he do
anything great without a teacher ? Had
such a case ever been ? Had not every
famous artist studied his art with some great
master of his age ? What hope was therefor
him, working in the dark, without a
master, without even a friend ?

VOL. I.

Meanwhile, to the outer world, he appeared
a strange, silent, dreamy boy — moody and
irritable at times — and sadly discontented,
his grandmother thought. His grandmother,
an old lady of "the old school," who prided
herself upon her common sense, had resolutely
set her face against any such '' nonsense
" as that desired by Gerald. Drawing
pictures was fairly well, she opined, as an
innocent recreation ; but to make it more
than recreation was, if not positive sin, a sign
of despicable frivolity. This old lady had no
conception of any world beyond that apparent
to her senses. But for her religious faith,
her nature would have seemed, to all intents
and purposes, devoid of spiritual element.
As it was, that faith, in its way exceedingly
devout, increased her firmness in opposing
what she regarded as a waste of time and
talents. Nevertheless, Gerald for years allowed
himself to hope that in time she would
yield to his wishes ; that her eyes would be
opened when she found that nothing quenched
the flame which burned within him. In
short, he cherished a secret fancy that, when
he left school, she would allow him to go to
London — perhaps even to E-ome — and study
according to his wishes.

He was penniless ; this poor boy, like his
sister, was entirely dependent upon the grandmother,
Mrs. Wilton. He was a little delicate
also in health, had grown too quickly ; and
his active brain absorbed much life and
strength which would otherwise nourish his
body. Her aid and consent were necessary
to him ; he could not go anywhere without
them, and would not, if he could. For
Gerald's moral faculties were at least as
keen as those of his intellect ; his conscientiousness
in the matter of filial duty was
almost morbidly extreme. His grandmother
had clothed, fed, educated him ; he owed to
her a debt of lifelong gratitude. Her conduct,
as regarded the desire of his heart,
seemed to him little short of cruelty ; yet,
with feverish self-command, he restrained any
undutiful word or feeling. Thus his boyhood
went by ; and at eighteen came a time
to which he had long looked forward as
decisive.

Despite his inward difficulties, he had risen
to the head of the old-established grammar-school
near his home. His masters were
high in praise of his steadiness and application
; all that he needed, they said, was a
greater love of study for its own sake. This


report confirmed his grandmother's opinion
that the idle life of a painter would be his
ruin. He must now leave school ; she could
not afford, had she thought it desirable, to
send him to the university : she resolved that
he should at once begin the laudable task of
earning his own bread. Her life was yearly
more uncertain ; her income would die with
her; she told Gerald, with the intent to
rouse his pride, that it was time he ceased to
depend on her scanty means. She wished,
however, still to keep him under her own
eye ; and at this juncture a situation fell
vacant in a private bank in the town. For
that situation Mrs. Wilton, without Gerald's
knowledge, applied in his behalf; and succeeded.
The salary was a mere pittance,
the work laborious : but this, she believed,
was just the training that he required. To
sober him, to bring down his unfounded aspirations,
and convert him into a practical
man of business : such was her aim.

The boy had gathered all his forces for
one final appeal ; from which he had hoped
more than he was aware of. He opened his
heart to his grandmother as he had never
done before ; he promised, if she would help
him forward in his desired path, that she

should never repent it ; that in a little while
he would repay all she had ever spent on him
he should call nothing his own until that
debt was discharged. She should hear of
him soon as a great painter — he felt the
power within him ! He could not work, he
could not breathe, he said, shut up in a
bank : it would crush out all that made his
life worth the having.

"For 'Could not,' Gerald, say 'Would
not'" Mrs. Wilton rejoined : " Duty is always
possible."

Then, when he argued that his duty was
not necessarily represented by the calling of
a bank-clerk, she informed him that the die
was cast, that she had arranged all preliminaries,
and that his work was to commence
on the following Monday.

Now at length burst from Gerald a passion
of fury and despair which caused Mrs. Wilton,
highly displeased, to order him away. Out
of the room, and the house, he rushed, as if
possessed by a fiend ; and was absent for
many hours. Late at night, just as the old
lady had begun to feel a little anxious, he
came back ; and coldly, as if going through a
form, begged her pardon : then walked upstairs
in the dark to his bed, without another word.

The subject was not again mentioned between
them. When Monday came, Gerald
went in silence to bis desk at the bank.

But anyone who possessed penetration — a
quality denied to Mrs. Wilton — might have
seen that the iron had entered into his soul.
His face had acquired a rigidity, his manner,
a distant coldness, as of one who desires
sympathy as little as he expects it. In truth
it seemed to him that his mind and heart
were actually turned into iron — into a cold
and heavy weight which he had to bear with
him wherever he went. Heaven and earth
alike, he thought, were bent on opposing
him in his struggle after the only thing he
cared for — cared for with such intensity of
craving ! He wondered, with dull pain beneath
the wonder, why that craving should
be implanted within him, so that he could
not, if he would, put it away ! An endless
why seemed re-echoing through the world.

But youth was strong in him ; the buoyancy
of his years fought for him, and won
the battle. After a time hope revived,
courage rose up afresh ; he resolved that he
would despair no longer. A dogged patience
took the place of bitterness : a determination
to endure, to toil, to wait. Day after day he

plodded through the appointed hours : but
when evening came — in summer, out of
doors — in the winter, in his room, wrapped in
his great coat, Halted by a tallow candle, —
he returned to the work that he loved;
drew, painted, carved, struggling towards
that fleeting ideal, so fair yet so capricious,
which lured him ever onward.

Thus four years rolled away in a monotonous
round. Gerald was now twenty-two — ■
a man, and, in formation of character, far
older than his age. Those forty-eight months
of resolute labour at an uncongenial occupation,
had borne their fruit of self-mastery, of
fortitude, of dauntless will. The visions
which came to him now were higher, more
glorious, than in the days of impatient expectation.
He had learned that there is
something grander than the fulfilment of an
artistic mission ; something better than a
gratified desire, however pure.

Meanwhile, the infirmities of age were increasing
upon Mrs. Wilton ; she had failed
perceptibly of late, had grown feeble and
peevish ; and when, shortly after Gerald's
twenty-second birthday, the bank, in which
he was steadily rising, stopped payment, the
sudden blow was too heavy for her strength.

She lamented, full of gloomy prophecies,
for a day; and then was struck down by
paralysis.

But the active habits of a long life were
not easily banished. At the end of a week,
she rose and came downstairs, altered in
speech and in countenance, but able to move
slowly to and fro about her usual occupations.
Gerald was at home, forcibly idle, and, had
his grandmother been well, he would certainly
have repeated his appeal of four years ago.
But now the grasshopper was a burden to
her; every small household Contre-temps
worried her as if double its importance ; the
subject of the bank was seldom absent from
her thoughts or from her lips ; she began to
fret about her own expenses, and to declare
that she, too, was in the road to ruin. Gerald,
she said, must help her; she had done enough
for him, — and, if he had any atom of a dutiful
spirit, he would now make due return. He
must obtain another situation immediately —
he must advertise, inquire; in fact, what must
he not ?

This was no time to urge his own claims.
He began at once, as she desired, to "lookout
; " but who does not know what such
"looking out" is, in this our over-stocked

England ? Every clerkship of every kind
"was already occupied in the county town ;
and the failure of the bank had thrown many
others into the same position as himself.
Mrs. Wilton declared that she would give up
her house, and accompany him elsewhere.
She had been exacting and tyrannical to this
boy ; yet she loved him, as much as it was
in her nature to love any one ; and of late
had grown to lean upon him, with a closer
dependence than she knew. Gerald answered
many and various advertisements; but it was
by other means that help came at last.

It came, unexpectedly enough, through
Marjory's friend Lina. The Peeles had now
for several months been settled at Alton; and
when a superior clerkship promised to be
vacant in an old-established bank of that
city, Lina, informed by Marjory of the state
of affairs, found means to secure influential
interest in behalf of an application from
Gerald. A few weeks later the affair was
settled ; Gerald was appointed to the clerkship,
far better than that which he had lost ;
and Lina now again offered her services to
find either a house or suitable lodgings for
Mrs. Wilton.

In anticipation of the move, the old lady's

strength appeared to revive. She declared,
with evident pleasure in the thought, that
there was no time to be lost, and for a day
or two worked, with feverish haste, at all
manner of miscellaneous preparations. But
on the third day she sat peacefully down in
her arm-chair, and said that she was tired,
and must rest. The morning lengthened
into afternoon, the early dinner-hour came
and passed, and still the restless old woman,
yesterday so full of occupations, slept on —
awakened once or twice by Gerald, but only
to repeat drowsily, that she was tired, and
would sleep a little longer. At length it
became impossible to rouse her at all ; the
doctor was summoned, and it was found that
she had had a second stroke.

Twenty four hours later she had slept herself
away, not even awaking for so much asa
last farewell.

The greater part of her income, being the
pension of a naval captain's widow, together
with a trifling life-annuity, ceased at her
death. A small capital, equivalent to about
fifty pounds per annum, was all that remained
; and this she was found to have
settled unreservedly upon Marjory.

I beg my grandson Gerald to believe,"

said the will, " that by this settlement I do
him uo injustice, but rather promote his
true happiness in easting him solely upon
independent exertion."

She had known well in what manner
Gerald would have employed that small
capital, if placed at his disposal. Left penniless,
he would, at least for a few years, be
compelled to work at something useful ; and
gradually, it might be hoped, he would forget
the dream of a foolish youth. The better to
ensure this object, she had added a codicil,
forbidding Marjory to give or lend any portion
of the sum, or its yearly interest, to
Gerald, or any other in his behalf, on penalty
of instant forfeiture : in which case the legacy
was to be transferred to an Asylum for the
Orphans of British Seamen.

Marjory was full of indignation when this
news arrived — conveyed in a letter from her
uncle, who had gone to attend Mrs. Wilton's
funeral. He was to bring Gerald back with
him to Rockswold. For the first time since
early childhood, — Gerald would see his sister,
that blue-eyed , white-robed baby whom he
remembered kissing in its nurse's arms when
he was taken from his home, after their
father had been laid in their mother's grave.

He had kept all that baby's letters, from the
very first, in large round hand between
double lines, to the last, of telegraphy just
emerged from schoolgirl angles, expatiating
on the joyous prospect of their meeting.
His own letters in return, though regular,
had been short : there had been in them all
the difference between a boy's letters and
those of a girl. But Marjory's ardent faith
in him had supplied the deficiency, and had
kept her happy and devoted, through all
imperfections of response. Only now, when
they were actually to meet, she became aware
that she knew far less of him than he must
know of her. His notes had only supplied
some slight fabric for her imagination to work
upon. She had been disappointed in Lina ;
she trembled a little now, as she waited,
counting the days and hours, in the little
vicarage.

She trembled, and repressed her trembling
by constant occupation : reading to Aunt
Lucy, and consoling her for Uncle John's
short absence, practising her music, especially
such as she expected Gerald to admire,
tending sick people whom her uncle had left
to her charge, teaching in the school — above
all, preparing with eagerness a little room ;

collecting pictures, and books, and trifling
ornaments, to make it pretty and attractive ;
day by day visiting it and adding something
to it — something for Gerald : until the fourth
of her uncle's absence dawned. Then no
occupation had power to still the fluttering
of mingled joy and fear, hope and anxiety,
in Marjory's breast ; for on this day Gerald
was expected.

CHAPTER XVII.

through life's fret and turmoil,

The passion and fire of art

In him was soothed and quickened
By her true sister heart.

Her heart, her life, her future,

Her genius, only meant
Another thing to give him,

And be therewith content."

Adelaide A. Procter,

Fair hair — a little wavy, like Marjory's own —
shading a square brow, with temples slightly
hollowed ; a fair but sunburnt skin ; straight
eyebrows, many shades darker than the hair ;
gray eyes, of a strange, melancholy beauty, so
clear that they seemed transparent, showing
the soul behind them; a straight nose, somewhat
delicately defined ; a sensitive mouth,
changing with every expression, yet not
without firmness, the lips more often slightly
parted than closed, but in no degree loose
or heavy ; a square chin, clearly cut ; a
figure close upon six feet in height, broadly

built, yet somewhat thin, with an air at times
as though it were an effort not to stoop;
thin, brown, nervous hands, with a strange
look of sentient life in them, constantly
moving, as from a restless sense of power : —
altogether, a person whom one would turn
to look after, passing him in the street,
whose face would haunt one with a vague
impression like that produced by bells —a
touch of melancholy, mingled with a magical
sweetness, a glimpse of something indefinable,
not wholly of this world. This was Gerald :
as Marjory saw him on that summer evening
when they met, it might be said, for the first
time.

This was Gerald. This time her dreams
were not disappointed. Here was something
beyond dreams, something which she had
never found before in any human being. She
thought that it would be an object worthy of
life or death to minister to that imprisoned
power which shone with deathless fire in
Gerald's eyes; to help in freeing that power,
that it might do its work — its glorious, its
divine work. All the dormant enthusiasm
in her nature burst into a flame, as she sat
thinking thus, and gazing at her brother.

The travellers had arrived in the June

twilight, just as one silver star had begun to
sparkle in the calm succeeding to the sunset.
Rest and food were their first necessities ;
but when the long meal in the little diningroom
was over, Marjory watched her opportunity,
and, slipping her arm into Gerald's,
said in an eager whisper :

Gerald, come with me — out of doors.
They won't miss us ; they delight in being
alone together; and it is such a lovely
night ! "

A moment later they were out in the
summer air. The sky above was cloudless,
of a deep, dark blue ; the moon nearly at its
full had risen, clear and calm. The grass
of the old-fashioned garden stretched before
them, in patches of light and shade — shade
cast by ancient apple-trees and pear-trees
standing in close proximity to the flowerbeds,
dark and motionless like watchers.
From those flower-beds a mingling of odours
lavender, wallflowers, carnations — floated
into the silence. The landscape, all in
shadow, sloped away beyond the mossy
wall; here and there a cottage-roof rose
black from sleeping fields : there was no
sound, no stir of any kind.

'gerald," said Marjory, ''I wish you

would paint a picture of a night like this,
and call it 'Waiting.' Just such a night,
only later on, so that one morning streak
might show behind distant hills, as a glimpse
of promise."

As she spoke, she drew him on, through
a low wicket, to the churchyard : where a
quiet path, shaded midway by a great yew-tree,
divided the graves. The deep black
plot beneath the sombre branches cast into
stronger relief the cold light streaming from
the moon upon the grassy mounds, and
sharply defining the outline of the tombstones.
Here and there, so clear a gleam
kindled an inscription, that it became almost
as legible as by day. A rustic bench encircled
the ancient trunk ; here the brother
and sister sat down.

"You must give up all notion of my ever
painting anything worth speaking of," said
Gerald, suddenly : "I am doing my best to
give it up myself."

'' Gerald, what do you mean ? " cried the
girl, her blue eyes wide in consternation.

*' I mean that I have been a fool to dream
of it so long. I might have seen, years ago,
that all the circumstances of my life were
against it."

VOL. 1. P

"But, Gerald, is it not the glory of the
greatest men to be great in spite of circumstances
? " cried ardent Marjory. "And
now, especially, when there is no one to
oppose you ! You are your own master
now. Why not throw up the Alton appointment,
go straight to London, and study at
the Academy? You will soon make your
way. I will go with you, if you will have
me. I can live on my fifty pounds, can't I ?
and I will help you in every way. You shall
have no hindrances — not one."

Only, unfortunately, I shall need a little
bread and cheese, and house-room too, I
fear ; and how should I get them if I were
doing nothing but study at the Academy?"


"Oh, dear! what dreadful power money has!
and I cannot give you any of mine ! But,
Gerald, listen ! Go to Alton for a year, or
longer if necessary, and live as sparingly as
you can ; and, when you have saved enough
to keep you for a year in London lodgings,
give up Alton, and go there. At the end of
that year you will be able to make more
than enough — by pictures, or by taking
pupils, or both — to give yourself up entirely
to art. And you will rise, Gerald. Have

you forgotten all your ambitions ? Oh, no ;
I can see them in your face ! You talked
so only to tease me'

No, Marjory ; I did not. Three or four
days ago I had this very plan in my mind.
I was fall of hope, happier than I have been
for years. I thought that it was now only a
question of months, of economy. I calculated
on how much — I mean how little — I could
contrive to live. I fancied it had been a
good thing, after all, that I had had to wait;
that my pictures might be all the better.
Yes ; I was up in the seventh heaven for a
little while ! I thought I must be terribly
hard-hearted to feel so, when my poor grandmother
was only just dead ; but I could not
help it. And then, all of a sudden, I found
this letter''

He put an open envelope into Marjory's
lap, and sat still, looking out over the graves.
Marjory stepped beyond the shadow of the
yew, that the moonlight might fall upon the
letter. It was written in a quavering hand,
yet one which had once been bold and firm ;
every word was clearly legible.

"Dear Gerald, —

Many years ago your grandfather, my
p 2

late husband, contracted a heavy debt, of
which the interest only, during his lifetime,
was paid. At his death this circumstance
came, for the first time, to my knowledge. I
at once began to pay off the principal in
annual instalments, which, chiefly owing to
the expenses of your support and education,
were not so large as I could wish ; and yet,
together with the interest, made a heavy
drain on my income. I hoped, however,
that I might live to see the debt entirely
cleared ; and this may still be the case. But,
since my health is now precarious, I think it
best to write this letter, which I shall leave
in my desk. Two hundred pounds of the
debt remains to be paid. This house, as you
know, I hire furnished ; my own possessions
are few and worthless — you could not raise
anything on them. I have written to my
husband's excellent friends, Messrs. Grove
& Carter, solicitors, and I have told them
that, in the event of my death, you will continue
to pay the instalments, together with
the interest, until the obligation ceases. This
the Alton clerkship will enable you, with
proper economy, to do. You may think it
unfair that I should leave such a burden on
your shoulders ; but consider, Gerald, how

much I have spent upon you — not in money
only, but in care and thought. Moreover,
to this arrangement I look to guard you from
the foolish career which you had marked out
for yourself, and into which you would otherwise,
at my death, doubtless plunge. I have
too much confidence in your sense of honour
to feel any fear that, with this obligation
upon you, you would wantonly throw up the
certain subsistence through which alone you
can fulfil it. You will see the wisdom, and,
indeed, the duty, of remaining in some steady
business until every farthing of the two hundred
pounds is paid. By that time you will
be no longer a boy ; and it is my hope that
advancing years will bring you a higher
aim than to fritter away your life as an
idle painter. God bless you, my dear
Gerald !

I remain,

Your affectionate grandmother,
Deborah Wilton."

And I cannot help you ? I cannot pay
the debt from my legacy?" cried Marjory,
Still standing in the path, while the moonlight
streamed on the relentless letter.

You forfeit it all if you attempt to pay

one farthing either of debt or interest. There
is a second codicil to that effect."

Marjory returned to her seat in silence.
A sudden blank had fallen upon her eager
young face.

'' It will be seven years, so far as I see, or
five at least, before I can get clear," said
Gerald. " I have signed an agreement with
Grove & Carter ; they were very kind ; there
will be no undue pressure. But think, Mar-pre
! I am twenty-two already. I tell you,
I hate my work — I loathe it — and yet I have
been grinding at it now for more than four
years ! By the end of seven years more I
shall be fit for nothing else. There's no
remedy, you see. I have no friends able to
help me ; T have no money. The only possibility
of my paying this debt is to keep on
at the same old tread-mill. Why, I am not
even certain that I have any real stuff in meas
to art ; it may be all smoke, for aught I
know ! There have always been plenty of
fools in the world who imagined themselves
geniuses. My best plan would be to uproot
those fancies. I need not give up ambition
altogether ; I might some day rise to be the
manager of a bank," said the young fellow,
bitterly.

** You never can uproot those fancies,
Gerald ; they are part of you ; they are not
fancies," cried Marjory. " I will find a
way to help you ; just wait a little ; let me
think."

She raised her hand as she spoke, and
Gerald was silent, waiting patiently, and,
despite his sadness, with some amusement,
while Marjory plunged into reverie. He
watched those earnest blue eyes of hers fire
in some inward absorption, and felt a sudden
glow of pleasure as he realised that here was
a spirit cast in the same mould as his own ;
truly, in a double sense, a kindred spirit, in
intercourse with whom he experienced the
new enjoyment of fellowship. He should
never have been so utterly wretched, he
thought, had she been with him always.

''I have thought!" she cried suddenly,
her eyes shining and her cheeks burning :
*' I have had a plan all my life, and now it
will be better than I fancied. I will get the
money to pay off your debt I "

'' But how can you get money ? " asked
Gerald, watching her curiously.

*' By writing. Ever since I was a child
my dream has been to write books, and get
money by them, for you, to help you to bean

artist. I did not know then, exactly, how
money could help ; but now it is plain enough !
I have such a story in my head ! I have
begun it more than once ; only I have never
yet been able to satisfy myself ; — but now the
bare idea of freeing you from this burden
seems to set me all on fire. I can do it,
Gerald ! I feel it — I am sure. And perhaps
very soon. You will see."

But I shall not like to take your money,
Marjory," said Gerald, smiling at her ardour.

You could not be so unkind as to refuse?
You would have to bend your pride ! Yes,
you mustn't be unhappy any more, or even
think of giving up your hopes. It will be
only a little more waiting ; and then you will
be free. I will work so hard, Gerald ! and
now I have something more to propose to

you."

"Wait one moment," said Gerald : " I don't
want to damp you ; but it is very hard, Marjory,
to make a beginning in authorship. I
have heard and read a great deal of the difficulties.
Unless you can get an introduction,
or have really a great talent "

Yes, I know : I know it is hard ; but I
mustn't think of that, and you mustn't talk
of it, for fear I should be discouraged. I

can but do my best ; and I feel a confidence,
stronger than I could tell you, that I shall
succeed. Don't think me conceited; it isn't
that : but I — I shall pray every day that God
may help me ; and I feel quite sure He will."

An involuntary gleam of sunshine broke
out on Gerald's face; her simple faith in her
mission was confirmed.

My life will be devoted to you, Gerald,"
she said : "I shall never marry, but remain
free to work for you. There is such power
in work ! If we do our utmost, we are certain
to be helped and bless' d."

You are very good, Marjory," said Gerald,
humbly.

*' No, I am not ; I am only hopeful. But
now I must tell you of my other plan ; — we
shall have to go in directly. Gerald, I want
to go with you to Alton."

'' I should be only too glad to have you,"
said Gerald : " But where is the money to
come from ? "

Money, money, money ! you have money
on the brain ! " cried Marjory, laughing like
a child : " Have I not fifty pounds a year of
my own ? and will not that keep me in food
and clothes ? It shall, I tell you."

But your lodging "

'* I was coming to that. Before poor
grand mamma died, Lina Peele told me of
some tempting rooms, close to the cathedral,
belonging to a real lady, who also keeps
a school "

"A young ladies' school?" said Gerald,
making a queer face.

A preparatory school for little boys. She
is a clergyman's widow, with one sister ; and
they have more room than they want. Their
last lodgers were a poor curate and his
daughter ; the daughter helped in the school,
and so got her lodging free. Now I have
been thinking that Mrs. Myers — that is the
lady — might take me on the same terms."

But how would you bear the drudgery
of teaching ? "

It would be no drudgery to me ! I delight
in little boys ; and Lina says that the curate's
daughter gave only three hours — from nine
to twelve. For the rest of the day I should
be my own mistress, and have plenty of time
to write."

And all for me ! No, Marjory, I ought
not to accept it; it is too much !" cried
Gerald, starting up. Marjory followed him,
clinging to his arm.

'' Nonsense, Gerald, don't be tiresome !

It would be nothing but pleasure. And I
could write better in a town. I love the
country more than I can express ; but I want
to see more of life — human life — at least fora
time. Lately I have felt such a restless
longing to get among my fellow creatures,
to know something of the stir of the world.
Perhaps presently I shall want to come back ;
but I would like to go for a little while. And
I shall be with you; we shall explore life
together ! "

*' How jolly it would be ! " exclaimed
Gerald, his youth asserting itself at last :
Only what will my uncle say ? ''

Oh, I'm sure he will consent. "When
grand mamma died, both he and Aunt Lucy
seemed so sorry that you must go alone to
Alton, and said it was so bad for a young
man to live in lodgings alone. Then I shall
no longer be an expense to them ; they often
find it hard to make both ends meet. Of
course, I should in any case now pay for my
board; but Uncle John would not like it."

I'm afraid they will miss you very much,"
said Gerald, looking at her bright face with
brotherly pride.

A little, at first, perhaps ; but I shall
tell them that they must send for me whenever

they want me. And I have always
spent a great deal of time apart from them ;
they are so perfectly wrapped up in one
another. I have helped in the schools and
cottages ; but I am not really wanted in this
small parish. I shall feel quite conscience-clear
in going to be with you."

*' Then we'll write to this Mrs. Myers tomorrow,"
said Gerald. It was as though a
cloud had passed from his brow, his voice,
his manner. And Marjory observing him
thought ;

My mission has begun. I shall succeed !
yes, I know that I shall succeed."

CHAPTER XVIII.

Dreams of the future allured me,

Such dreams as young hearts only know,
When the skies are all sunshine and glory,
And this earth seems a heaven below."

Musical Bouquet.

It was towards six o'clock on a broiling
afternoon in early August, that Marjory's
eager blue eyes looked from the windows of
a second-class railway-carriage, and saw,
wide spreading on either side, the roofs and
spires of Alton, the cathedral tower rising
like a beacon in their midst. Beneath the
cathedral flowed the river, winding on through
a fair expanse of fruitful meadows and
orchards. Marjory had forgotten how much
beauty lay close around the old city ; she
looked at it now with new eyes, a child no
longer, striving, unsuccessfully as yet, to
trace her childish memories. The train
steamed slowly into the large and busy
station. An excursion train had entered
just before ; the platforms were crowded ;
there were loud voices, scuffling, and pushing.

The country maiden felt bewildered, and
even a little alarmed ; it was a relief to see
Gerald's now familiar face looking from the
throng.

Gerald, Gerald, here I am ! my luggage
is in that van," she cried, holding fast to
his arm : " Oh, I am so glad to be here !
but I hope my luggage is safe."

Come along, and we'll see for it ; I have
a friend among the porters," said Gerald,
piloting her through the crowd. He had
been at Alton upwards of a month, and
Marjory had performed the long journey
alone, under the guard's supervision.
There's a cab all ready outside," said Gerald,
when the luggage was ascertained to be safe :
I am very glad too, Marjory ! I'm tired
already of living alone. It will all be different
now."

It will be perfectly delightful," cried
Marjory : '' Is this the cab ? I hope no
one will steal my boxes. What numbers of
people ! "

'* Almost the amount of the Rockswold
population ! " said Gerald, laughing : '' What
would you say to London, I wonder !
and, for the matter of that, what should
I?"

Oh, this is quite enough, to begin !
London would be altogether too much. Now
we are off. Gerald, surely he is driving too
fast ! Shan't we be upset ? "

Gerald laughed again, soon joined by
Marjory. Both were full of spirits. Gerald
indeed could not remember a time when he
had been so happy, so hopeful.

*' You are Whittington, and I am your
cat," said Marjory : '' We are setting forth
on our adventures. I am quite brimful of
excitement, Gerald ! I don't believe I can
ever feel quiet again. When shall we get
out of these back-streets ? "

Before long. There are fine old bits,
though, in some of these streets ; such quaint
houses ! I have lighted upon three or four
in the very worst places, black and white,
with splendid old oak carving, and overhanging
upper stories."

"And there is an old church ! The stone
is almost black with age ; and has it not a
glorious stained window ? Gerald, we must
go on exploring expeditions. I seem to be
suddenly let loose into ' the wide, wide
world.' "

'' It is a wider world than Rocks wold, at
all events ! This part is called The Cross ;

I suppose the old town cross was here. And
this is High Street. Now we shall soon beat
home."

I see some charming shops, Gerald ; I
must not go too often into the town ! Oh,
the cathedral ! "

They had turned a corner, and suddenly
the stir was gone. Here was an old-world
place, with quiet houses overlooking a railed
oblong of smooth turf, and, between turf
and houses, a road leading to the north door
of the cathedral.

What is there in the aspect of an ancient
cathedral which lifts one instantaneously into
another atmosphere than that of work-a-day
life, with its common talk and traffic ? One
looks up at the grand heights, at the massive
walls ; and the present is gone like a dissolving
view ; centuries long dead arise in hoary
greatness. The spiritual world — how near,
how vivid, it appears, as one stands gazing
thus ! Those altitudes are material ; yet
they bring the ethereal very nigh. The unseen
universe which surrounds us, often forgotten
in the hurry of the scene, — here,
beside that embodied dream of glorious old
masters, its presence is not believed in merely,
but felt. It is as though that dream had

been an inspiration, leaving behind it the
power of inspiration for ever.

'' The mere fact of living always within
sight of this, should make one great," thought
Marjory, as she stepped from the carriage.
The whole north side of the cathedral stood,
many-windowed, before her, the pinnacled
and richly decorated tower rising midway.
The north door, deep within a fine perpendicular
porch, was partly open, giving a
glimpse of the nave. An old verger, in a
long black gown, stood in ,the portal, inhaling
a breath of outer air ; a meditative
canon was walking leisurely along the raised
pavement to his home. The rooks were
cawing to one another from carved nooks
where for generations they had sheltered ;
the calm sky stretched above, the fretted
pinnacles defined in clear outre against the
blue.

Marjory stood still, and breathed the spirit
of the place : while Gerald rang at one of the
row of houses.

"Mrs. Myers has two houses," he said.
Ours is No. 14; she and Miss Wilmington
live at No. 13 with the boys. There is a
door of communication inside."

Will you please to walk in, miss ? " said

VOL. I. Q

a good-tempered voice, with a high-roofed
twang which carried Marjory back to B rank-some
and Mrs. Hammond. A rosy little
maid, with a snowy apron, stood smiling in
the doorway. Marjory smiled in return, and
entered the house, while Gerald saw to the
luggage. The little maid led the way up one
flight of shallow stairs, lighted by a large
window, gay with geraniums in china pots.
At the top of this flight, three doors opened
upon a small landing.

These are yours, if you please, miss.
Mrs. Myers' compliments, and she will be indirectly."


'' What a dear little room ! " cried happy
Marjory, as the maid opened one of the doors.
It was the sitting-room, with two low windows
looking out upon the road — the College Yard,
as this side of the cathedral precincts was
designated. The room was clean, and
fresh, and bright to the last degree, simply
furnished, but with refinement, betokening
the hostess ; and now it looked at its best,
the round table spread with a snowy
cloth, a vase of roses in the middle, and
tea ready laid — with radishes, and water-cress,
and golden butter, and pretty china
brightening the effect. A cottage piano was

among the furniture ; a little writing-table
stood in one window, a flower-stand in the
other; Gerald's books and pictures were
strewn about, and made the place homelike ;
and at home Marjory felt herself forthwith.

"Now may I see the bedrooms?" she
said; and the little maid opened the other
doors. Her room and Gerald's were close
together, furnished alike, and with the same
western aspect. The spotless cleanliness of
the parlour was even more striking here.
Beds and toilet-tables seemed bleached to the
utmost possibility of purity; the crockery,
white with a pink rim, shone in quite a
dazzling manner. But Marjory ran straight
to the open window, facing her bed. Immediately
below, a strip of garden, with a grass-plat
and one ancient apple-tree, was bounded
by an old wall of russet brown ; and beyond
this wall flowed the wide river, mighty yet
peaceful, green meadows on its opposite
bank, and cows feeding there, as in rustic
Rockswold. A range of hills — the Hepburn
Hills, as Marjory remembered — bounded the
horizon. Sometimes those hills were well-nigh
effaced by mist or rain, sometimes startling
in their clearness ; now they were bathed
in a soft haze of mingled light and shadow.
Q 2

Thus far, Marjory might have imagined
herself still in the country ; but plenty on
either side remained to remind her of the
contrary. Some way to the right, the river
was spanned by a massive stone bridge of
three arches — a boat-house hard by, where
Marjory saw a crowd of boats awaiting customers.
Beyond this bridge, the houses
clustered thickly on either bank ; here and
there a spire, or the chimney of a factory,
rose above the roofs. In the distance the
Grand Stand was visible, close to the river, —
the race-course extending beyond the range
of Marjory's vision. All this on the right :
on the left, an old house, a canonical residence,
seemed to spring out of the water;
the deanery gardens stretched away in a line
with the window, a line continued by other
buildings connected with the chapter, all
more or less gray and venerable ; among
them, immeasurably grander than the rest,
rose the western front of the cathedral itself.
Past all flowed the broad river, — the murmur
of the town mingling with its ripple, and telling
of the corresponding flow of human life,
no less unceasing.

Marjory could have lingered in that window
for hours ; but a tap at the door recalled her

to herself. Looking round, lie saw a small
elderly lady, with drab hair, partly hidden by
a blonde cap, a drab dress, and drab boots.
Indeed, she had much the appearance of a
drab mouse, enlarged to the minimum of
female humanity. As Marjory turned, she
performed a low bend, between a bow and an
antediluvian courtesy, and then held out her
hand.

Miss Stanhope, I presume. I am Mrs.
Myers. My sister. Miss Pilkington, hopes
to wait upon you later. I trust I see you
well ? "

Marjory thanked her, praising the
rooms.

I am gratified to hear that they please
you. Cleanliness at least we can rely upon ;
soap and soda are not costly articles."

And yet worth their weight in gold ! "
cried Marjory. " I am so much obliged to
you for letting me come in this way. I do
hope that my teaching will satisfy you ; if
not, you must send me back."

"There will be little fear," said Mrs.
Myers, graciously, " your duties will be very
simple. The first thing will be to make
yourself at home ; our charges do not return
for another week."

I thought I saw two little boys looking
out of a window."

Those were my own sons, Benjamin and
Ambrose. My sister, Miss Pilkington, is the
master-mind of the establishment. I am the
nominal mistress ; but she is my right hand.
The understanding is that I superintend the
wardrobes and domestic matters ; and she
the outdoor exercise and castigation. Judicious
punishment is a strong point with her.
Not that she is at all hard. Miss Stanhope ! "

I suppose the little boys are very naughty
sometimes," said Marjory, smiling.

"Exceedingly so," said Mrs. Myers, "and
only, in her opinion, to be repressed by
chastisement of a practical kind."

'' Now, Mrs. Myers, you know how often
I have told you to send for me when that is
to be administered," said Gerald, coming upstairs
: *' I am quite willing to take the office
of whipper-in-chief, if you will permit it."

Mrs. Myers laughed below her breath in a
mumbling manner, and observed :

You must not think that we have any
pleasure in chastisement, Miss Stanhope. I
merely mentioned the subject in anticipation
of Miss Pilkington's doing so, being anxious
lest you should deem her severe. We do all

in our power to make the little boys happy ;
indeed, I only hope that their noise will not
annoy you. They would quite get the better
of me," said the mouse ; " But Miss Wilmington
is a master-mind. Are you ready for
the urn ?"

Marjory thankfully replied in the affirmative
; and Mrs. Myers, with another bend,
retired, pausing to look back and say — her
hands falling lightly over each other, exactly
as the foresaw of a mouse might fall, were
it placed on its hind legs : '' We reside in the
adjoining house ; but the kitchens and the
servants are in this one ; so you will be properly
attended, I hope. At any time that
you wish to speak to me or Miss Pilkington,
this door is entirely at your disposal."

So saying, she denoted a door in the wall,
opening in a somewhat breakneck fashion upon
the staircase : and by its means disappeared.

'' There is another door downstairs in the
kitchen," said Gerald, " through which the
No. 13 meals are carried, and the servants
go in and out. The bell-wires communicate,
and Priscilla, the little maid, runs backwards
and forwards. It was Miss Pilkington's
arrangement. You know she is a master-mind."


It is a very good arrangement," said
Marjory, laughing ; '* You and I will be
delightfully private ! I should not at all like
to live in the next room to that awful Miss
Pilkington."

Miss Pilkington is not awful — not a bit
of it ; she's only a good joke," said Gerald,
with his quiet smile. '' By-the-by, I have
found no less than nineteen caricatures of
her, all, unless I am mistaken, the performance
of one hand. Most of them have ' Sweet
Sally,' or * Lovely Sally,' scribbled underneath
; and one, ' The Sally Pill, cure for
all ill.' I have got them, every one."

'' Where did you find them ? "

She invited me to look round the schoolrooms,
and examine the books and maps ;
and there I came upon them. The artist
may think himself lucky that it was I, and
not she ! "

Shall you show them to him, when he
comes back ? "

"Ay, and frighten him well, the little
beggar. I shouldn't have thought twice
about them, only they have a dash of talent,
which struck me. He is aware of it himself,
perhaps ; for he has had the audacity to sign
his name on several — ' Lewis Harding ! '

I wonder if he is related to Harding, the
famous painter."

'' Couldn't you ask Mrs. Myers ? "

I did — not saying why, of course, only
that I had come across the name. But she
could tell me nothing except that he was the
pickle of the school. There was one very
mild portrait of herself, inscribed ' Our
Ally.' "

Her name is Alice ; I remember the
signature," said Marjory, laughing : '' Oh, I
am so glad that this is a boys', instead of a
girls' school ! "

I am not, at all. I might have got some
good studies out of girls, — models for my
angels."

'' I dare say ! You wouldn't have been
allowed to go near them. In that case, Mrs.
Myers wouldn't have taken us. Oh, Gerald !
there comes the urn, and I am not ready. I
must just wash my hands."

'i'll make the tea, — I'm used to it. Don't
hurry," said Gerald. But Marjory was too
much excited not to hurry. In three minutes
she was again with Gerald, turning over his
books, while the tea was brewing; and talking
all the while.

"The best of lodging with a real lady,

Gerald, is, that one will never be stinted in
water. Such a delightful quantity in my
room, and a great bath ! — and you have one
too, I saw. I remember what a triumph of
resolution cleanliness was in Mrs. Hammond's
lodgings."

When the lower orders learn to appreciate
water, we shall have made a great step
in civilisation," said Gerald, philosophically :
One hears of free libraries. I wish free
baths could be established in every town 1 "

Yes, it seems such a pity," said Marjory,
quite mournfully, " that so many millions
should never know the delight of plunging
into fresh water, and coming out clean."

'by-the-by, Marjory, I went to Brank-some
the other day, and tried to hunt out
Mrs. Hammond's house. I found one at last
which answered to your description ; but that
is all I can say, for names and numbers are
altered, and the whole quarter has spread
a mile into what was country in your
time."

'' Nevertheless, I could find the house
directly," cried Marjory, with eagerness.

Well, you shall see if I was right. I took
the bold step of knocking at the door ; but
nothing was known of the Hammondss. I

asked elsewhere, but with the same result.
The name seems to have vanished."

Marjory looked a little blank.

That is tiresome' she said ; " I hoped
that Mrs. Hammond might have told me
about Thome. Her mother kept one of the
lodges there ; and she knew Bellhouse, and
all of them."

Well, we will have another hunt. I did
not take so much pains as I might. Perhaps
they have only emigrated to another part of
the town."

I shall enjoy the search," cried Marjory,
in a glow again. " I am looking forward,
more than I can say, to exploring all the old
places. Have you — I am almost afraid to
ask — buthaveyouheard anything of Thorne? "

Her heart quickened its beating, as she
listened for his answer. She felt as though she
couldn't bear to face the transformation which
eight years of " the changes and chances of
this mortal life" might have brought upon
that fairy land of her memory.

But Gerald had heard nothing.

I asked Mrs. Myers about it, one day,"
he said ; " But she has only lived at Alton
two years, and has no country acquaintances ;
she did not even know the name. We'll

commit the extravagance of a cab, some day,
and drive out there, after bank-hours. We
can walk back, if you are able, in the cool of
the evening."

'' Able ! I should think so ! Oh, Gerald !
it will be like a dream come true. Only — I
am half afraid."

After this, she stood silent for a while ;
looking out to where the cathedral, in its
massive grandeur, seemed to say, "I at
least am changeless." The rooks recalled
those others in the rookery at Thorne ; the
sky rose in a blue vault, above tower and
houses, just as Marjory had seen it long ago.
She started a little when Gerald's voice
brought back the present.

'' I've inspected the tea, Marjory, and I
think he'll do, — ^as the people about here say.
Nothing is neuter here, everything has a
masculine personality; and yet, I should
think, there was never in any county a less
imaginative race. But the washerwoman
sent me this message on Saturday, anent a
missing shirt : She 'open I'd please to excuse
him for a day or so, as he'd met with a accident,
through er being bad, and obliged to
leave him to er daughter."

I remember the same in Mrs. Hammond.

It used to puzzle me painfully, in those days.
—Where shall I sit, Gerald ? "

'' Here, of course," said Gerald, placing a
chair behind the urn ; 'you are the mistress,
you know. How jolly it is ! " he said, smiling,
as he sat down at the opposite end. " When
I think that you will be always here, it seems
too good to be true; the next best thing
to "

He stopped suddenly.

"To what?" asked Marjory.

To the pleasures of ham," said Gerald,
carving very carefully. *' I hope you will
like this ham ; It came from the country,
through Mrs. Myers' butter woman. Henceforth
I turn our eating and drinking over to
you, with the greatest relief."

*' I hope I shall manage well : I mean to
try very hard. I dare say Mrs. Myers will
advise me, or Miss Pilkington's master-mind."


Her momentary curiosity had been diverted
by the teapot — which she was nervously propitiating
with a view to Gerald's second, or
even third, cup of tea. She had no suspicion
of the secret relief with which he saw his
abrupt pause forgotten. How could he be
so ungracious as to say to this young sister,

who had evidently no thought but for him,
the words which had risen spontaneously to
his lips — " The next best thing to a wife !"
How could he betray to her that her devotion,
so entire, so unselfish, stood only
second in the light of that ideal devotion —
as yet only an ideal to Gerald. He had never
been " in love " with any being of flesh and
blood ; for he had never yet found any such
to embody the dream of his artist nature.
Moreover, he felt, with a galling sense of the
yoke, that his poverty precluded such embodiment.
Nevertheless, the dream lingered
in that nature of his, hidden and wrapt up
in it; and poverty could not at least obliterate
his own private views of the highest
earthly happiness. But private they had
always remained, so far.

By-the-by, Gerald, I forgot to ask —
have you seen anything of the Peeles ?"

Nothing ; except their house. They are
all away at Dover, I believe, Mrs. Myers said."

'' I knew that Lina was at Dover ; she
has a married sister there : but I fancied
the others were at home."

By-the-by," said Gerald, feeling in his
pockets, " Here is a letter in your friend's
hand, which came for you this morning."

Only an Alton post-mark ! Si
be at home again," cried Marjory. — "^
see ! she has sent three tickets for a
harmonic concert in the music hall
morrow night, — one for you, one for
and one for Mrs. Myers."

She is at home, then ?"

No ; she has left Dover, but she \i
spending a week with some friends a few
miles from here, and they will drive in to
the concert. She will not be at home before
the end of the week, when Mrs. Peele will
join her. Gerald, do you know that I have
actually never been at a concert ? What is
the Philharmonic Society?"

A set of musical amateurs of this town
and county. They have a concert once a
quarter, and some professional swell comes
down from London to conduct. I believe
the society is considered unusually good for
the provinces, and the concerts are crowded.
I have heard a good deal about this one,
from our fellows at the bank."

"Gerald, is that a man coming upstairs?"

It is Miss Pilkington," said Gerald,
rising, and opening the door, just as a decided
hand began — not a tap, but a genuine
knock, on its outer panels. Marjory rose

likewise, in some trepidation ; and belied a
lady above middle height, with two fat curls
of gray hair, confined by combs, on either
temple, and eyes of a startling prominence.
She bestowed on Gerald a passing nod :
and marched, as with a purpose, towards
Marjory.

'' How do you do, Miss Stanhope ?" said
a contralto voice : ''I am sorry that I was
engaged when you arrived. I hope you find
the rooms comfortable."

She nodded once or twice as she spoke,
and stared from beneath a frowning upper
brow.

Thank you, I only hope you may behalf
as well satisfied with me and my teaching,"
said Marjory, nervously.

'ewe are not at all hard to satisfy," replied
the lady, nodding again. ''My system I
will explain at your leisure. The difficulties
I reserve in my own hands ; Mrs. Myers
takes the motherly part ; and your share
will be chiefly mechanical."

I will do my best to fulfil it," said Marjory.


"I am sure you will," said Miss Pilkington.
She paused an instant, silently surveying
Marjory ; then repeated, " I am sure you

will," with another frowning nod; and turned
abruptly to Gerald.

You look as if you wished to speak tome,
Mr. Stanhope."

'' What an awful thing it is to be in your
presence, Miss Pilkington ! Your penetration
is superhuman. I was merely going to ask
if you or Mrs. Myers would honour us with
your company tomorrow evening. Miss
Peelehas sent three tickets for the concert?"

Mrs. Myers will enjoy it, no doubt. I
will tell her. As for myself, I do not appreciate
music."

'' And yet * music hath charms to soothe

the ' you know what. Miss Pilkington

which the little boys are of opinion that
you possess."

'' If I am savage, they would soon be
savages, without a tight rein, Mr. Stanhope.
I make it a point of duty, during school-hours,
to imagine myself a man. Was it not
one sage satirist, Thackeray, who was repeatedly
saying, ' Discipline must be maintained
? ' "

'' Miss Pilkington, you shock me ! What
would become of you if a Government inspector
were sent down to examine you in
light literature ? Thackeray may have made

VOL. I. li

the statement in the course of his life ; for
that I will not answer. But the person who
was repeatedly saying it, proceeded from the
brain of Dickens."

Indeed ! You surprise me. But I have
neither time nor taste for modern fiction. If
you will produce the passage in Dickens's
works, I will own myself mistaken. At all
events, it is a maxim to which — under the
impression, I know not why, that it came
from Thackeray — I am deeply indebted. I
have a heart, Mr. Stanhope, though some
might doubt it ; and the female heart, as we
all know, is weak. It does not do to go by
it on all occasions. Miss Stanhope, with respect
to little boys. And for many years,
when I have wished to silence its dictates,
my habit has been to whisper inwardly, ' Discipline
must be maintained.' I have found
these words an unfailing guide."

'meanwhile, won't you have a cup of tea,
Miss Pilkington ? " said Gerald.

*' I ? No, indeed. I must be oflP," she replied,
at once in a violent hurry, and stumped
away.

She's not so very awful, after all, Gerald ! "

No ; only an oddity, and a very kind
one. Well, Marjory, now you have seen them

both, and you can form a fair idea of what
your life here will be. They are always
the same — and always pleasant and good-tempered
; they will not interfere with us in
any way. I don't see how we could be more
comfortable if we were a duke and duchess."

We should be far less comfortable in that
case, because we should be less free ! I feel
all primed for work, Gerald, and longing to
begin ; and this happy opening seems a good
omen. Oh, Gerald ! if only the end is as
happy as the beginning "

She stopped suddenly. Why at this moment
should a shadow cross her mind ?
The evening light was falling on Gerald's
face ; he looked more hopeful than she had
ever seen him.

"Never mind the end," he said; 'ewe
can leave that for the present. At any rate,
we have set forth with flying colours."

Yes, indeed," cried Marjory, joyously,
cheered by his smile. Her spirits flew quickly
back to their previous exaltation.

R 2

CHAPTER XIX.

Thou with strong prayer and very much entreating
wiliest be asked, and Thou shalt answer then,
Show the hid heart beneath creation beating,
smile with kind eyes, and be a man with men."

Frederic W. H. Myers.

When Marjory had unpacked the few things
required for the night, she begged Gerald to
take her out. She felt too restless to sit
still ; the heat of the day was past, and '' the
sun was approaching his going down ;" the
evening calm would soothe her excitement.
Gerald was nothing loth, and she was quickly
ready to start ; but he asked her first to
come upstairs for a moment, saying that he
had something to show her.

*' I thought we had no upstairs," said
Marjory. " Are not all our rooms on this
floor?"

Miss Pilkington will not prosecute you
for trespass, if that is what you fear ; and
I have something to show you," repeated
Gerald.

So Marjory followed him to the landing on

which the servants' bedrooms opened, and
thence, up another short flight, to an attic
in the roof.

The low doorway could not be entered
without a stoop ; but, once inside, there was
abundance of room — the roof rising high, and
leaving on either side a wide slant, occupied
by boxes and other lumber. Through a
gabled window, looking westward, a flood of
red light was streaming as Marjory entered.
She saw the river far below, with that same
light upon it, and, beyond, the Carlton Hills
in golden haze. Bat the chief attraction for
her eyes was an impromptu easel, which
Gerald had erected by means of a wooden
box-lid raised upon a packing-case, and kept
in its proper position by a pile of old books.
On this rough easel, covered by an oblong
canvas, the outlines of a picture had been
sketched.

It was the picture of a massive bridge like
that of Alton ; but the waters beneath it were
more turbid than those of the Alton river,
dashing against the arches in troubled waves.
They were wider also : one bank was close at
hand and clear, but the other, with the end
of the bridge, loomed dimly through clouds
of mist. Towards that misty shore a long

procession of figures was passing. Some
were old and stooping; some young and
strong ; some walked in groups, some singly.
One or two had paused to lean over the parapet,
and watch the tide below. The faces
were imperfectly filled in, as yet ; but the
touch of a master had been there, making
the vague lines eloquent. The moon was
figured in the sky, half hidden by clouds,
casting strange gleams on the dark waters.
At the foot of the canvas were scribbled
Longfellow's lines :

I thought how many thousands
Of care-encumbered men,
Each bearing his burden of sorrow,
Had cross'd the bridge since then.

"I saw the long procession
Still passing to and fro,
The young hearts hot and restless,
The old subdued and slow."

Are they crossing to the other world ? "
said Marjory.

You can take it whichever way you like.
Either to the other world, or some uncertain
future in this. I have only a half-fledged
idea of their destination, myself: what chiefly
filled my fancy was the thought of the procession,
passing on and on, like the feet in

Dickens's 'Two Cities.' I seemed to hear
those feet," said Gerald, dreamily, " all the
while, as I sketched out the figures."

You have begun this since you came
here ? "

'' Yes : I thought of it first a fortnight
ago, as I was standing on the bridge down
yonder. This is only the rough idea, as you
see ; the faces will take a long time. I see a
fresh one whenever I go into the town."

'' And this, Gerald ? this will be beautiful
! " cried Marjory, bringing to the light
a picture of considerable size, which had been
turned with its face to the wall. Here a
young sculptor was just awaking from a sleep
into which it seemed that he had fallen from
sheer discouragement of spirit. So at least
his attitude and surroundings implied. He
sat in a humble room, upon a rush-bottomed
chair, his arms folded on a rough deal table ;
near him stood a half-finished statue, and, on
the floor beside it, a chisel, as if thrown from
him in discontent. But the workman was
awaking, his head slightly raised from his
arms — a new light dawning in his eyes,
ready, so it seemed, to disperse the cloud
which still shadowed the lower part of the
thin and careworn face. For he was looking,

as in answer to a call, to a distant corner
of the poor room, where a winged figure
hovered in mid air, in a surrounding flood of
glory. One hand of that figure pointed to
the unfinished statue, and the chisel lying
idle on the floor ; the other held on high a
laurel-wreath. The head was turned towards
the sculptor ; the bright hair shone, but the
face was blank — the incomplete portion of
the picture.

Marjory, her eyes full of intense appreciation,
looked inquiringly at Gerald ; but his
own were fixed upon the picture, in anxious
abstraction : the sculptor's trouble seemed
reflected in himself.

*' It is of no use," he said, after a long
silence : ''I cannot catch it ! Marjory, turn
it back."

*' What do you mean, Gerald ? "

Turn the picture back, as it was before ;
the sight of it vexes me, I have vague fancies
for that spirit's face, but they will not
come clearly. I cannot get the look I want.
Sometimes I think 1 have it, but directly I
try to put it on paper it fades. For a whole
year I have been striving after it."

Marjory turned the picture back without
another word. Her sympathy was too intense

for speech. She understood the subject
: the spit form was the Ideal made
manifest. What wonder that a fitting shrine
for such manifestation should be difficult to
find ? She and Gerald both stood silent fora
while, looking towards the window.

How did you find out this room ? " she
asked suddenly.

'' Miss Pilkington offered me the use of it :
partly, I think, from dread of damage — she
had seen my paints lying about — and partly
from real kindness. It is only a lumber-room,
as you perceive ; and yet a far better
workshop for me than the proper little parlour
downstairs."

'' It is so quiet," said Marjory. " And so
high ! one feels raised above the world. May
I come here whenever I like, Gerald ? "

'' I should not have thought you would
imagine that necessary to ask," said Gerald,
smiling.

'rand I may look at those ? " asked Marjory,
pointing to a large box, minus a Hd :
which was piled to overflowing with drawings
— coloured and uncoloured — sketches,
copies, original fancies, accumulated through
Gerald's years of waiting.

*' Oh, yes, look at what you choose ; only

don't talk of them afterwards ! I am disgusted
with two-thirds of them ; and the
rest will never come to anything. I hardly
know why I brought them here ; but egotism
is deep in human nature. I hadn't resolution
to burn them."

I should hope not ! you don't know what
pleasure it will be to me to shut myself up
with them tomorrow ! "

Gerald slightly shrugged his shoulders,
without reply ; and turned towards the
door.

'' We had better go out now," he said ;
and, Marjory casting behind a lingering
glance, they returned downstairs. The neat
little maid was crossing the small entrance-hall,
and paused, with a smiling curtsey, to
open the outer door. As they stepped out
upon the pavement, the cathedral once again
impressing Marjory with its solemn grandeur,
a peal of bells broke forth from some church
in the town.

'' Those are St. Crispin's bells," said
Gerald, — 'That very old church which yousaw,
as we drove from the station. They often
ring in the evening."

There could be no doubt that the peal was
old ! Such bells are not often moulded in

these days, for churches of small account.
Each, mellow, sweet, with a strange, unutterable
melancholy, they gave their own tone to
Marjory's musings, as she looked out on the
surroundings of her new home.

Eight bells : each a distinct voice of the
past. Marjory fancied that she could see the
Alton people of the times when those bells
were young, walking to and fro in the streets,
in their quaint costumes — to them, the latest
fashion ; that she could hear them talking in
the strange language of those old English
days, discussing public matters, so much as
they knew of them, wars, marriages, and
royal doings — matters of history now, and no
longer of general interest, for they happened
hundreds of years ago. Thence her fancy
travelled to the flat stones, black with age,
that paved the aisles of the old churches,
covering those quaintly-clad forms which then
were so busy. Beneath those stones lay
some hearts worn with aching, and others
which had scarcely known what aching meant,
throbbing high with hope and joy as the
bells rang out. Both alike were forgotten
now ; and still the same bells were ringing.
Had they only been conscious beings, how
philosophical, ere now, must they have grown !

Wo will have one look into the cathedral,"
said Gerald ; " You must see it
thoroughly another day."

The low north door was still ajar; they
entered, and stood within the nave. Speechless
with awe, Marjory gazed into the vastness,
into the heights of the groined roof,
the intricacies of moulding and carving ;
found face after face, of angel, apostle, saint,
look down to meet her upturned eyes. Pure
and calm as the stone which formed them, as
she gazed they seemed to multiply; and,
one after another, to glance afresh from unexpected
places.

*' We want to lock up, sir, if you please,"
said the black robed verger.

The doors are always open in the day,
Marjory ; you will be able to come in whenever
you like," said Gerald, as she lingered.

I shall come for inspiration in my writing
— my writing which is to be for you,"
whispered Marjory. Then they went out, the
old verger following, and locking the door.

Now," said Gerald, '' you must turn
yourself over to me ; I shall take you where
I choose to-night. After this, you can explore
for yourself, or with your friend. Miss
Peele."

I hope you and Lina will get on well
together, Gerald. I have often talked to her
about you."

I shan't see much of her," said Gerald ;
'* I must spend my spare time in work, or in
study for it, to be prepared in case your plan
should succeed."

'' Don't say ' in case ! ' It will succeed. I
don't mind telling you why I feel so sure :
because you will understand, and not call it
cant. I am praying night and day for success
: and that is why, Gerald."

But prayer for temporal things is not
always answered," said Gerald, wistfully.

I have been thinking a great deal about
that, and I will tell you what I have thought.
I want you to follow me, step by step. You
believe that Jesus Christ did live on earth,
Gerald — and in His Divinity, and His
Word?"

Gerald bowed his head.

'' Of course, if one do not believe in those
foundations, the whole case is altered.
But you and I have no doubt that He did
really say : ' If ye shall ask anything in My
Name, I will do it.' "

'' But " said Gerald.

'* Wait one minute ! St. John says :

If we ask anything according to His Will,
He heareth us.' That limits the matter, and
shows, I suppose, why many temporal prayers
are not answered. But it is my belief that
many and many more might and would be
answered, if people had more faith. You
know we are told again that we must

believe,' and ' not doubt in our heart ' that
the prayer will be granted. At least we
should have no doubt but that it must be
granted, ' if it be according to His Will ! '
You agree to that, Gerald ? "

'' I suppose so."

'' But you mustn't only suppose it ; you
must believe it, and feel sure of it — only
with that limitation. And now, about this
particular prayer of mine : I do feel quite
sure, and I do mean to feel quite sure, that
it must be granted. Because it must be
according to God's Will, Gerald, that the
power which He gave you should be-made
use of. He did give it to you ; for it
was born in you : it is not a fancy, an
imitation, but a real power. Gerald, it must
be His Will that it should be used, not
buried."

I suppose so," repeated Gerald : " It
seems probable. I don't know that I ever

put the fact to myself in that decided way,
before."

'' Well, but, if you think it well over, you
will see that it is a fact. Could any one
believe that our Maker would design and
create, and place in an immortal soul, such
an artistic talent and such a craving to give
it vent, for nothing, Gerald ? Surely there
must be a purpose in it, for Him and for the
world. That seems to me self-evident, and
therefore I say that it must be according to
His Will to remove the hindrances which
have kept that talent pent up, without outlet,
and to set it free for its work. This is
why I feel confident, even certain — I say
it reverently, Gerald — that my prayer for
you to be an artist — which God created you
will be granted."

She spoke with ardour which could not
fail to impress. There was a strength and
brightness in her face, as of some young
radiant spirit sent from the city of the gods
to cheer the souls of men, and breathe into
them life from his own sunlit nature, to
lighten the toils of earth.

'^ But, Marjory, to confess the truth, I
have often, on the other hand, thought it was
not God's Will that I should be an artist.

Circumstances have been so against it all my
life ; my desires have always pulled one way,
and my necessities another."

'' Yes, but circumstances are not always
a mark of Providence. Because it is often
through conflict with circumstances that lives
are made grand. Just think of all the heroes
who had difficulties, and even failures, at
first ! Now — to go on — you know that I
have been scribbling all my life, more or less ;
and I have taken such pains, Gerald, and
done my utmost, to learn the art of writing.
A short time ago, when I sent a little story
to a magazine, the editor, though he declined
it, wrote that he was struck by the evidences
of power in thought and style, and that,
with practice, I might hope to become a
successful author. Those were his very
words, Gerald ! "

Well done, Marjory ! Ah, I dare say the
highest renown I shall ever achieve-will be
as the brother of the celebrated Miss Stanhope
! "

Oh, you unkind boy ! when you know
that all I care for in the matter is to help
you. I should write in any case, from the
love of it ; indeed, it was that which first put
this idea into my mind But, only for you,

I should never dream of trying to publish :
I would far rather leave that alone, only it
will be such joy to help you, Gerald ! "

'' Thank you, Marjory ; I cannot help
catching a little of your hopefulness," said
Gerald, with his dreamy smile.

And don't you see," went on Marjory,
fast and eagerly, as though words were not
rapid enough for the thoughts which flowed
iiito her brain — '' don't you see it is not as
if I had prayed for a power not given to me
by nature ? That would be presumption.
But since I can write a little, and feel that
I have it in me to write more, surely there
is no presumption in believing that I am
meant by this means to help you ! I do
believe it — I do, Gerald," cried the girl, her
whole face glowing. *' And, believing this, I
believe also the promise that my prayer will
be heard."

Oh, if it should ! " said Gerald.

Their eyes met. Marjory was struck,
silenced by the expression in his. It was
that of one who sees within sudden reach a
prise which his very soul has yearned to
gain, but has long given up in despair.
With all her sympathy, Marjory had hardly
realised the intensity of that yearning, until

VOL. I. s

this moment when she saw it in those gray,
transparent eyes, through the flash of hope
revived

'' Oh, if it should ! " She laid up those
words in her heart.

In her absorption, she had hardly noticed
that, during this conversation, they had been
slowly walking away from the college-yard,
and round to the west end of the cathedral.
Below that western end she now awoke to
find herself standing, behind a line of iron
rails, overlooking the river with the meadows
beyond, and the range of Shelburn hills.
The house which Marjory had observed from
her window, standing out over the water,
was close below : an old canonical residence
of time-worn brick, blackened by age.
Under the wall at its rear, a few steps led
downwards to a gateway, beneath which
Gerald and Marjory passed into the enclosure
known as the College Green.

They were still under the shadow of the
cathedral, but now on its southern side;
between this and the green arose the ancient
walls of the college school, from whose
Foundation scholars the staff of choristers
was mainly supplied. The green consisted
of a large quadrangle of grass, fenced iu by

iron palings, and shaded by magnificent elm-trees,
planted at intervals along the boundary
walk of smoothly-rolled gravel. Beneath
these trees a few ladies, of the elite who
possessed private keys of admittance, were
enjoying the evening air, and watching a
party of children engaged in croquet at one
end of the velvet Hke turf.

The children's laughter rang pleasantly
across the quadrangle, wakening cheerful
echoes from the gray buildings around, as if
to show that life and youth were still active,
even here. These were the young generation,
who some day might learn to smile
with superior wisdom at the old institutions
among which they had been nurtured, — perhaps
some of them to vote for total abolition
of the cathedral system. At present, little
dreaming of any such future, they sent the
painted balls flying over the ground which
ancient monks had paced in hallowed meditation
; and Marjory through the palings
watched them with a fellow-feeling of enjoyment,
her young mind beneficially lightened
of its strain. Beyond the quadrangle lay
a gravelled space, bounded by venerable
houses, which were occupied, almost without
exception, by members of the cathedral ors
2

scholastic staff, or relics of the same. Here
a canon's residence ; next door, that of the
head master, with his large family of children
and boarders ; then a narrow slip of a
house, rented by a minor canon, then the
quiet home of a former bishop's elderly
daughters, then the late archdeacon's widow ;
and so forth.

In this still corner the great world was
banished, and a little world formed in its
stead; with its own ways, its own society,
its own forms and topics of speech. A dignified,
orderly little world, respectable to a
degree, and critical of all that differed from
it in opinion or in manners ; mixing only,
beyond its own circle, with members of " the
county" — ignoring the upper classes of 'the
town," as a sphere beneath its notice.
Excellent people, nevertheless, within their
own boundaries were its denizens — kind and
amiable, despite their narrowness, and doing
much quiet good according to their lights.
Doubtless there will be many to miss them
if, as our children grow, and the scope of
their ideas widens, such small societies are
swept away altogether in time's " ever-rolling
stream ! "

The way by which Gerald and Marjory had

entered these secluded precincts, was accessible
only to pedestrians ; but at the other
end of the quadrangle was a massive gateway,
known as Chad's Tower, surmounted by a
turret, the habitation of an ancient porter,
whose duty it was to close the great gates at
ten o'clock each night, and open them at six
each morning. They were open now,
revealing a paved passage beyond — whither,
when Marjory's eager eyes were satisfied,
Gerald conducted her. Once through this
passage, just wide enough for two carriages,
and under a gray old archway, some hundred
yards on, they were again at the entrance of
the College Yard, having made a complete
round.

CHAPTER XX.

I dwell amid the city ever,
The great humanity which beats
Its life along the stony streets,
Like a strong and unmanned river
In a self-made course,
I sit and hearken while it rolls."

Elizabeth Barrett Browning.

Now you have seen the oligarchic end of
Alton," said Gerald, smiling ; "If sou are
not tired, we'll go on and have a look at the
people."

I am not at all tired, and it would be a
shame to go in yet. How delightful the
evening air is, after so much heat ! and the
sky has such soft tints in it. And I do so
enjoy the bells."

Yes, they seem to put a poetry into
everything. I wonder what it is in them
that influences one so ? I want to take you
to Heathcroft, Marjory, — the ground lying
about the race-course. It is open to the
public ; and on these warm evenings all
Alton seems to be turned out there. We can

go by the river-side, if you like, and come
back through the town."

So they passed their own house again, and
went down by steps to the towing-path.
Broad and calm beneath them flowed the
river in the evening light, with a gentle
splash as it swept along the stonework that
hemmed it in. Gerald and Marjory walked
in silence for some way, under the line of
garden wails, which ended presently, succeeded
by warehouses, offices, and workshops,
soon dispelling the old-world hush of the
cathedral atmosphere. Below the bridge,
they seemed to have entered another state of
being. Here was an old barge, gaily painted,
moored close to a little wharf, with all
manner of boats, from a river schooner to
outriggers, congregated round it. A party
of young people were just embarking for an
hour's row. Unsophisticated Marjory stopped
at some distance to watch the process : — two
girls and two young men took each an oar,
another girl steered. They were all very
merry, if not very refined, and pushed off
amid chaffing and laughter. Marjory looked
and listened with intense interest; while
Gerard smiled, amused at her freshness.

The commonest matters were all new to

her ; lie observed everything, enjoyed everything.
Every person whom she met was an
object of individual interest ; and, as they proceeded
on their way towards the race course,
her attention was increasingly occupied.
Many more boats met or passed them, — some,
like the first, freighted with merry parties,
some manned by youths in costume, practising
for an approaching regatta; sometimes an
outrigger, long and narrow, shot past, sculled
by a single oarsman ; and now, for the first
time, Marjory beheld a canoe, — a wondrous
experience !

Pedestrians also multiplied. Presently
the lines of building, only varied by occasional
entries to narrow streets or courts,
where dirty children were playing, and dirty
women gossiping at closely crowded doors,
came to an end ; and a small gate opened
upon the series of fields known by the name
of Heathcroft. These fields filled an extensive
space between the town and the river.
Here the grand stand rose, ugly and conspicuous
; here also was a cricket-ground ;
here the annual regatta, and athletic sports,
took place. And here, on these summer
evenings, the Alton citizens came to breathe
the fresh air from the river. Numbers were

pacing leisurely to and fro, some in family
parties — father and mother, and children
running before ; some in couples of love or
friendship, some solitary, but all at ease, all
seemingly happy and refreshed. The whole
was a pleasant sight, thought Marjory, as
she and Gerald mingled with the rest. Many
were chatting with friends on the river, —
numerous boats paddling backwards and
forwards near the shore, within reach of the
sweets of society. At a little distance boys
and young men were playing at cricket ; the
tap of the bat upon the ball resounded
through the still air. The grass was very
dry, and various groups were seated upon it,
some of them with books or work. The
opposite bank was lined with villa-like houses,
and gardens sloping to the river ; lower
down were trees, and meadows stretching
away into the country. The sun was setting
peacefully in crimson glory; the music of the
bells came softened, from the old church in
the town.

'' You might make a good picture out of
this : ' Heather oft, Alton, in the summertime,'
" observed Marjory.

Yes, and there are single studies without
end ; every variety of face and character, if

one watches from a little distance. The
cathedral people do not know what they lose
by their exclusiveness. If they would come
here sometimes, or to places like it they
might learn a thing or two more than they
guess, about human nature."

Human nature is not their study, I suppose,"
said Marjory; ''or they are content
with what they see of it among themselves.
I can understand that one might grow to
feel very comfortable, shut up in a refined
circle of one's own."

'' But then it would be one's own — not the
great world," said Gerald, in his dreamy
way : " ' It takes all sorts to make a world,'
you know. It's better to live in a world, in
spite of all the passion and coarseness and
wear and tear, than in a nutshell."

They had been resting upon the pleasant
grass ; now rising, Gerald suggested that
they should return home through Albion
Square. The river was soon left behind, and
Heathcroft traversed in the direction o£ the
town. Passing the militia drilling-ground,
and other enclosures, they entered by a turnstile,
upon a flat path, which ran parallel,
for half a mile, or more, with Heathcroft.
Here for some minutes they paused, beside

the low white paling, to look back at the
scene which they had left. It was gay and
pretty, the numerous figures dotted in all
directions over the green, the river flowing
below, cows and horses grazing in adjacent
meadows, and the peaceful bank opposite,
richly clothed with trees, bathed in the amber
of the sunset.

There is a great deal of happiness in this
world ; it is not right to call it a vale of
tears," said Marjory, as they turned away.

Gerald made no answer ; he only smiled
a little, as he walked silently by her side.
Marjory fancied that beneath the smile she
heard a half smothered sigh. In another
second, however, he looked up, and went on
pointing out names and places. They had
quitted the path, and were threading a labyrinth
of new houses, some gaily stuccoed, in
gardens, neat shrubs before the doors — others
small and bare, recalling the old feelings of
Branksome. Presently a turn in the road
brought them into a more pretentious quarter,
where the houses were all alike stuccoed, and
differed only in size, varying from a respectable
family block to an elegant slip, tall and
narrow. Looking about her, Marjory found
that they were ranged in the form of a

square, bounding an enclosure of considerable
size, with a croquet-ground, seats and paths.

Now I will show you your friend's house,"
said Gerald.

They paced slowly round the square, a
pleasant place, and 'truly genteel" in its
appointments ! every house and every garden
neat even to primness, and the central enclosure
surrounded on the outer side by acacia-trees,
chestnuts, and limes, casting upon the
road a comfortable shade, in which birds
made sweet music. Presently Gerald paused
before a one-storied house, its garden gay
with standard roses, and a great urn, full
of crimson geraniums, on either side the
door.

'' This is Mrs. Peele's," he said.

The blinds were all drawn, and the shutters
closed. Nevertheless, Marjory paused
for several minutes, and gazed with a curious
fascination. What would she not have given
once, she thought, to see Lina's home — the
home of her ideal ? It would then have seemed
to her a sacred place, with a peculiar, an
ineffable charm. Now it was just a house —
No. 25, Albion Square. She was sorry that
the halo had so completely faded. She was not
yet sure if it were not by some fault of her own.

'' What are you thinking about, Marjory ? "
asked Gerald.

'' Nothing of any consequence," said Marjory,
blushing. That experience concerning
Lina was buried as yet in the recesses of
her girlish heart ; she had spoken of it to
no one.

They walked on, talking of other things,
until the circuit of the square was accomplished.


Now, Marjory, if you are really not too
tired, and would like to have one look at
Branksome ' '

I am only a little tired, and I could not
pass so near without just seeing it," cried
Marjory.

They went on, and, turning another corner,
found themselves once more in the town, in
the old street called The Friars, a name
which Marjory well remembered. Before
them rose an ancient hospital for decayed
men and women, with a little chapel where,
morning and evening, a cracked bell ting-hanged
for prayers. This also Marjory remembered
; and now it was she who led the
way, turning out of The Friars, between two
iron posts, at the head of a long, narrow lane,
which led below the hospital walls into the

region of Branksome. In a little while they
had plunged into the thick of the red brick.
There it all was, as of old ; only the colours
were somewhat softened and less staring,
after the eight years of sun and rain ; the
shrubs were not quite so stunted ; and there
were trees which had been saplings in those
past times. But the little shops, the Baptist
chapel, the academies, the uninteresting doors
and pebble walks, were all exactly the same ;
and Marjory felt like a little child again
among them. It was as though she were
coming home from her walk in the summer's
evening, to go to bed in the fusty little room,
overlooking roofs and chimney-pots, at Mrs.
Hammond's. The fancy quite oppressed her,
until she looked at Gerald, and satisfied herself
that these eight years had not been a
long dream.

Ere long, behold the clock-faced church !
but here was a change indeed. The doors
stood open ; Marjory looked in, saw stained
windows, a '' dim religious light," low open
seats of polished maple, a super-altar, with
candles and flowers, choir-stalls, a new organ.
The girl from quiet Rockswold had never
before seen such a church : the transformation
seemed a work of magic.

That gable-ended place beyond, which
used to be the school, is now a Sisterhood and
Orphanage," said Gerald : " And this is the
Clergy House," he added, indicating a building
of the prevailing red brick, which Marjory
remembered as containing two semi-detached
abodes. Now it was one house —
small enough still, but distinguished by a
painted window. A clergyman in a cassock
was crossing the little garden.

How strange it all is ! " was Marjory's
only remark. She stood still for a little
while, then went on in silence.

'' Stow, here is the house which I thought
must have been Mrs. Hammond's ; but I
had little beyond guesswork to go upon."

Your guesswork was quite correct,
though. Yes, that is Mrs. Hammond's : there
is the window of our little parlour, and Aunt
Lucy's bedroom above. How natural it all
looks ! Oh, how it all comes back to me !"
cried Marjory, standing at the iron gate, and
looking up the path.

Could it really be eight years since the day
she had come down that path, so hot and
tired, a little child going in search of the
country ? — since that other day when Lady
Thome's sleek horses had drawn up here in

the road, and she had gone back along the
same path — a strange aching in her heart as
she thought that her happy visit was over ?
Eight years ago ! And she had never throughout
them heard a word of Thorne ! "Was it
unchanged, Hke this little lodging-house, or
metamorphosed like the clock-faced church ?

Gerald, I must go in — I must ask about
Mrs. Hammond."

'' Well, I did my best, as I told you ; but
you can try again if you like. I'll wait for
you here."

So Marjory went once more through the
familiar little garden, and knocked at the
well-known door. It seemed strange not to
turn the handle and walk in.
A stout woman, in a black print dress
studded with white spots like peppermint
drops, answered the knock She was evidently
the mistress of the house.

Can you tell me anything about a Mrs.
Hammond who once lived here?" asked
Marjory.

"No. Been asked before. Never knew
no such a party."

Then who had this house before you ? "

The parties before us were folks in the
name of Hawkins ; and Harris's was here

afore them. That was five year ago and
more. Yes' said the stout person, counting
on her fingers : " We have been here three
years an' a half, ourselves."

Gerald," said Marjory, as she rejoined
him, " How soon can we go to Thorne ? "

As to that, I suppose we could go the
day after the concert."

The day after tomorrow. Oh, Gerald,
if you could give up that one more evening !
I have such a longing to find out about them
all ! Even Mrs. Hammond gone, and swallowed
up in the years ! I could have

heard something from her."

Well, we'll go then ; and you shall find
out all you can," said Gerald, kindly. Marjory
earnestly thanked him, as they turned on
their homeward way.

Through the heart of the town they went ;
all down the Friars and the Cross and High
Street ; the shops for the most part closed,
the sunset radiance replaced by dusk, but
the streets bright with gas, and still lively
with numerous pedestrians returning from
Heathcroft, or places more countrified, to
which the summer evening had tempted
them. And the bells were still ringing : their
sweet strong voices echoing from the world

VOL. I, T

long gone by. Marjory, now thoroughly
tired, was glad to re-enter the quiet college-yard;
still more glad when, an hour later,
she lay down in her white little bed, her
blind drawn up, and a silvery star gleaming
on her from above the peaceful river.

CHAPTER XXL

World ! O Life ! O Time !

* # #

When will return the glory of your prime 1

* * *

Out of the day and night

A joy has taken flight." — Shelley.

The music-hall, brilliantly lighted, was filling
rapidly when Mrs. Myers, Gerald, and Marjory
entered it on the evening of the concert.
The stewards, distinguished by satin rosettes,
were active in escorting the holders of reserved
tickets to their seats ; and Marjory
presently found herself comfortably ensconced
about half-way down the middle phalanx of
chairs, in a position equally excellent for seeing
and for hearing. This latter fact was
but a natural inference from the circumstance
that the tickets had been chosen by Lina —
Lina, who was always right, and knew
the correct thing in every department of
social science. Marjory, as she took her
place, wondered again at that fading of the
halo !

But this was not a time for metaphysical
T 2

musings ; the world without was all new and
wonderful, and demanded entire attention.
How the people came thronging in ! Marjory
gazed, entranced, at the pretty girls, the
family parties, the friends who entered together.
She admired the fashionable dresses,
the flowers, the coronas of starlike lights,
the panelled pictures of Saint Cecilia, of
Handel, of Dr. Burney. A provincial concert,
passably arranged, to Lady Fairlegh
in the front row; — a confused blaze of
fascination to Marjory !

Meanwhile, Mrs. Myers, in a blonde headdress
and a dove-coloured silk which had seen
better days, sat in mouselike propriety at
her left hand. On her right sat Gerald,
looking dreamily at all around him, but absorbed
in visions of his own the while — far
more real to him than these outer objects.
Marjory, between them, formed a picture of
radiant youth and freshness, ^ at which many
turned to glance — her blue eyes were so
bright, her hair was so sunny, her whole
countenance so illuminated by eager interest.

As to her dress. Aunt Lucy, with infinite
pains, had ascertained from a London correspondent
all proprieties ; in accordance with
which, within the bounds of strict economy.

Marjory's Alton outfit had been chosen.
And economy, with taste and contrivance,
had proved itself surprisingly elastic ! At
Rockswold Marjory had feared that her new
dresses were too grand for every-day wear ;
but her twenty seven hours at Alton had
already dispelled this impression, making her
instead thankful for Aunt Lucy's happy
thought of writing to the London friend.
Thus to-night she was prettily and fashionably
attired ; and the simplicity of the materials
seemed only in accordance with her
youth. Gerald noted with pride and pleasure
the admiring glances cast, from time to time,
in her direction ; but Marjory herself, after
her old childish fashion, was far too full of
her surroundings to think of herself.

Meanwhile, sounds of tuning had begun in
the raised semicircle ; the performers were
coming to their places. Her eyes seemed larger
and bluer as she gazed into the intricacies of
the orchestra ; at the variety of instruments,
and the confusing throng of black-coated and
white-robed vocalists, — who were whispering
and laughing among themselves, and looking
at the audience, as the audience were looking
at them. Presently the London conductor
assumed his wand; and silence followed.

Then the performance was opened by a grand
overture, in which all the instruments joined.

Marjory's observations were in no degree
hindered by her enjoyment of the music,
which seemed indeed to add a romantic
charm to groups and faces otherwise dull
and uninteresting. A spell of enchantment
on her ears, her eyes wandered among her
neighbours ; she invented stories concerning
them, as she had been wont to do about the
young ladies of Miss Somerville's school ;
new scenes, and even characters for her book,
flashed suddenly upon her fancy, as she gazed
from row to row of the various faces and
families, which had been living each its own
life, for years and years, while she, unaware
of them, lived hers. The fulness and the
diversity of the world of human beings seemed
to strike her as a new thought ; she realised
it with an intensity impossible in quiet E-ocks-
wold. Her eyes shone with a strange excitement
; she felt herself in a region, not of
music alone, but also of poetry — the music
and poetry of humanity, manifest to her now
as never before.

So popular were these concerts, that almost
every place in the large hall was filled ; but
one chair, the last of a side row, somewhat

in advance of the middle row where Marjory
and her party sat, had hitherto remained
vacant. She had observed it with regret, asa
blank spot among the throng, and then,
looking elsewhere, had missed the moment
when it became occupied. Suddenly, glancing
once more in its direction, she saw that it
was empty no longer. A young man was
seated there — sl man whose dark hair was cut
and brushed in a manner which, together
with the carriage of the straight shoulders
below, suggested the idea of a soldier. Marjory
looked at him a little curiously, fancying
that his figure was somehow familiar to her.
His figure was all that she could see ; his back
was towards her ; he was looking straight
before him, with folded arms. For a second
or two she watched him ; then, her attention
being otherwise attracted, she thought no
more at present of the new-comer.

The overture had been followed bya chorus;
and now came a vocal trio ; one of the three
names was " Miss Peele." Marjory glanced
from programme to orchestra ; there stood
Lina, calm and beautiful, in a white robe, of
soft flowing tulle, one spray of starlike jessamine
in her hair. She looked the more lovely
in contrast to her companions, — a stout

matron in blue silk, with a profusion of flaxen
curls, and a prim little clergyman. The
matron sang soprano, the clergyman bass ;
and Lina, between them, took the second part.
The song was an old madrigal, with words
of no particular meaning, all about shepherds
and leas and purling streams ; but Marjory
had an instinct that such serene subjects were
more suitable to Lina than mary of passion or
of power. She had a mezzo-contralto voice,
with a plentiful range of high notes, but
richer and fuller in the low ones ; her singing
was strictly in accordance with its excellent
training; her manner, too, was perfect, entirely
composed, no flutter, no shyness, no
awkwardness. A couple of years ago, it
would have seemed to Marjory that an angel
stood there in those white robes, white stars
about its head. Some indefinable instinct
prompted a glance towards the soldierly young
man in the side row ; but his attitude was
unchanged. Still looking straight before him,
with folded arms, his head erect — if he admired,
he showed no outward sign thereof.

As Marjory's eyes returned to the orchestra,
she heard a low voice in her ear.

Who is that beautiful girl, Marjory? Give
me the programme."

'* That is Lina," cried Marjory, delighted
at the impression produced by her friend.

'' Miss Peele ! "

'' Why not ? " said Marjory, laughing.

I had no idea that she was so beautiful,"
said Gerald.

He leaned forward, as he spoke, his elbow
on the back of the chair before him, his eyes
fixed with strange intensity upon Lina.
Marjory felt no surprise that his artistic instinct
should be quick to recognise perfection
so unquestionable. The trio over, she looked
towards him, expecting some further remark;
but he had relapsed into dreamy
silence.

In the course of a bright glee which
followed the trio, Marjory glanced again
towards the side rows. The person who
there attracted her had turned slightly in his
chair, so as to face the centre of the orchestra.
His arms were folded as before ; one foot
was crossed upon the opposite knee, with an
easy coolness of attitude, which recalled to

Marjory What? She had now a fuller

view of him ; he might be eight or nine-and-twenty,
scarcely handsome, yet narrowly
escaping it, and with the unmistakable air of
high breeding ; an air which he carried with

a careless grace that seemed a second
nature.

His profile was partly visible. Marjory
was struck by its expression — unhappy, bitter,
proud, with a touch of defiance, — a little
cynical, a little weary, as if the world had
served him ill, and he were sick of it. The
impression that she had seen him before,
deepened upon Marjory. Again and again,
as by a secret fascination, she found her eyes
returning to that chair ; but, for some time,
she told herself that she must be mistaken,
that it was only a strong likeness which
attracted her.

But now began a piece to which Marjory
had all the while looked forward : an assortment
of Scotch airs, woven together with
exquisite taste and feeling, the treatment of
which, for amateur musicians, was of unusual
excellence. The old airs went straight to
Marjory's heart ; as in the day when she was
a little girl in the drawing-room at Thorne,
watching Mrs. Vivian's shapely fingers, as
they drew magic from the strings of her
harp. '' John Anderson, my Jo, John,"
melted into " Auld Lang Syne," — one of
the identical airs to which the child on
that summer-evening had listened. She

saw the whole scene again : the little old
lady, with her grave serenity, — the stately
harpiste, cold and proud — the young soldier,
with his kind, bright face, on which as yet no
shadow of care had fallen. Then, involuntarily,
she turned once more to that bitter,
unhappy countenance in the side-row. She
could see it no longer ; he had changed his
position again, and was leaning forward, his
brow shaded by his hand. Thus shaded it
remained, till those Scotch airs were over.
Then suddenly he rose, and left the room.
He went so quickly that Marjory did not see
his face; he passed her in a moment, and
was gone.

Shortly afterwards, the first part terminated;
people began to get up, to stretch
their limbs, and chat. Marjory's attention
was absorbed in wonder as to whether that
man in the side-row would come back ; and
in watching his empty chair. She longed
to get a full view of him ; her mind was busy
with speculations. She did not observe that
Gerald had risen, looking earnestly towards
the platform; until presently, stooping towards
her, he said :

'marjory, Miss Peele has left the orchestra.
I can take you to speak to her, if you like."

^' Oh no, thank you — do not trouble,"
replied Marjory gratefully ; "I'd rather wait
till the concert is over."

Gerald said no more.

The ten minutes' grace was quickly past ;
the audience resumed their places ; voices
were hushed; the conductor resumed his
wand. At this instant the owner of the vacant
chair came up the side-row, close to Marjory.
One or two people were before him ; he
paused ; and, in pausing, happened to glance
in Marjory's direction. Her eyes met his;
she knew him ; he was Mr. Hugh.

Suspicion was certainty now. There could
be no mistaking those dark, bright eyes,
when fully visible — however changed their
expression. They were the same eyes ; it
was the same face, though bereft of the old
sunshine. The blood rushed in a flame to
her cheeks ; her heart beat rapidly ; she had
a confused sense that the music had begun,
that Mrs. Myers whispered '' How fine ! "
but she heard all as hearing not. For the
moment she could think only of that face, so
strangely, so sadly altered. What had happened
in these silent years to alter it so ?

He had gone back to his place; he was
sitting as before. He had not recognised

her, of course — low could lie expect it?
She had been a Httle child when they parted ;
and now she was almost a woman. But the
change in him was not of natural growth.
That peculiar air of lightness and brightness,
that reckless gaiety, which had characterized
the young soldier — what had chilled and
quenched them ? As Marjory gazed, the
transformation grew upon her. This man
with the hard, bitter face — he was like a
dark shadow of the Mr. Hugh of old. He
looked so restless, too — such deep dissatisfaction
.was mingled with the air of
scorn. And withal there was something
which went to Marjory's heart, and moved
it as it could never have been moved by the
careless gladness which she remembered.
The stamp of a broken heart was upon that
brow, once so sunny ; the trace of pain — pain
aching and wearing, which had eaten deep
into the very lite of that proud, glad young
spirit. She felt as though she were gazing
upon a wreck — a wreck cast nearer hell than
Heaven.

And, gazing, the memories thickened in
her mind : she saw the past as though rehearsed
before her. She heard again the
merry voice saying: "Don't found your

views of life on the sentiments of codgers
. . the world's a very jolly place . . .
there's nothing too good to be true." She
fancied how contemptuously would this dark
countenance smile scorn upon such words
uttered now by any youth like that youth of
the past ! Then came the recollection of
Mrs. Vivian's devotion, of the petted boy
who had "never known what it was to be
crossed," whose maxim it had been '' never
to think of disagreeable things before the
time." What terrible time had come to him
since then ? what storm, with death in its
blast, had swept over him ?

Was he married, and had Lady Eose
Fairlegh been an unloving wife ? Somehow
he did not look as if he were married : but
rather as if he had no home, as if no one
belonged to him and he to no one — utterly
lonely, a waif, and desolate.

Then awoke in Marjory's heart a passionate
pity, akin to that which she had felt
eight years before, when, on the night of the
thunderstorm, she lay awake in Miss Evie's
little bed, thinking of him — wondering how
it was that he could be at once so kind and
so wicked — and trembling, child though she
were, about his future. The same pity,

intensified, took possession now of all her
heart and mind ; burning like an ardent
flame in her enthusiastic and egotistical
nature. She longed to speak to him, to ask
what blight had wrought so sad a change ;
she desired to penetrate to the root of that
hard bitterness.

Yet withal she was conscious of a fear of
him — a fear altogether new : he looked so
cold and sarcastic, such a thorough man of
the world, in its worst and hardest sense.
His face, too, had a pride, a haughtiness,
which she had seen in Mrs. Vivian's, but
never before in his. But of the cause she
could know nothing : at least for the present.
She could only watch, wonder, think — until
her heart felt ready to burst. She had not
hitherto realised how closely the tendrils of
her childish affections had twined themselves,
not only around all at Thorne, but specially
the young soldier who had been kind to her.

For several minutes she had looked away,
though still absorbed, towards the orchestra.
Some one was singing "You and I;" as
from far away came to her the words — " In
the sweet summer-time, long ago.^^ Her
blue eyes, the eyes of her childhood, went
back to that face of which those words

seemed to speak. Then lie saw that he had
turned, his arm upon the back of his chair ;
that he was looking full at her with a strange
surprise. Meeting her glance, he looked
away at once ; but she fancied that she had
caught a gleam of recognition. It might
have been fancy only.

The last chorus was over, every one had
risen to join in the National Anthem. People
had already begun to go out, impatient to
escape before the final crush. Among the
rest, he went — alone as he had come. Marjory
was conscious that he paused for one
second, less than a second, and looked once
more in her direction. An instinct which
she had never previously experienced, withheld
her from looking in return, and kept her
eyes fixed upon the extensive shoulders of
an elderly lady in a low dress, in the row
before her. The ordeal was quickly over ; he
passed on ; and now Marjory's head was
slightly turned to glance after him : but he
had already disappeared.

CHAPTER Xxvi.

*' When I see her earnest eyes,
In them a heaven of beauty lies !
So pure are they * that from their ray
Dark Vice would turn abashed away.'
I almost thought to-day to trace
A sort of young Madonna face."

John Jerninghams Journal.

The performers were bearing off their instruments
; there was a hum of voices, a creaking
of seats, as people pushed them aside to
make a passage.

'' Shall we wait till the crush is over ? "
said mouse like Mrs. Myers.

Marjory assented, sitting down ; but suddenly
started up again.

'' Lina ! I had forgotten her ! Mrs. Myers,
will you excuse us one moment ? Gerald, I
must speak to Lina."

'' This way," said Gerald eagerly, as she
seized his arm.

But is she not gone to the door ? "

"No, she is there, under that window.
She seems in no hurry ; most likely she

VOL. I. u

is waiting for a carriage. Make haste,"
said Gerald J making his way through the
crowd.

Marjory clung to his arm, and was presently
on the opposite side of the hall. Thereunder
a window, as he had told her, stood
Lina, among a little knot of acquaintances.
Marjory felt suddenly shy : the more so,
since Gerald, having brought her to within a
yard of her friend, stopped short, and remained
in the background. But Lina had
perceived her, and advanced, with her usual
graceful dignity.

Well, Marjory, here you are ! Welcome
to Alton ! I hope you have enjoyed our
concert? "

Oh, yes. Thank you so much for the
tickets. Lina, this is Gerald."

She looked eagerly round for her brother,
the brother concerning whom so many hopes
had so often been poured out to her friend.
She had seen the impression produced by
Lina upon him ; now she watched anxiously
the impression produced on Lina. It was
favourable : this a glance revealed — not so
much by any decided expression in Lina's
face to that effect, as by the absence of expression
to the contrary. Marjory was well

acquainted with the rigidity, the stiff coldness,
which, on occasion, Lina's classical
features could assume. But she had never
looked more gracious than in acknowledging
Gerald's bow.

'' How do you do, Mr. Stanhope ? " she
said, extending her hand : ''I have heard so
much about you, that it does not seem right
we should meet as strangers."

Marjory, well pleased, glanced at her
brother. He was flushing to the roots of
his fair hair; those deep transparent eyes of
his were fixed upon Lina. Some sudden
light transformed his whole countenance.
He smiled a little, but said nothing: his
whole being seemed absorbed in that gaze.

His evident admiration, respectful as evident,
seemed by no means displeasing to
Lina. Her graciousness increased as she
expressed to Marjory her hope of calling
in the College Yard immediately upon her
return.

'' We go home on Friday, and, if Saturday
be fine, I shall hope to come then, with
mamma ! "

You shall see Gerald's drawings," whispered
Marjory.

Lina inclined her head with a smile. She
u 2

thought Marjory, as usual, '' gushing," but
received the gush amiably, as, in this instance,
a pleasing proof of sisterly pride.
A summons from the party in the background
closed the interview, — Lina being conducted
on an elderly gentleman's arm to the carriage,
and Gerald escorting Marjory back among
empty seats to Mrs. Myers, and thence to
the cloak-room, where they had left what
wraps were needed in the warm summer
night.

Afterwards, through the gas-lit streets,
they walked home to the quiet college
yard.

I have seen Mr. Hugh, Gerald ! " were
Marjory's first words, when she and her
brother were alone.

You are certain ? He must be altered."
'' Quite certain. The same face and the
same eyes — but yes, he is altered ! The
brightness is exchanged for bitterness."

I suppose the world has gone hard with
him in some way. It is a hard world, you
know."

At but a year or two behind Gerald's present
age, that young soldier of the past had
said something very different about the world!
Marjory recalled his words for the second time

that evening; and thought, as many before her
have thought, that, after all, human lots are
less unequally distributed than appears. The
same lesson must be learned universally;
only some learn it earlier than others.

'^ Perhaps it is only that he is sick of
having his own way," added Gerald, with
a touch of bitterness in his turn. " One
o£ Fortune's spoiled children. There are
plenty."

He was one, I know; but now he

looks as if Fortune had only deluded him
in the old days, and afterwards cast him
out."

Did you see his mother ? "

No ; he was quite alone. No one took
any notice of him. And he used to be so
sociable, and so much liked ! Well, I suppose
we shall hear how it is, some time."

Perhaps at Thorne, tomorrow," said
Gerald.

Marjory sighed.

'' I am half afraid to go to Thorne ! It
has been like an earthly Paradise in my mind
all these years, and now — what changes shall
I find ! "

I question whether there be any such
thing as an earthly Paradise," said Gerald,

with this dreamy smile. "As to changes,
there is nothing for it but to face them,
making up one's mind to the worst."
'' That is a gloomy doctrine, Gerald."
*'Xo, not necessarily. There are worse
things than change ! Men and women can
bear a great deal if they resolve not to give
way."

The entrance of the little maid with supper,
disturbed the colloquy. Marjory raised a
corner of the blind, and looked out, cooling
her burning cheek against the pane. It was
a still night ; not dark even yet ; the cathedral,
with its fretted tower, rose gray against
the cloudless sky. Beyond, one large star
shone serenely with steady light. It recalled
to her the star which she had seen from her
little bed at Thome, on that first evening
when she had awakened to see Bellhouse
sitting: in the window. The scent of the
cigar stole back to her, the song of the
thrush, the bright young voice coming up
from the path below. Then she remembered
how, later, she had watched Bellhouse kneeling
by the chintz arm-chair; how from
Bellhouse's prayers had sprung her own
resolution to pray for Mr. Hugh. That
resolution had been faithfully kept ; though.

for many years now, mechanically. "
Almighty God, bless Mr. Hugh, and make
him good ! " She had never forgotten or
altered the childish petition ; still, as a
fixed habit, she repeated it every night
before she lay down in her bed — every night
for eight years ! and yet, was the face that
she had seen to-night the face of one whom
God had blessed ? Was it the face of one
whom God had made good ? Could it be
that God had overlooked the little prayer, or
had refused to hear it ?

Do you please to want anything more,
miss ? " said Priscilla's voice.

The little maid was surveying the table,
anxious to know if any requisite tor the
simple supper were forgotten. Marjory satisfied
her mind upon this point, and then took
her place opposite Gerald.

Gerald was unusually agreeable to-night.
The music, or something else, had excited
him, and made him more lively and less
silent. Marjory found him so entertaining a
companion, that she was soon, despite herself,
restored to her usual spirits. They discussed
the concert, the music, the people ;
all but Lina. Gerald did not seem inclined
to talk about Lina. This Marjory observed

with some surprise ; but she supposed that
his admiration had been simply an artist's
instinctive homage to beauty ; the face had
charmed him, but, without further knowledge,
he felt no particular interest in the person.

CHAPTEH XXIII.

They are all gone into the world of light,
And I alone sit lingering here !

Their very memory is fair and bright,
And my sad thoughts doth clear.

Dear, beauteous death, the jewel of the just !

Shining nowhere but in the dark ;
What mysteries do lie beyond thy dust.

Could man outlook that mark 1

If a star were confined into a tomb.

Her captive flames must needs burn there ;
But, when the hand that locked her up gives room,
She'll shine through all the sphere."

Henry Vaughan.

The afternoon sun was slanting upon the
many-tinted beds below the windows of the
old nursery at Thorne. Sweet perfumes,
curiously blended, floated upward, as of yore,
into the room where little Marjory had
rested. Flowers of by-gone times — clove-carnations,
wall-flowers, and jonquils, lent
their odours to the harmonious compound.

The best days of the spring were over ; but
sweetness came from it still; — and very sweet
also was the jessamine, which clustered round
the windows. The roses were in fullest
bloom, a galaxy of beauty — from the rosettes
upon the walls, to the ancient standards
bordering the paths. Among the blossoms
bees hummed drowsily, returning with plenteous
store to their old holes ; wood-pigeons
in the shrubbery were cooing, cooing, with
the soft melancholy of yore ; a great white
cat stretched herself on the grass, lazily
basking in the sunshine ; beyond, the slopes
of the park lay in alternate light and shadow
beneath the grand trees which Marjory
remembered. The same atmosphere of peace,
of radiant calm, which had characterized
Thorne in other days, pervaded it still. The
old flower-garden looked just as Marjory had
seen it on many and many an afternoon of
that pleasant month which lived in her
memory as a month in Eden.

An elderly woman was going to and fro
among the flowers, inspecting with careful
tenderness one after another of the old
favourites, stooping now and then to remove
a withered spray, or to collect the fallen rose-leaves,
with which she was filling the basket

on her arm. Her face was pale and grave,
with a chastened expression, telling of a time
when deep furrows had been ploughed upon
the quiet brow. Of the same time also told
her hair, beneath her plain white cap, plentifully
mixed with gray; there had been no
gray at all in it when Marjory was at
Thorne. But her eyes were still bright and
keen; as yet no dimness shadowed them,
despite their many tears. She was bending
to gather a fragrant blossom from Lady
Thome's favourite root of jonquils, when
through the open glass-door behind her came
a rubicund damsel, with a good-natured face,
strong arms, and chestnut hair, — a coarse
copy of the wavy locks which, eight years
before, had crowned Jessie's graceful head.

'' Aunt," said this damsel, "here's a young
lady, asking for you. Where be I to
show her? "

Where am. I to show her, my dear. You
mind your grammar, Kitty ! specially when
you open the door to ladies. Did the young
lady give a name, my dear ? "

Lor, aunt ! here she be a-coming ! "
ejaculated Kitty, forgetting her grammar a
second time in her surprise at the spectacle
of Marjory coming straight on, as though

she knew the place, through the darkened
drawing-room.

Oh, I beg your pardon ! The doors were
open, and I couldn't help coming. I knew
that there was no one here but you," cried
Marjory, as Bellhouse, basket on arm, turned
inquiringly from the jonquils.

You must please excuse me, ma'am,"
said she, with an old-fashioned reverence;
'' I have some recollection of your face ; but
I do not know your name."

''I am Marjory, — Marjory Stanhope. I
was here eight years ago : don't you
remember ? Lady Thorne found me in the
park, and brought me home, and I slept in
the old nursery, in Miss Vie's bed."

Yes, sure, so you did ! I beg your
pardon, ma'am, for not knowing you. Little
Miss Stanhope ! a little dear she was, too ! —
Remember? of course I do. You're heartily
welcome, ma'am ; and, now I look at you, I
can see exactly the same face — blue eyes and
all. Ah, Miss Stanhope ! times are changed
since you were here ! "

At the first glimpse of recognition, eager
Marjory had seized the old woman's hand ;
and now she could not refrain from kissing the
grave, pale face — graver and paler than of yore.

Dear Bellhouse, I am so longing to hear
all about it, if you would not feel it too
painful. May I stay and have a little talk
with you ? "

'' May you ! I should be vexed indeed,
ma'am, if you hurried away just as you had
come. I hope you'll stay as long as ever it
is convenient. I have liberty to receive my
friends — excuse me, ma'am, for applying such
a name to you — and it will be real comfort
to have a talk with you. For you knew her
ladyship — and loved her — yes, that I'm sure
of, child as you were."

'' Indeed, I did," said Marjory, her eyes
filling : '' She has been a sacred memory tome
all these eight years. May we sit down
on this green seat, Bellhouse ? I remember
it so well. I spent such happy hours here,
and the flowers and their scents seem like old
friends."

'' You've a faithful heart, ma'am ; I always
thought it of you, and now I see it. Yes,
please to sit down ; and, if you'll condescend
to allow it, I'll sit by you. But you've never
come alone, ma'am ? — you have not a friend,
I hope, waiting all this time outside ? "

No, my brother, who brought me from
Alton, is gone to sketch in the park; and he

will not care low long lie is left alone. I
was to join him if I could not see you ; but,
as it is, lie will call for me here."

I remember how you talked of your
brother, ma'am — and the letters you used to
write to him. I can see you now — a funny,
old-fashioned little thing ! scribbling away as
fast as ever the pen would go. I used to tell
you you would spoil your hand, I remember.
But, ma'am, if I may ask, how is it that you
are here ? "

Marjory briefly explained her residence at
Alton, and related how her first anxiety had
been for tidings of Thorne.

We drove out in an open fly, and I made
the driver put us down in the lane, almost in
the very place where I stood on that burning
day, and watched Jessie in the plantation."

'' You watched Jessie, my dear ? "

Marjory started and coloured. What
promise had she made to Jessie, eight years
ago ? When she looked back in the light of
maturer experience, she saw in that promise
something which had escaped the little
child.

Jessie used to gather burdocks there for
Lady Thorne. I hunted out all the old places,
Bellhouse, so far as I could. We went

throng the white gate to the brook, andover
the little bridge, and then to the lodge
to ask a few questions before I dared to come
up to the house."

*' And they told you at the lodge, ma'am,
how it was ? "

*' They told me that — that dear Lady
Thorne was dead, and that you were here
alone, with one or two servants. I had feared
that there might be some changes ; but it
was a shock to hear of this. I dared not
ask anything more. I thought I would
rather hear all from you, if you would tell me."

It is a real pleasure to me to see you,
Miss Stanhope ! To be sure, the sight brings
back old times ; but so does many another
thing ; I am used to the pain of that. Well,
my dear ! it is four years now I have lived
here alone. I am very contented and comfortable;
and Kitty, my niece, who is the
only maid-servant besides, is a very good girl,
though rough, from her mother, my sister,
having married beneath her, and, dying
young, the children were brought up by their
father's sister, whose ways and manners were
not quite what I have been accustomed to.
But Kitty improves ; and she is good-tempered,
and don't mind being told; and I

don't despair of her in time. And then,
ma'am, the gardener and his wife, they live
too in the house ; and they are very comfortable
with me, and don't interfere in any way.
So I have as much comfort as I can expect —
far more than I could ever have believed in,
if I had known what was coming upon me.
But the Almighty settles things for us in a
way we don't expect, — and far better than one
fears, my dear ! as, no doubt, you've found
before now."

'rand Lady Thorne has been dead four
years ? ' '

Four years last month, ma'am, it is since
my dear lady went home. That's what she
called it. ' Bellhouse,' she said, on the last
morning : — she was not altogether herself, but
very calm, with the old gentle look on her : —
Bellhouse,' she says, ' I'm going home to
Sir Archibald and the children, and you'll
follow when you ve arranged matters here.'
She was partly wandering, ma'am, and
thought, maybe, that she and I had been
left in some strange place where there was
business to be seen to. But I knew that it
came quite natural to her to speak so of her
death ; for that was how she had long thought
of it."

It was a good bit later in the day, ma' am —
just such an afternoon as that when she first
brought you up to me in the old nursery —
broiling hot, and we had all the windows
open for air, and the jessamine smelled so
sweet : I was sitting by her bed — she had
been dozing a long while, when suddenly she
opened her eyes, and said : — ' Bellhouse,'
she said, ' I have suffered a great deal. But
it is over now.' Those were her last words,
my dear."

"And, then, what happened?"

She took hold of my hand, and clasped
it, and turned on her side, and went off to
sleep again, as peaceful as if she had been a
child. And I sat and watched her for an
hour or more, and never knew the moment
when she died."

How lonely you must have felt ! "

'* Afterwards, my dear, afterwards. Just
at that time. Miss Stanhope, I felt only
that I had learned a lesson."

Please go on, it interests me so."

"I felt, ma'am, as never before, that our
troubles are only for a time. It's a truth
we're often hearing ; I've read it in good
books, I was taught it when I was a child,
and I've heard it in sermons. And yet, if

VOL. L X

you'll believe me, I never saw it right till
then, as I sat by my lady's side. I'd been
with her in all her griefs, ma'am ; when she
lost that beautiful baby, Miss Jane, and
Master Archly, and Miss Evie, — and then Sir
Archibald. I had seen her heart ready to
break. And I had known how long life
seemed to her then, and how hard she felt it
to have to go on alone. Her dear heart
sank, I knew, many a time, when she looked
forward. ' Life's long day,' ma'am, as the
hymn says ! But now, there she lay, and
what \^as it all ? No more than a dream :
past and gone and done with. ' I have
suffered a great deal,' she said ; ' but it is
over now.' And of a sudden I saw clear,
ma'am, that some day it will be over for us
all, and then what will it matter ?

' When the shore is won at last,
Who will count the billows past'"

murmured Marjory.

"It's how we have borne it, ma'am, will
matter then, I take it. And I thought how
my dear lady had borne it, how patient and
quiet-like ; trying to do the best she could,
all the while, for other people. And it
seemed to me that, now she had got through.

the Almiglity would feel a pleasure in making
up for all He had seen fit to lay on her ! Ah,
it is wonderful, ma'am, how all of a sudden,
upon times, things come to us that we
thought we had known for years ! The
Almighty opens a window, as it were ; and
the view comes unexpected."

Peace was in the woman's homely face as
she spoke, triumphing over all pain of outward
circumstance. Marjory saw it and
marvelled, and meanwhile a voice within was
saying :

I could not bear a life like hers, or Lady
Thome's ; I could not — I could not."

Then came an inward tremor as she remembered
that she might yet be forced to
bear one !

'' Bellhouse," she said suddenly, " You
have not mentioned Jessie."

Bellhouse paused before replying. Something
rising in her throat seemed half to
choke her for a moment.

'' Then they said nothing of her, ma'am,
at the lodge ? "

I did not ask," said Marjory, blaming
her own impulsiveness. She feared, from
the look in the mother's face, that Jessie too
was dead.

X 2

Jessie, ma'am — I have little to tell sou
of Jessie. She married. That is all I know."

Marjory looked her answer; she dared
not speak ; there was that in Bellhouse's
manner which checked inquiry. But suddenly
the unnatural calm broke down ; tears
welled from the patient eyes.

''V\\ tell you, my dear— I'll tell you.
You've a kind heart ; you won't take advantage.
There's them that are always on the
watch for scandal, and in general I keep my
own counsel. But you knew her before, and
you were fond of her. She stayed on,
ma'am, at the place where she went, with
Miss Bulkley, at Ripley, near Bellingham."

Bullingham ! " repeated Marjory.

'' A town in Hampshire, ma'am. Do you
know the name ? "

A friend of mine, a Miss Peele, lived
there."

*' Did she indeed ? But Ripley is seven
miles out of the town, a country place like
this. Miss Bulkley was an elderly lady, very
kind ; she lived with her brother."

Mr. Bulkley ! I remember him quite well.
He came to Thorne. A very stout old gentleman,
who travelled with two servants. He
was very good to me."

'* He was especial fond of children. When
he visited here, quite as a young man, he
made so much of the little dears in the
nursery ! His sister was just as kind, and a
mighty friend of her ladyship's. She treated
Jessie as a pet — too much, I fear, my dear I
it was her beauty, you see, that bewitched
every one; and she had a deal of liberty.
But I knew that she would not do to be kept
too straight ; and the accounts of her were
very good. By degrees I had got almost
used to being without her ; and I hoped she
was settling down into a faithful and
honoured servant — which was what I always
desired. She came here once, with Miss
Bulkley, on a visit ; and I was very much
pleased by all I saw of them together. And
so things went on, — all right, as I thought,
for more than two years and a half. Then,
all of a sudden, one morning, came a blow."

Marjory's face grew pale, in sympathy with
that of her companion. Bellhouse paused to
glance half nervously over her shoulder ; and
went on with lowered voice :

It was a letter, ma'am, from Miss Bulkley
to her ladyship, to say that Jessie was gone,
no one knew where. She had disappeared
either in the night, or very early, and they

could find no trace of lier. All possible
inquiries were being made, Miss Bulkley told
us, and we should hear again when they
knew more. That was all."

'' Oh, Bellhouse ! What did you do ? "

I took to my bed, ma'am. Her ladyship
broke the news to me, as gentle and as
tender ! but it drove me well-nigh beside
myself. ' Bellhouse,' says my lady, ' we
must keep this quiet ; we must say no word
to any one till we hear again.' I saw the
wisdom of that, ma'am ; but contain myself
I couldn't. All the strength fled out of meas
it were, in a minute. I went to my bed,
and there I lay."

Oh, how glad I am that it was not after
Lady Thome's death ! "

Oh, ma'am ! if it had been, it must have
killed me, or drove me mad ! Words can't
say, ma'am, what she was to me. She would
come to my bed like an angel straight from
the Almighty. He sent His comfort by her ;
and I lived on that, and nothing else, for two
whole days and nights. The servants
thought it was just illness, and her ladyship
gave orders that no one was to disturb me
more than needful. Well, ma'am, the third
morning I had a letter. Oh, that letter ! I

seemed to go mad with joy, just as I had
done with sorrow. I jumped up, put on my
clothes, and ran with it straight to her
ladyship."

Was it from Jessie ? "

Yes, from Jessie herself : only a note,
but written in such spirits ! It said that
she was happily married ; that she could tell
me no more at present, because his friends
would be angry if they knew of the marriage,
for he was a real gentleman. They were
going abroad for a bit ; and she would write
again as soon as things were more settled.
She begged me to get her ladyship to ask
Miss Bulkley's forgiveness, and say that she
would some day explain all. As for me, she
said, she would more than make up for all I
had ever suffered on her account. Just at
the end came these words : ' Dear mother,
you see I told you true. I am a lady
at last ! '

That was the letter, ma'am, signed
Jessie Russell,' and enclosing a packet of
photographs of herself in her wedding-dress.
At first, as you'll understand, all I seemed
able to think of was the knowledge that she
was safe, and married respectable. There
was the photograph, with my Jessie looking

so well and happy ! and her wedding-ring
quite plain. After all I had feared and
fancied, it seemed too much joy ! "

And how glad Lady Thorne must have
been too ! "

"Well, ma'am, she was glad in a way;
but yet she looked grave : and, as soon as
the first surprise was over, I saw plenty of
reason. First of all, the letter was so giddy
and thoughtless — and the whole thing had
been done in such a way, so underhand all
through, and so ungrateful to Miss Bulkley.
Oh, my dear, I shed many a tear of shame
before the day was done ! And then, ma'am,
I felt uneasy again. I began to think that
her husband must be a queer sort of man to
manage things so ! The more I thought,
the worse it seemed ; at last I had it all outwith
her ladyship. Then she told me
that she had been uneasy from the
first ; only she did not like to damp my
relief."

And Jessie had never given any hint of
her being engaged ? "

Never a word, ma'am ; neither to me
nor to Miss Bulkley. No one at Eipley had
any notion of it : except that she used to go
out for long walks alone, upon times, and

particular in the three months before she
disappeared. But never a word was breathed
to blemish her character ; indeed, thank God,
ma'am, I had a confidence that Jessie was
too proud, if nothing else, for that ! Her
ladyship eased the way for me there, by herself
giving out that Jessie was married, and
gone abroad ; and many a one came wishing
me joy, and asking all manner of questions
that I could not tell how to answer. And
all the while my heart was aching, and pining
for my Jessie, and wanting to know more
about her, and what sort of person was her
husband. And I could not help thinking,
ma'am, how different all would have been if
she had come to be married at Thorne, and
how proud I should have felt of her ! It was
a sin in me, my dear, and the Almighty has
punished it — but I had always a pride in
Jessie. And I kept fancying how pretty
she would have looked at her wedding in
Thorne Church, and how kind my lady would
have been, and what presents she would have
had, and what a cake at the breakfast ! and
what a joyful day altogether — only I should
have sorrowed, very like, to part with her —
but still I should have felt myself selfish to
begrudge her a home of her own. But now

I couldn't feel sure what her home would befor
what could one expect from a stolen
marriage, and the husband too much of a
coward to tell his friends, and all ? However,
I kept on hoping that things would turn out
better when I knew more ; and day after day
I watched the post for another letter. — But,
my dear, I never heard from Jessie again."

Never again ! "

Never one word, ma'am."

She paused, looking up to the sky in the
way that Marjory remembered.

The Almighty knows where she is ; that's
my comfort. He made her ; and He loved
her better than I could ; and very like, at
this minute, she's safe with Him."

Then, more freely than before, the tears
streamed, and for some minutes there was
silence.

'' How you have suffered ! " breathed Marjory,
softly, at last.

Yes, my dear, yes. But Well, there's

no use to talk of it ! You may fancy how it
all was. Sometimes I feared my Jessie was
ill, and felt half mad, thinking she might
be wanting me to nurse her. Sometimes I
thought she had grown ashamed of her old
mother, and that her husband might even

have insisted on lier giving me up. And yet
I could not find in my heart to believe, withall
her vanity, my Jessie would ever do that !
And sometimes I thought she might be dead.
That is what I am getting to feel well-nigh
certain of, now."

I wonder the suspense has not killed
you."

'' I kept a firm hold to the thought, ' The
Almighty loves my Jessie better than I do.'
I might have died, or worse, but for that."

I suppose you do not expect much now ?"
said Marjory, under her breath.

'' No, I made up my mind years ago,
ma'am, to expect no more. Expecting only
made me wretched. If my Jessie had been
alive, and in her right mind, would she have
stayed all these years from her mother?
Wouldn't she have written, if only a few
words, to ease my mind, if no more ? I
never can believe to the contrary ; Jessie was
never cruel. She was proud beyond everything,
and foolish, and a bit selfish ; but
cruel she never was. Sometimes, indeed,
ma'am," said Bellhouse, sighing heavily,
while a painful anxiety came over her face
like a cloud — " sometimes my mind misgives
me lest perhaps — if she found she had a bad

husband — lie might have been too proud tolet
me know, and so kept silence, and hidden
herself. She might — she might ; I could
not answer for it ! But I try to put the
thought away ; it hurts me too much : — I'd
rather think she's safe with the Almighty.

*' Wasn't it King Hezekiah, ma'am, that
said ' Lord, I am oppressed ! undertake forme
! ' That is my feeling, so strong ! and I
feel quite sure that He does undertake, as if
I saw it with my eyes. And T know there
will come a day when I shall see my Jessie
again, and be with her and my dear lady forever.
I have prayed so much for her all my
life ; the Almighty would never forget those
prayers : — no, it can only be that the right
time is not come. When I see her, she'll tell
me all about it ; so I must just be patient,
and wait as my lady waited."

Then Bellhouse was silent, and Marjory
felt that she had herself no fitting words to
say. But in place of the . tears had come a
hush and a peace, which imparted to the
homely face a touch of the divine.

Chapter XXIV.

The voices are gone, bus: I linger,
And silence is over all ;
"Where once there was music and laughter
Stands Death in the empty hall.

There is only a dead rose lying,

Faded and crushed on the floor ;
And a harp whose strings are broken,

That love will play no more."
W. W. S. blackwood s Magazine July, 1879).

And now," said Marjory, when Bellhouse lead
settled down into her first composure, '' I
want to ask you about Mr. Hugh Vivian."

You don't mean to say, ma'am, that
you've heard nothing all this time about the
changes at Copelandss ? "

What changes do you mean ? " cried
Marjory, flushing between mingled curiosity
and dread.

Well, to be sure ! you were but a child,
certainly, at the time ; but it was the talk
of the whole county, and I made sure that
it would be in all the papers."

But what was it ? what happened ? "
r seated Marjory, breathless and still flushed.

Well, ma'am, about a year after you left
us — let me see," said Bellhouse, pausing to
make inward calculations : " Yes, you left us
eight years ago, and it is seven years since
Mr. Vivian's death. Mr. Vivian died, ma'am,
struck down in a moment, of heart complaint;
no one knew, before, that he had it. They
telegraphed for Mr. Hugh, to Scotland, to
his regiment ; and of course we all thought
that he would be master now. Poor fellow,
he thought so himself, and never expected
any blow worse than his sudden loss.

And then, ma'am, it came upon us like
a thunderbolt, that the family were ruined !
The estate had been heavily — moggidged, I
think they call it, for years and years, and
would have to go clean away ; and, besides
that, were heavy debts, thousands and thousands
of pounds. All the beautiful things
had to be sold, ma'am : it would have broken
your heart to see it, — for Copelandss was quite
a picture, I'm sure, inside and out. All the
statues and the pictures and the plate ; Mr.
Brown, — our butler, he cried, ma'am, to think
of the plate ! and the beautiful furniture, old
and new, and even the family jewels : and
the carriages, and the horses, Mr. Hugh's
chestnut, and all — every one had to go.

Her ladyship bought some of the plate, and
a few favourite pictures, and gave them as a
present to Mrs. Vivian. But she wouldn't
take them, nor let Mr. Hugh ; she said it
was too painful. So then her ladyship left
them to Mr. Hugh in her will ; but they are
still here : he is living in lodgings, poor young
gentleman, and has no room for them."

But, Bellhouse, how was it ? The Vivian
seemed so rich ! "

They did seem so, ma'am ; but it turned
out to be only seeming. I don't understand
much about such things, but I have heard it
was in this way. Mr. Vivian's grandfather
and father were both very wild and extravagant,
and lived very fast, far beyond what
they could afford ; and the grandfather married
a great lady, and had to make a heavy
settlement on her ; and, at her death, what
should she do but leave it away from the
family ? What with it all, the estate was
moggidged long before our Mr. Vivian's time ;
and both he and Mrs. Vivian had been
brought up very high, and to a fine way of
living ; and they were too proud, if nothing
else, not to keep it up. And so things went
on till they got past mending, and I have
heiird say that their only hope was for Mr.

Hugli to make a grand marriage, and bring
back the family fortunes. But you see,
ma'am, as it turned out, poor Mr. Vivian
died when Mr. Hugh was not much more
than one-and-twenty ; and then it was allover."


All over," repeated Marjory ; " For this
world, at any rate."

She sat with her hands clasped, her eyes
fixed, gazing into vacancy — upon Copelandss as
she had seen it in that summer day's drive,
eight years ago : the stately mansion, with
its terraces and gardens ; the young soldier,
reining in his horse, with that air of careless
grace, and saying, with peculiar meaning,
overlooking that fair vision — '' There's no
place like home ! "

'' And for the next world, oh, my dear ! "
said Bellhouse, answering Marjory's dreamy
words : " If only that noble lady, Mrs. Vivian,
had been like her ladyship ! Her ladyship's
heart seemed of late years to be as much in
Heaven as here ; but Mrs. Vivian was otherwise.
She had always been one of the great
ones of this world ; and when that went, all
went. All but Mr. Hugh : and the sight of
him broke her heart."

How did he bear it ? "

Ma'am," said Bellhouse, " we must speak
always tenderly of the dead; and yet — I do
blame his parents. Yes ; I've thought, many
and many a time, how cruel it seemed to
bring up that poor young fellow so, with
every luxury, every one bowing before him :
why, ma'am, he was for all the world like a
young prince at Copelandss ! It does seem
downright cruel to have reared him in that
manner, and not so much as had him taught
any honest way of earning his bread, when
ruin was staring them in the face, — and as for
him, certain sure to come upon him ! — unless
so be that he had died, or made, as I said, a
great marriage. And that was but a chance,
ma'am, as all might know; and Mr. Hugh
was not one to be forced in marriage, neither.
He was a spoiled boy as ever lived, poor
fellow ! I don't believe it had ever entered
into his head, till his father died, that anything
could thwart him ! And then — why,
then, everything came upon him all at

once."

Did you see him at the time ? "

Mrs. Vivian sent for her ladyship, and I

went with her ; we were there the first part

of the sale. Mrs. Vivian had hoped to leave

Cop lands sooner ; but she was too iU ; and

V( L. I. Y

the sale could not be put off. It had begun
two days before she could get away. She,
poor lady ! kept herself close, as far as possible
from the noise and confusion ; but
poor Mr. Hugh could not hide himself so.
He had to be in the thick of all."

How terrible it must have been to him !"
My heart bled for him, ma'am, indeed.
There he was — obliged to see all the folk that
came crowding up the terraces, — some only to
stare and gossip, and abuse the family's extravagance
; for you know, ma'am, Mr. and
Mrs. Vivian were always too high to be much
of favourites in the neighbourhood. And
others came just to haggle and bargain, and
get more than their money's worth — brokers,
tradespeople, and such like. And there they
all were, examining and chaffering, and
making their coarse remarks about the beautiful
old things — them that he loved most,
poor young gentleman, as well as the rest.
Those were the vulgar sort ; but there were
others ; perhaps harder for him to see. The
gentry, ma'am, came flocking : the Earl from
Fairlegh, and Sir Thomas Bohun, and Lord
Colquhoun, one or more from well-nigh all
the great families round about : for there
were pictures, and old china, and valuable

things of every description to tempt them.
And besides those came many that Mrs.
Vivian had looked down on, and sighted,
because they were not quite in her set, or
from no better reason ; people that Mr. Hugh
had been brought up to despise and make
quiet fun of at home : you see, ma'am, I
knew all the ins and outs, from being so
long at Thorne. And some of them had
always been glad to pick up any story
against the family ; and some had been
accustomed to toady them, and would have
done anything in the world to get an invitation
from Mrs. Yivian ; or even, I do believe,
one of them grand bows of hers ! And Mr.
Hugh, he knew all about it ; and yet there
he had to be and see them now, coming to
gaze and finger and traffic with the rest. I
stood behind a pillar, ma'am, in the great
hall, and watched him as long as I could
bear it. You remember Mr. Hugh, my
dear ? "

'' Oh, yes ! "

'^ Then you know what a bright look he
had in his face, and how he seemed always
ready to make fun, and throw out a laughing
word, no matter to whom ; and yet he
was high too, in his way, and always the
I Y 2

master : — more of a king than a master, indeed,
with the people about the place. Well,
my dear, the very last time that I had seen
him, he had that look and that manner;
when I saw him now, a little backward from
the crowd, the change seemed to strike me
through ! He stood very straight, ma'am,
like a young soldier born ; and his head a
bit higher than usual, very still, and very
proud. But the colour was all gone out of
his face ; he was as pale as, with that brown
skin of his, he could be ; and his mouth was
set in a way which I had never seen before
stern and resolute, as it were, as if he had
made up his mind to battle through without
showing an inch of what he felt. But his
eyes — you'll remember he had fine dark eyes
they were brimful of agony. I shall never
forget that look, ma'am ! As I turned away
for I could not bear it long — I thought :
But for his mother, he would shoot himself
Yes, and often I .have thought since,
that so it would have been — in that first
freshness of his troubles — but for her."
I recollect how fond he was of her."
More than fond, ma'am ; he was wrapped
up in her : and good to her past everything !
As soon as she could be moved, she came to

Tliorne ; and lie rode over every night from
Copelandss : and I never saw son more devoted.
When he was with her, his only
thought seemed to be how he could shield
and comfort her ; and she got to lean on him
as if she had been a child. She might have
stayed at Thorne, poor lady, as long as ever
she had a mind ; but all her cry was to get
away, away to some strange place. Ah, she
was proud, ma'am, Mrs. Vivian ! She could
not bear the pity and the gossip, and the
tongues so busy with her name ; and she
would rather die than live on charity — even
my lady's. She was set from the first on
hiding herself, where no one knew her. But
the difficulty was, where to go ; for they had
no money, except a little that was over from
the sale o£ poor Mr. Hugh's place in the
army. I don't rightly understand these
things, ma'am; but no doubt you can tell
my meaning."

The sale of his commission, you must
mean. But how could he live if he left the
army? "

He could not have lived in it, ma'am ;
his habits had been too expensive : it would
have been very hard to alter them, and break
off all his old connections. Then he wanted

to make a home for this mother ; and, above
all, the money was downright necessary.
Some even of that had to go towards the
debts."

'' And what did they do ? "

It was a hard case, ma'am, and puzzling.
My dear lady did her best in every way, and
applied to friends for advice ; and at last
help came through Mr. Bulkley — Mr. Bulk-ley
of Eipley, my poor Jessie's master, my
dear. He was always a gentleman for helping
all that needed it ; and, as it happened,
he was a large shareholder in a bank at
Bullingham, and so was able to get a clerkship
there for Mr. Hugh."

'' But what a change ! "

Yes, ma'am, indeed. No one I heard
speak of it but said. What a pity ! And yet
it was the only thing at the time ; for, you
see, there had been a sad fault in his education.
His father and mother, they had
built upon chance, so to speak : — may the
Almighty forgive me, if I judge them ! They
were that proud of Mr. Hugh, they would not
have wondered if he had married a princess !
and he, poor young gentleman, had been
allowed to do pretty much as he liked, and
learn or not learn, as the fancy took him.

Else, if only lie could have passed a hard examination,
there was many a post to be got
for him : so I understood. But that he
never could, without a deal of study — for
which there was no time, nor money ; so he
had just to take what he could get. Poor
fellow, he accepted the clerkship ; and they
went off to Bullingham."

Here Bellhouse relapsed into a reverie,
and Marjory sat intent upon a thought which
had suddenly struck her. She was recalling
a conversation with Lina, more than a year
before, — Lina's mention of a clerk in her
father's bank — " a black sheep," whose name
was Hugh Vivian. That name had seemed
a mere coincidence, then, both to Marjory
and her friend ; but now it had a new significance.
. . . What had he done to cause
that look which she remembered, on Lina's
classical face ?

'^ You heard of him sometimes, I suppose?"
"Now and then, my dear, — only very rarely.
Mrs. Vivian, she was too broken-hearted, I
take it, for writing. Any way, there came
only two or three short notes from her to
my lady ; and Mr. Hugh — well, he wrote
once or twice, but only that. Miss Bulkley,
she would mention them sometimes ; but she

knew little of them. Lie would have been
glad, lie said, to have them often at Ripley ;
but they would not come. That was Mrs.
Vivian's doing, ma'am, you may be sure. I
take it she could not bear to visit, in her
altered position : — she that had always been
the first, or made much of with the first, in
all companies hitherto. It would have been
gall to her to think that Miss Bulkley invited
her from pity, as it were ; and, as for poor
young Mr. Hugh, all his wish was just to
pleasure her ! So we heard scarce anything
about them, and in a while their name seemed
to have faded out of the county : but yet the
news did come like a shock, when Mrs.
Vivian died."

'' She died too, then ! How long ago ? "

'' Oh, a long time, ma'am — two or three
months before my Jessie was married. Some
inward disease had worked in her many years ;
and her trouble and poverty quickened it,
and brought it to light. The doctors could
do nothing, — such doctors as she could afford,
at least, poor lady. She just languished
away, and died in their lodgings at Bingham."


And he was left alone ? "

Yes, poor young gentleman. Oh, he has

suffered enough to break his heart twice over,
ma'am ! After his ma was dead, he threw
up his situation, and went away — no one
knew where. It was just after that, my
trouble began about Jessie; and I had no
anxiety to spare for him, or for anything
outside my daily duties. All I know is, that
he was travelling for many a long day ; but,
poor fellow, he has come back now, into our
country. Very like, ma'am, you will see him
before long ; for he lives at Alton."

''I believe I did see him — last night,"
was all that Marjory answered. Many
thoughts were busy in her mind.

'' Did you indeed, ma'am ? I wonder you
recognised him ; for he is changed. His
troubles have set their mark on him ; and I
fear he takes them hard. He comes, upon
times, to see me ; he doesn't say much, but
he is always kind, and thoughtful of my
comfort. He remembers my old tastes,
ma'am, and brings me a little present to suit
them, now and again. But there's something
about him vexes me a good bit," said Bell-house,
shaking her head.

"What is it?"

I can't rightly explain, ma'am : a kind
of scornfulness, and a look on his countenance,

if I speak of the Almiglity or of
Heaven ; and them being all I have to hope
for now, are so much in mj heart that, like
enough, they're more on my lips than I know
of. Well ! I trust he'll be brought round,
if he's going wrong, and shown the silver
lining to his troubles. I pray it, and that's
all I can do for him, poor fellow," said Bell-house,
sighing.

'' How does he live now ? Is he in a
bank again ? "

'' Ko, ma'am, he's quartermaster, I think
they call it, to the militia ; and I've heard
that he gets something besides, by writing
for magazines and newspapers : but he has
to pinch and contrive, I take it, compared
to the past, to live even in the way he does.
He has a lodging, ma'am, he tells me, in
High Street, — two little rooms."

And who lives at Copelandss, now ? "

'' Oh, my dear, 'tis piteous to see Cope-lands
! As for me, I don't desire ever to set
eyes on it again. That gentleman the poor
squire had moggidged it to, was one who sets
no store by old places. He'd never had any
of his own, I suppose, and so knew nothing
of that kind of feeling. Why, I heard him,
myself, say at the sale, looking round about

him : 'The sooner every one of these useless
old houses is swept away, the better for England
! ' What could you expect, ma'am,
from such a sentiment ? He sold it to some
carpet-weaving company, who fancied it from
its nearness to the river ; and now the house
is turned into a factory.

'many say they would not have known
the place ; and I don't wonder ; for there's a
great tall chimney put up, that disfigures it
sadly ; we can see it, ma'am, from one part
of our park. Then most of the gardens are
done away with, and the terraces are levelled ;
and there's a great yard all round : and the
stables are turned into out-houses for the
factory. Inside, great numbers of rooms
are pulled down, and thrown into one ; and
the whole place is full of machinery. They
say, too, that the parish of Copelandss is
downright ruined by the quantity of bad
characters who have come there to work.
For my part, ma'am, I wish they'd alter the
name ; for the place is a different place
altogether."

*' But the beautiful old park ! They could
not alter that ? "

Oh, dear, yes, ma'am ! In the parts near
the house, there's a number of cottages;

ugly, upstart-looking places they are too,
mostly of red brick ; they have been put up
for the hands — one now, one then, as they
were wanted. And the rest is all sold, or
let, to different parties. The trees are well-nigh
all cut down and gone, and the land is
parcelled off into fields. The new branch
railway cuts right across, and now they're
building a station. Poor Mr. Hugh — or Mr.
Yivian, for so we call him now, he's been
over there once, he told me. Once was
enough, I should think, poor fellow ! "

'rit is too painful to dwell upon," said
Marjory.

She did not wonder now that Mr. Hugh
was changed. Her heart ached for him, and
with him.

CHAPTER XXV.

All are scattered now and fled,
Some are married, some are dead ;
And when I ask, with throbs of pain,

Ah ! when shall they all meet again
As in the days long since gone by,
The ancient time-piece makes reply, —

For ever — never !
Never — for ever ! '

Never here, for ever there,
Where all parting, pain, and care,
And death, and time shall disappear, —
For ever there, but never here !
The horologe of Eternity
Sayeth this incessantly, —

For ever — never !

Never — for ever !' " — Longfellow.

I HAVE never asked you how Thorne was
left," said Marjory, suddenly ; " How is it
that no one lives here ? "

'' Perhaps I have told you, ma'am, in old
times, that Sir Archibald was the last of his
family. They were an old Saxon family, as
I've always been informed ; and so no wonder
they have died out at last. But Sir Archibald
put it in his will, that at my lady's
death all should go to a little Master Crawford,

whose grandfather had been his bosom-friend.
Master Crawford is grown up now,
and in Parliament, and very clever, with no
taste for country life. However, he's not
like that person who got Copelandss ; he hasa
reverence for old days and old houses. He
keeps on the old steward, and we two or
three servants, to take care of the place.
What his future plans may be, I don't know ;
he is quite young as yet, and upon times I
fancy that some day he'll be marrying, and
bringing down a young wife. Bat that I
leave."

'rand perhaps, after all, you might find
her a comfort ? "

'' I don't know, ma'am — I can't say. It
would seem strange to see any one in my
dear lady's place. Though, as to that, I
should not be bound to stay ; for her ladyship
left me a small independence : with care,
I could manage, if needs were. So far I've
been laying it by regular;, against a rainy
day. Except a few little legacies like that,
all her ladyship's money went to a distant
cousin of her own, who was poor. She was
very just, and had strong feelings of kith and
kin ; else poor young Mr. Vivian might bethe
better."

And now there is only one thing I have to
ask : What has become of the Hammondss ? "

Martha Hammond, my dear, that you
and your poor aunt and uncle lodged with ?
Well, her mother at the south lodge died
six years ago, and after that she had no tie
to these parts ; and Hammond had a good
offer in the tailoring line from a friend who
had emigrated ; so off they all went to
Australia ; and I understand they are doing
very well."

Marjory's curiosity was now satisfied, sofar
as lay in Bellhouse's power. She sat
still, in a kind of maze, thinking everything
over, comparing the Thorne of her childhood
with that of the present. Once it had been
the little old lady's lot to see all the same,
yet different ; now her own turn had come.
A strange melancholy stole over her; the
glow which had transfigured all life since her
arrival at Alton, faded into twilight. She
saw Time as a relentless figure, the future
like a scroll in his hand, unfolding ever more
and more — dark places no less than bright
ones. He could never pause, nor allow his
subjects to pause, in that ever-changing
monotony — a monotony which made the past
prophetic of the present.

There's something very strange in life,
Bellhouse !" she said ; " But some people are
happy in spite of all ? Though there are so
many changes and chances, we are helped
through, if we trust ? "

Bellhouse turned her grave pale face, and
looked gently at the eager girl, so young, so
inexperienced, taking life, as it were, by
hearsay. The blue eyes met her older ones
with a questioning glance that trembled on
the edge of tears. What was in the girl's
mind, she wondered? She paused, and
pondered before answering.

'' Yes, my dear," she said tenderly, at last
'' yes, we are helped ; and the help of the
Almighty is wonderful. But it must come in
His own way."

Marjory was satisfied. Here was the evidence
of one who had passed through some
of earth's fiercest storms; but the closing
sentence escaped her. She had not yet
realised — who has, at eighteen ? — how vast
a difference may lie between God's way and
man's way.

'' I'm so glad you came, ma'am," said
Bellhouse, after a pause. *' It has done mea
power of good ! The more I look at you,
the better I remember you; you seem just

the same to me now as when sou were a
little girl, playing about here. Poor Mr.
Yivian — Mr. Hugh that was — I remember
his saying : ' If that child grows up as blue
as her eyes, Bellhouse, she'll be a noted
character ! ' Poor young gentleman ! he
was always fond of his joke."

'^ He was very kind to me, I remember. I
wish I could help him ! Well, Gerald will
be coming for me soon ; but, first, may I
have one look at the dear old room, and Miss
Evie's little bed ? "

'' To be sure, ma'am ! of course you may.
Come along in with me, and you shall go allover
the house, if you like. I take a pride,
my dear, in keeping it just as it used to be,
and such as will satisfy her ladyship, if she
can see it still. How pleased she would
have been to-day ! she had such a fancy for
you, my dear. You mustn't go yet awhile ;
you must have some tea to refresh you before
your walk — and your brother too, ma'am,
if he will excuse the liberty."

As Bellhouse spoke, they were passing
through the darkened drawings-room. There
was the piano ; the harp upon which Mrs.
Vivian had played ; the portfolio of engravings
which Lady Thorn e had opened for

VOL. I. z

Marjory ; the chair in which the little old
lady had sat, netting serenely at the shawl
for her old woman. The old scent of rose-leaves
pervaded the room ; the furniture was
swathed in holland covers, — otherwise it
might have been but yesterday that the
scenes in Marjory's memory had passed.
Silently the girl followed across the hall, up
the oak staircase, and along the passages, ina
pilgrimage through the house. The chintz
arm-chair was still standing in the deep-seated
window of the old nursery ; the paper
was bright as of yore, with the wondrous
birds and roses, so greatly admired by the
child. Figures long vanished flitted before
Marjory's eyes, as she trod the familiar floors.
She heard voices speaking once again, each
in its own tone. The charm which Thorne
had ever possessed for her was magically
strengthened ; she felt an unaccountable love
for the place, a clinging to it as though it
were her home.

*'I hope you will never leave Thorne,
Bellhouse. It would almost break your
heart ! "

I can't answer for that, ma'am. If the
Almighty had meant my heart to break, it
would have broken years ago. But it would

be a sore wrench, my dear, certainly. I
can't fancy living, to be called life, anywhere
else ! "

'' It will never be, I feel sure ; forgive me
for thinking of it ! " cried Marjory in her impulsive
way. Then they returned downstairs,
and reached the hall just as Gerald was ringing
at the door.

Now Marjory, in pride and pleasure, had
to introduce Bellhouse to Gerald, and Gerald
to the land of her dreams.

*' I have heard a great deal about you,
and about this place," he said to the old
servant : "I feel as though I had come into
the middle of a story-book ! "

'' And I am sure it is a great honour, sir,
to see you here," said Bellhouse, with her
old-fashioned reverence ; '' and her ladyship
would be glad to welcome you, if she were
here at this moment."

With these mutual civilities, Bellhouse
and the young man were speedily excellent
friends; and Bellhouse, as Marjory perceived,
was deeply impressed by his sketch from a
knoll in the park.

Here, as a background, rose the west end
of the church, and a few of the rustic gravestones
; while in the foreground was one of
z 2

the grand old trees, encompassed by divers
forms of life. Among the boughs sat a
squirrel, discussing an imaginary acorn ; a
thrush, straining his throat in song, was
perched high in leafy solitude ; the bright
eyes of a field-mouse peeped from the moss
which clothed the foot of the trunk. Here
also, in the chequered shade, clustered grasses
and wild flowers ; the tiny pimpernel, with
its upturned face, buttercups, and a root of
sturdy foxglove ; large ferns, spreading wide
and feathery, dandelion clocks and clover,
growing all together in a colony, as every
countryman and woman has seen them many
a time, in just such another place.

Bellhouse, country born and bred, marked
the fidelity of each detail ; and at the same
time instinctively felt the power of the atmosphere
of ideality which Marjory had learned
to recognise as a characteristic of Gerald's
work. Half unconsciously to himself, that
atmosphere glowed and widened; emblems
flowed naturally from his pencil, lurking ready
to be searched out and studied. Even herein
this faithful copy of facts, that emblematic
spirit was present. Life and material nature
in the foreground ; in the background the
old end of the church, and the silent graves.

Above the graves a bird was soaring, away —
whither ? " Whither ? " was the thought
suggested by the mere sight of that soaring
bird.

'rit's a most beautiful picture, sir," said
Bellhouse.

If every one were as easily satisfied, I
should soon win my fortune, shouldn't I ? "
said Gerald, with that melancholy smile which
Marjory longed to brighten. But Bellhouse
did not understand ; she only looked at him,
with pleased wonder in her homely eyes.

I'll go and see about some tea now, sir,"
she said, '' if Miss Stanhope will please to
take you round the flower-garden. I daresay
she will like to show you the old
places."

So — Marjory with the feeling of a dream
fulfilled — the brother and sister went off
together ; while Bellhouse, glad, and even
excited, summoned Kitty to spread a snowy
cloth on a small table in the old library.
Afterwards she waited upon them, while they
regaled themselves with Thorne cream, bread
and butter, and great white raspberries lying
on cool green leaves. The sky was already
tinged with crimson when they started on
their homeward walk ; Marjory begging Bell-house

to visit her sometimes in their Alton
lodgings.

'' Thank you, ma'am, it's but seldom I
go into the town," replied Bellhouse in an
under-tone ; " I get troubled — the streets are
so full of unknown faces, and thoughts come
to me of my Jessie dying among strangers."

As the brother and sister walked away
over the smooth park slopes, Marjory, looking
back, found her view impeded by a mist
of tears. They passed through the churchyard
— that fair and peaceful place, which
had taken the little child's fancy, years ago.
Marjory looked for the grave, new made no
longer, which she remembered; but it was
lost among a host of others, which had
sprung up about it. They went down the
wooden steps into the road, and so — gazed
after from quiet cottages, by rustic eyes, asa
curious novelty — into the shady lane of
old.

Marjory said little all the way. They
walked quietly home, entering the college-yard
as the summer moon was rising above
the tower of the cathedral.

As they crossed the little entrance hall
the smiling maid came tripping to say that a
gentleman had called during; their absence.

What was his name ? " asked Marjory,
listlessly.

I don't know, miss. His card's in the
parlour, however. He asked for Mr. Stanhope
; but he inquired very particular, miss,
about you — whether you had come for any
length of time ? — and when I told him you
was come to live, he said, ' Oh, indeed ! '
surprised like."

Listless no longer, Marjory ran upstairs.
The card lay on the table. She hurried to
the moonlit panes, and read :
'' Mr. Vivian."

Chapter Xxii.

Pray that He may prosper ever
Each endeavour,
When thine aim is good and true !"

Baron von Canis.

Marjory sat long in her window that night,
too restless to sleep. She had put out her
candle, but moon and stars were shining;
there was no darkness, though the deep
voice from the cathedral had proclaimed
twelve strokes above the silent town. Below,
she could hear the river flowing on, the same
bj night as by day : the moonbeams lightened
it with a stream of molten silver, tremulous
in the tide. The drowsy cows on the opposite
bank, one here, one there, rose like
shadowy carvings from the grass. The
chimneys and angles of the old house above
the water showed in sharp outline against
the sky. There was no breeze ; and the city
slumbered.

But Marjory's brain was busy. The sense
of Life's mystery forced itself upon her tonight,
as never before. She looked at the

stars, remembered that each was a world.
Was Lady Tliorne in one of them ? was Mrs.
Vivian, was Jessie, there ? They had but
changed their place in the universe, gone
from one quarter to another. When would
this separation, this silence, end ? What was
the meaning of all this change and disappointment
? Vague, confused, rushing
one upon another, eager questions coursed
through the girlish mind.

And among them, constantly prominent,
came the thought of Hugh Vivian. He had
asked about her. He must have recognised
her. She would meet him soon. But the
conventionalities of life would come between
them ; she would not be able to speak out
what was in her mind. Outside, cards, civilities,
remarks on weather, calm voices,
polished manners, polite smiles. Inside, the
heart of humanity, passionate, suffering,
sinful, striving — yet ever seeking concealment,
except when now and then a poet, oran
artist, or a mighty preacher, cries witness
to the truth. Is not this also mystery ?

So, in a medley, flowed her musings.
Presently, from their midst, rose a defined
imagination — an inspiration, it seemed to
her. She had planned a story which she

would white ; but here her plan appeared
transfigured : the varied emotions which had
possessed her during the day embodied themselves
within it. Here would be an outlet
for the multitude of thoughts which had
arisen as a new world within her, since she
arrived at Alton. She longed for morning,
to begin at once ; meanwhile, as at length
she lay down in her bed, she thought of
what this sudden conception might bring to
Gerald. Had it been granted to her on purpose
for him, she wondered ? This was her
last conscious question as her blue eyes
closed.

When morning came, her faith in the
answer was less confident ! She remembered
that she was only a young girl, immature,
inexperienced : her heart misgave her when
she thought of the great literary world. But,
following at a humble distance great masters
of old, she had resolved that, before she
began her work, she would seek a blessing
on it in the cathedral.

It was the twenty eighth morning of the
month; the , first Psalm was — 'lord, remember
David." The voices of the choristers
rose clear and sweet into the heights ;
Marjory's heart rose with them.

Lord, remember David, and all this
trouble. How lie share unto the Lord, and
vowed a vow unto the Almighty God of
Jacob."

She thought of past ages, of the old Bible
men and women ; how unquestioning they
trusted in a supernatural Power, and were
not disappointed. They had no idea of a
stony First Cause, of immutable '' laws of
nature." Their faith was in a living God, a
personal Being, Who knew each one of them
by name, and ordered all their concerns.

The memory of their history rose freshly
to her mind, as she looked up to where the
calm figures sat enthroned. The sacred
words echoed round them, borne by the
music ; the ineffable repose of their faces
seemed to bear majestic witness to the truth
of those words.

There the Lord promised his blessing,"
chanted the choir. " The Lord that made
heaven and earth, give thee blessing out of
Sion."

All Marjory's self-depreciating feelings
banished like a mist. It seemed to her that
a promis nat come direct from above ; that
already she was giving thanks for the fulfilment
of her mission !

As lie went swiftly away to the lodgings,
to begin lier work forthwith, many noticed
the ardent girl, with the glow in her blue
eyes, and the purpose in her step, and wondered
of what she was thinking ! But she
herself was too much absorbed to notice any
outward thing.

Gerald looked pleased, when he came
home to their early dinner, to hear that the
start was made. They chatted over the
future, making plans ; and Marjory, at least,
forgot that her book was not already published,
and on its way towards a second
edition !

In the afternoon, as she was reading in
the sitting-room, and at the same time
knitting socks for Gerald, a double knock
suddenly resounded upon the door below.
Involuntarily she started and coloured, with
an instinctive thought of Hugh Vivian ; buta
minute later she could have laughed at her
own foolishness, as Priscilla's high-pitched
tone announced, '' Mrs. Carberry," — and an
elderly lady entered.

A most good-natured looking lady was she,
with a kind, freckled face, and benevolent
little eyes, — smartly attired, in a lace shawl
and purple silk dress, with flowers in her

bonnet. Before Marjory's heightened colour
had subsided, she was half-way in a long
sentence of explanations, in which the name
of Lina Peele conspicuously occurred. By
degrees, Marjory comprehended that to Lina's
acquaintance with her visitor the present
attention was owing.

I want to know if you will excuse ceremony,
and come on Monday to a little croquet
party at my house ? I shall be so glad if you
will ! Just a few young friends to five
o'clock tea. I have no young people of my
own ; but I am so very fond of them ! I
cannot feel happy unless they are frequently
about me. Will your brother excuse ceremony,
and come also ? I have brought Mr.
Carberry's card. He was too much engaged
to accompany me, and he knew that he
would not be likely to find your brother at
this hour."

Thank you, I'll tell Gerald. I shall hope
to come, if he is able to take me," said
Marjory, her eyes brightening at the
notion.

'' Oh, he will be able, — he must. I want to
introduce you both to other pleasant young
people. And you will meet your friend, Miss
Peele. A sweet girl, is she not ? A treasure

I consider her. The belle of Alton, and
the flower of Alton. Quite. Is she
not?"

'^ I can well believe it," said Marjory ; " I
know she was both at our school." Again
came that prick of conscience at her own
fickleness.

School friendships are very interesting,"
proceeded Mrs. Carberry : '' I had several of
my own, and this gives me a pleasure in
those of the young people. I assure you, you
will find your friend fully appreciated in our
circles. Every one looks up to her, and admires
her. She is exceedingly useful also to
dear Mr. Throckmorton. Beautiful services
Mr. Throckmorton has. Miss Stanhope 1 It
is wonderful how St. Philip's is improved.
I attend it, although we live at a considerable
distance, and Mr. Carberry remains firm to
our parish church. But I feel the services
of St. Philip's a spiritual treat. I cannot
resist them."

"St. Philip's is certainly much altered.
I knew it eight years ago."

'' You must find changes indeed, then, if
you recollect ; but you do not look old
enough to have many such long recollections."


Oil, but I have ! " cried Marjory ; '' Many
and many."

I should hardly have thought it," said
Mrs. Carberry, with a good-natured smile.
Speaking of changes, I see Mr. Vivian's
card. May I ask if he has called on your
brother ? "

He called yesterday, while we were out."

'' I am surprised indeed ! He is generally
so sadly unsociable 1 ' Mr. Vivian,' I say to
him — on the rare occasions when we meet —
Mr. Vivian, I greatly wish that we could
sometimes have the pleasure of welcoming
you beneath our roof. We have a large circle
of pleasing young friends, who would be
charmed to make your acquaintance.' But
no ! he shuts himself up. Poor fellow ! He
has had sad troubles. That was why I
alluded to him just now in connexion with
change."

Yes," said Marjory. She shrank instinctively
from mentioning to Mrs. Carberry her
former knowledge of Hugh.

'' He comes of a very fine old county
family. He was heir to a large property,"
said Mrs. Carberry, shaking her head, and
speaking in an important under-tone : '' His
present position is much to be deplored. To

be sure, there is nothing disreputable in the
duties of a quartermaster ; but I regret that
he did not choose a higher vocation. However,
I make a point of mentioning his reverses
to every stranger, that it may be known who
and what he is. I have a great respect, Miss
Stanhope, for old families, although I am not
of one myself. You are I understand ? "

I believe so," said Marjory, smiling, inwardly
surprised that Lina should have
thought it necessary to mention this circumstance
!

'^ Yes, our dear young mutual friend told
me that, as regarded ancient descent, there
was no better blood than yours in the kingdom.
You must excuse my familiarity. Miss
Stanhope ; but I have a real pleasure in good
blood. I felt an affection for you, if you will
permit me to say so, directly I saw your
former pedigree in an old edition of Burke's
'Landed Gentry.' Poor Mr. Vivian — he is left
out of the new editions ! I am so truly glad,
Miss Stanhope, to think 'that he has calledon
your brother. It is like turning over a
new leaf; for I never knew him to do such a
thing before. Your brother's looks must
have caught his fancy ; now I think of it, he
stopped Mr. Carberry yesterday morning in

the street to ask the name of the new clerk
in the bank ; and he called, it seems, in the
afternoon."

But why should Mr. Carberry be able to
tell him ? " said Marjory, smiling again.

'^ Mr. Carberry, my dear Miss Stanhope !
Why, he knows every name in Alton. No
stranger enters the town, but Mr. Carberry at
once knows all about him. I can't say how
it is, for he is not a prying man : but these
lawyers are omniscient. My husband is the
head of an old firm of solicitors, and that is
how our acquaintance began with Mr. Vivian;
they were the family lawyers, and, at the
time of the troubles, Mr. Carberry saw a
good deal of this poor young man. I am
sure we should think it an honour to have
him constantly with us, if he would only
accept our invitations."

He knows the Peeles, I suppose ? " said
Marjory, inquiringly.

'' Ah, you naughty, wicked girl ! I know
what you are thinking of ! " cried Mrs. Car-berry,
in a sudden burst, to Marjory's great
surprise. She shook her finger at Marjory
several times, with wonderful rapidity, as she
spoke: 'you are thinking how nice it would
be if our dear young friend could console

VOL. I. 2 A

him ! Just the very idea which has repeatedly
entered my own head ! We must try to
arrange it : now that you are come, I shall
have an assistant in the matter. Your brother,
too, will have some influence, since Mr. Yivian
has taken a fancy to him. What a sweet
wife she would make — charm away all his
troubles ! You naughty, match-making little
girl!"

"Indeed, I never thought of such a thing,"
said Marjory, when she could get in a word.
The idea was repulsive to her: she knew
not why.

Ah, well ; never mind. Then you'll
come on Monday? You and your brother: —
as soon after five as possible. He will be
disengaged then, I know. It is always a
pleasure to me to enlarge the circle of my
young friends. Good-bye."

She bowed and smiled, smiled and bowed,
herself from the room ; and Marjory was left
to ponder.

END OF VOL. I.

OF THE

U N IVLR5ITY

or ILLINOIS

A STUDY.
IN THREE VOLUMES.

BY

THE AUTHOR OF "JAMES GORDON'S WIFE."

Do not fear to hope ! Can poet's brain
More than the father's heart rich good invent ?

Be bounteous in thy faith, for not misspent
Is confidence unto the Father lent.

George Macdonald.

VOLUME IL

LONDON :

WYMAN & SONS, 74-75, GREAT QUEEN STREET,

lincoln's-inn fields.

1880.

ALL Eights Deserted.

Cheat QU£>;X Street, LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS,

LONDON-W.C.

Marjory.

CHAPTER I.

How shall I gain

The right to disdain 1

The right to look down

With a saint-like frown

Upon sorrow and sin 1

How shall I win

The right to scorn

My brother forlorn,

Or pass him by

"With reproving eye,

As much as to say,
Get out of the way,

And taint me not

With the poison spot

That comes from thy heart, thy face, thy
brow,

To me, much holier than thou !'" — C. M.

Late in the afternoon of the next day, when
Gerald had returned from the bank, Lina and
her stepmother made their promised call.
Mrs. Peele was a Httle woman, plain in face
and quiet in manner, evidently relying on
and looking up to Lina, just as Marjory had

VOL. II. B

seen done by all the world, ever since the first
day of their acquaintance. As Lina entered,
Marjory was struck afresh by her great
beauty. She was dressed plainly enough ina
pink striped cambric robe — fashionably
made, however — a black silk jacket, fitting
tightly to her form, and a black hat with
drooping feather. This morning costume
suited her no less well in its way than the
flowing white at the concert. It would have
been difficult to say on which occasion her
loveliness showed to best advantage.

Marjory was in her favourite place beside
the window, where Lina joined her. Mrs.
Peele sat in the large arm-chair near the
hearth, and chatted with Gerald. But continually,
in the intervals between remarks
upon the weather, the cathedral, the respective
merits of the College Yard and Albion
Square — which were all that he and Mrs.
Peele could find to talk about — those large
gray eyes of his, full of a strange, reverential
light, were straying across the room to that
face beneath the shady hat. Marjory observed
it, and thought that he might be
making a study of Lina's features. Lina
did not so interpret those dreamy looks ;
but she felt an attraction which was new to

her. Adoration was her natural atmosphere,
and she held it cheap; flirtation she abhorred.
But those eyes gazing, gazing, at her now,
were not like other eyes. She found Marjory
a little tiresome. She would have liked
to rise, and change places with her stepmother.


But this under-tone of inclination was in
no degree discernible. She continued talking
to her former schoolfellow, with the most
affable composure, of old times, mutual acquaintances,
and so forth. Meanwhile, Marjory
also was not wholly absorbed in the
words which she heard and uttered. She
was trying to conquer a strange reserve,
never felt before — to introduce a certain subject
without embarrassment. She could not
command her manner with Lina's ease ; she
could not help seeming absent and pre occupied
; till at length, apropos to nothing, out
she came with the thought in her mind.

Lina, you remember my telling you about
Mr. Hugh — Mr. Vivian I must call him now.
He is here, living at Alton."

The sudden stiffness which she had observed
at Eockswold,a year before, came again
over Lina's countenance.

I knew it. I knew that you would see
B 2

him sooner or later. I thought it better not
to warn you beforehand."

But why, Lina ? Pray tell me." She
lowered her voice, speaking more eagerly
than she herself was aware. " Is he the Hugh
Vivian whom you knew at Bullingham ?"

''He is," replied Lina, in a cold, clear
tone.

You are quite sure we are speaking of
the same person?"

'the militia quartermaster," answered
Lina, with an infinitesimal touch of scorn :
*' I recognised him soon after our arrival at
Albion Square ; and a short time later I
heard his history, and knew that he must be
your old acquaintance."

Mrs. Carberry told you his history ?"

She did. She is a kind person, but given
to chatter."

"And, when you asked her to call on
me, did you tell her that I had known him
before?"

"No. Why should I ? There was no
occasion to mention his name."

I am glad of that, because I said nothing.
But, Lina "

Well ? "

You called him a black sheep."

He was one, at Bellingham. He may
not be so, particularly, now. I have heard
nothing, since we came to Alton, against his
moral character."

'' Why do you say specially, ' his moral
character ? ' "

Because one point against him I have
heard : that he sneers at all religion."

"Poor fellow," said Marjory, with an involuntary
sigh. She sighed because she was
thinking of the past, of Hugh's past ; but
Lina looked severe.

You know, Marjory dear, I told you at
school, that you were too latitudinarian.
There are limits to tolerance ; and compassion
may become sentimentality."

'' Oh, yes : but you did not know him in
the old days. You are hard on him, Lina.
I am forgetting, though, — you said that he
had once done you a great injury," said
Marjory, looking somewhat wistfully into
Lina's beautiful eyes.

I told you, at the same time, that I did
not know — exactly — what the injury was;
and I have no means of proving it. I cannot
explain myself, but I must beg that you will
mention this to no one at Alton. There are
plenty of gossips, who might ferret out

things better forgotten. I should not wish
anybody here to know that I have any special
cause for resentment against Mr. Yivian."

She spoke with strange disturbance of her
usual calm, and Marjory hastened to assure
her that she need not fear her repeating anything
forbidden by Lina.

Only Mr. Vivian was in my mind when
I questioned you. I did not wish to think
him so very bad."

I do not say that he is very bad," said
Lina rigidly : "I have no concern with anything
he may be at present. The past, as I
said, is better forgotten. And now let us
speak of this no more. — You have been
to Thorne, you said. Did you find any
changes ? "

You know nothing, then ? Oh, I will
tell you "

Lina ! " said Mrs. Peele — *' Is it not time
for us to be going ? "

'' Yes, the children will expect us," said
Lina : " I suppose, Marjory, you would hardly
care to walk part of the way home with
us?"

A blankness which had shadowed Gerald's
face, passed like a cloud. He started up,
exclaiming :

Yes, Marjory ! a capital idea. Get your
hat, and I'll come too, to bring you back."

Unsuspecting Marjory departed, thinking
Gerald very kind. When she returned, five
minutes later, equipped for the walk, he and
Lina stood together at the table, looking over
her album of photographs.

Who is that ? " Lina was saying as she
entered : '^ I know the face."

'' I did not mean to leave that there," said
Marjory. It was a loose photograph, which
she had mechanically slipped between the
pages of her album on the previous evening,
when intent on Hugh Yivian*s card : — the
portrait of Jessie in her bridal dress, beautiful,
happy, beaming.

Please give that to me, Lina ; 1 must
put it away. It is poor Jessie. Bellhouse
gave it to me last night."

So the Jessie of your Thorne fairy tale is
married ! How unsuitably she is dressed !
A pretty face, nothing particular in it. Whom
did she marry ? "

'^ A Mr. Russell," said Marjory shortly.

She had by no means decided how much
or how little to tell Lina of Jessie's sad
history. Bellhouse would hardly wish that
it should spread further than was necessary.

But Lina was not of a curious disposition,
and asked no troublesome questions. Her
inquiry as to the husband's name answered,
she said no more.

And now, as they set forth, Marjory found
herself walking alone with Mrs. Peele, while
Lina and Gerald went before. This seemed
indeed to happen naturally, since the crowded
pavement of Saturday prevented their remaining
undivided. Marjory, behind, was
pleased to see, from the manner in which her
brother and her friend conversed, that Lina
appreciated Gerald.

I have not seen your pictures, after all,
Mr. Stanhope. We were hurried to-day ;
but I must hope for it next time I
come."

My pictures," repeated Gerald, slightly
colouring; 'you are very good to dignify
them by that name ! I hope you will not
expect true pictures, though, or the contrast
will make them seem even poorer than they
are."

"I do not think there is any chance of
their seeming poor ; I have heard all about
them from Marjory."

'' Marjory is partial, you know. I do hope,
I confess, to attain to pictures some day;

at present my performances are only — what
shall I call them ? — efforts, perhaps."

And what are the grandest pictures but
efforts ? " said Lina — " efforts towards perfection
; some nearer to it than others, but
none attaining it."

Gerald looked at her with all his soul in
his eyes.

The ideal ! " he said, musingly : " Shall
we ever reach it, I wonder ? Here, I know
we never can, but hereafter ? And, if we do,
what then ? "Will success satisfy us ? or will
another ideal, undreamt of before, rise like a
mountain-peak beyond ? "

There is nothing, I think, to be gained
by such speculations," said Lina, in her
decided tone. " We have not capacities for
them at present."

Or, rather, our capacities are not unfolded
at present ; we have them, but they
are asleep."

You must take care that you do not get
too dreamy," observed Lina. She felt a
great interest in this young man, and wished
to influence him for his good. " So much
talent goes to seed, it seems to me, because
talented people are so often unpractical, or
waste their powers in abstractions. The

point is, not what we are to be and have,
but what we are and have now ; to be industrious,
and make the best of our present
powers."

Only dreams minister to work," said
Gerald : '' They are inspirations sometimes."

Dangerous ones," said Lina, sententiously.


'' Does that follow ? The best part of life,
so far, is unseen ; and no one can reach the
highest type of art, whether in poetry, music,
or painting, unless he realises the unseen asa
fact, learns to live consciously in its presence.
Because, you know, copying is by
no means the whole of art. Faithful copying
of outward detail is a great deal ; it maybe
called the body ; but the bringing out of
the unseen is the soul. And so dreaming, as
you call it, becomes part of an artist's
practical work. When the dream in his own
mind is complete, the picture is half done."

'' As for me, Mr. Stanhope, I fear that my
art sympathies are sadly defective. I am a
great admirer of fine pictures, and of really
good music ; and that is all I can say. When
you speak of the soul, and so forth, I do not
follow you. Surely, to copy nature is in all
art the principal aim."

Yes ; but what is nature ? Something
more comprehensive than one realises at first
sight. Certainly no great effect can be
gained without command of form and colour ;
but form and colour are servants, even then."

You must show me your own pictures,
and then, perhaps, I shall understand you
better," replied Lina.

To Marjory she would have replied : " This
is nonsense ;" but she already esteemed
Gerald too highly to suspect any nonsense
in him.

'' My own pictures ! There it is again,"
said Gerald, smiling. '' Talking is one thing,
and practice is another. I have not myself
even attained so far as correct drawing."

'you are very humble."

'' No ; only clear-sighted. I am all astray
for want of a master."

You will have one some day, no doubt.
Patience and resolution work wonders."

Hackneyed words ! embodying one of the
maxims which formed the unbending rule of
Lina's life; but, spoken by those beautiful
lips, they were a bugle-note to Gerald.

'thank you," he said; "I shall try to
be patient and resolute. It will be easier if
I can see you sometimes."

How simply and naturally was this sentence
spoken ! — so simply, that Lina did not
at first take it in. But a moment later the
rich colour deepened on her cheeks. She
was accustomed to the compliments of young
men ; but this was not like a compliment.
She felt, for once in her life, embarrassed,
and unable to reply.

CHAPTER 11.

A cold and clear-cut face

Perfectly beautiful : let it be granted her : where is the

fault 1

* * *

Faultily faultless, icily regular, splendidly null,

Dead perfection, no more ; nothing more." — Tennyson.

It was a relief to turn from the bustle of the
streets into the cool of Albion Square. The
acacias and horse-chestnuts were so green,
spreading, and shady; the central gardens
looked bright, yet peaceful; the whole had
an air of seclusion. A bird was singing, as
birds sing in the country, in the heights of
the boughs.

Somehow the atmosphere of the place appeared
to Gerald an emblem of Lina's life —
that calm, high life as he regarded it, apart, as
it were, above the world. Only just round the
corner roared the town, with its stir and
traffic ; this quiet square was close to it, and
yet far removed. Just so were that serene

face and palm-like form among the throng of
work-a-day men and women.

High amid starlike saints,
Radiant and calm,
Girded with golden crown,
Bearing green palm."

These words were floating in this mind ashe
walked on in silence, casting a glance
at Lina now and then, — seeing her always,
whether he glanced or not. Presently they
reached the gate of the white house, with the
geraniums blazing on either side the door.

'' You must come in and have some tea,"
said Mrs. Peele : '' We always dine early, and
drink tea at this time, on account of the
children."

'rare you too busy, Gerald?" asked
Marjory, hesitating. But Gerald did not
even look at his watch; he only thanked
Mrs. Peele, and they went in.

The interior of the house was the essence
of neatness and propriety. At school, Lina
had always been held up as a pattern of these
virtues ; and her careful hand was equally
visible here. That excellent rule — " A place
for everything, and everything in its place"
seemed scrupulously obeyed. The books

were all in the book-cases, excepting a few
arranged, after the usual fashion, upon the
round table in the drawings-room. No stray
volume lap on a sofa or smaller table, as if
thrown hurriedly down at a sudden call. It
was plain that, if books were ever read in
this household — and of this Marjory felt
sure, for Lina was a person of high education
— they were replaced in their respective
niches immediately after use. The music
was all in the music-stand ; the needlework
out of sight in box or basket; even the
chairs and foot-stools had each its own spot.
No one could have imagined that the house
contained a number of children— boys in the
majority.

The drawing-room upstairs had large
windows, overlooking a lawn, with a few neat
flower-beds and a garden-seat under a mule
Beyond the green palisade was
an extensive view over Heathcroft, with the
river winding past the grand stand, and the
villa-like houses rising among their shrubs
on the opposite bank.

How nice this is ! " said Marjory, standing
in one of the windows. " You can see
all that goes on on Heathcroft."

We see a great deal too much sometimes,"

said Lina. "It is most unpleasant
during the races."

I should have thought you were not near
enough for any unpleasantness."

We are near enough to hear the noise,
and the cheering of loud, coarse voices ; and
the bare sight, however distant, of the booths
and the low people is repugnant to me."

She is too high and pure to bear even
the knowledge of anything that is not so,"
thought Gerald. Marjory felt somewhat
guilty as she privately acknowledged that,
for her, such scenes would have an undoubted
fascination, though not unmixed with pain.

Her thoughts were diverted by the children,
who entered prepared for tea, their
hair well brushed, their hands spotless — two
girls of seven and eight, and three boys from
nine to twelve. The youngest boy was a
day-boarder with Mrs. Myers and Miss Wilmington;
the others attended the cathedral
school ; and the little girls had also at Easter
become pupils at a day-school in the square.
Mrs. Peele would have preferred to educate
her girls herself — at least, till they were
beyond her powers ; but Lina had overruled
this fancy. '' The discipline of school
was excellent," she said ; " and children found

their own level among others. So to school
Lizzie and Bertha were sent, their mother
meekly repressing the disappointment which
would arise when she remembered that from
their birth she had planned to keep them in
her own hands to the age of fourteen. At
present the holidays were not yet over ; but
Lina superintended an hour or two of holiday
tasks each morning after breakfast.

These were the second Peele family. Of
the first, Lina was considerably the youngest ;
the only son dead, as has been seen ; the
other daughters married. Mrs. Peele, gentle
and timid, had always been the most admiring
and submissive of wives. She was now
equally admiring and submissive to Lina, who
was in every way a striking likeness of her
late husband, and his favourite child.

Tea was laid out in the neat dining-room
below : a regular meal — with thick bread and
butter for the two elder boys, and three
basins of bread and milk for the others.
The children did not like bread and milk ;
but Lina said that it was the proper fare for
children ; therefore it was daily prepared, and
they were obliged to eat it. Mrs. Peele had
lately taken the bold step of adding a small
piece of bread and butter by way of reward,

VOL. II.

when the basins had been duly emptied ; but
she always looked deprecatingly at Lina, in
dispensing this indulgence, knowing that
Lina regarded it with severity. Lina poured
out the tea, and sat at the head of the
table. She had not taken off her hat ; as she
was going afterwards, she told Marjory, to
Evensong at Saint Philip's.

The children were all marvellously proper
and well behaved. They were handsome
children, with the clearly cut, regular features
which characterized the Peeles. Only the
youngest little girl resembled the mother,
being plain, light-eyed, and under-sized ; but
Marjory liked her the best. The others,
children though they were, had a cold and
critical aspect, of which this little girl was
devoid ; and she was evidently her mother's
pet. Her brothers and sisters all had high,
narrow foreheads, and manners of perfect self-possession.
This child had a square freckled
forehead and a broad head, and was shy and
awkward.

'' Lina, may I go with you to the orphanage,
and hear the children sing ? " Marjory
heard her murmur, under cover of conversation
between Mrs. Peele and Gerald.

Not to-night, dear. You must stay to

mend that dress. You neglected it before
tea."

Because, Lina I heard mamma say
that she wished the lilies were not over in our
garden, and I was thinking, and I remembered
my sixpence, and I got Charley to take
me to the nursery gardens, and I bought
some lilies for mamma's vase, to surprise her ;
and, when I had arranged them in the vase,
it was time to get ready for tea. I'll get up
early, and do the dress before breakfast on
Monday, Lina."

'' No, dear, you know the rule : that, when
you tear a thing, you mend it at once. You
will stay at home and do it."

The little thing grew red, and shuffled,
and winked to hide a tear, as she gulped
down the unpalatable bread and milk. Marjory
felt a keen sympathy with her; but Lina,
behind the urn, was immovable.

Towards the end of the meal a single bell
began to sound, somewhere in the direction
of the town, with a shrill and steady clang ;
and, directly they left the table, Lina said
that it was time to start for Saint Philip's.
Somewhat to Marjory's surprise, Gerald proposed
that they should accompany her. So
they bade good-bye to Mrs. Peele, whom
c 2

Marjory caught soothing little Bertha by a
whispered promise to read to her while she
worked. The other girl, handsome Lizzie,
walked beside Lina; the boys escaped to play.

I am sorry that the boys do not care
for the daily services," said Lina pensively :
On Wednesdays and Fridays I insist upon
their attendance ; but I do not like to force
them too much'*

You cannot expect every one to be like
yourself by nature," said Gerald, reverentially.
Marjory stared at him ; then felt irritated,
she could not have told why, and said with
some sharpness :

They would be extraordinary boys,
indeed, if they preferred St. Philip's to the
open air in such weather."

'* I do not wish to see them ordinary boys,"
said Lina, calmly.

There was but a sprinkling of worshippers,
mostly women, in the church. The sexes
were divided. Gerald sat a little to the rear of
the places into which Lina, Marjory, and
Lizzie went on the opposite side : choosing
the best prospect of Lina's face, with its
beatified expression of devotion. The service
was short, but hearty. Marjory could not
but feel that it had more of the fitting atmosphere

of worship than the clock-faced church
had known in the old days. The ugliness,
the commonplace aspect everywhere, was
done away. The surpliced choir, reverent
and attentive, appeared a fit emblem of the
holy worshippers above, and of what
those hearts should be that strive to worship
here. Nothing ludicrous or wearisome
marred any portion of church or service. If
one could not assert that more of the essence
of spirituality was here than had been in the
past, here, at all events, was more appearance
of it. Outward reverence was in perfection ;
the grandeur, the beauty, of religion were
brought into prominent place. All things
tended to realisation of the Divine Presence,
of the fact that this was His Temple. That
fact seemed forced upon all present, whether
they entered feeling it, or no.

The outward display of devotion in which
certain of the congregation indulged was,
nevertheless, slightly surprising to Marjory ;
but she remembered that minds are cast in
various moulds, and refrained from condemnation.
Lina was most punctilious in these
observances. She curtseyed at every Gloria,
bent low in certain parts of the Creed, and
frequently crossed herself.

Many eyes were bent on her as lie passed
from the church, seeming to light the whole
place with her beauty. Among the rest,
Marjory saw that one of the clergy, a young
man in a cassock, stole a long look as he
strode past her in the porch, bowing slightly
as she caught his eye, but not stopping to
speak. He went hastily on, after a string of
children in red cloaks, who were crossing the
street, headed by a sister.

That is Mr. Throckmorton," said Lina ;
*'I have a singing-class at the orphanage, so
I must say good-bye. It will be their bedtime
in half an hour."

Good-bye," said Gerald. '' Are you going
to Mrs. Carberry's party ? "

I hope so. Then I shall meet you and
Marjory ? That will be very pleasant. — I
must come and see your drawings next week,
Mr. Stanhope. Good-bye, Marjory dear.
Come, Lizzie ! "

She took the child's hand, and, with a
graceful bow and smile, went off towards the
orphanage. The door closed behind her with
a clang. Gerald, who had looked after her,
turned at the sound, and a shadow settled on
his face.

What fellows those parsons are ! " he

said; '' They are like tame cats ; no one interferes
with anything they do."

"Was it poor Mr. Throckmorton who
gave rise to that remark ? " said Marjory,
laughing : *' Pray what has he done to deserve
interference ? I only saw him walk, most
unoffending, into the orphanage ! "

That's just it," said Gerald, wrathfully :
Wherever they wish to go, they can : they
have it all their own way. Now, that fellow
he can meet Miss Peele as often as he
likes ; so long as it is at a school or an
orphanage, no one will say a word."

I thought he had such a nice face ! " said
Marjory — " so good and earnest."

Yes. No doubt others think the same.
It's just the face that women adore."

'' That depends upon the woman ! " said
Marjory ; '' Lina is not the sort of girl to adore
any man."

"There I am sure you are mistaken,"
cried Gerald, warmly : " She is the sort who
would give up everything in the world for a
man whom she really loved — die for him, if
needs were."

My dear Gerald ! how can you know so
much about her in this short time ? "

I see it in her face," said Gerald — " In

her eyes. She has one of those strong,
devoted natures. Only she is so high and
pure, she would not care for just any man.
Such a nature looks out for something above
this world — something like itself : rarer than
it supposes. That is why fellows like that
Throckmorton are so dangerous ! It is his
business to teach and preach, and hide his
humanity as much as possible ; and so he
seems like a saint, which he isn't. A good
fellow, no doubt, — but not that. — Why are
you laughing, Marjory ? "

'^ I am laughing at your lively imagination.
Who would think, to hear you talk,
that the very existence of this unfortunate
Mr. Throckmorton was hardly known to you
till to-day ?"

'' There are things one can see through at
a glance. Not that I wish to undervalue
him. No doubt he's an excellent fellow;
only he is a man, not an angel."

'' I know Lina better than you do," persisted
Marjory ; " and I have come to the
conclusion that she is one of the most essentially
unromantic people I ever knew; far
too sensible to think him, or any other, an
angel."

Never mind," said Gerald. — " I must

look up your old letters, Marjory. You used
to write me volumes about her, once."

'* Yes ; I used to think her perfect — too
good for this world. But now, in spite of
her beauty . . . Gerald, what is it that seems
wanting in her face ? "

'' I see nothing wanting in it. Nothing at
all. It is a wonderful face," he repeated,
half to himself ; '' Almost divine. Se is an
angel, if you like ! "

Marjory, half troubled, half perplexed,
watched him as he walked by her side, with
that poet's face of his, and the light in his
gray eyes. She thought of Lina, and contrasted
the two countenances. Hers was a
perfectly cast mould, she thought ; his was
full of spirit — a spirit rapt, aspiring, struggling,
not rightly understanding itself or the
world — imprisoned, craving for outlet. The
look in Shelley's eyes, in John Keats' eyes —
of both there was something; and with it
something wholly his own. — something that
she remembered evermore, as Gerald's look,
only Gerald's.

I hope you won't be disappointed anymore,
my Gerald ! " she thought ; '' You
have had so much disappointment, all your
life."

She changed the subject after this ; and
they spoke of Lina no more. When they
reached the house, Gerald said :

*' I must paint this evening, Marjory ; I
have been idle lately."

He went straight to the attic. Marjory
also shut herself up, and worked at her story
till bedtime.

CHAPTER III.

"God! God!
How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,
Seem to me all the uses of this world !
Fie on't ! ah, fie ! 'tis an un weeded garden."

Shakspeare.

The next day was Sunday; a summer Sunday,
of sunshine, calmness, peace. The atmosphere
was all vocal with the chiming of bells
from the churches in the town. How populous
that town must be ! how the people
came streaming, streaming, through the
College Yard ! The other churches, of which
there were upwards of twenty, here and
there, had each doubtless its own congregation
; but all together must have been but a
tenth part, Marjory thought, of the congregation
in the cathedral. She and Gerald had
gone early, warned by Miss Pilkington, and
had been fortunate in finding a friendly
verger, who placed them in a vacant stall.
There she sat, and watched the people flock
by, every variety of face, form, expression.
The carved faces above seemed to look down

upon them compassionately. '' "We have gone
through all," their calm eyes said. '' We
know what life is. We remember." Then
the organ pealed forth through the midst,
echoing from pillar to pillar ; the voice of a
human soul, who had long passed on higher,
but had left in these harmonies, expression
of what countless other souls would fain express
also, if they could.

The stream of people had scarcely ceased
when the long white-robed procession of
choristers, lay-clerks, minor canons, canons,
the dean, vergers with staves, the bishop,
filed in from the chapter-house. After that
Marjory tried to think of the people no more.
She had scanned the faces with double attention
in the thought that among them might
appear one seldom absent, during the last
few days, from her mind. But Hugh Vivian
was not of that multitude.

In the evening, alter the second service,
the brother and sister went a quiet walk by
the river-side, and sat down in a peaceful
place in a green field beyond the town.
Marjory had her '' Christian Year ; " Gerald
also had a book ; but he did not read. He
sat with his chin on his hand, looking out
over the water towards the Shelburn hills.

What was lie thinking of? Margery wondered.
He seemed lost in a dream of happiness and
peace. The glow fell on his face ; it was difficult
to discern what of it was from the
sunset, and what from his own musings. A
village peal was ringing in the country, faraway
; a dragon-fly, among the reeds by the
river, was humming of its new life. A hush
was over all things. They sat on till the
sunset was ended and the glow had melted
into transparent green. It had been a time
to remember and look back upon, thought
Marjory, as she turned homeward.

A little shy, but happily expectant, on the
following afternoon, she found herself, with
Gerald, crossing the lawn of Mrs. Carberry's
garden. The garden was large, with trees
and bright flowers, and a magnificent croquet-ground;
where, beneath a gaily striped
awning, Mrs. Carberry was seen presiding
over tea and servants — smiling, bowing, and
making herself agreeable. The Carberrys
were rich, childless, and hospitable ; Mrs.
Carberry in particular was never, as she
truly said, so happy as when surrounded by
guests. She was always planning to bring
friends together, to make prosperous matches,
to prepare surprises for youths and maidens.

Kind to the heart's core, she seemed to live
chiefly in the amusement of other people : —
in their amusement ; nothing much deeper.
Perhaps she was not herself sufficiently deep
for more.

'' How do you do, Miss Stanhope ? so glad
to see you ! And this is your brother. I
am delighted to make your acquaintance.
]sow you must have some tea to refresh you
after your walk : or perhaps Mr. Stanhope
will prefer claret-cup ? Please both sit down.
You see I have collected a charming assembly
of young friends. I am so glad we have a
fine day ! and, Mr. Stanhope, I owe you an
obligation."

"Indeed?" said Gerald.

Yes, indeed. I feel certain it is to you
that I owe it. I have never been able to
get Mr. Vivian here before ; but now, having
taken a fancy to you, he has actually promised
to come. I expect him every moment.
Seventeen times. Miss Stanhope, have I invited
him since he settled in Alton ! to eight
dinner-parties, five garden-parties, and four
picnics ; and he refused them all. But now,
the eighteenth time, he accepts ! Yes, Mr.
Stanhope, it is your doing ! My dear Lina,
here you are ! — and dear Mrs. Peele ! how

good of you to come ! — and the dear boys
too. Welcome all ! Now what will you have —
tea or claret-cup ! "

Mrs. Carberry's attention was quickly'
diverted — Gerald's also, as he hastened to
place a chair for Lina : neither thought again
of Mr. Vivian. But Marjory sat abstracted,
lost to the outer world. She heard indeed a
hum of voices, a flutter of dresses, a clinking
of cups and spoons ; she saw a confused
array of bright colours. But this was as a
dream. The real part was a blithe young
voice of the past, a light laugh, two dark
eyes, a young soldier riding along a shady
lane, with an air of careless grace.

'' Mrs. Carberry has spoken to you three
times, Marjory."

I beg your pardon ! " cried Marjory,
with a start.

What do you say to a game of croquet,
my dear ? Lina and your brother have just
agreed to join four other young friends.
Shall I find a partner for you in the same
game ? or shall we form another ? "

If I may, I would rather look on ; I do
not know the game," said Rocks wold-bred
Marjory.

'' Not know croquet ! " ejaculated Lina

and Gerald in one breath. Gerald added in
his kind, brotherly way :

Why, Marjory ! you never told me that.
I'll soon teach you, if you will come."

No, I should only be stupid ; and the
rest would not like it," whispered Marjory,
as she saw two thorough-paced croquet
players impatiently awaiting the end of this
discussion : one armed with a private mallet,
vaguely formidable in her ignorant blue
eyes.

Well, my dear ! this is Liberty Hall.
Do exactly as you like. Here is a comfortable
seat, where you can see all that goes
on ; and I will find a young friend for you
directly," said good natured Mrs. Carberry.

A bevy of new arrivals fortunately averted
the fulfilment of this promise ; and Marjory
was left free to enjoy her favourite part of an
unobserved spectator. The lawn was dotted
with gay parties, the sun was shining, the
flowers were sweet, every one seemed happy.
The dark side of life was hidden to-day, and
ignored. To the young like Marjory, it
seemed as a bad dream, which after all one
might easily escape. She was smiling to
herself, when Mrs. Carberry suddenly tapped
her on the shoulder.

My dear ! allow me to introduce Mr.
Vivian."

She looked up into Hugh Vivian's face.

Her heart had begun to beat like some live
creature ; the blood rushed in a vivid flame to
her face. She felt a choking in her throat,
a longing to cry, as the little girl of old
might have cried — " Mr. Hugh, I am so very
sorry for you ! "

But she was a little girl no longer, she was
a grown-up young lady ; and this was not
Mr. Hugh, this was Mr. Vivian : a man, and
not a youth — a man of the world, with a sarcastic,
bitter face. Her self-command returned
as suddenly as it had left her. She
bowed smilingly in answer to Mr. Vivian's
raised hat ; and then, by a mutual involuntary
movement, they shook hands. Good-natured
Mrs. Carberry saw in this nothing
peculiar. Her attention was greatly divided,
her kind little eyes had strayed to another
quarter of the ground, where she espied
advancing arrivals.

'' Miss Stanhope will no doubt introduce
you to her brother. You came only to meet
him, I know. Very unkind ! but I forgive
you. I bear no malice. Oh, there is sweet Mrs.
looked ! and that elegant Miss Maddox, —

VOL. II. D

and dear Mr. Pollock too — how truly kind !
I must fly ! Pray make yourself quite at
home, Mr. Vivian."

She was gone ; and Hugh Vivian sat down
at some distance, on Marjory's bench.

Why am I supposed to be so anxious to
meet your brother ? " he said, with a touch
of a smile ; " I shall be highly honoured, of
course, by his acquaintance. But I came to
meet you. I knew you, in one moment, at
the concert."

And I knew you — not in one moment,
but soon."

Did you ? I thought I was changed beyond
all knowledge. As for you, you are not
changed at all. Your face carries me back
how many years ? "

'' Eight years this month," said Marjory.

'' Eight ! Eighteen hundred — eighteen
thousand — an eternity, isn't it ? Fancy your
turning up again, and here ! Do you know
it was all I could do, the other night, to help
going up to you and saying : ' Well, little
Marjory ! ' Only you are not Marjory now ;
you are Miss Stanhope."

As he spoke, more and more of the
Mr. Hugh of yore awoke in his face ; a
softened expression dawned upon it, the

bitterness gave way, as lie looked into Marjory's
blue eyes.

'' I suppose you know about poor old Lady
Thorne ? " lie said, after a long pause.

"Yes, I went to Tliorne last week, and
saw Bellhouse."

She told you everything ? "

'eyes."

A sob rose in Marjory's throat, and half
choked her. She looked away, over the
croquet-ground, afraid to meet the dark
glance, once so sunny.

*eyes? — Well! — Was it somebody in the
Bible who said : 'The Almighty hath dealt
very bitterly with me ? ' "

It was Jacob. But he was comforted
afterwards."

Was he ? A lucky fellow ! Never mind.
How do you come to be here ? "

At this croquet-party ? "

"No, at Alton. I thought you lived
somewhere two or three hundred miles
away."

Yes, but Gerald, my brother, got a clerkship
in this bank, and I am keeping him
company in his lodgings."

Then you are going to stay ? "

I hope so. Till— if "

D 2

CC {

Till — if — ; ' have you any special hope
of living anywhere else ? "

*' Some day, perhaps, if I succeed in a
plan. I mean, if Gerald can ever afford to
give up the bank and go to London or Rome,
I shall go with him."

'' That is all you mean ? Pray excuse my
rudeness. I can't help remembering old
days, when I might ask you anything I
chose ; and I thought, perhaps, when you
said ' Till — if — ' so modestly, that you might
be "

*' What ? " said Marjory, staring.

'' Looking forward to somethingevenbetter
than life with Gerald."

There could be nothing better to me, if
he were only an artist. That is my dream
still. It used to be, if you recollect, eight
years ago."

"I recollect," said Hugh, perceiving that
she had caught no glimpse of his meaning ;
eyes more fancy-free than those which met
his own at this moment could not exist : "I
thought of it when I saw you with him."

•' How could you tell that he was
Gerald?"

I felt sure that he was your brother,
from the likeness. Then I set to work

to ferret him out, hoping to find you. How
do you like your lodgings ? "

'« Very much. I am to pay for my share
in them, by teaching the little boys."

Are you indeed ? Is that necessary ? "

Quite, if I live with Gerald ; and I want
to live with him, and make him happy — if I
can. Besides, I shall enjoy it. Why are you
disgusted ? "

Oh, nothing ; only you don't look as if
you were made for a drudge."

I shall not be a drudge ; it is only for
three hours. After twelve o'clock I shall
have all my time to myself."

'' And what have you been about, all these
years ? "

I have been living at Rocks wold," said
Marjory.

Far ' up country,' isn't it ? "

Yes, in — shire, eight miles from the
nearest town. Everything here seems quite
exciting after it."

Ah, that is how you have kept the same
face, I suppose ! You have lived ' far from
the madding crowd.' I suppose nothing
ever happens at Rockswold ? What did you
do all day?"

*' Endless things, I was never dull one

minute. I should be much more likely to
grow dull here in the town, if it were not for
Gerald, and my plan."

I wonder what this wonderful plan maybe
! Something in * Gerald's ' behalf, of
course."

You would laugh at it," said Marjory :
You used not to look so scornful ! "

The words slipped out unawares ; she bit
her lip, and blushed.

'' No, that was my ignorance."

I don't understand," said Marjory, repelled
by his manner.

'' My ignorance of this world, I mean ;
and the people and affairs of it. I took it all
for a very different concern. But enough of
that ! I want to hear about you. So you
have really gone on, ever since I saw you
last, nowhere but at Rocks wold ? "

*' Yes, I have never been even on a visit.
I went to a day-school for eighteen months ;
but that was at Rockswold too. It was there
I met Lina."

I beg your pardon ! "

Lina Peele. You know her, I think ? "

He looked across the croquet-ground to
where Lina, calm and beautiful, stood, mallet
in hand, awaiting her turn. As he looked.

lie was cold and bitter again in a moment ;
the softened expression was gone.

'miss Peele ! Yes. I had once the misfortune
to be under her father. He was
manager of the BuUino^ham bank, and I a
junior clerk. That was part of the style of
thing, Miss Stanhope, which opened my eyes
as to the world."

'' Did he know your history ? "

Yes, that was my chief offence. An idle
cross between a soldier and a country gentleman
! nothing could be more objectionable.
Your school-fellow, Miss Peele, who is his
living picture, would say the same."

She seems to have adored her father. I
thought, from her description, that he must
have been a delightful man," said Marjory,
hesitating between sympathy with Hugh, and
a certain vague doubt of him, inspired by
Lina's innuendoes.

'' The Peeles all thought each other perfect.
That was the family characteristic. He
could be delightful, perhaps, on occasion —
to certain people. He was a rigid kind of a
man, formed on rules, with a handsome face,
carved into faultless lines, like his character.
If I am not uncommonly mistaken, Miss
Peele is just such another."

But don't you admire lier ? she is so
lovely ! " said Marjory, gazing meditatively
at Lina, with the sting of conscience which
troubled her when she feared to be disloyal
to her friend.

'' I acknowledge that she is lovely; and I
should perhaps admire her as much as, I
suppose, she deserves, if it were not that,
when I look at her, I see Mr. Peele ; and that
is enough for me."

'you seem to have disliked him very much!"

'' I simply hated the fellow. And I had
cause to hate him."

His face looked dark and hard, like that
of some fallen spirit. Marjory remembered
that fierce passion which had filled her with
such horror at Thorne ; which had given rise
to the little prayer offered nightly since that
time. Would that prayer ever be answered,
she wondered ?

More of that pitying wonder than she
knew, was discernible in her eyes. He saw
it, and again the hardness softened, as he
looked upon that face which seemed a ray
from a by-gone paradise.

You think me very horrible," he said,
with a melancholy smile ; '' I fear I am hardly
fit to talk to you."

I don't think you horrible at all," said
Marjory, colouring; *' Only I am sorry that
you dislike the Peeles. Lina and I were such
great friends at school."

'' I remember what a child you were for
beauty 1 You thought her an angel because
she had perfect features; that was all."

Not all, I hope. She is very good and
clever, much better in every way than I am.
I could not help looking up to her."

She is a saint, no doubt. But you know
there is a certain coldness in saints ; and the
Peele saintliness is peculiarly icy. As to her
father, he was made of ice ! I can't imagine
how he got through so many summers."

"And Lina's brother — Eichard — what was
he like?"

Why did Marjory ask this question ? She
did not know if she were right to ask it ; for
therewith came the recollection of that mysterious
wrong, connected, Lina had said,
with her brother. Was it a breach of friendship
thus to seek information concerning
him, from the person by whom that wrong
had been done ?

Richard," he repeated : " Well, he was
a splendid-looking fellow — the handsomest
of the lot ; and that is saying a good deal.

In his own family lie passed as a paragon to
the last. His father believed in him almost
as implicitly as in himself: that is saying a
good deal, too ! "

And Lina was devoted to him, though
she mentions him so seldom. Did you know
him well ? "

'' I saw a good bit of him ; he used to be
in and out of the bank. Yes, and I knew a
good bit about him too. His father and
sister would have been slightly astonished atone
or two things I could have told them."

But was he not what they thought
him?"

As to that, if he were half they thought
him, he must have been more than man. I
ought to be, and am, the last in the world to
blame a fellow for having a little more human
nature in him than marble statues find necessary
! But hypocrisy is another thing."

'' Are you sure he was a hypocrite ? Poor
Lina ! You are mistaken, I hope," said
Marjory, reproachfully.

"Never mind — I don't want to condemn
him, I'm sure; he is dead, and there is an
end of it. I was never more surprised than
when I found his name below Mr. Peele's, in
the BuUingham cemetery ! "

Was that the first you knew of his
death ? "

Yes," said Hugh : " I had been away—
out of England — nearly two years. I went
back, on my way here, for an hour, to Bullingham,
to see my mother's grave."

He paused. Marjory, glancing at him, was
struck with the world-weary look which she
had observed at the concert. Dark memories
seemed to flock about him. He seemed
tired, not in body but in soul.

Life is a mystery," she said dreamily.

'' It is indeed. And a cruelty."

Oh, don't say that ! " cried the girl, with
a pain in her heart.

'' To some, I meant. Not to all, perhaps.
I hope it will not be so to you," he added,
softening, with his old kindness, as he met
her troubled eyes.

"It is a mystery only : — indeed — I feel
sure," said Marjory, as if pleading : '' If
people had only patience — just to wait and
see "

Pardon me, have you ever gone through
a great trouble ? "

I was often very unhappy, as a child,
when my uncle and aunt were so poor. As
to a great trouble — I don't know."

That is quite sufficient. Wait till you
do know, and answer me then."

But that poor old woman at Thorne —
Bellhouse — she has gone through awful
troubles, — I don't know how I could have
borne half ! — and she does not think life
cruel."

Unfortunately, we are not all old
women."

'' You consider faith an old-womanish
quality, then ? "

'' I don't go into abstractions. I am thinking
of facts. You remember my mother ? "

Yes," said Marjory, under her breath.

'' Can you fancy what it must have been
to see her shut up in two close little rooms,
in a provincial town, suffering every hour for
want of things which had been daily bread
to her all her life, and dying by inches because
I had no money to get proper medical
help — help which might have saved her !
Dying by inches, painfully, all through a
long, hot summer and autumn. Can you
fancy it ? "

He went on as if half to himself.

The sky deaf, blind, dumb, all the while,
no pity in Heaven or Earth : and she in
tortures, — until at last I was almost glad to

see lier die. After that, I think it is small
wonder if I can't say much about faith ! "

A long pause followed : Marjory sat deep
in thought. Meanwhile the blue sky beamed,
like one great smile, on the sunlit garden ;
clear young voices, merry laughter, rang
across the velvet lawn ; happy faces glowed ;
flowers bloomed ; gnats danced in magic
measures in the balmy air ; a lark soared upward
into the ether, singing as if mad with joy.

'ris it all a mockery ? " cried Marjory, of
a sudden. '' No ! I will not believe it. Mr.
Vivian, I could say what I think — only I will
not, because you tell me I have suffered too
little to have any right. I wish I too could
go through some great sorrow — as great as
yours — if that would teach me to convince
you!"

"Don't wish that! "he exclaimed, earnestly.
'' You don't know what you say. Why should
you take my words to heart so ? I am nothing
to you."

You and Jessie ! " she said, hardly hearing,
and going on with her thoughts. '' You
two whom I saw together on my first view
of Thorne ! You both seemed so happy that
day, so light-hearted. And now she is gone —
no one knows where ; and you ! "

When did you see Jessie and me together
? " inquired Hugh.

*' In the lane by the plantations. You were
riding, and Jessie was getting burdocks."

She blushed crimson, suddenly remembering
Jessie's request and her own promise.


Surely poor Jessie must be dead ! " she
went on abruptly, '^ or she would have written
to her mother."

'' I don't see that that follows," said Hugh.
Marjory glanced up quickly, surprised at his
tone. He, too, had coloured ; a hot flush
had mounted to the roots of his hair.

'' You seem to have an unlimited belief in
goodness, divine and human ! In my opinion
Jessie would write or keep silence as suited
her own purposes. She was not overburdened
with heart."

Were you at Bullingham when she disappeared
? "

''No, I was gone."

"You saw her sometimes, I suppose, as
you knew the Bulkleys. Had she seemed
unhappy or unsettled ? When did you see
her last? " asked Marjory, running on with
her eager questions.

He frowned, as at some bitter recollection,

and observed gloomily : " You seem very
much interested in Jessie."

I can't help it ; and her disappearance
was so strange ! Yes, she inst be dead :
but why did not her husband write ? "

Don't talk of her ; you remind me of
painful things," said Hugh : '' I wish I could
lose my memory ! "

As he spoke, one of the games of croquet
had come to an end ; the players dispersed ;
some of them,laughiDg and chaffing, advanced
over the turf. Mr. Vivian muttered to Marjory
some hasty excuse, and walked off in an
opposite direction.

CHAPTER IV.

In the years I've changed,
Far and wide my steps have ranged,
And many sins and errors have been on me avenged."

Alexander Smith.

The croquet was over ; it lead grown dusk ;
the greater number of the guests were gone :
but hospitable Mrs. Carberry had laid hands
on a few, and carried them in to hear her new
piano. She did not play herself, she said;
but her young friends played. It was a rich
treat to hear them. Dear Lina must give
her opinion of the instrument, and sing to it
one of her lovely songs. Twilight was music's
hour ! the lamps need not be lighted ; dear
Lina required no notes. So they sat, sprinkled
here and there about the drawing-room, the
low windows opened widely, admitting balmy
fragrance. All were silent, while Lina's
beautiful fingers explored the tones of the
new piano. Hugh Vivian had entered among
the rest, and sat alone in deepest shadow.

A tiny ante-room adjoined the drawing-room
; the window of this also was open ;

and here Marjory's favourite star was visible,
brightening the twilight sky. Marjory, from
her station near the door, looked at this
window with longing ; at length, unnoticed,
she rose, and slipped away to a low chair
beneath it. The music came softened from
the further room ; it seemed to come from
the sky — from that star, thought Marjory.


*' Now, Lina, my love, treat us to that
charming little song which I admired so
much the other day," said Mrs. Car-berry.


Lina struck a few light chords, and obeyed.
The simple words, set to a sweet and plaintive
air, rang out in her clear voice through
the stillness.

When the balmy breath of Spring
Wakens nature into gladness,
When a thousand voices sing,

Even mine forgets its sadness ;
When the shady paths I tread,
Where the pine-trees wave overhead —
O forest green and fair,
O pine-trees waving high !
How sweet your cool retreat, how full of rest !
Here, free from care and pain,
Gay as a child again,
Peace and contentment reign within my breast

VOL. II. E

Oh, how sweet in forest glade,

When the mid-day sun is shining,
Underneath the leafy shade,

On a bank of moss reclining,
Lulled by many a murmuring stream,
Through the long bright hours to dream ! —
O forest green and fair !
O pine-trees waving high !
How sweet your cool retreat, how full of rest !
Here, free from care and pain.
Gay as a child again,
Peace and contentment reign within my breast !"

forest green and fair ! pine-trees
waving high 1 " Was it a cry from some
spirit imprisoned among close streets and
high walls, and pining for places far away, in
the country that it loved ? Marjory's eyes
wandered from the calm star to the shadowy
room which she had left. Sitting alone, like
herself, half hidden by the folds of a curtain,
she saw Hugh Vivian. His head was thrown
a little back ; his hands were clasped behind
it : he was looking far into the past, Marjory
felt certain. She knew how, in the semi-darkness,
his eyes were burning like fires in
gloom. She saw the vision upon which they
rested : — a dingy room in a dingy street, the
air close and full of din ; and her, that beautiful,
proud lady, her majestic face flushed

and contracted by pain — lying on a liard sofa,
among ugly surroundings, and thinking of
Copelandss, her home.

'' O forests ! pine woods ! " rang the
cry ; ''0 world of suffering ! multitude
of aching hearts ! " Tears, unnoticed by herself,
stole down Marjory's face, as she looked,
and thought, and listened.

Suddenly Hugh Vivian was beside her.
He sat down on a chair opposite her own,
resting his elbow on the window-sill.

'' What are you thinking about ? " said he.
'you are just like your old self! — creeping
away alone, and looking on from the background."


'you startled me," said Marjory: "I
saw you in the drawing-room just now ! — I
can hear the music better here. And see ! " —
she pointed to the star.

"I know that star well," he said, gazing
at it with a strange forlornness of expression.
" It was shining, just as it is now, on
the night when my mother died. She noticed
it — told me to look. Where is she now, I
wonder ? "

Somewhere far up beyond it," said Marjory,
softly.

"You have still that old innocent belief, I

UNIVERSITY OF

see. Well I I wouldn't disturb it for the
world ; it must be so delightful.

' There is beyond the sky
A 'Even of joy and love.'

How poor old Lady Thome's school-children
used to drone that out ! "

'' It is true ; I believe it more firmly than
ever," said Marjory's earnest voice.

I wish it were within the range of
balloons," said Hugh. " Behold Miss Peele !
Depend on it, she is advancing to rescue you
before your mind is finally corrupted."

Lina had indeed risen, her song ended,
decidedly declining further performance ; and,
while Mrs. Carberry persuaded another dear
young friend to replace her, she, tall and
graceful, and with a purpose, made her way
to the ante-room.

'' Let me offer you a chair," said Huo-h.

"No, thank you — I will sit here," said
Lina, coldly, stationing herself upon an ottoman
close to Marjory. " How pleasant it is,
Marjory, here ! — cooler than in the drawing-room."


I wish it were light enough to look at the
books," said Marjory : " Here is a table quite
covered by them."

'you don't lose much by not examining
those," said Lina ; " Mrs. Carberry is not
very discerning in her choice. She buys
every book that she hears talked of — nice, or
not nice."

'' Might we be honoured by a definition of
the word ' nice ? ' " said Hugh.

You and I would hardly agree respecting
it," remarked Lina, with the same cold distance
; " Miss Stanhope — to whom I was
speaking — knows what I mean."

'' Do you. Miss Stanhope ? Pray explain
it to me then," said Hugh. "What do you
call 'a nice book? ' "

A nice book ! " repeated Marjory, a little
nervous, as she observed Lina's manner ;
'' I think a new definition of that word should
be given in the next edition of Johnson's
Dictionary. I myself should call a book
nice, if it were interesting, pleasant ; in fact,
if I liked it. That is how the word is used
nowadays."

''I mean not merely that," said Lina;
I could not call a book nice if it were irreligious,
or in any way improper."

'' Oh, of course not ! " exclaimed Marjory.
But does Mrs. Carberry buy such books as
those ? "

Hugh all the while sat listening, his lip
slightly curling in a smile.

That paper on the table now — " pursued
Lin a, with a gesture of her finger, her head
a little higher than usual — " ' The Lynx.' If
I were Mrs. Carberry, I should be quite
afraid to leave it lying here."

"You would dread the effect on your
housemaid ? " inquired Hugh.

Fortunately, it is beyond a housemaid's
comprehension. I say all this for your sake,
Marjory, because I know that your appetite
for reading is omnivorous ; and it does not
do to rely implicitly upon Mrs. Carberry.
She would offer to lend you any number of
books or papers if she heard you express the
least desire for them : and therefore I think
it well to warn you."

And pray may I ask how the ' Lynx '
incurs peculiar condemnation ? " said Hugh.

I really do not care to discuss the point,"
said Lina, frigidly ; " Marjory, if you doubt
my judgment, glance over — do not read — its
last article on ' Modern Fiction ; ' and you
will see what I mean."

Do just have the goodness to mention
what special points you disapprove in that
article," said Hugh, with some eagerness.

*' Yes, do," said Marjory. " I won't read
it, if it is bad. I would rather hear your
report."

And, then, there is so much less trouble
in forming one's opinions at second-hand,"
observed Hugh.

'' Since you ask it, Marjory, I will explain
myself a little more clearly," said Lina. 'the
articles are undoubtedly very able, though
caustic and unpleasant in tone. They profess
to take a bird's-eye view of the range of
popular fiction, dividing modern novels into
classes, and picking them to pieces at the
rate of a class a week. This week it is ' The
Goody Class ; ' the name alone is significant !
but what I myself think peculiarly shocking,
is an attack on the doctrine of a special Providence,
which the critic remarks to be ' the
leading idea,' urged with absurd familiarity,
in the religious novel. After quoting various
passages illustrative of his assertion, and
giving each a ludicrous turn, he goes on to a
general discussion of the principle : and anything
more irreligious I never read."

Perhaps he is an atheist," said Marjory.

An atheist without doubt; and worse."

What do you consider to be worse than
an atheist, Miss Peele ? " said Hugh.

'* One who is not satisfied with his own
unsettled opinions, but does his best to unsettle
those of others," said Lina, severely ;
'' I imagine the critic in question to be a badman,
who has brought upon himself various
misfortunes, and lays them to the charge of
his Maker."

Before you imagine anything further,"
said Hugh, " I had better tell you that I am
the man."

'you ! " exclaimed Marjory, aghast.

Lina showed no surprise ; she simply
appeared to petrify, saying nothing.

'depend upon it," said Hugh, warming in
proportion, — not with a pleasant warmth ; he
looked another person from the Mr. Hugh who
had talked of old days to Marjory ; — " depend
upon it, people who have courage to speak
out their minds on these subjects merely echo
the minds of myriads who are too cowardly
to speak, and so smoulder away in silence."

To put it plainly, then, you think that
the majority of professing Christians disbelieve
in a Providence," said Lina, with slow
distinctness.

She would have disdained, but for Marjory,
to answer him ; but Marjory's principles
must be protected.

As to comfortable Christians of no particular
fibre, and little to try it if they had,
I don't pretend to say. But for the multitude
of poor wretches who knock about in
the world, keeping their heads above water
as best they can, I do think — and I not only
think, I am certain — that the majority of
those, whatever stock of ready-made beliefs
they may start with, soon find by stern experience
that Providence helps them just
as much, and as little, as they help themselves."


Cela va sans dire," said Lina, sententiously
; " That is a proverb, you know."

'' Exactly. A very soothing proverb for
those who start fair, with plenty of health
and strength, a capital, and perhaps helping
hands — 'interest,' as people call it. Such
fortunate beings have only to be industrious,
keep their eyes well open, and off* they go !
The lookers-on clap, and cry, ' Tally-ho ! '
They are pointed out as examples ; probably
it is all set down to a habit of rising at five,
A.M., or of supping on oatmeal porridge;
such practices are supposed to be specially
blessed by superior powers. Altogether,
they prosper, grow sleeker every year, and
go at last, like ' the blessed gentleman in the

white waistcoat,' in oak coins, with silver
handles, to Heaven. Happy fellows ! they
believe in Providence, no doubt."

I think you hardly know what you are
talking of, Mr. Yiviai]," said Lina.

Marjory said nothing ; she was absorbed
in listening, in watching Hugh's face through
the twilight.

Just let us look at the other side ; there
is a different kind of start: the multitude
who set out with no money."

That is their parents' fault. Poor people
have no business to marry."

'' Human nature is stronger, I fear, than
poverty. Never mind whose fault it is, — there
is the fact : — multitudes turned upon the
world, without money, perhaps without
health, without much education, without big
friends to give them a push or a pull, — in
short, without anything in particular — except
mouths which must eat, hearts which must
beat, bodies which must suffer, and brains
which must form their own conclusions.
Multitudes of them. You ignore them, perhaps,
but I tell you that they are here, all
round you," said Hugh, fiercely ; '' Some of
them sink, no doubt, at an early stage, into
nonentities, or beasts of the earth ; but

millions are of a different stamp, — they struggle
and strive, on and up, do the best they can ;
but what they can, is not what they would ;
and they make no way. Circumstances
sweep them off into hospitals, — into workhouses,
into the slums of great towns, into
niggardly homes. There they die out, like
sparks which flickered, and so ended, for
lack of fuel. If they had a little money, ora
little more strength of body, or a special
talent for some useful art, Providence might
interfere. Having nothing of this, they have
no Providence : — can you blame them, if they
question its existence ? Only, as I said just
now, very few dare to own such questioning."


I can express no opinion about unbelievers,"
said Lina ; '' They, and their tenets,
are not desirable subjects of thought. I do
not think it at all right that Miss Stanhope,
who is young and inexperienced, should hear
such conversation."

'' Then Miss Stanhope had better cut me
from henceforth," said Hugh, starting up ;
I am not at all ashamed of my colours. I
am an unbeliever. I do not see how any one
in my circumstances can be otherwise. Unbelief
must at least be less demoralising than

submission to such a Power as that wliicli
you call Providence."

Had an evil spirit entered into him, to
utter its blasphemies ? Marjory trembled.
She felt an impulse to rise, and fly from the
presence of this man, who was Mr. Hugh no
longer. The same feeling, not as an impulse,
but a principle, had moved Lina. She rose
in silence, with quiet grace, gave one look,
as summoning Marjory to follow, and walked
majestically from the room. In the doorway
she turned, expecting Marjory ; but Marjory
had never stirred. She remained in her
place, her head showing like a shadowy
carving against the opal background of sky :
alone with Mr. Vivian.

For one second she had been on the point
of following Lina ; but suddenly, like a flame,
a passion of pity arose within her. She forgot
herself, what she was, where she was ;
and thought only of him, of the fiery furnace
into which his soul had been cast. What
wonder if the devils had taken advantage, to
blind his eyes, and whisper in his ears ? —
Long ago she had caught a glimpse of a dark
side in his nature ; now it had been quickened,
by misery, to an unnatural life. But
the better side, which had so charmed her,

was not dead. She thought of her prayer
and took courage.

'miss Peele is gone. Why don't you go?"
he said, turning suddenly upon Marjory. He
was angry; there was wickedness in his eyes.
She would have shrunk away ; but that pity
held her back.

"Why should I go ? " she asked, speaking
half unconsciously ; it seemed less she, than
that pitying spirit, who spoke. — " It is only
because you don't understand. — Oh, how
I will pray that God may make you
understand ! "

She paused and checked herself, afraid of
a sneer ; but no, he only looked at her ; and
his expression softened. Gradually the evil
spirit seemed to fade into some inner gloom.
He did not speak ; but suddenly he turned to
the window, and, resting his head upon his
arm on the opened sash, looked out again
towards the star. Marjory could not see his
face ; she sat motionless and silent. Thus
full five minutes went by.

'' I must go," he said, turning abruptly
back, and holding out his hand : " Goodnight.
— Thank you."

The next moment he was in the drawing-room,
shaking hands with Mrs. Carberry?
and then he was gone.

CHAPTEH V.

I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold 1 "

Shakspeare.

The Peeles had risen ; Gerald rose likewise,
and looked about for his sister.

'' Come, Marjory ! We shall have a pleasant
walk. Do you see how bright the
moon is ? "

'' Marjory," said Lina, at her elbow, '' I
wish to speak to you alone. Ask your
brother to walk in front with mamma."

Gerald looked suddenly blank, but acquiesced
; offering his arm to Mrs. Peele. Mrs.
Carberry made voluble adieux, full of hopes
for future meetings ; and the party set forth,
Marjory growing nervous as she entered
upon her tete-astute with Lina. Gerald,
attentive to Lina's least wish, remained resolutely
in front, doing his best to maintain
conversation with Mrs. Peele. The boys
were still further in advance, and thus they
all passed through the iron gates of Mr Car-berry's

domain, and under the shrub-bordered
wall, towards the town.

*' I am anxious to give you a hint, Marjory,"
said Lina, in a low voice : " You must
not be offended. At Rockswold, as you
know, you saw little of the etiquettes of
society."

Well !" said Marjory, not over-graciously.

I went into the ante-room, much as I
dislike that Mr. Vivian, for your sake. You
see, Marjory, dear, it would pain me no less
than yourself, if — through ignorance, mind,
I know quite well, only through ignorance —
you should be talked about."

'' I don't understand you one bit."

'your understanding will enlarge, when
you have lived here a little longer ; at present
I suppose I must speak plainly. Do
you know, dear, it is not at all the thing fora
young lady to sit alone with a gentleman
in a room separate from others ? "

'why, everybody saw us! we were close
to the drawing-room," cried Marjory, crimson.
Besides, he came; I could not help it."

I know ; but, when he came, it would
have been better if you had gone. ' A word
to the wise is sufficient.' You will remember
another time."

I don't know that I shall," said Marjory;
*' I can't bear the thought of such nonsense
between Mr. Vivian and me ! Lina, I wish
you had not put it into my head ! It is only
that I can't forget old times, or his kindness
when I was a lonely little child. I should
hate to forget it ! and if it does him good,
after his troubles, to talk to me about past
days, how can I repulse him ? It would be
quite wicked, when neither of us means any
harm, — just for stupid etiquette ! "

Etiquette is very necessary," said Lina :
'' and there is another point. He is no way
a fit companion for you. I was simply astonished
that you could remain in the room
with him, after his talking in that shocking
manner ! I myself could not have stayed
another moment."

You never knew him in former years,"
cried Marjory, much excited. " If you had
seen him as he was atThorne,and atCopelands,
his home, you could not help pitying him."

"It is sometimes a painful duty to set
pity aside," said Lina calmly. " When pity
and duty clash, no right-minded person
should hesitate. We must be faithful; we
must deliver our own souls; and then weare
free."

"But suppose you care for the wicked
person, and want to help him ? " cried
Marjory, on the verge of tears. " That is
all very well if one thinks only of one's own
soul, and of being ' faithful ' in a rigid kind
of way ; but suppose one is longing to help
him ? " repeated Marjory, passionately.

*'Ah, there is the danger!" said Lina,
quite unruffled. "When we allow personal
feelings to place themselves in competition
with duty, we cannot tell where they may
lead us. You make me afraid for you,
Marjory," she added with composure. "Do
read Abercrombie ' On the Moral Feelings,'
and Locke * On the Understanding,' once
more. You know your failing, and how I
have cautioned you on the importance of
self-government."

Yes, I know, but It is no use ! I
could not make you understand what is in
my mind. — Why is it that you hate Mr.
Vivian so?" asked Marjory, with sudden
change of tone.

"Marjory I" said Lina, in mild reproof;
I hate no one ; I merely have reasons for
believing Mr. Vivian to be a bad man ;
and I fear lest you should suffer from his
society."

VOL. II. F

** I wish you would tell me your reasons."

I may, perhaps, some day. Meanwhile,
I hope that you will take my advice, and have
as little as possible to do with him. Now I
have delivered my conscience; this unpleasant
subject may close."

She was evidently comfortably assured of
having performed a duty; and ere long she
was chatting with her mother and Gerald,
while Marjory walked in silence alongside,
smothering a tempest in her heart. Marjory
felt, with a strangely sudden intensity, that
Lina and she could never again be real
friends.

Between their natures a great gulf was
fixed ; she had partially suspected it before ;
now she saw it ; there it was — full of ice and
snow — yearning at their feet ! She had not
discovered it in the innocent school-days,
because her mind had been dazzled by the
light of Lina's statuesque beauty, streaming
from its other side. Was Gerald dazzled now
in the same way ? thought Marjory, with a
sudden pang.

She glanced at him ; his cheek was flushed ;
his gray eyes shone with that new radiance,
which she had noticed of late. He seemed
to hang upon Lina's words — upon her

looks, — when she smiled, this whole face
glowed.

'' Oh, my Gerald ! " thought Marjory, witH
a stab at her heart. The annoyance on her
own score was forgotten ; she was full, not
of herself, but of those two — Hugh on one
hand, Gerald on the other. But Hugh Vivian
repelled no less than he attracted her, she
thought ; pity alone maintained her vivid
interest in him ! while Gerald — somehow her
whole life seemed bound up in Gerald. As
lie looked at him, now, that new pang of
anxiety sharp within her, she felt that she
could cheerfully die for him.

They had soon reached the college-yard ;
but Gerald insisted upon escorting the Peeles
to their square. Marjory went in alone.
The lamp was lighted in the little sitting-room,
and the table prepared for supper;
but she would not sit down without Gerald ;
and she felt too restless to settle to books or
work. The thought struck her that she
would beguile the time by looking at his
pictures ; she lit a candle, and mounted to
the attic.

The low window, still open, had no blind.
She seemed almost on a level with the starlit
sky, stretching away before her. Setting
F 2

down lier candle, sie knelt within the framework,
and looked out, her elbows on the sill.
Far below, by the river-side, a tall lamp was
burning; a policeman was slowly pacing
along the towing-path ; the opposite bank lay
like a shadow-land, still, mysterious. It
seemed to her as if again that cry were
ringing —

forests green and fair !
O pine-woods waving high !
How sweet your cool retreat, how full of rest ! "

Somehow, intermingled with those words,
came thoughts of Gerald. If she should ever
be compelled to see Gerald suffering, as Hugh
had seen his mother, powerless to help, even
relieve — what would it be to her ? to her
hope, to her faith ? She shrank from the
mere idea ; and with that shrinking rose new
pity for Hugh. What was she, she thought,
to condemn him ? — she who had never known
what anguish meant ! What if she yet should
know ?

She shrank again, and moved from the
window. In doing so, her eyes fell upon
Gerald's substitute for an easel. Upon it
rested a picture ; not the imperfect sketch of
the '' Bridge " — another, complete in colours.

Raising her candle, she recognised at once
the painting which had been turned to the
wall : that of the sculptor, gazing at the
vision of his ideal, for which Gerald had
vainly so long sought a face to satisfy his
fancy.

Marjory looked in astonishment. The
features were no longer a blank; the face
was filled in. A brush, from which the paint
had not been washed, lay on the boards supporting
the easel. The light of the candle
streamed full upon the upraised eyes, half
wondering, half enchanted, of the sculptor;
upon the shining robe and bright hair of
the floating figure ; upon the countenance,
etherealised, beatified, which that bright
hair crowned.

Beatified, yet familiar ! A startled cry
broke from Marjory. That face, so true, yet
so untrue, in its portrayed, was the face of
Lina.

CHAPTER VL

"And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts."

Longfellow.

No knight of olden time, riding full tilt into
the tournament, his lady's colours at his
helm, felt his courage quickened by a brighter
or more disinterested flame than that which
fired Marjory's heart, when she began her
commonplace work in Mrs. Myers' schoolroom.
It was a hot August morning ; and
the sun, high betimes, shone through big
bare windows upon boarded floors, long
deal tables, wooden forms, a flock of little
boys of all ages from six to eleven ; upon
Miss Pilkington, walking to and fro, with a
magisterial air and full eyes ; upon Mrs.
Myers, gently striving to keep order, as she
dealt out slates and copy-books from a cupboard.
In upon this scene came Marjory,
with blue eyes bright and shining, and a face
all aglow with hope and purpose. The rampant
little boys regarded her with pleasure,
opining that she was young and '^ up to

larks," like themselves. Miss Pilkington,
too, was pleased, and felt that lie had every
cause for satisfaction in her new assistant.

Yet all the while, deep in the girl's heart,
beneath the upper radiance, rankled a sting :
the remembrance of that face in Gerald's
picture. She resolutely assured herself that
she was a foolish girl, full of fancies — that
Lina's face had without doubt a beauty
worthy to be reverenced, — that admiration
was one thing, love another — she herself admired
much that she did not love. Why
bring love at all into the question, she
asked : — but then the sting rankled more
sharply than before .

As days passed on, however, she saying
nothing to Gerald, and he nothing to her,
of the alteration in the painting — the poignancy
of that discovery lost its power. She
felt free of care again, and accused herself
of making a mountain from a molehill. '' It
is my quiet Blocks wold life," she thought,
which has made me morbid, and inclined
to take everything au grand series. I am
glad I have come out of it, if only for a
while, into the realities of active life. I have
no time now for imaginations."

Her hours were indeed amply filled. She

and Gerald both rose early, and sometimes
went out before breakfast ; at other times
Marjory read, sitting in her window, the
river flowing beneath, the meadows, in their
morning freshness, stretching beyond, the
dew upon the grass. From nine to twelve
she was busy in the school, soon becoming
greatly interested in her pupils, studying
their respective characters, and winning their
hearts apace. In these few hours of teaching
she had no sense of drudgery, — only of pleasurable
occupation, which she soon learned
to love for its own sake.

Then, from twelve to one, came a free
hour, spent sometimes in music or reading,
sometimes in the cathedral. She often went
into the cathedral, and sat alone, looking up
into the vastness, toward the immortal figures,
motionless, yet full of inspiration. Sometimes
the organist was practising ; sometimes
a young boy's voice, reciting an anthem solo,
rang from behind the screen. Then life and
all things in it became transfigured; and
that transfiguration often lasted throughout
the day, sometimes into the next day, and
gave her new and wonderful ideas in her
work for Gerald. That work, her book, was
in these days the principal thought in her

mind : all else seemed subordinate to it.
She was continually dreaming about it, seeing
its people and its scenes, as living pictures,
though visible to no other. Between the
afternoon and evening, she generally contrived
to get four hours for the mechanical
part, the writing. At this time her mind
was so full that she had only to sit down,
and the sentences, bad or good, flowed quickly
from her pen to the paper. She was young,
and strong, and healthy, and felt as though
she had a power of almost unlimited work.
Gerald came home at one to their early
dinner, which was over by 1.30, and as soon
afterwards as was possible Marjory sat down
to her desk.

In the evening, in the cool of the day, the
brother and sister went long rambling walks
together ; sometimes into the country, sometimes
about Heathcroft, sometimes through
the streets, where human life teemed with
never-failing interest for Marjory. Perhaps,
when they came back, there was space for
another hour of writing ; perhaps it was already
half-past nine, the hour of supper, the
most cheerful meal of the day. After supper
they would sit and talk — talks treasured in
Marjory's memory; or they would read,

Gerald in the arm-clair, and Marjory on a
stool at his feet ; or, by mutual consent —
for there were times when both were too full
of ideas for aught else — Gerald would go to
his attic, and paint, and Marjory would return
to her writings.

Of outward society they had fully as much
as they desired. Several ladies called upon
Marjory, acquaintances of Lina or of Mrs.
Carberry : kind people, who felt a benevolent
interest, not unmixed with pity, for the two
young workers alone in lodgings : —they did
not know how little such pity was needed ! —
Lina had contrived to convey a strong impression
of the gentility of her friends : although,
she said, from peculiar circumstances,
Miss Stanhope had chosen to help her brother
by a little light teaching, while sharing his
home. Thus the brother and sister were
received favourably, and as equals, into the
town society, which, as a rule, was naturally
inclined to classify new-comers by a standard
based upon possessions rather than personalities.
In this instance, the rule was
waived, in deference to Lina : who, though
her Alton residence had been of no longstanding,
was already deemed an authority
in social matters, an oracle of good-breeding —

intimacy with whom was an acknowledged
criterion of caste. From her emanated a
lustre which, without her, gentle little Mrs.
Peele could not have possessed ; but by this
reflected radiance the whole family shone as
luminaries in the town society — the town
society as distinguished from the cathedral
society, which disdained the town, associating,
beyond its own pale, mainly with county
magnates. Even Lina's empire could not
penetrate to these sacred precincts.

Invitations came often to Gerald and
Marjory through the bright days of summer
and early autumn : to croquet parties — for
in those times croquet was rampant — to
picnics, to evening assemblies, concluded by
a dance. Sometimes Marjory fancied that
her brother was more anxious than he had
need to be, than from his letters, and her
first knowledge of him, she should anticipate,
to accept these invitations. She herself regarded
them as interruptions, both to his
work, and her own : and often persuaded him
to refuse one or another, and spend the time
thus redeemed in painting or sketching, orin
studies conducive to the same. But
Gerald, as he said, '' Well ! I suppose you're
right ! " and turned from the tempting note,

sometimes checked in its birth a sigh which
Marjory could not bear. Then on the next
opportunity, without consulting him, she
would write unqualified acceptance ; and no
one, when the time came, was happier in these
social meetings than she ! Her enjoyment
was untinged by any alloy of worldliness or
self-exaltation.

The change from her daily routine was
novelty and pleasure : for the rest, she regarded
herself, and Gerald also, as they had
once agreed, as members of " the working
classes" — whose special aim was at once above
and below conventional ambitions ; and she,
for her own part, had, as she believed, no
personal aim at all — living solely in and for
Gerald, that Raphael of the future.

Sometimes at these parties she met Hugh
Vivian, sometimes not. It was a little
strange, she thought, when her whole life
was centred so entirely in Gerald, that anyone
unconnected with him should have power
to interest her as she felt that Hugh Yivian
did. He had certainly a strange fascination
for her ! the fascination of those days at
Thorne. It was on account of Thorne, she
thought, that this fascination was so vivid.
In the Alton society, such as it was, she

quickly became a favourite. Every one liked
and welcomed her, and she, as a rule, liked
every one. She had soon struck up a variety
of friendly acquaintanceships, and not only
among her own sex : she was an amusing
companion, her smile was bright, and her
blue eyes were greatly admired. The young
men of Alton made much of her, and circled
round her, wherever she went ; and she enjoyed
their society well enough — but not one
of them excited in her anything at all resembling
her feeling for Hugh. When she
found him among the guests, or, as sometimes
happened, he came in towards the end
of the evening, she was at once in a new
atmosphere : one which she could not have
analysed, had she tried : and she did not
try. She knew only that it had a strange
enchantment.

She believed that she enjoyed it because
it acted with inspiring influence on her story.
Certainly it did so act ; — on such occasions,
she always went home full of what she called
"the spirit:" — a magical state of double existence,
in which the world of her fancy appeared
at least as real as that of sense, its inhabitants
living and moving before her mental
eyes, like figures in a theatre. Church-bells

transported lier to this state ; music, sunset
clouds, certain pictures and poems, had the
same peculiar witchery ; and she supposed it
was because a corresponding halo transfigured
her memories of Thorne, that the presence of
one, in these so prominent a figure, brought
with it a charm no less potent. It was a
charm of exactly the same nature ; half
bright, half melancholy. Those eyes, once
so full of lightness and of sunshine, had a
strange power now to make her heart ache.
That look of half sarcastic philosophy, stamped
on the face by experiences fraught with anguish,
kindled within her a yearning that was
almost pain. She had a craving for a quiet
talk with him : a craving always baffled, and,
for this very reason, increasing more and
more.

After that hour in Mrs. Carberry's anteroom,
he had never touched upon subjects
ol importance beyond the moment. He
seemed to enjoy chatting with Marjory, when
they met, much as he had enjoyed it years
before, when she was a child who amused
him. She amused him still, apparently ; he
had a pleasure in drawing out her opinions,
and rallying her upon them, with something
of the old badinage : only, the old undercurrent

of gaiety had ceased its flow, and instead
was continually evident a similar current
of an opposite nature, tinging all his
views of men and of things. Sometimes,
unexpectedly, Marjory found him watching
her from a distance, with an expression which
she could not fathom ; whether cynical, or
compassionate, or both, she felt unable to
decide.

He knew everybody in Alton, and was one
of the very few townspeople invited more
than once a year to dinner-parties, or 'eat
Homes," in the College Green. In past years
all the higher dignitaries there had been on
intimate terms with his family ; and the
acquaintance was not forgotten, although
maintained at some distance now, as befitted
his altered circumstances. He himself, with
his quick pride, made no attempt to lessen
that distance. On the contrary, he appeared
in these houses at intervals only just sufficient
to avoid rudeness; and the same in the
county — where, indeed, from his mother's
haughtiness, his parents had never been
great favourites, and where death or years
had already severed the few real friendships
they had formed.

So, by degrees, the mothers with marriageable

daughters, who at first had guarded
them, nervously watchful, from his approach,
found in him no danger, and grew instead to
regard him, while still under thirty, as a confirmed
misogamist. In the town, where his
history was universally known, and where
many still remembered the grand, beautiful
Mrs. Yivian, driving in state through the
streets, once a week or so, with the air of a
queen, his acquaintance was considered an
honour ; the more so, since it was difficult to
obtain, and he was reported to have inherited
his mother's '' high way." Had he made himself
more common, the prudent among the
citizen-mothers would doubtless have dreaded
the penniless quartermaster no less than did
the mothers of county and college. As it
was, his cold reserve encircled him with an
atmosphere of interest, which caused him to
be courted almost in proportion as such
courting was by him ignored ; and every
lady felt a sense of having secured a prize, if
by chance he said yes, instead of no, to her
oft-repeated invitation. And, indeed, the
distinguished air, relic of his high breeding,
which had clung to him through every privation,
singled him out at once among all other
young men who, in his absence, shone

supreme ornaments of Alton society ; and
who, in other circumstances, might have
regarded a militia quartermaster as beneath
any notice beyond patronage.

But Lina cared nothing for the eclat which
kindled the Alton mind. That was all of the
world, worldly, she thought; and she was
above the world. She disapproved of this
man. Had she not, deep within her stately
heart, special reasons for such disapproval —
over and above that general reason, of his
religious scepticism ? To set society against
him by innuendoes was beneath her ; besides,
she had no proof by which to convince the
world. But Marjory, at least, should not be
deceived by him. Thus continually, when
alone with Marjory, Lina would throw out
hints concerning that mysterious wrong of
which Hugh Vivian had been guilty. At
such times there was something in the steady
gaze of Lina's beautiful eyes which made
Marjory blush, and shrink into herself, she
knew not why, and prevented her crying, as
she longed to cry,

Lina, speak out in plain words ! and tell
me all the truth."

Something, moreover, in that gaze excited
the question : *' What right have I, after all,

VOL. II. G

to trouble myself about him ? " And so,
day after day, she was silent, though, all the
while, the consciousness of that secret which
Lina knew, quickened unawares her interest
in him, and made her think about him far
more than otherwise might have been.

But this was all an under-current. Uppermost
were thoughts of Gerald. She had
made it her first business, when the boys
returned, to search out the Lewis Harding
of the caricatures ; and had found him in a
red-headed pickle of ten years old, — an advanced
age in this juvenile community, — in
spite of which he was the wooden spoon of
her class. Marjory soon contrived to introduce
him to Gerald, who first overwhelmed
him with confusion by producing the caricatures,
then struck a match, and burned them
in his presence. Thereupon they became
sworn friends ; and Gerald discovered that
Lewis's chief desire was to be artist to a fleet
of discovery — should any such office exist ;
thus to combine the achievement of two
modest aims— to visit all the countries in the
world, and to beat Uncle Tom hollow in
painting. The '' Uncle Tom " thus mentioned
proved, as Gerald had thought possible, to
be Harding, the great artist, of world-wide

fame ; a relationship of wliicli Mrs. Myers
and Miss Pilkington explained their ignorance
by the fact of Lewis's having been only
half a year in the school ; while the name
was so common, and the boy — as they
opined — so stupid, that such a connection
had never entered their minds.

The good ladies gladly sanctioned the
friendship between Gerald and the pickle,
when they found that his pleasure in Mr.
Stanhope's society provided at once a threat
and a persuasive, in regulating his conduct.
Henceforth, the whilom reprobate was never
so happy as when — at moderate intervals —
he was allowed to accompany Gerald in a
walk, or to creep up into the attic in an
evening, to watch him paint, volunteering
saucy criticisms, and answering questions
about his uncle; for Gerald delighted in
drawing forth tales of the great master's
private idiosyncrasies. Mr. Harding was at
present in Scotland, studying scenes from
the hills ; scenes which, in any other hands,
would have been hackneyed, but from
his would come forth in the glow of a
beauty only then interpreted. His nephew
hoped that, in returning home, he would
make a divergence to Alton, where he had
G 2

long intended to complete a sketch, from the
western end of the cathedral. Lewis had
even, in his most illegible scrawl, indited an
epistle as follows : —

Dear Uncle Tom, There is a most
wonderful Cleaver fellow hear who can draw
Anything you would Stair if you saw him
he ought to be in the Academy and he wants
awfully to see you so please come soon your
affectionate Replied."

Of this, however, Gerald knew nothing.


If only he could see Gerald's drawings,
he would devise some way to help him ; he
would recognise the power in them, and wish
to free it," said Marjory one day to Lina.
This was a matter in which Lina sympathised.
None of that repellent chill which checked
the mention of Hugh Vivian, extended to
Gerald. Indeed, Marjory's hopes respecting
him were much strengthened by Lina's
opinion ; for Lina was highly educated, had
travelled, and had visited, with the eye of a
connoisseur, many Continental picture-galleries.
Her judgment, too, was known to be
dispassionate, unaffected by partiality ; therefore
Marjory's heart was stirred by joy and
triumph when Lina, sitting in Gerald's attic,

pronounced this work to bear the undoubted
stamp of power.

Lina had called alone one afternoon, when
Gerald was at the bank ; and Marjory had
caught at the opportunity to ransack his pile.
The picture of the 'ideal" had been removed
from the easel; and the " Bridge," now nearly
finished, was restored to its place. Otherwise
Marjory would never have taken Lina upstairs
! Somehow she would not for the
world have Lina know of that portrait. Even
now the former pang shot through her in
remembering that Gerald had taken it, as
she had privately discovered, to his own
room; where, although by day it remained
hidden from profane curiosity, she felt sure
that at night, and in the early morning, he
sought from it inspiration for his work.

Before the easel Lina paused. Gerald had
been busy of late in perfecting the figures.
The young hearts, hot and restless ; the
old, subdued and slow " — both were here
magically true. Into this quiet attic, so high
above the bustle of the world, a portion of
that world seemed to have come, — to be there
living and moving. What depths of fire
burned in that young man's eyes, unconsciously
so like Gerald's own ! How weary,

disappointed, yet patient, was the gait of that
toil-worn figure behind him ! How ardent,
yet half fearful in their ardour, were those
young lovers, pressing on hand in hand !
How divine seemed the inspiration of that
poet, who had paused as if to listen ! How
careless was the glance of that bright-eyed
child, throwing petals from its nosegay into
the water, and watching them float away !
How the tide flowed — how the water foamed !
One could almost hear it dash against the
buttresses ! Surely this was not a picture ;
it was a page of real life, caught and fixed.
Its power seemed to move Lina as she gazed.
Marjory had never before seen in her such
enthusiasm.

Marjory, this is more than mere cleverness.
Your brother will be famous some
day."

And yet he is not satisfied even with
this," cried Marjory ; " He says the drawing
is not correct."

He is right not to be satisfied ; the true
artist's motto is always ' Excelsior,' you
know. And perhaps he is right about the
drawing. Yes, I could point out defects."

Marjory's face clouded.

*' That arm is too long ; and the turn of

that foot is scarcely natural : then the colour
is not smooth enough, and the shading is
too decided ; but these are minor points. If
he could have a little practice under a good
master, such faults would soon be gone. The
spirit that breathes through all has the stamp
of greatness."

And now that changeful face of Marjory's
was all aglow once more.

'' Thank you, dear Lina — thank you ; you
make me so happy ! Now, sit down, and I
will show you others. Some of these little
sketches, when he was a boy, — I think they
are really wonderful."

So Lina sat down, and Marjory knelt on
the floor, picking out the choicest treasures
of the large heap. Here a face, a mere outline,
but still a true human face, stamped
with the expression of the moment ; here a
group of rustic figures, each in itself a study ;
here a bit of moorland landscape, with a gray
old stone, on which a sunset ray was slanting
; here a fishing-boat sailing out at twilight
upon a lonely sea ; here a scene from some
novelist or poet. Lina did not grow tired,
although the stock seemed endless, and
Marjory was continually saying, '' Just one
more ! "

CHAPTER VII.

"And whether, so you're just and fair,
Other folks are so, you don't care ;
You who profess more love than others
For your poor sinful human brothers."

Arthur H. Clough.

Steps below, and Gerald's voice calling " Marjory
! " announced his return from the bank.
She jumped up, scattering her drawings, and
ran, intending to summon him to the attic ;
but an instant later she came back, crestfallen.


'' How tiresome ! he has brought some one
with him. Lina, we must go down."

Never mind, I have seen a good deal :
and, Marjory, I must just say one thing."

Marjory paused in collecting the scattered
drawings, and looked up into Lina's face.

Keep up your heart ; don't lose courage ;
persevere in trying your utmost to free your
brother from that unfortunate debt. From
all I have seen to-day, I feel a conviction that
there is more in him than even you are aware."

Marjory could only exclaim, " Oh, Lina ! "

between laughing and crying. Then, the
drawings restored to their box, the two girls
went silently downstairs, each absorbed in
her own thoughts. Lina walked first.
Marjory, behind, wondered, as they reached
the sitting-room, to see her face suddenly
change and grow rigid. The mystery was
speedily solved. It was Hugh Vivian who
had entered with Gerald.

I met your brother at the door," said he,
as he shook hands with Marjory : " I have
never before succeeded in finding him at
home ; and even now it was a near-run
thing ! "

Marjory scarcely answered. She felt herself
a coward ; yet how could she be otherwise
beneath that gaze of calm and penetrating
severity ? Here was altogether a different
person from the Lina of five minutes past.
Marjory had loved her then, had felt for her
something of the old enthusiasm. Now she
almost disliked her ; the chill of that unfathomable
gulf struck her once more.

Gerald, we have been looking at your
drawings," she said nervously, turning from
Hugh to her brother. Gerald did not reply ;
he was absorbed in Lina, placing a chair for
her, begging her to sit down.

'' I have been working hard all day," marjory
heard him say. " Do stay and give me
some refreshment."

He looked, indeed, tired and harassed, and
Lina seemed to soften. Perhaps she was
contrasting all she had just seen, with those
many hours of uncongenial toil ! She sat
down ; and Gerald sat near her, leaving his
visitor to Marjory's sole charge. Marjory
was not sure that he had not altogether forgotten
that any one beside himself and Lina
was present.

*' What a nice room you have here ! " said
Hugh Vivian : '' Certainly there are lodgings
and lodgings. This is rather a contrast to
my den in the High Street ; it looks like
home."

*' It is home," said Marjory, involuntarily
" Wherever Gerald was would be home tome."


I wonder how many such devoted sisters
there are in the world ! I should think they
might easily be counted. If I had had a sister,
now, I feel convinced that she would have
married long ago ; or, if not, she would be
sighing to be married — watching daily, like
Mariana, for some one to come and deliver
her from my moaned grange."

'' I am sorry you have so bad an opinion
of sisters in general."

Bad ! Not at all. It's human nature,
isn't it, to prefer a husband to a brother ?"

Not my human nature," said Marjory,
laughing. '' Besides, I should think it wrong
and treacherous to have any such ideas
until " She stopped suddenly.

'' Until what ? Why won't you tell me your
deep plan in Gerald's behalf?"

Why should I ? It would be nothing to

you."

'' Yes, it would. Your devotion to him
interests me as a psychological phenomenon ;
and it is pleasant to find that I have any
power of interest left."

I dare say ! You want to pry into the
most sacred part of my life, that you may
make a ludicrous study of it, like those books
you are pleased to call ' goody.' "

You think I would do that to any feeling
of yours ? You misjudge me. 'No, — I haven't
forgotten the days when we were friends at
Thorne."

As he spoke, he was looking at her in a
half dreamy way, which suddenly made Marjory
blush. At this moment she felt Lina's
eyes on her, and started to her feet.

By-the-bye, talking of Thorne," she said,
going to the table — " I wonder whether you
have seen this ? "

Hugh followed : and took from her hands
the album open at a page whence that sad
portrait of poor vanished Jessie smiled in
proud consciousness of exalted station, from
its bridal robes. "When he received the book,
that dreamy expression had not faded ; the
hardness in his eyes was softened, as so often
with Marjory : — but one glimpse of the photograph
acted with magical effect. At once
his face clouded; he winced visibly, and
closed the album.

"Yes, I have seen it," he said shortly.

Marjory's blue eyes widened in surprise,
then glanced instinctively at Lina. Lina was
gazing at Hugh, with an expression beyond
Marjory to fathom. It was not only dislike,
but cool observation, and mistrust, — and
something else — as if a sudden notion had
struck her. Hugh did not observe it. He
was looking down, gloomy and bitter again.

Is that book yours ? " he inquired, after
a pause.

"Yes."

Why do you keep that photograph there ?
I wish you would take it out."

Why should you wish that ? " said Marjory,
mystified.

She had nothing in common with you.
You believe in her, because of her face. No
doubt many others have believed in her : and
found their mistake. — I tell you, I can't bear
to see that face of hers there, in your book ! "
He spoke with suppressed passion.

What do you know against her ? " said
Marjory — '' She was vain and foolish ; but,
I hope, nothing worse."

'^ You hope .^ " — he repeated cynically :
' Charity loveth all things :' but I fear it
is often disappointed."

'' I would bear that, to be on the side of
charity ! How changed you are ! I remember
you were never more irritated than by
suspicious — 'codgers,' you used to call them."

You are not changed, at any rate," he
said, suddenly smiling : " You are just the
same as eight years ago, only intensified.
You had that same devotion for ' Gerald,'
even then. I'm glad your friendship for a
party who shall at present be nameless," he
added, lowering his tone — "has failed in
transforming you."

I only wish I were half as good as she
is," said Marjory, reproachfully.

He smiled again.

*' What constitutes goodness ? Sancti-copiousness
— or scandalisation — or what ?
Is disagreeableness a necessary component
of it ? or is such a pair ever to be allowed,
as goodness and toleration in harness ? "

Think of dear old Lady Thorne ! She
was good : — a saint in its best meaning,"
said Marjory.

Yes, but she was old ; she had had long
acquaintance with the world and all manner
of its people. Young saints must be intolerant,
I suppose ! — If tolerant, they would not be
saints ; if saints, not tolerant."

'* Your experience has evidently been unfortunate."


'' It has at least been this : — that if a
man's religious views happen to differ from
the generality— never mind his heart, brains,
morals, anything else, — he is anathema, of
no account, a leper, straightway, to true
saints. I suspect you are not a saint. — Are
you?"

'' No, indeed : I wish I were ! "

Don't wish that ! If you became a saint,
you would have no more to do with me."

'* I should be all the more anxious to "

To convert me ? No doubt : — but suppose

you found that impracticable. Now
mark what I say ! If you are hungry, ill, or
homeless, saints will help you : — they add to
their fund in the Heavenly bank, you know,
by that. But if you have difficulties of another
kind — mental doubts, for instance, inability
to swallow all their beliefs, — if you
are at all ' unsound,' and therefore, I should
have thought, from their own point of view,
more to be pitied than any other class of
sufferer — in such cases, the saints will scout
you, glance at you from the other side of the
street, with mild contempt ; — in fact, regard
you as pitch, of which the mere touch would
defile."

'' You have met with unfavourable specimens,"
repeated Marjory.

Have I ? Your friend over there is one :
and you consider her a favourable one," said
Hugh, again lowering his voice : ''If you
listen to her, I feel sure she will persuade
you that, in holding any intercourse with me,
you commit a mortal sin. But I hope you
will not listen to her ; in that respect at least."

At this moment Lina rose to depart.
Hugh rose also, suddenly remembering an
engagement, and, making hurried adieux,
strode off, walking against time. Lina also

lead an engagement at a neighbouring house,
and could not accept Gerald's proposal that
lie and Marjory should escort her home.
When he returned from conducting her downstairs,
he found Marjory in a dream at the
window. 'anything wrong?" he asked,
coming up behind her.

Xo — I was only thinking," said Marjory,
with a start : '' What were you and Lina
talking about ? You seemed to find your
conversation very interesting."

'did we ?" said Gerald, with heightened
colour. " Somehow, it did seem interesting ;
and yet we were talking of nothing particular
—-just any little thing that came up."

"Not about your pictures?" cried Marjory.
" We had just been looking at them."

I dare say she thinks them rubbish. I
wish you would let them alone, Marjory :
you will sicken her," said Gerald, irritably :
She said not a word on the subject ; so that
speaks for itself."

On the contrary," cried Marjory, " I
never saw her so enthusiastic before. She
was delighted with them."

Nonsense," said Gerald.

You unbelieving boy ! I will tell you her
very words. Remember ! She never pays

compliments, and lie is never lavish of
praise."

Then she repeated what Lina had said : —

'' This is more than mere cleverness. Your
brother will be famous some day."

'' She said that ! " Gerald exclaimed.
Marjory looked at him, startled by his tone.
A flush of joy, of rapture even, had risen to
his very temples. He could scarcely have
seemed happier, had Raphael himself pronounced
the verdict !

For the first time Marjory's unselfishness
failed her. It could hardly be for its intrinsic
worth that he thus valued Lina's praise !
And, if not, why should this have such power,
when her own so often failed, — or, if not utterly
failing, proved powerless to arouse more thana
feeble gleam of hope ? Why ? There was
the question !

Marjory thought again of the Ideal : — and
her heart ached.

VOL. IT.

CHAPTER Viii.

So strangely, mysteriously, "wonderfully

Her presence seized upon my inner life ;

* * *

Beloved at once, I felt graved on my heart
'Tis she, or none on earth." — Schiller.

But such pangs were not of long continuance
in Marjory's generous nature, and she soon
forgot them in devotion to her work.

Gerald, may I read my story to you ? *'
she said one evening, entering the little parlour.
The lamp was just lighted ; Gerald sat
at the table, sketching in pen and ink some
fancy which had come into his head.

I can't work always alone ; I don't know
how I am getting on, — I am tired," said
Marjory : " Would it plague you, Gerald, to
listen ? "

"My dear Marjory, you work too hard,"
cried Gerald, starting up. " You must not
overdo yourself ; how selfish I am to let you
toil in this way ! And after all "

He paused, and drew the arm-chair to the

table, that Marjory might rest, the light
falling on her manuscript.

'' After all, to no purpose, perhaps — you
mean that. Yes, I know — I know very well !
But remember what I told you the first night
I came here. It is that which makes me
hopeful, Gerald ! "

She stopped, on the verge of tears, the
reaction from over-excitement.

'' Now let me hear the story," said Gerald,
soothingly.

He sat down again, and resumed his pen ;
and she turned to the beginning, and read.
Presently she half forgot that the story washer
own, and felt interested, as in the work
of another. Gerald also looked up from his
etching : the pen lay idle in his hand : soon
he laid it down altogether, and turned towards
Marjory, his elbow on the back of his
chair. Now and then he said : " Capital,
Marjory ! " or, " Well done ! " or, '' I never
knew you could write like this ! "

She stopped at last, out of breath.

That is not all ? " said Gerald.

No, a good deal more is finished ; but I
had better leave it for another time. Do
you really like it, Gerald ? "

"Like it ! Why, Marjory, it is first-rate, far
H 2

beyond my hopes. It is better than nine
novels out of ten."

He lead risen, and was walking up and
down the room.

'' Yes, indeed," he repeated : "I have read
fifty not half equal to it ! and yet they get
published, somehow; and, if they, why not
this ? "

He paused in his walk, stooped, and kissed
her : a very rare occurrence.

'' I am not worthy of such a sister," he
said. Some inward compunction seemed to
strike him.

Marjory laughed and clapped her hands,
with almost childish glee.

You have made me as happy as Mr.
Harding would make you if he said that you
might turn out a second Michael Angelo ! "
she cried : " It's not that I dream of becoming
famous, or a great author — only just of
writing books which will sell ! After all, that
is a modest aim enough."

''If it succeeds, I will return all you earn
for me — with compound interest, I trust. Tome
the debt will only change hands ; but
there lies all the difference ! Now that I
have heard your story, I almost dare to
hope."

"You ought to hope, Gerald. Because
you know it is not only my work I am
depending on."

There was an enthusiasm about this girl,
which was strangely infectious. Certainly
she read her Bible with the heart of a child !
but was not that the right way to read it ?
Gerald felt rebuked ; some voice within him
whispered that it was not possible for such
faith to be disappointed.

They sat up late that night — Gerald asking
to hear more, if she were not tired, after
supper. Marjory, in all the first delight of a
tyro in authorship, cared little whether she
were tired or no ! At the end, Gerald proposed
that they should meet for the same
purpose, every week.

'' It will help me very much," said Marjory,
The work will be less lonely. And you can
criticise."

'' Not that my criticisms are worth much !
you should go to Miss Peele for those."

She has not seen it, yet. I have often
meant to consult her : only, somehow, I am
afraid. It is foolish to be so impressionable ;
but I can't help it. If she should throw
cold water on it, I should feel out of heart at
once."

'^ But she would not; she would help you.
Her advice would be invaluable."

In one way. But in another — Gerald,
don't you see it in Lina ? She is so passionless
! — like a still lake, which cannot sympathise
with tides. It seems to me that she
has a certain fixed standard ; and whatever
comes up to it is right in her eyes ; but
whatever differs from it, however beautiful,
or true, is wrong. I can't quite define my
meaning; but — Gerald, don't you understand?"


'' I think I do. But, I suppose — we
should call an angel passionless, shouldn't
we?"

'' Not exactly in Lina's way ! I'll give you
an instance : — Mr. Vivian ; she is so terribly
hard upon him ! she condemns him utterly,
seems incapable of entering into — oh, Gerald,
I have told you about his troubles : — you
don't think him utterly hopeless ? "

Suddenly it had struck her — what if
Gerald should agree with Lina on this point,
as on others ? She looked at him, distressed
by that fear ; but his kind smile reassured
her : that smile so strangely kind and quiet,
for so young a face. But Gerald continually
seemed to her less like a young man, just

entered upon the battle of life, than like one
"who, after long fighting, has reached a height
whence he can turn with friendly eyes, to
encourage weaker combatants.

I think him hopeless, dear ! I should bea
hopeless prig myself, to think anything of
the kind ! Few men come out deathless
from such trials ; and only those who have
gone through them can judge of them. But
as to Miss Peele — she is so far above all this
kind of thing that she cannot comprehend
it. She is too perfect herself to be capable
of making due allowance for the force of
temptation in lower natures."

At this expression, Marjory's spirit rose
in indignant championship.

Mr. Vivian's is not a low nature," she
cried — '' I am quite sure of that, little as I
know of him now."

I said lower, — not low," said Gerald,
musingly : " No man could ever have been
born with such a nature as hers. Women maybe
half angels sometimes ; but men, never.' "

Then you think Lina half an angel ? "

"I?" said Gerald, suddenly crimson : —
My thoughts are of no consequence. You
know what she is, or you ought to know,"
he added with an under-tone of reproach.

He rose as he spoke, taking his bed-candle;
and Marjory felt herself reproved.

'don't be angry with me, Gerald," she said.

"I'm not angry," said Gerald ; ''I only
think you must take care that your sympathy
with Vivian does not blind your eyes to the
beauty of real goodness — of a spirit that has
never known pollution. You know it is only
natural that such spirits should shrink from
a baser touch."

I suppose it is," said Marjory, humbly ;
perhaps, after all, I should feel the same,
if I were as good as Lina. — But I am not."

It might have been only fancy — but she
thought that this admission made Gerald's
good-night" more than usually affectionate.
He did not contradict it ; and they parted
without further words.

When he was alone in his own room, he
went to the window, leaning with folded arms
against the panes, and looking out. The
sky was not cloudless ; but the clouds were
soft, gray, and timid, like one who does not
dare to indulge his stormy passions in the
presence of a higher and calmer being, who
sits with him in his home. For the sky in
which those gray clouds floated, was of a
still, dark blue, silent, grand ; and high enthroned

in it shone the three quarters' moon,
with a light only too cold to be radiant.
Beneath it the city slept, the dark houses,
the closed factories : — only the river seemed
alive, with its incessant washing ripple.
Gerald remembered when, on, many such a
night, he had sat in his little room in the far
north, a craving, ambitious boy, with a restless
heart, and had watched the sky, and
wished that he could paint it, thinking of the
great masters of old, and then again had
wished that he had wings to fly from his
trammels — and suddenly had found his cheeks
wet with tears from unfathomed depths.

ISTo tears came now ; yet he felt much as in
those past days. He longed — he longed — for
what ? What was this new feeling, overpowering
that which so long had been his
master-passion, making his worship of Art
second to another worship, leading him for
the first time to regard Art as a means of
advancement to something else? — " O Art,
my Art, thou art much, but Love is more ! *'
Why did those words haunt him ?

Gerald had never been subject to those
coarser temptations which seem sometimes
strangely interwoven with the artistic nature.
He was fastidious, almost to a fault, hard to

please, — or, rather, hard to satisfy ; and it
was well that a kindly nature, almost morbidly
sympathetic, kept these qualities duly
balanced. Hugh Vivian, when two or three
years younger than Gerald's present age,
might have said with more or less truth, —

Many a one I have loved for a minute —
Worshipp'd many a face I've seen : " —

though he could also with truth have added
the latter part of the verse. But Gerald had
never loved in this sense, even "for a
minute ; " he would have thought himself
cold and invulnerable, had it not been for the
dreams of his imagination, which taught him
that the object, not the capacity, was wanting.
'one needs must love the highest," he
thought ; and hitherto he had entertained
small hope of finding that highest, — within
his reach at least. But what Schiller had
written long before — what the young Prussian
prince felt, when he saw for the first time,
Louisa, his angel-queen: — this had Gerald
felt, when he saw Lina on the evening of the
concert, in her white robes, the jessamine in
her hair :

'Tis she — or none on earth !"

Ever since, lier face had floated before his
mental eyes, as a vision fair, sweet, pure,
beyond expression — something which he
could hardly realise as verily existing upon
earth. At first he had been content to adore
from a distance ; but, as the fancy deepened,
its poetic calm had passed into something
less calm than fever — something that filled
him with vague craving, making him sometimes
happy, sometimes wretched, never
actually at peace. Now, as he stood in his
window, a strange ache at his heart, he was
thinking that the moon, so serene, so high,
was like Lina, and he like one of those gray
clouds — illumined a little by the pure rays,
but not really near her, or worthy so to be.
In his fancy, he saw Lina standing in the
sky, those jessamine stars still in her hair ;
he gazed toward her, as Dante gazes at
Beatrice in the picture. Unconsciously he
began to plan a picture of his own — of a
maiden standing even thus, and her lover on
earth, looking up with vain devotion.

The lover has no wings, and the maiden is
rising — up — where he cannot follow. The
moon shines, the stars shine, the maiden
shines ; the lover alone, far below in shadow,
is dark and of the earth. Suddenly a voice

says, " I will help you." Through the shade
comes a figure with Marjory's face ; but she
is not Marjory : she is Art. She comes with
hands outstretched ; slowly a new power endues
the lover's frame. He also has wings ;
he rises into the light, reaches the shining
maiden : she turns, looks at him, and smiles.
Oh, unutterable rapture ! — and with this
Gerald opens his eyes. Tired in body and
in brain, he had fallen asleep as he stood at
the window, his head resting on his arms.

Now awaking, he found himself still on
prosaic earth ; but the brief dream had
chased away his heart-sickness ; he was
cheered, his hopes were renewed. He felt
that in him which needed only space to become
power, fame, glory. Hitherto he had
worshipped art for its own sake alone. Stow
he craved not only for art, but for fame :
that he might lay it as an offering at her
feet. And, as to Marjory, she should never
repent her unselfish devotion. Not in money
alone would he repay her ; he would find in
addition a thousand better ways to prove his
gratitude. Despite his fatigue, his castles in the
air kept him long awake, imagining, planning.

CHAPTER IX.

Nay, yet there's more in this.
I pr'ythee speak to me as to thy thinking,
As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts
The worst of words." — Shakspeare.

The autumn proved unusually fine ; and, as
the year advanced, Marjory found continual
pleasure in the changes of sky and trees.
She had seldom time, in these shortening
days, for country walks ; but the first novelty
of the town, with all its world of human life,
had not yet lost its charm ; she was living
still in the magic dream which had encompassed
her since leaving Rockswold. The
distant hills beyond the river were tinted
with soft lights — changeful, but only in
beauty ; sometimes purple shadows, sometimes
golden ones slanted across them ; in
the morning they were hidden in haze, through
which their outlines grew gradually back to
clearness. The elms in the College Green
were rich in tints ; now and then, already,
a leaf fell gently, and floated to 'its rest

beneath the parent shade." The rooks cawed
on, and never missed it.

Often, in the afternoon, Marjory would sit
for half an hour on one of the benches placed
at intervals below the trees, watching, and
listening to the cathedral music in the service
of evensong. She went in to the service
sometimes ; sometimes it suited her better
to sit without, and drink in the thoughts
which at such hours seemed often less
thoughts than voices from the invisible
world. She was a strange, solitary girl,
living her own life alone in this large city ;
yet not conscious of loneliness, not yet
awake to the longing for a companion
spirit.

One day she was sitting thus, when the congregation
dispersed, streaming away in units
or twos, seldom more, to their respective
abodes. A few quiet ladies, with shady
hats and dark-coloured garments, came out
through the cloisters, taking no notice of anyone
or anything, as they passed towards the
venerable houses skirting the Green. A few
more, of a different stamp, younger, brighter,
daughters of the canon in residence, and
of the dean, — walked together, fashionably
dressed, with young, clear voices, fashionably

accented, and light laughs, echoed back bj
the hoary towers. These did just glance
at Marjory ; one girl a little older than herself,
glanced a second time, and met the
gaze of her bright blue eyes.

"Do you know who that girl is, Mr.
Vivian ?" she asked, as Hugh Vivian, walking
with swift soldierly tread, as was his
wont, appeared by way of Chad's Tower:
the whole party stopped to shake hands,
having known him from their childhood : —
*' I have seen her often lately here, or in the
cathedral. She looks so nice, and her eyes
are lovely."

Mr. Vivian gave one quick glance towards
Marjory, who had risen, and was moving
away.

"She is a Miss Stanhope," he said, shortly.

What a nice name I They must have
come quite lately. I'll make mamma call.
Where do they live ?*'

Miss Stanhope lodges with her brother,
who is a clerk in the old bank, at Mrs.
Myers' school."

"Oh"— The "oh" spoke a volume of
disappointment — " I hoped that they were
a pleasant family, come to live here. We
want some more nice girls at Alton."

Miss Stanliope is a very ' nice girl,' and
a perfect lady," said Hugh Yivian. '' To
be sure, she teaches — three hours daily, I
believe — in the school. Do you still think
her eyes lovely?"

*' You look very satirical, Mr. Vivian. I
never understand you. Good-bye. What a
charming afternoon ! "

She nodded gaily, Hugh bowed, and they
went off in different directions. Mr. Vivian,
who was hurry hug after Marjory, slackened
his steps when he saw her otherwise approached.
Lina Peele had joined her ; they
turned together towards the seat which she
had recently quitted. As he met them, he
merely raised his hat, and passed on like a
whirlwind.

His expression is quite evil ; I know
no other word for it," remarked Lina, after
an instant's silence. Marjory made no reply.
She was squeezing her wrist, which she had
been told would check a blush.

I thought, when the maid said you were
not at home, that I would look for you here.
I want particularly to speak to you," said
Lina.

I have been sitting on this seat for half
an hour, enjoying all the loveliness. Just

look at the hills, and the calm light on the
river ! '*

It is very nice ; I shall come and sketch
it some day ; but I cannot stay long now,
Marjory, and I want your attention."

'eyes!"

I have had a thought in my mind for
many days, of which I cannot get rid ; at
least, that would require an effort which I
am not sure it is desirable to make. Did
you not say that that silly Jessie Bellhouse,
whom you knew at Thorne, was lost ? "

'' I believe I did."

What did you mean ? "

'* She has disappeared ; her mother heard
only once from her after her marriage."

Was not there something mysterious
about that marriage ? I forget what you told
me."

'' She eloped from Ripley, and was married
secretly in London."

Her mother had no ideas about the husband
? "

None ; Jessie only wrote that he was a
gentleman. I remember, at Thorne, she was
always prophesying that she should be a
lady some day. I was too j^oung then to
understand her, but I do now. She knew her

VOL. 11. 1

beauty, and trusted to it to win some great
person's heart."

'' Perhaps even then she had won the
heart — or what answered to it — of someone
whom she considered great ; and that
might have been her reason for talking so
foolishly."

'' I think not ; it was only vague chatter.
I fancy her head was full of novels, which
she applied to herself."

'rand Bellhouse could not hear of any
Mr. Russell — that was the name, you said ?
in the neighbourhood of Ripley ? "

'' No, Miss Bulkley knew of none. Jessie
must have met him in some underhand way.
She must have been altogether underhand, I
fear, when I look back."

'you acknowledge that? Suppose she
agreed with her husband in adopting a
feigned name ? Such devices are of everyday
use, you know ; and in this case there
may have been some excellent reason for
concealing the truth."

"The thing is possible, of course; but,
Lina, why should you suggest it ? It sounds
so uncomfortable, so horribly deep. I can't
bear to think of it."

"We are obliged to think sometimes of

disagreeable truths," said Lina, inexorably;
Truth is truth, and ought to be brought to
light. You will find directly that I have a
purpose in all this ; I want only to ask you
one more question. Eight years ago you
were a child, but now you are wiser ; look
back, and try to remember. Did you see in
those days any signs of a flirtation between
Jessie and Mr. Vivian ? "

'' Oh, Lina ! " indignantly cried Marjory,
hot all over. She could say nothing more
at the moment, for the choking in her throat.

Did you ? " Lina repeated.

*' You have no right to ask such questions.
I am not bound to answer."

'every well," said Lina, in the frigid tone
which betokened offence ; *' But you must
remember that silence gives consent."

''Lina, Lina!" cried Marjory, rising.
'' Ashy will you put such hateful ideas into
my head ? What is your spite against Mr.
Vivian ? If you ask me so much, I have
surely a right to ask something in return."


'' I am surprised at this' display of temper,
Marjory," said Lina, who, having risen likewise,
was pacing the gravel path in calm
dignity by Marjory's side. '' It does no good,
I 2

I can assure you, to Mr. Vivian's cause; and
merely shows "

She paused.

"What does it show?"

Lina was silent.

'' I ask you, what does it show ? " repeated
the girl, losing her self-control. " I hate
innuendoes and underhand dealing. Pray
speak out at once ! You madden me."

So it seems," observed Lina, calmly.
'ras to underhand dealing, I am surprised
that you should mention any such meanness
in connection with me. I suppose it is because
we were talking of Mr. Yivian, whose
dealings have been very much so, I fear, —
and with reason, if one may say it. "What
does your excitement show, you ask ? I
reply, it shows a strange interest in Mr.
Vivian and his concerns."

'' You have no right to speak in this way !
You are unkind; you are not what I thought,"
cried poor Marjory, fairly bursting into tears.
She was no stately, self-contained person
like Lina ; she was under nineteen, passionate,
girlish, impulsive. '' You vex me more than
I can say. There is nothing strange or
wrong in my interest in Mr. Vivian. He
was kind to me years and years ago, when

lie was ricci and liiglily thought of, instead
of being poor and trampled on as he is now.
I was a poor, lonely little thing, and he was
good to me ; and I am grateful to him still.
I won't believe the horrible things that you
insinuate."

I insinuate nothing," said Lina, quietly.
But, since you accuse me of it, I will speak
plainly at once. I observed Mr. Vivian's
expression when you showed him that wedding
photograph. A singular, a striking
change came over it ; he had evidently some
most painful association with the face. I
was struck instantly by the conviction that
he knew, or had known, something of Jessie.
Afterwards I thought all the circumstances
over, and my conviction was confirmed."

'' Well, tell me the worst that you suspect.
I would rather know what is in your
mind."

'' You ought to know it. ' Forewarned,
forearmed ! ' I suspect this : — At least," said
Lina, correcting herself with her usual precision
— " * suspect' is not perhaps the word.
I will say merely that I shall not be surprised
if, in time, it appears that Jessie's Mr. Russell
is no other than Mr. Vivian himself."

'' And for this — this — imagination, you

have no better origin than a change in Mr.
Vivian's face ! "

A most remarkable change," interposed
Lina. ''I was watching him closely. It
was a look of painful recollection, of mortified
pride, as if he were sting — and something
indefinable behind. Any unprejudiced person
who had observed him would say the same.
Then, as I told you, I thought things over
things you know nothing about. I recalled
the time when, from your account, Jessie
vanished. A little while before, Mr. Vivian
had vanished also from Bullingham — no one
could tell where. I remember hearing my
brother and others remark on his leaving no
address ; his landlady brought one or two
letters which came for him, to my father, not
knowing where to forward them. Nothing
was ever heard of him in Bullingham again.
And it was at that very time — soon afterwards,
at least If I could find out the

whole truth, it might prove, might account
for "

She stopped suddenly, in unwonted agitation.


'' What is the matter, Lina ? " said Marjory,
beginning to soften, as she saw her
friend distressed.

Marjory, you remember my telling you
that, as I believed, Mr. Vivian had done our
family — one in it especially, now dead " — her
voice trembled — " a great wrong. This idea
about Jessie seems to throw some light, in a
way which I cannot yet explain, upon circumstances
which, if fully revealed, might
clear "

She hesitated ; the, perceiving that Marjory
was closely observing her, made a sudden
effort, became again calm and stately, and
said, in her usual tone :

I will tell you what I mean, at some
future time ; not at present."

After this both were silent for the length
of the green quadrangle.

'' I should not have mentioned this notion,
Marjory," said Lina, as they turned the
corner, " if I did not trust to your good sense
not to talk about it."

Talk about it ! " cried Marjory, hotly ;
I should think it wicked to breathe a word
of such suspicions to any one ! For he is
innocent, Lina, I am quite positive. I would
not believe anything else for the world."

'' Not if he were proved to be guilty ? "
said Lina, quietly.

*' He never will or can be, I am sure — quite

sure. There is absurdity on the very face of
it ! If he married Jessie, why is he not with
her ? And where is she ? "

That is for him to answer. My imagination
is not powerful enough to fill in the
details. I only at present feel certain of
this one point : that between him and this
Jessie some mystery existed, which the sight
of her photograph recalled. At all events,
there is no more to be said on your side
than on mine. If I am mistaken in accusing
him, you have no reason to constitute yourself
his champion."

'' He was so kind to me in past days. He
was so devoted to his mother. He had
faults, but his heart was good : I am sure —
sure of it," she repeated, the more emphatically,
as she realised her inability to prove
her assertions.

That is your feeling respecting him ;
more you cannot call it. Mine is just the
reverse. All that I heard of him at Bellingham
placed him in an unfavourable light.
My father's opinion of him I know; and my
father's judgment was universally respected.
At the time when you say he was so kind,
you where only a little child; what does a
child know of character, except as affecting

itself ? Look at him now ! what is he ?
An infidel, writing blasphemous articles,
scoffing at all that is holy. I know for a
fact that he never attends any place of worship.
What can you expect of such a one ?
Consider ! whose opinion is borne out by
the facts ? Yours or mine ? "

But why should you say all this to me ?
Why should you make me wretched ? If
he were twice as bad as you say, I
could not help it : how does it concern
me?"

You know best," replied Lina promptly.
'that it does concern you is evident; otherwise
it could not, as you own it does, make
you ' wretched.' I have said all this simply
as your friend, as wishing your eyes to be
opened to — well, let us say, to his possible
character. Time will prove how far I am
right. Meanwhile, I only ask you to observe
for yourself his manner as regards Jessie.
You can draw from it what inferences you
please ; — only be candid ! You have been
partial, hitherto, — and, Marjory dear, if you
will forgive me, — I fear, too much interested
in Mr. Yivian."

Again Marjory's face was crimson to the
roots of her hair; but she said nothing, — partly

from confusion, partly from anger, which
choked her when she tried to speak.

Lina paused, hesitated, continued:

'' He seems to wish to flatter you ; from
motives of his own, doubtless. Don't be
deceived by him, Marjory ! It would grieve
me to see a friend for whom I have such
affection, and — and — your brother's sister — ■
led away by him."

You need not alarm yourself," said Marjory
gruffly, moved, despite herself, by Lina's
earnestness. " My heart and mind are bound
up in Gerald. I have none, — of any consequence,
— for any one else."

That is right," said Lina, approvingly.
Then don't be led by mere feeling ; let
reason come first. Good-bye, dear Marjory.
Think it over."

Marjory could not respond, '* Good-bye,
dear Lina! " She took the hand extended to
her, received its pressure ; and, without another
word, Lina was gone.

CHAPTER X.

Roaring torrents have breached
The track, the stream-bed descends
In the place where the wayfarer once
Planted his footstep — the spray-boils
o'er its borders ; aloft,
The unseen snow-beds dislodge
Their hanging ruin ; — alas,

Havoc is made in our train !

* * *

The gaunt and taciturn Host

Stands on the threshold, * *

* * and asks

* * *

Whom in our party we bring 1
Whom we have left in the snow ?
Sadly we answer : " We bring
Only ourselves."

But thou would'st not alone
Be saved, . . . alone
Conquer and come to thy goal,
Leaving the rest in the wild."

Matthew Arnold.

The river's shining ripple was just visible
beyond gray walls ; the elm-trees stood high
and still in their autumnal glow ; the cawing

rooks answered from height to lieigbt ;
the great cathedral rose towards the sky ;
the cloister arches led away into mysterious
shades : the venerable houses stood roundabout,
showing no sign of the ever renewed
life within them. How sad it all looked,
Marjory thought ! She had not thought so
an hour before. But now, suddenly, life
seemed to her a terrible thing, full of deceit,
of guile. The distant murmur of the town
seemed like the troubled waves of a sea of
bad and stormy passions, on which human
life is tossed.

Issuing from one of the silent houses, came
a little old maiden lady, in a mushroom hat,
and a little trim bachelor gentleman, clerically
attired, both with mild and precise old
faces. They were a canon, twenty years installed
here, and his sister. Arm in arm
they walked, with short, prim foot-steps,
'' taking a little turn " before their quietly
luxurious dinner. Here they were, and herein
the surrounding homes, were many more,
such as they, retired from the shores of that
great sea, ignoring its power ! Were they
human beings at all — these gentle, dear,
kindly-looking old people ? — or were they a
mild species of nonentity, incapable of any

strong feeling ? Otherwise, how could they
so ignore forces so terrible ?

Such at least was Marjory's thought as
she sat, bewildered, where Lina had left her,
and looked round at the gray old buildings,
and strove with the ferment at her heart.
Around this peaceful quadrangle were gathered
an estimable and amiable assembly,
richly gifted in money, in position, in influence,
yet more or less shut up amid these
gifts — their eyes and their ears closed to the
very existence of some of the world's mightiest
moving powers. This or that was shocking,
was improper, was undesirable to be considered
: therefore they turned their backs toit,
while its surge rolled in, and swept away
millions of human creatures, less favourably
placed. Marjory could hardly have told why
with such indignation, such compassion, she
watched the placid little gentleman and lady
as they paced round and round the quadrangle.
But the contrast between the seclusion,
the hallowed calm, and that awful gulf
called Vice, of which her talk with Lina had
opened a glimpse, seemed almost to overwhelm
her.

Yes, that gulf, with its lurid flames, lies
close to us all. We may ignore it, but it is

there : and our choosing thus to ignore, our
fastidious shrinking, may be the unconscious
means of plunging in its depths some less
fortunate fellow-being, whom otherwise we
might have warned. Under our feet, only
severed by a thin crust from the strata
which we call Society, that black gulf burns.
Close to you and to me. Perhaps, mercifully,
we ourselves are safe from it, but
others — some very near to us, are not safe ;
and let us not forget, we might have been as
they ! How the flames roar and rage as one
goes near ! we may shrink from them in
abhorrence ; but, for some, those flames
have an attraction. A magic veil is over
their eyes : perhaps a little care from
us, a little watchfulness, a little sympathy
mixed with our condemnation, a tender
hand stretched out at the right time, might
charm that veil away. Meanwhile we shut
ourselves up in our refinement ; the flames
roar on : down into them go the precious
bodies and souls, made for so different a
purpose ! They are swallowed up, perished ;
we know nothing, and so care nothing.

Nothing yet. A time when we shall know,
and care, is to come.

Marjory's imagination, easily fired, had

derived from Lina's suspicions a whole new-world
of thoughts. At first she resolved
that she would cast those suspicions from her.
But then the question would force itself,
What if they should be true ? and, if true,
what manner of man must this Hugh Yivian
be ? Such stories of deception, of desertion,
were to be found every day in the papers :
of common occurrence, in one class or
another, in life. How should she dare to
assure herself that, because he could be
pleasant, because he seemed to be kind-hearted,
because he was unhappy, and interesting to
her, he was beyond possibility of crime.
He had not religious faith to guide him, she
remembered, with a stab at her heart. Perhaps
Lina was right in calling her partial.
Something in him had taken her fancy, from
the time when she was a child at Thorne.
Thorne had been an Eden to her memory ;
now sorrow had come into that Eden, and
treachery, as into the Eden of old. Was
this what she had read in books of the
hollowness of life ? Were there, after all, no
such things as real happiness or purity ?
Once more she recalled that scene when,
even in those days, he had horrified her.
Ah, that had been a glimpse into the passion

of his nature — a nature wliicli years had
strengthened, which infidelity had robbed of
restraint.

Then, as to Jessie. She could not have
analysed, she did not try to analyse, this
sharp pain at the thought of Jessie. Yes ;
she remembered now ! Now, alone, old
memories came thronging, old words rang in
her ears. Once more she was a weary child
in Miss Evie's bed, and Jessie's face was
bending over her pillow. '' I'll be so much
obliged if you won't mention to mother that
you saw me in the plantation." The very
look, the very tone ! had the air spoken,
putting on a form of long ago ? Marjory
looked round, half fearfully ; but all was still.
Only the old canon and his sister were still
pacing around that calm quadrangle.

Why had those words never struck her in
the same sense before ? Had she been blind,
deaf, stupid ? or only simple ? even now,
what was the truth? Had he felt but a
passing fancy for Jessie ? or, if more, how
deeply had it struck ? There was no sure
ground in those '^ trifles, light as air," which
she remembered : yet, coupled with that look
which Lina, and she also, had observed, they
had a double significance. Yes — she also

had wondered, many a time, at that look, as
of some burning recollection, caused in a
moment by the mention of Jessie's name,
however Lightly before he had been talking.

And she could not think of one fact to
prove that it did not mean what Lina suggested.
Lina appeared to know him, in someways,
more intimately than she did. Lina
was too calm, too reasonable, to suspect anyone
of actions of which she had no cause to
judge him capable. Marjory had pitched,
rather than condemned, his religious scepticism,
on the score of his trials ; but now it
occurred to her that this scepticism might
arise from indifference, together with a
natural disinclination to confess truths which
would condemn his own life. It might be
that, through all these changeful years, he had
been growing more corrupt in heart. It
might be that he had drifted ever further
from all that is best and highest. And yet,
if so indeed it had been, where was her
prayer ? — that little prayer to which she had
been so constant ?

The autumnal afternoon was closing in.
Beyond the hills a band of yellow light was
gradually widening ; a shiver swept the
heights of the elms : it was suddenly colder.

VOL. II, K

Marjory rose, and turned slowly homeward.
She had felt so happy, so peaceful, when she
came out, only two hours ago. Now all
seemed changed, — the tints more sad than
beautiful, — the river, as it flowed along, had
a melancholy tone. The first little rift had
begun to show itself in the lute of her Alton
life. She resolved that she would try not to
dwell upon Lina's notion, and, if she could
forget it, think of it as absurd. Yet all the
time she knew that that awful possibility
would never be long absent from her
mind.

Six deep, deliberate strokes pealed from
the cathedral tower. She quickened her
pace, ashamed to find that she had forgotten
Gerald. He was not, however, at home when,
out of breath, she reached their sitting-room.
He had come in at his usual time, Priscilla
said, but had gone out again ; and Marjory
had taken ofi* her things, and had made the
tea, which was usually half an hour earlier,
before his step was heard.

Entering, he threw himself back in the
easy chair, looking fagged and out of spirits.

'' Gerald, I am so sorry!" cried Marjory ;
I wont be so late again."

"It doesn't matter," said Gerald, listlessly :

I wanted a turn. Give me as strong a cup
as you can, please."

'where did you go?"

To look for you. Priscilla said tliafc Miss
Peele had called, and I thought you might
have gone up to Albion Square."

He was bending forward over his tea,
stirring it slowly ; Marjory did not observe
the flush upon his face.

'' Lina followed me to the College Green,
and then went home alone. She had an
engagement."

I can tell you where it was," said Gerald,
gulping his tea down : "Another cup, please,
I'm awfully thirsty."

«« "Why, did you meet her ? "

I walked behind her all down the Friars,
and to the orphanage. And soon after,"
said Gerald, rising, and going to the window,
'' I saw her in the orphanage garden with
that fellow Throckmorton. I wonder how
often he joins her there. Things are certainly
convenient for parsons ! "

He is very musical, you know. He
superintends the singing, and Lina helps
him."

She does, does she ? " said Gerald. He
had put down his second cup of tea, untasted,
K 2

in the window-seat, and was leaning against
the frame, his back to Marjory.

What chance could any fellow have
against a parson ? " he observed in a gloomy
undertone.

Are all parsons so very irresistible,
then ? " said Marjory, laughing.

It's very well for you to laugh, Marjory;
but Throckmorton would be more than human
if he didn't make due use of his opportunities.
That orphanage is a famous cat's-paw,"
said Gerald, savagely, drinking his tea as if
scalding were a relief.

Gerald, what a shame ! " cried Marjory .
You wouldn't have him neglect his work ?
Lina would be shocked, and think you profane,
if she heard."

"To me it seems much more profane to
make a rendezvous of the orphanage. She
doesn't ! I don't mean that she does," cried
Gerald, excitedly, as Marjory was about to
speak — " She is quite innocent, I know, of
all but the highest motives ; but, if there be
nothing else in him, he's more than man, —
as indeed she considers him."

She doesn't care a straw for him ; of
that I am sure. The eldest orphan is going
to service, and Lina has heard of a place.

She was telling him about that, no doubt,
when you saw them in the garden."

But you can't pretend to say, Marjory,
that you haven't noticed Throckmorton's
admiration ? I won't call it more than
admiration — at present. What it ends in,
remains to be proved."

'' He certainly does admire her. But so
does almost every one''

Almost!' Who does not?" said
Gerald, half angrily : — he was in a strange,
excited state, this afternoon, thought Marjory:
'' You have something behind, Marjory —
I see it. Tell me at once. Is she engaged
to Throckmorton ? "

My dear Gerald, what an imagination !
Nothing of the kind. It is only, since you
ask, that I have once or twice thought he
did seem rather smitten. But I don't believe
he has any intention of proposing to her, or
to anybody. He is strong upon the celibacy
of the clergy."

'' That I think nothing of whatever. Many
a man is that, until he is forced to change
his mind. You have noticed it, then ! It is
not my fancy. — I may as well give up all" —
he checked himself suddenly.

Mr. Stanhope ! Mr. Stanhope ! " cried

a cracked voice, followed bj a rush of noisy
boots. Marjory opened the door ; and in
burst Lewis Harding : his red hair in dire
confusion, his jacket dusty, his inky fingers
holding an open letter.

Mr. Stanhope, quick ! Sally's after me !
Sally said I mustn't come till I'd ' cleaned
me ; ' but I couldn't wait. Head this ! "

He thrust the letter into Gerald's hand,
and instantly disappeared under the table*
Marjory had no attention for this manoeuvre;
she had caught sight of the signature, and
flew to look over Gerald's shoulder.

Dear Lewis, —

I shall be at Alton in a day or two,
and will look in on you ; and you can introduce
me to your friend.

Your affectionate uncle,

Thos. Heeding."

' My friend ' means you, Mr. Stanhope,"
said a squeaky voice beneath the table-cover.
Marjory clasped her hands in a rapture, and
gazed at Gerald. She had thought that he
would be half transported with joy ; but he
did not look as she expected. A flush had
indeed risen to his face ; but anxiety — the
anxiety from which his recent words had

sprung — was still its prominent expression.
He seemed hardly to take in the meaning of
the note, his thoughts were but half with it.

Perhaps, thought Marjory, he could not
realise at once that he was truly to meet the
great master — an interview with whom, as he
had once told her, he would have begged his
way to London to obtain ! Here was his
wish close at hand : — and was it no more to
him than this ?

"Is Harding here?" said Miss Pilkington's
manly voice at the door.

CHAPTER XI.

*' Then a voice cried, ' Rise, master !
From the burning brand of oak
Shape the thought that stirs within thee !'
And the startled artist woke." — Longfellow.

Thomas Harding, R.A., was a great master
in his art : great both in natural gifts, and in
the labour which improved them. In some
respects he was altogether original, forming
a school of his own ; in which he trained a
choice assortment of disciples. To be numbered
among these was in itself a proof of
artistic merit : for he was fastidious in his
selections, undertaking none who were not of
decided talent. The sham of it shrank away
at his approach ; on pretentious stupidity, it
must be confessed, he was even unnecessarily
severe.

He lived not only by his art, but for it and
in it. A bachelor, his movements were untrammelled,
and they varied in accordance
with his work ; but the place he loved best
on earth was Rome, where he had a studio,
and where every year, as his friends observed,

he lingered longer. His chief English, tie
was the boy Lewis, only child of his only
brother, whose widow had married again ;
and for Lewis's sake alone had he consented
to give Gerald the benefit of his opinion.
From the obscure young man himself he
expected nothing ; and indeed it had so often
been his painful duty to discourage presumptuous
aspirants, that this duty had, by
practice, ceased to be painful, and had almost
become a pleasure ! His character for plain,
even blunt speaking, was widely known ; and
Gerald was well aware that the truth, neither
more nor less, would now be told to him.

'' To-day I shall know whether I am an
artist or not," he said to Marjory, on the
morning when Mr. Harding was expected.

But you don't mean to give up hope if
his verdict is against you ? He is not infallible."


He will be, to me," said Gerald ; " I have
perfect faith in him. And, if he says that I
have mistaken enthusiasm for talent, I shall
not be surprised."

*' Gerald," said Marjory, timidly, as he
started for the bank — " that picture of the
Ideal ; ' you have taken it away. I do want
Mr. Harding to see that."

The quick fliisli which Gerald lead not
yet outgrown, came in a moment, red and
hot, all over his face.

"No," he said, "I can't. These that I
have chosen are enough."

He stooped to fasten his boot-lace as he
spoke, and then was gone, while Marjory
was still casting in her mind how to persuade
him without betraying her discovery.

The eventful hour arrived. Mr. Harding,
escorted by Lewis, entered the little sitting-room,
wound up to be patient and forbearing.
He was a tall man, with an abundance
of gray hair, and a powerful frame which
gave no evidence of sedentary occupation.
He might, from his appearance, have been a
mighty wrestler, a second Goliath. Were
this remarked to him, he would have said,
So much the better ! that the business to
which he devoted himself was no poetic
dream, but real work; worthy of strength
and substance in its workers.

Beside him, Gerald looked younger and
more boyish than usual ; but there was ever
an unconscious dignity in Gerald, beyond the
power of circumstance. No one ever despised
or looked down upon him, though the
reason might not always appear. Marjory,

trying to scan him from Mr. Harding's point
of view, felt satisfied, and proud of her
brother. His clear gray eyes met the critical
eyes fearlessly, yet with reverence ; their
expression recalled to Marjory the old lines : — •

He either fears his fate too much,
Or his desert is small,
Who dares not put it to the touch,
To win or lose it all."

Through long years Gerald had been learning
how sublime it is to suffer and be strong.
He did not fear his fate, now that, at last, he
felt it about to be decided. As to his desert,
there was no doubt of that, Marjory thought
if only Mr. Harding would think the
same !

After a brief introduction, straight to the
point went the great artist ; for he held time
to be precious.

'' My nephew has told me that you desire
my opinion on your drawings."

I should value it more than I can say."

Only Marjory, who knew him so well,
could see that his heart was beating faster
than usual.

But, first, I must warn you — I have often
had to offend people," said Mr. Harding, a

kindliness, not previously apparent, growing
in face and voice; ''I shall tell you nothing
but the truth."

The truth is what I want, sir; I am prepared
for the worst."

Yery well then, worst or best, let us
have it," said Mr. Harding, rising; "Where
are the — drawings, or whatever you call
them?"

Marjory felt somewhat indignant at this ;
but Gerald only smiled, and brought four
paintings which he had chosen as specimens.
Then he fell back a little, and waited.

A silence of full five minutes followed — five
minutes of painful suspense. When, at
length, Mr. Harding spoke, his voice seemed
strangely sudden :

Is this a copy? "

"No, sir."

Entirely your own ? "

"Yes."

You are an ambitious young dog, at any
rate. Let's see the next."

Neither Marjory nor Gerald could tell
what was in his mind, as he turned to the
second picture.

"You are entirely self-taught, I think?
No school of art, or anything of that kind ? "

I have learned nothing but what I
could pick up, sir, from books and engravings."


*' Hand over," said Mr. Harding.

Another silent interval, while the third
picture was studied. Then came the fourth,
the 'abridge."

** That arch is out of drawing."

A great deal is, I fear, sir ; but I meant
to alter that," said Gerald. He cast a look
at Marjory ; and she saw that his heart was
sinking.

You had found it out, then ; that's
something. Where did you get all these
faces?"

They are faces I have seen, chiefly ;
some I imagined."

"Dreamed of them, eh? Well!" He
looked again into the picture, as if studying
every part. Marjory expected a mingling of
approval and disparagement; Gerald, a
sentence of hopeless mediocrity. Neither
was at all prepared for his actual words, ashe
turned from the table.

I wish you were my son ! " he said,
laying his hand on Gerald's shoulder.

Sir ! " said Gerald. Marjory, more clear-sighted,
started to her feet, all aglow.

*' I tell you, I wish you were my son.
You should have been the first artist in
Europe ! "

You are making game of me," said
Gerald, bewildered.

I am not. I said I should tell you the
truth, and that is it. You have great
powers ; you must open your eyes to them.
Somebody says there are two ways of finding
one's own level. Yours is higher than you
take it for; you are too modest, boy," said
Mr. Harding, who was now pacing the room,
while Lewis, transported with delight, danced
privately in a corner : '* It is dishonesty to
waste our gifts. I tell you, you have genius
in you; I see it in every one of those
pictures. There are faults, crudities, both
in colouring and in form ; but there is
genius. Think of that ! Why, my young
fellow, I know men who have been daubing
away for forty years, and have made very
fair names, and fortunes, too, who would
give their lives for one spark of genius.
And here you have a stock of it, ingrain ! — to
be made the most of, sir ; mind that ! "

How can I make the most of it .'*" said
Gerald, speaking as in a dream.

Give yourself up to it, body and soul.

There are plenty of bank-clerks in the world :
throw this up ; it is a case of Pegasus in the
pound. You've already lost time enough,
and too much. Send in your notice tomorrow
morning — to-night, if possible ; and,
when you are free, come along up to me in
London."

For a moment, while the great artist spoke,
Gerald's face flushed high ; but, as quickly,
the colour faded.

Mr. Harding," said he, in that quiet way
which covered — only Marjory knew how
much: ''I have not words to tell you how
I wish that this could be. But it cannot.
I have no money."

Well, I guessed you were not overburdened
with that ; else why on earth should
you be a bank-clerk?" said the artist. "But
it would be a downright sin that a talent
like yours should be lost for lack of money !
I tell you what, young fellow ; you come tome,
and I will teach you all I can, without
a farthing of money : the fact is, I shall find
it a pleasure. For the rest, while you are
my pupil, I will engage that you earn enough
in the way of your work to give you bed and
board, and something over, if you are careful.
This for a couple of years or so, and then

you will be independent of me, or any one.
Now, what do you say?"

I thank you inexpressibly ; but I have
more than daily necessities to think of. I
am hampered by a debt, which I am bound
to pay before I can consider myself free."

A debt ! That's bad. How comes a
young fellow like you to be in debt ? " said
Mr. Harding, fixing his keen eyes on Gerald.

It's not my own, sir ; it was bequeathed
to me. I would explain, only I might try
your patience. It is £200, with interest.
Here, with care, I can pay £28 a year of it ;
but I could not be sure of doing that regularly
if I left the bank. You see, sir, if I
were dependent upon your kindness, you
might die — forgive such plain speaking; or
I might not turn out as you expect ; and,
then, what of the debt ?"

Mr. Harding meditated a second or two,
his eyes still fixed on Gerald. Then, in an
abrupt manner, he rose and looked at his
watch.

Well ! my time is gone. I am due to
this young fellow " — putting his hand on
Lewis's shoulder : " But I can't leave the
matter so. You dine with me at * The Sun '
to-night, and we'll go thoroughly into it."

Gerald thankfully acquiesced ; and, with a
hasty bow to Marjory, the artist went his
way.

'* Gerald," said Marjory, coming to the
table where he stood, still as in a dream,
there is no doubt now about your vocation.
It shall not fail. You shall be set free."

Then she kissed him, and went away alone
to her room.

They did not meet again until his return
from '* The Sun." Marjory had sat up for
him, writing. When he entered, a feverish
excitement had flushed his cheeks and brightened
his gray eyes. Marjory jumped up,
and drew the arm-chair into its place for
him, seating herself on a low stool at his
feet to hear his story. This was their frequent
attitude in an evening, when their
work was done and Gerald was tired. He
was generally tired at night, after his hours
of uncongenial toil ; and Marjory had often
felt a little anxious, when at such times she
saw on his young face a careworn look which
made it almost haggard. But in the morning
he was always fresh again, and ready for his
task.

Marjory ! " he exclaimed now, '' That
Harding is — I can't say what —more than I

VOL. n. L

ever thought him. Such a vision I have had
to-night ! Fancy learning under him ; first
in London, among all the life — real life, not
vegetation — then, better still, at Munich,
Venice, Rome. To go where the great
masters worked — to follow them. Oh, to
imagine it seems half enough ! If only our
poor grandmother could come back, with her
wider knowledge, and free me from that
debt!"

Did you tell Mr. Harding all about it ? "

Yes ; and he would actually have lent
me the full sum : but I would not consent."

Oh, Gerald ! are you sure you were
right?"

Quite sure. It would only be to exchange
the debt without the same security
of payment. I have a fixed salary here ; all
else is uncertain. I showed him clearly that
I am bound for the present. Then he told
me, if I could in any way get free towards
the end of next year, to write to him ; and
that, in such a case, he would take me, with
a party of select pupils — select as to art, you
understand — forth rest they maybe butchers,
or bakers, or candlestick-makers, for aught
he cares — to winter at Rome ; stopping at a
few principal places, for pictures or sculpture,

on the way. Some of his best pupils go with
him in this manner every year : they pay
him a good premium, but he would take
nothing from me. I would be his slave
through life," cried Gerald, with enthusiasm,
'' if that would repay him ! So there is that
hope, that chance rather — if by any means
I could get free before the end of next
year. But, oh, how mad I am even to dream
of it!"

No, Gerald — it may be possible. Listen
to me. I have been thinking, and calculating.
You know I hope that my book maybe
finished, and published, by the spring.
Lina knows a young authoress who got £80
for her first book ; and it was not at all a
remarkable book, either : and for her second
she got more. Can you tell me any reason
why I may not at least hope for the same ?
Then, by this time next year, you will have
saved, at your present rate, about £40 :
there would be £120 at once. And, if the
book succeeded, the publisher would agree to
take another ; £80 more in prospect ! and so
the whole £200 would be made up."

The days of miracles are past," said
Gerald, with a smile.

'* This would not be a miracle ; it would
L 2

be only ordinary success. Or say, if you
like, that I get, not enough to clear the debt
but to reduce it so far as that the balance
may be safely left to be paid off from your
work with Mr. Harding."

That does sound more practicable," cried
Gerald, warming. '' He guaranteed that I
should earn a certain amount. — "Well, Marjory,
perhaps — I do not know — it may be
enough to found a hope on. It all depends
on this : whether your writing succeeds, or
no."

I do think it must succeed. I have taken
such pains ! — and, Gerald, I have prayed for
success so earnestly. It is the fashion now
to scoff at prayer, and to call it irreverence
to speak of God, as the Bible speaks of Him,
as our Father in Heaven. But you don't
agree in this, Gerald ? — Gerald, are those
promises nothing ? "

This girl, brought up in the loneliness of
nature, among hills, and woods, and fields,
with little other company beyond books and
her own thoughts, had grown to realise the
unseen Presence which encompasses the
world, almost as though it were seen. There
was no cant in her, no extra assumption of
religion. It was simply that, to her, spiritual

existences were not a fancy, not a superstition,
not a theory to be dutifully accepted :
but a reality, warm and living.

'' Well ! " said Gerald at length : " I suppose
I may at least hope ! — And what it will
be to me," he added, suddenly brightening,
''if you do succeed, words cannot say."

'' That's right ! " It does me good to see
you smile like that. Hope ? I should think
so, indeed ! After such encouragement, who
could help it ? "

Such wonderful encouragement," repeated
Gerald : '' Only it is like a dream. I
have sometimes dreamed of words like those
he said to me, and when I woke everything
was a blank. But this is no dream. Oh,
Marjory, what might life be ! It seems tome
that through all these years I have
caught only a faint glimmer of it ; and now
it lies open before me. What the human
soul is made for ! — the beauty and glory to
be attained even in this world ! The bare
possibility of inheriting it is enough, just
now. I shall owe it all to you, if it comes.
I see no other deliverance. How shall I
thank you ? "

There can be no question of thanks between
you and me, Gerald. When I see you

an artist, in your own place, the joy of that
alone will be almost too much for earth."

"WTiat a treasure you are, Marjory, even
to me ! — and what a wife you will be, some
day!"

A wife, Gerald !" cried Marjory, scarlet :
"What can make you think suddenly of
that ? I shall never marry. I want to Hve
always with you."

Thank you, dear," said Gerald. Her
quick ears detected a change of tone. She
glanced at him : his eyes had grown dreamy,
looking far away.

CHAPTER XII.

Once ; and only once, and for one only,
So to be the man and leave the artist."

Robert Browning.

What are you thinking about, Gerald ? "

The flush deepened on his face.

'' I was thinking . no matter what. I
am a fool. — Marjory, you were too young to
remember our father and mother ? "

Yes : I have no idea of them, except in
imagination."

I remember both. Our mother was very
pretty, you know. She died first. I recollect
seeing her lie looking, as I thought, like
an angel. I fancied she was asleep ; but
after that I saw her no more. A year later
our father died; I missed him terribly.
When he was at home, he had me constantly
with him ; I respected him immensely, and
thought him perfect. Then our grandmother
came, and took me away : — it was all strange
and lonely. You were gone too. The suffering
of that time is keen even now, when I
look back*'

'' You never told me of all that, Gerald."

'' I am not often so talkative as to-night !
Mr. Harding has been like champagne to me.
Well, you know, our parents made what is
called an imprudent marriage. My grandmother
was constantly harping on it ; but it
would have turned out well enough, if he had
not died. He was rising fast as a barrister
highly thought of in head quarters, I have
found lately. Long before this, he would
have been rich and flourishing : it was
stopped only by Death."

They lived always in London, did they
not?"

Yes : at first in lodgings. I once saw
an old letter of our mother's — it was lost
afterwards — written from those lodgings.
Such a happy letter ! — one glow of brightness,
such as I see in you, Marjory, sometimes.
I have often thought of it since we
have been here, and fancied that their life
might have been a little like ours. They
were poor, but not oppressively poor,
and growing always better ofi*. Both had
plenty of work ; but they were very happy.
They both loved books, music, pictures, and
congenial friends : and they had some of all.
It must have been a pleasant life. At all

events, it was life — active and vivid, while it
lasted.

A long silence followed : Marjory musing,
Gerald looking irresolute, as if in debate with
himself.

According to some people," he said abruptly,
'rit is dishonourable to propose to
any girl before making her a home."

I can see no dishonour in the matter,"
said Marjory. 'rit is just a question of a
long engagement ; and, if a girl really loved
a man, she would surely rather wait for him
than marry any one else."

But suppose he were not sure of her
feelings ? Ought he, under those circumstances,
to try to make her love him ? "

He might be doubtful without cause ; it
might be a mutual mistake. Many a girl
would rather die than betray love for a
man who had never asked for it. How
could she be certain of his love unless he
spoke ?"

"But a girl can generally tell when a man
cares for her ? "

I think that depends on the kind of girl,"
said Marjory : "1 speak only from guesswork
; and yet I think I am right. I believe
that there is many a woman who is either too

proud or too humble to build any confidence
upon a man's affection unless lie has actually-told
her of it. And then, perhaps, if he
thought, as you say, that he should be dishonourable
to speak before he could marry —
then— especially if he went away — she might
think she had been mistaken in fancying that
he showed signs of caring for her ; and then
she would suffer agonies of mortification, and
do her utmost — the kind of woman I mean
to regard him only as an ordinary acquaintance.
Most likely, as time passed on, she
would succeed; and perhaps would marry
some one else : and yet, after all, the first
might have been the one who was really meant
for her, and she for him. No doubt there
have been many such cases."

'' And all the time a mutual mistake, as you
expressed it," said Gerald : " The first poor
fellow nursing the thought of her in his mind,
hundreds of miles away ; working for her,
building castles in the air about her : till suddenly
he takes up a newspaper, — there's her
marriage to So-and-so of So-and-so, at ,
by So-and-so, assisted by So-ands
; — and so it all ends."

But why didn't he speak ? " cried Marjory,
reproachfully ; then laughed at her involuntary

earnestness, Gerald laughed too,
a little, and observed that lie had better
weave the fancy into her story.

But how did we come to talk of all this ? "
said Marjory, " when our minds were full of
Mr. Harding?"

'^ It shows their feebleness, I fear," said
Gerald, rising. '* We had better go to bed
and refresh them."

'rit is very late ; and yet I do not feel as
if I could sleep. Oh, Gerald ! what a day
this has been ! "

You are not sleepy ? " said Gerald, putting
down the candle which he had begun to light :
If you like, I'll tell you something."

'' Tell me anything you like," she replied,
her heart throbbing with an indefinable fear.
He remained standing by the mantel-piece,
his back to Marjory, who had not left her
stool ; and, resting his elbows on the marble,
his forehead on his folded hands, looked down
into the fireless grate.

'' Marjory, I am going to ask you a question.
Women know each other best."

He hesitated.

Would Miss Peele be disgusted if I told
her that — that I cared for her ? "

A long pause followed. At length, in a

tone of forced composure, Marjory answered :
There is nothing in you to disgust any one."

Is that all you can say ? "

I — I don't know. I am sure that Lina
likes you very much ; and she respects you.
She does not respect every one."

"Do you think— is it possible that — that
she could ever grow to care for me ? "

Once more Marjory was long silent, struggling
with herself.

** Yes," she said at last; " I think it is."

'' You really think so ? " cried Gerald,
turning flushed and eager, and sitting down
opposite his sister. " You really and truly
believe that I might have a chance ? "

'' I do. I feel almost sure of it."

'' Marjory, you frighten me. I am afraid
to let myself hope. You — you don't think
she cares for any one else ? "

The sight of his anxiety, of that agitated
face, usually so quiet and dreamy, touched
Marjory to the quick.

'' I not only ' don't think ' — I am certain —
that she cares, in that way, for no one else in
the world."

"Well, now, listen, I'll tell you," said
Gerald, shading his eyes with his hand : "The
first moment I saw her, at that concert, I felt

that I had found my ideal ; and ever since
the feeling has grown, till I am altogether
bound to her. It seems as if even to become
what Mr. Harding said — the first artist in
Europe — would be as nothing to me without
her."

Oh, Gerald ! " had nearly broken from
Marjory's lips. She restrained herself justin
time for her chances of continuing his
confidante.

"If you feel that, it must be strong indeed,"
she said.

I tell you it is my life. I never did live
before. Well, I meant to go on and bear it,
as I have borne other things ; but lately I
have thought I couldn't stand it much longer,
especially when that Throckmorton "

Your poor innocent bugbear ! "

Nonsense, Marjory ; I know more of
these things than you do. Yesterday I made
up my mind that Harding's opinion should
decide it one way or the other. If he had
said that I could never expect to be more
than I am now, I would have given up all
hope of her for ever. But now — if I can
feel sure of any chance — I'll speak at once,
and ask her if at least I may strive to win
my way up to her. That hope and the other

can rise or fall together ! That's all I dare
expect, as yet, I suppose ; but even that would
be an insanity to me."

Oh, Gerald, I only hope she is worthy of
such devotion ! "

'worthy!" cried Gerald; "She is an
angel. You have but to see her face to tell
that. Many and many a time her face has
been a heavenly inspiration to me."

"So it was once, to me," said Marjory.
She did not add the rest that was in her
mind. But Gerald observed no omission.

It strikes me that she is one of those
women you spoke of, who would sooner die
than show any affection for a man who had
not asked them for it."

"As to dying, I don't know," said Marjory:
Lina's feelings are very well governed.
But I am sure that she would not allow herself
to love any man who did not love her."

Exactly. And if he did not speak — as
you said, how could she know ? I could wait
better, if it were not for St. Philip's. There
she is at that end of the town — and we at
this end ! — seeing him constantly, while I
have only stray chances, and scraps of time.
It makes me half mad : — I must put an end
to it, Marjory. I'll tell her; and face the worst.

Marjory looked at him with an ache at her
heart, and saw in his face all that he did not
speak. He craved, with craving unutterable,
after Lina. He would be thankful for whatever
she would give him.

'' After all, if I were to her but a hundredth
part of what she is to me, she would not feel
it hard to wait three years or so. It might
not be more than three years."

No, it might not. It will not, if you can
accept Mr. Harding's offer. Lina is of a
very calm nature. Waiting would do her no
harm."

'' And, if I succeed — some day, I will more
than make it all up to her ! How I shall
delight to surround her with everything she
cares for, everything that is brightest, best,
most beautiful, on earth ! I will work for
her, live for her; she and my art will be
blended together in my mind. They will
inspire me alike, and I shall serve them both."

In his restless mood he had resumed his
former place, Marjory still at his feet. He
could not see her blue eyes filling, again, and
yet again, with tears which she as regularly
forced back, or brushed away with her hand.
He did not see the blank look which had
gathered on that young face, whose brightness

but a short time before had strengthened
and refreshed him. As she sat silent
on her stool, listening to his rhapsodies, it
seemed to her that the sunshine was dying
out of her life, and leaving only twilight.
She had been so full of plans for Gerald — so
looking forward to life with him some day, —
life in a world of art, of beauty, of noble
work, where she would watch his talent grow,
and minister to it, enjoy his triumphs, and
see the dream of years fulfilled. Yes, that
was barely an hour ago ; and now — this was
what she must work for ! For Gerald to
marry Lina ; to prepare Lina a home : Lina,
Lina was everything to him, everything that
his art could not supply.

Marjory saw clearly, without morbidness,
her own place in his life. He felt a tender
and grateful affection for her, as his dear
and good sister ; he found in her a congenial
companion ; ' and there it ended. Whereas,
so long as she could remember, Gerald had
been a part of her inmost existence. She
could not fancy life without him, and her
dreams for him. And now, if independently
of her, he could pay off his debt, would he
miss her at all, should she die, or go from
him for ever ? An affectionate regret he

would feel ; but, so long as lie lead Lina,
would there be any real blank in this days ?
She could not face the thought, and crushed
it down. At that moment the cathedral
clock struck one, with a deep peal, resounding
through the night. Gerald rose quickly.

I had entirely forgotten the time," he
said, as Marjory looked up : " That startled
me. I thought it was a passing bell ! "

'you are over-excited," said Marjory, the
self forgetting instinct reviving : " Come, you
must go to bed at once ; you will be quite
worn-out tomorrow."

She lighted his caudle and her own, and
bade him good-night. As she did so, he held
her hand for a moment, and said :

Marjory, you believe in temporal prayers.
"Will you pray that she may not reject me ? "

Marjory paused a moment, looked down to
hide those troublesome tears, then answered
gently :

'' Gerald dear, I will pray that God may
give what is best for you."

'' That would be best," he said: " Think
how it must raise a man to have an angel
always with him ! "

Marjory's heart was too full for speech.
She smiled; and he took the smile for assent.

VOL. II. M

Chapter XIII.

*' Life is strong, and still
Bears onward to new tasks and sorrows new,
Whether we will, or no." — Archbishop Trench.

The next afternoon, Marjory passed, with the
little stream of worshippers and curious
strangers, through the deep-perched door of
the cathedral. All things seemed always
clearer to her in that grand atmosphere.
Far above sat the still figures in majesty of
conquest. One, with a crown, was looking
downward : it seemed to Marjory that he
looked at her, gravely, and in rebuke.
Another, near, looked upward with steadfast
gaze. Hundreds of years he had sat there,
one hand between the leaves of a book, open
upon his knees, his face, with purely chiselled
profile, turned upward, rapt. Earth's clamour
was here stilled for a while. Help
came to Marjory, and fellowship, in the
battle which she bad been fighting alone.
Others had fought before her, had endured,
had trampled this same jealous agony under
their feet, and passed on, to the crown. She

knelt in a shadowy place, lier face hidden ;
for tears were falling fast : the tears of a
young girl's first grief. She had no human
friend to pity them : Gerald least of all must
have any suspicion of her feelings. In such
case he would wonder at her, despise her,
she thought : he would not know her for his
Marjory, his helper. So she struggled with
herself. While it lasted, the battle was
sharp, — but it was not long. She would
have fiercer ones to fight some day, perhaps.

'' How much of self there has been in
me ! " she wrote afterwards, in a little book
in which she sometimes effervesced : "I am
ashamed — I am horrified at myself ! I
thought that all I wanted was my Gerald's
well-being : if this will further it — and he
says it will — why am I so wretched ? It is
horrible, mean egotism. My one comfort is,
it does not hinder my wish to work for him ;
that is as strong as ever.

"Yes — I can go on working, in spite of
this hateful pain. I had forgotten the element
of pain that must be in all life. All
has been so bright, so full of hope, since I
came to Alton : — and I have been so happy.
This life with Gerald has been a dream fulfilled
— and Mr. Harding's encouragement
M 2

seemed to crown it ; and now the change
has come. It is like the change in that old
dream of Thorne, where Mr. Hugh was a
fairy-tale prince. I have learned, in books
and sermons, that such things must be ; but
learning of them is different from living
them.

Well, if I am wretched, I suppose I can
bear it, as others have had to bear. But
what pains me most of all is, that I ought
not to be wretched. I ought to be unselfish:
and I can't."

Here the effervescence ended abruptly.
A cab had stopped before the door, and a
note was sent in to Marjory.

'' Dear Mae joey " — it said —

*' I want to see you. I send a cab,
that you may come at once.

Your affectionate friend,

Caroline Peele."

It was almost six o'clock, and the day was
waning ; but Marjory had seen nothing, since
their early dinner, of Gerald. As she read
this note, she guessed where he had been ;
she put on her hat and jacket again, and ran
downstairs. Without orders, which she forgot

to give, the man drove straight away to
Albion Square. The streets were full of
people, returning from their work ; the gas
in the shops was lighted ; " the busy world
a thousand ways " was still hurrying on.
The repose of Albion Square struck Marjory
now, as always, in contrast to the stir and
din. The trees were sad-coloured, growing
bare; the paths strewn with leaves — which
all the old square-keeper's labours could not
keep under. A robin, with a sad autumnal
note, was singing in the acacias.

The door of No. 25 was speedily opened,
and Marjory was shown upstairs, into Lina's
bedroom. Like everything pertaining to
Lina, that room was a picture of propriety.
Marjory had never yet seen there a book ora
garment out of place; it was plain that
Lina's well-governed mind was never so
ruled as to forget or disobey the rules of
order. The housemaid too was evidently
under her complete control ; no speck of
dust was at any hour to be found in this
model temple : the priestess of which now
advanced to welcome Marjory.

There was an unwonted flush on Lina's
face : not fitful, like the flushes to which
Gerald and Marjory were prone, but a fixed

glow, decided as lier character. She looked
more beautiful, less statue-like, than usual ;
her dark eyes were brighter, her mouth was
somewhat relaxed from its firm lines.

'' I sent for you, Marjory, because I felt
that, under the circumstances, I could not
come to see you. Your brother tells me
that you knew of his intention."

I knew what was in his mind ; I did not
know that he had come to you this afternoon."


'' I had a note from him early, asking if
he could see me ; and he came about four
o'clock."

"Where is he now ? " cried Marjory, in
her impetuous way.

I fancy he went towards Heather oft. I
asked him to leave me for a time. I wished
to be alone — to consider, — and then it
occurred to me to consult you. Marjory,
you have your brother's interests warmly at
heart; and you know him, of course, far
more intimately than I as yet can. Do you
think, from your experience of his character,
that, if I consented to an engagement, it
would help, or hinder, his work ? "

'' He says it would be the greatest help
that he could have."

But does lie deceive himself ? It might
go on for years. Would not such a tie hamper
him ? "

All his own doubt is, whether it would
be fair to you."

To me it would make little difference.
I have plenty of occupation here : indeed I
do not know how the St. Philip's clergy
could manage at present without me. Therefore,
for my part, I should much prefer the
waiting ; and I hope, besides, that I should
never fret at what is inevitable."

Your calmness is wonderful ! " exclaimed
Marjory.

I never allow myself to be otherwise
than calm ; and I should maintain the same
principle in my engagement. But, as regards
your brother, I do wish for your candid
opinion. Would the double aim hinder him
in his artistic work, — when he enters on it,
I mean ? because, if so, I should not think
it right to be the means of spoiling his prospects."


'' Is this love ? " thought Marjory. *' I
know little about it, — only what I have read.
Is this what love ought to be ? — and the
other, that I have read of, a mere dream ? "

She sat silent, staring at Lina.

Come, Marjory, speak ! I only wish to
act for this true good. Would he have power
to concentrate himself in his work, keeping
his hopes about me in their proper place,
as secondary to the others ? Has he the
requisite self-control ? — because, if not, I am
convinced I should only hinder him."

Oh, Lina, I don't know," cried Marjory :
'' He does control himself wonderfully ; and
yet — he is not like you, — he is not calm,
evenly balanced, as you are. I don't know
what to say. You must decide : — only dodo,
accept him, if you can. If you can care
for him, the rest will right itself. I don't
mean only ' care for him : ' that sounds too
cold, — but — T can't say it, — if you feel it,
you will know," cried Marjory, flushed and
quivering, far more excited than Lina herself.
Lina sat perfectly motionless, her hands folded
in her lap.

'' As to that," she said slowly, " one cannot
measure real life by novels and poems.
Papa always taught me that sober sense,
not romance, should guide us in all important
assails. I sent for you, because I was anxious
to come to a sensible conclusion. If I had
chosen to be led by feeling alone, I may say —
since you are his sister — that I think more

iiighlj of Mr. Stanhope than of any one on
earth. Now that I find what power is in
him, I am quite surprised by his patience and
humility, shown for so many years. Mr.
Harding's opinion, however, has only confirmed
my own impressions. I believe that
your brother has, mentally and morally, the
makings of a great man. I believe that he
is destined to be a great man : and that the
time will come, when any woman, even the
highest, might feel proud to become his wife.
If I engage myself to him, it will be from a
far better feeling than romantic love : from
true esteem, and soundly based affection : —
and, even in a worldly point of view, I shall
not consider it foolish, because, so soon ashe
can enter on his own path in life, his fortune
will be secure. All that I desire is not
to check the greatness which ought to be
free to developed itself, and to advance him ashe
deserves."

'' You are noble, Lina — you are great too —
worthy of him," cried impulsive Marjory,
throwing her arms round her friend : "Now
let me go and bring him in, that you may
tell him everything, and leave him to decide."

Marjory, it is growing dusk ; — it is too
late for you to be out alone," cried Lina;

but Marjory snatched up lier hat, and dashed
away. She walked swiftly, almost running,
towards Heathcroft, thinking only of Gerald.

Heathcroft was no longer a place for
holiday strollers. The breeze blew damp
and sharp from the river ; and there on the
bank was Gerald, walking aimlessly up and
down. She knew his figure from afar, and
guessed all the suspense, all the anxiety, that
he was feeling.

Gerald, Gerald ! come back," she cried,
clasping his arm.

Why, Marjory ! " he exclaimed. How
pale he looked ! how large and clear were
his gray eyes in the fading light !

'' I have been with Lina — I am come to
take you back. She has told me all that is
in her mind. I think there will be no difficulty
; only come at once."

He turned, mechanically, and in silence ;
and they retraced their steps to the square.

I was watching for you," said Mrs.
Peele, opening the door : " Mr. Stanhope, will
you step into the dining-room ? "

Leaving Marjory in the drawing-room on
her way, she went to summon Lina : whose
stately dress was shortly heard sweeping
downstairs.

^' Lina is gone to him," said Mrs. Peele,
rejoining Marjory : " She must decide this
business for herself. I will not deny to you,
Miss Stanhope, that I am taken quite by surprise.
She generally treats these things so
coolly : — they have occurred, as you may
know, before : — and now — I am sure I like
your brother so much — he is a most superior
young man : — but— but — one cannot help
feeling uneasy."

Because he is so poor, you mean. But
you have heard Mr. Harding's opinion ? "

'eyes — yes — very hopeful, I am sure.
Enough perhaps to justify an engagement.
It will be a sadly long one, I fear — her poor
papa would hardly approve : and yet — Lina
is so like her papa : I have every confidence
in her judgment. I trust her sisters will not
blame me."

'' I don't see how they can."

Well, no— I hope not: they know that
Lina is her own mistress. The house, and
even the children, seem often more like hers
than mine. I am not afraid, either, that the
long engagement will hurt her; she never
allows herself to worry. She is training the
children in the same way ; Lizzie is wonderfully
like her already. Poor little Bertha is

more like me ; and I can't help worrying.
That is a weakness, I quite feel. Lina is
above such weakness. Yes, I am sure she
is fully competent. We will trust her decision."


Marjory set herself to relieve Mrs. Peele's
evident anxiety, by various glowing prognostications
concerning Gerald's future: in which,
as she was rewarded by seeing, the little
woman began presently to believe.

*' I have never wished to be worldly," said
Mrs. Peele : ''I do not approve of worldliness
: " and, this admission made, the whole
affair assumed a more cheerful aspect.

Thence the conversation diverged to Mrs.
Peele's own personal matters; which she
found it exceedingly refreshing to discuss
with so sympathetic a listener. By degrees,
as their tete-astute, in common with that
downstairs, continued long, she began to
talk of old times at Bullingham, and of her
husband.

'^ Mr. Peele, in his best days, was very
like Lina : just that calm, superior nature : —
which made it the more painful to see him
at last, quite broken down by trouble. He
had been intensely proud of his son ; so you
may guess what a blow all that was to him."

What did all that mean, Marjory wondered
? The words were accompanied by a
look of intelligence, as though Mrs. Peele
never doubted their clearness.

To tell you the truth," she said, bending
forward, and lowering her voice, — '^ I may
confess it to you, since, if things turn out
as I expect, you will be like one of the
family, — I always mistrusted Richard. I
hardly know why ; and I feel that my judgment
is not to be depended on; but there
was something I cannot define. — I never
mentioned this ; and Lina has no idea of it,
though she thinks I did not appreciate him ;
but I was less surprised than any one, when
the blow came."

I don't understand," said Marjory.
*' This is something of which I have not
heard."

Mrs. Peele's expression changed suddenly;
she looked red and startled.

Indeed ! I thought, as you had been her
friend for so long, you would be sure to know.
Pray ask me nothing ! Don't let Lina suspect
that I have alluded to it."

Marjory hastened to promise this ; and,
Mrs. Peele, with nervous abruptness, changed
the subject. But these vague allusions had

seemed to throw some additional light upon
Lina's mistrust of Mr. Vivian. The sting of
that mistrust, and of the suspicion with
which it was coupled, began to rankle more
deeply in Marjory's mind, as she sat beside
Mrs. Peele, answering and listening, yet
thinking all the while of these other things.

Suddenly steps came up the stairs ; Gerald
entered. His whole face seemed transfigured.
Instantly Marjory knew that all was decided,
that Lina had accepted him. Mrs. Peele
rose ; but Marjory sat still, gazing at him, a
choking in her throat.

Mrs. Peele," he said, " Lina wished me
to tell you that we are engaged. She has
promised to let me work my way up to her.
You must not be vexed with me — or afraid."

I am certainly not vexed ; — it is very
natural," said Mrs. Peele, nervous and agitated
: '' And I will try not to be afraid.
Lina knows best, of course. I am sure I
wish you all happiness."

She pressed his hand, and, by a sudden
impulse, raised her face to kiss him. Gerald
looked deeply gratified, thanked her, and
returned the pressure with a warmth which
caused the little scene to end in an irrepressible
cry from poor Mrs. Peele ! She hastened

away to Lina; and the brother and sister
were left alone.

Gerald, I am glad — very glad, and thankful
— for your sake," was all that Marjory
could say.

She felt as though the words were cold ;
but they were not cold to Gerald. The whole
world was couleur de rose to him. He might
have been insulted, ever so savagely, and he
would only have laughed. He seemed hardly
able to contain himself. He sat down by
Marjory, and spoke of Lina — of what she
had said, how she had smiled.

'' I begin to believe that I shall really be a

great man some day ! If she is with me, I

may be anything. I feel sure now that the

difficulties will all be conquered : they seem

half gone already. This day ten years — even

this day five years, Marjory — who knows ? "

Who knows ? " Marjory repeated.
* * *

Some hours later, when the young
Stanhope were starting on their homeward
walk, Lina drew Marjory aside.

"Marjory dear, just one word, "she said;
I won't keep you a moment. — I watched
from my window, when you left me, this
evening, to find your brother; and I observed

that you ran across Heathcroft. Please don't
be vexed — but I feel it better to say that it
does not look well for a young lady to run ina
public place. You have lived so long at
Eockswold — I thought I would mention it.
That's all, dear. Good-night."

Good-night," returned Marjory, and
followed Gerald, not knowing whether to
laugh or to cry.

CHAPTER XIV.

The look, the air, that frets thy sight,
May be a token that below
The soul has closed in deadly fight

With some infernal fiery foe,
Whose glance would scorch thy smiling grace,
And cast thee shuddering on thy face."

Adelaide A. Proctor.

Now had begun a new phase in Marjory's
life. She worked with double vigour — often
to the extreme limits of her strength ; thinking,
composing, writing. As time went on,
she noticed that Gerald watched her progress
with ever more of anxiety. He guarded her,
with jealous care, from casual interruptions ;
brightened when she felt herself ' inspired ! '
was visibly depressed, when — rarely enough
her courage seemed to flag. She trembled
sometimes when she realised how much
depended on her exertions. Yet, on the
whole, she felt that the cause was less her
own, than His who had created Gerald, his
talents, his aspirations ; never doubting but
that she was furthering the purpose for which

VOL. II. N

Gerald had been born into the world. Let
those who will, laugh at her simple faith !
Such was the fact of it.

But, nevertheless, these days were far from
happy days to Marjory. She felt lonely, as
she had felt long ago, when she was a little
child in this same Alton. She loved Gerald
so much, so absorbingly: she had not known,
till now, how she loved him. It was not the
commonplace love of ordinary sisterhood ; it
was an idealised devotion, with an element
not unlike that which he, in his turn, lavished
upon Lina. His genius, his whole character,
seemed to her beyond compare. She would
willingly have been his servant, his slave
even, counting her service a joy, if she might
have been also his friend — necessary to his
happiness.

She was not morbid. It would not have
occurred to her to question how much, or how
little, she was to him, had not that question,
as it were, forced itself. For now she could
not but see — although reproaching the pain
which came with the sight — how entirely he
was wrapped up in Lina. It seemed as
though he could not live one day without
Lina now. When he was away from her, he
was dreaming of her, silent, preoccupied;

sometimes not hearing Marjory's answers
when he spoke, often not caring to speak at
all, unless of her. One afternoon, when the
three were together, Lina suddenly observed :
I looked out last night, at half-past eleven,
to find what constellations were visible ; and
there, in the road, was a man, staring up at
my window. It is not the first time that
this has happened. I think I shall speak to
the policeman."

Marjory glanced at Gerald; his face told
its own tale. She slipped out of the room,
that he might be free to explain. He had
been parted from Lina all the previous day,
restless all the evening. He could not sleep
without gazing at the light which betokened
the beloved presence !

'* I am tied to very thee

By every thought I have ;
Thy face I only care to see,
Thy heart I only crave."

Those old words of two centuries past
seemed now uttered for the first time, in
every look, every action, every tone, of Gerald
towards Lina.

And as for Marjory — he seemed sometimes
to forget her existence ! It was all very
N 2

natural, no doubt, but no less a trial: especially
as she was often harassed by a fear as
to Lina's power of appreciating such devotion.
Lina had no idea of the perseverance
with Which Marjory studied her: scanning
her every word and gesture, with regard to
Gerald. In some points the result was satisfactory;
there was no question but that Lina,
as she expressed it, was " very fond " of
Gerald. She esteemed him highly, behaved
to him graciously, and was well pleased to
receive his homage. But Marjory, who had
her own ideas of that, to her, mysterious and
beautiful world called love, felt something to
be wanting ; and was continually haunted by
that mournful old French saying about ^'Vun
qui aime, et Vun qui se laisse aimer, ^^ "Was
that saying invariably true ? — a truth of
necessity ? If she were in Lina's place, she
thought, her feeling would be very different
from Lina's ! It would be joy almost beyond
earth, joy to make her tremble, to be thus
loved, thus worshipped — and by such an one.
Lina took everything, from the beginning,
quite naturally, with even composure. Allowance
must certainly be made for differences
of temperament ; but Marjory could not help
inwardly reiterating her first inquiry — '' Is

this love"— and, after a while, "Will this
always satisfy Gerald ? "

A deep sadness followed that last thought.
For just now, in the freshness of his joy,
Gerald was satisfied only to realise that they
were engaged, that she had promised to give
herself wholly to him, some day — some blessed
day, dim and distant, but sure — too blessed
not to be sure. Only to sit by her, to hold
her hand, to gaze into her face, to call her
Lina, to hear her call him Gerald; this alone,
as yet, fully satisfied him. But Marjory
knew him well enough to feel certain that ina
little while he would want something more.
And would he ever receive more than at
present ? Was Lina capable of more ? — Ah!
that was the question : — one which Marjory
could not answer. Lina herself would have
said that the answer, whatever it might be,
was no concern of Marjory's.

Throughout those waning autumnal days,
the sense of loneliness deepened. Marjory
grew more silent, more absorbed in her own
thoughts, read a great deal to herself. Subscription
to the city library was one of the
very few luxuries in which the brother and
sister indulged. Marjory indeed regarded it
not as a luxury, but a necessity, to cultivate

her mind for her work. Now, as at Rocks-wold,
her books supplied the human companionship
which was lacking ; and in the busy
town, surrounded by a multitude of fellow-creatures,
this girl, young, healthy, full of
life, led more and more the existence of a
solitary student.

There was another also in this town, who
lived secluded in the midst of numbers ;
and often now, as Marjory sat alone in the
little parlour, or walked alone by the riverside,
and round the College Green, her
thoughts would unconsciously wander to that
other, whose life had once been so different :
she would find herself pondering over Hugh
Vivian, the change in him, the cloud which Lina
had conjured, — over Mrs. Peele's allusions,
and " the blow " in which he seemed to have
had a share. Sometimes she found herself longing,
with an almost passionate desire, to be
able to ask him himself what he had done in
those days at Bullingham, — whether, indeed,
he knew anything of Jessie and her marriage.
Despite her anger against Lina's suspicions,
she could not, when she next met him, help
a certain restraint of manner, the necessary
result, to her open nature, of the doubts
which had been excited. Her eyes did not

meet this with the same freedom; her tone
had a coldness which he tried at first to
rattle away by his usual light badinage ; but
Marjory, though she laughed and chatted,
still maintained an indefinable distance. Then
he tried a little coldness on his own part;
but this had no effect. The sudden barrier,
of whatever nature, seemed impenetrable.

Hugh Vivian spent more thought on it than
he would have cared to confess ; sat in his
dingy lodging-parlour, speculating on its
cause; went through his daily work, wondering
about it. One evening he contrived to meet
Marjory at Mrs. Carberry's house; and walked
straight to the corner where she was chatting
with two girls of her own age, determined to
fathom the mystery.

Marjory could not help colouring, as he
sat deliberately down upon an ottoman at her
elbow : the more so, as the girls, foolish and
somewhat vulgar, glanced at each other, and
simpered ; and one of them whispered to
her — 'you won't want us now ! "

She glanced hurriedly at Mr. Vivian, afraid
lest he should have heard ; but he was deep
in his own thoughts. That, in some way,
those thoughts concerned herself, she could
not but perceive. Her eyes met his, and the

colour deepened on lier face ; for lie did not-withdraw
them — only looked at her more
pointedly, with a half questioning, half
gloomy expression. Her own eyes fell, and,
greatly to her annoyance, she found that the
objectionable girl had observed this pantomime.
She touched her companion, — who
giggled ; both hastily rose, and, shuffling
behind chairs and tables, removed to a distant
quarter. Marjory, seriously vexed,
would fain have followed, could she with
dignity have done so ; but, this being impossible,
she was obliged to remain alone on
her chair.

"I did not expect to see you to-night, Mr.
Vivian," said Marjory, coldly, doing her best
to look calm and unconscious.

'Unpleasant surprises will sometimes occur, ' '
said Hugh Vivian, in a provoking tone : ''I
had a spare hour, and it seemed a favourable
opportunity to prepare for a series of studies
I am meditating, from second-rate society."

You are extremely polite," said Marjory.

If I had thought you second-rate, I should
not have used the expression."

Thank you at least for condescending to
exempt me, if you condemn my companions."

'' You are very caustic to-night, Miss

Stanhope. Another time you would agree
with me'*

In what?"

In my opinion of the present company."

*' Then I should be very ungrateful, when
Mrs. Carberry is so kind."

'' Kindness is beside the point."

But not gratitude."

I stand rebuked. Perhaps we all ought
to feel exceedingly grateful to Mrs. Carberry
for collecting us together, and giving us at
least the amusement of a mutual stare.
Nevertheless, I rather doubt the obligation,
seeing that such assemblies are her favourite
pastime. But I do confess to some gratitude
for the pleasure of meeting you."

'thank you for another compliment,"
said Marjory.

Thankfulness misplaced again ! I was
merely stating a fact. You, wrapped up in
your ' Gerald,' have no idea of what that
pleasure is to me ! When I see your face,
I forget for the time that this world is a
deceitful old blunder. Years roll back — I
am a foolish cornet again — wood-pigeons
are cooing, and thrushes singing, in those
trees at Thorne. I see the old house rise ;
the drawing-room windows are open ; old

Brush is lying outside in a lazy doze : inside,
my mother and Lady Thorne are sitting, — and
you are with them, looking at old pictures."

He broke off, to hide a quiver in his voice.

Brush — Oh, where is old Brush ?" said
Marjory, dreamily.

'* Dead and gone, like the rest. Poor old
fellow ! he was a faithful friend to me. Yes,
he * went off,' three or four years ago — ' like
a lamb,' as the old women say — in his sleep.
He was worn out, and it was time he was
done with : but I missed him a good bit. I
thought all that I ever cared for was gone.
Then suddenly one day I saw you. I have a
fancy sometimes that it saves me from withering
up, heart and brain, and all, like a dried
leaf, to look at you now and then."

He was looking at her as he spoke;
and Marjory, meeting his eyes once more,
felt her whole soul stirred by pity — pity, and
something deeper, which seemed to thrill all
through her. Suddenly, like a rush of cold
water, came the dread instilled by Lina.
Suppose he should be only a skilful hypocrite
! Her face, transparent as a child's,
showed the doubt. Hugh paused ; and the
gloom, which had melted, returned and
deepened.

*' I see how it is," he said abruptly :
'' That friend of yours, old Peele in petticoats,
has set you against me. I don't
know why I should care, either," — he muttered,
half to himself : '' But I do. I care
terribly."

'' It is wrong to be set against any one
without good reason," said Marjory, incoherently.


** Exactly. Very wrong. So don't give
in to it," said Hugh, with a sudden relapse
into his half-jesting manner : *' Though, at
the same time, I won't deny there may be
very good reason for such as you to be set
against such as me. But I should like to
know, what particular crime Miss Peele has
contrived to ferret out ? "

She did not tell me of any crime," said
Marjory, simply.

'' But she has insinuated that she could, if
she would. Ah ! the fox is unearthed at last.
I see ! I've a good mind to summon her for
libel."

Innocent people need not fear what anyone
says of them," observed Marjory, adopting
his own tone, to cover the confusion
which, at his correct guess, had dyed even
her throat with crimson.

'' I'm not so sure ! That depends on to
whom it is said. Suppose some one whom he
respects believes the scandal ? I suppose he
would mind then."

I think he need not. His innocence
would be sure to come out at last."

'' You have a firm faith, then, that justice
will eventually win the day."

So firm, that I could never for one moment
doubt it," said Marjory.

'^ It is an intuitive conviction, I suppose ?
It cannot be based upon experience, for two
good reasons."

And pray what are they ? "

"Number one — you are too young.
Number two, experience, I fear, proves
something rather different."

Shortsighted experience, perhaps — or
what people mistake for experience : taking
a part for a whole, and judging without
patience."

Severe, and slightly vague," observed
Hugh.

Vague, I dare say, because I can't express
myself: but it is true, nevertheless,"
said Marjory, nodding her head.

'' What an oracular nod ! Only that your
physiognomy and that of an owl are so dissimilar,

I should think you were the bird of
wisdom itself. Well, according to your belief.
Miss Peele may some day discover that
there is not so very much less iniquity incertain
of her models of excellence than in
me, whom she sets down as ink-hued forever
! Only perhaps the iniquity is somewhat
different in kind."

'' I know Lina is prejudiced."

You have found that out at last ?
Hurrah ! "

She may not be prejudiced in your
case."

'' May not : the barest possibility, be
pleased to observe. Miss Stanhope. Remember,
I make no pretension to be considered
a saint •"

'' Certain people are quite as vain of not
being saints, as others of the reverse."

'' Again such severity ? — I had no idea you
were capable of it. — I am not one of those —
no, indeed," cried Hugh, with sudden earnestness
: " I say, simply as a matter of
honesty, that I know well I am not a saint :
in other words, that I have a terrible capacity
for badness. But, granted all of which
any one may accuse me, I alone can estimate
my own excuses ; and, on the faith of a gentleman,

I must say that if Miss Peele — by
breach of faith in others — can mention any
particular sin in my wretched Bellingham
life, I, on the other hand, could tell you of
special circumstances of temptation which,
however unmerciful she might be, would
win, I know — I am certain — pity, at least,
from you."

His impassioned tone struck Marjory.
She looked at him, and if before she had
doubted, she now was sure, of the existence
of some secret — something of which he was
ashamed — connected with his time at Bullingham.
What could that secret be ? She
trembled as she thought of Jessie.

'* Well ? '' he said, as she continued silent ;
gazing at her as if he longed to pierce the
veil which hides soul from soul. "Well?
won't you believe me ? "

Their eyes met again : again that indefinable
thrill ran through her.

*' Yes," she said ; '' I am not your judge ;
and — I do — I do believe you. But may I
ask just one question ? There is nothing now
is there ? — nothing that — no concealment
that I must condemn if I knew it, now ? "

As she spoke, her innocence of crime stood
her in good stead : she coloured only a little

lier blue eyes looked straight into this,
only slightly shadowed, as the eyes of a child
might be, if it were indefinitely told that a
friend had committed some wickedness. A
mingled expression of reverence and pride
filled Hugh Vivian's fearless eyes, as he
looked back.

'' Nothing whatever," he answered. — " If
your faith in all kinds of inscrutable mysteries
be so complete, you may surely place
some in me ! There is nothing whatever in
my present life, or connected with it, that I
should be ashamed to confess— to you or to
any one."

His tone satisfied her entirely. A heavy
weight fell from her mind. The thought of
Jessie hidden — deserted — she knew not what
had struck her momentarily with horror
unutterable. Now she felt certain that, as
regarded Jessie at all events, he was guiltless.
How otherwise could he speak thus
decidedly, knowing of Bellhouse's blighted
old age, of the suspense which only news of
Jessie could end ? — knowing that any news,
even of her death, would be better than this
blank silence ! No — however else, in the
past, he might have sinned, he was innocent
of this. It was a baseless, a wicked suspicion

: — wicked, though originated by
Lina.

You are glad I can say that ? Then you
have some interest in me," he said, with an
indescribable mixture of pleasure and gentleness,
watching her face.

I am glad," Marjory replied, though
blushing deeply. '' It would be painful to me
to think you so very bad, because — because
of old times," she concluded, made nervous
by his gaze. '' Now let us talk no more of
such disagreeable subjects."

'' And we are friends again ? " said Hugh
Vivian.

'' I don't know what you mean."

Yes, you do. You know quite well that
you have frozen me up into Nova Semble
itself, whenever during the last month I have
spoken to you. Now you mustn't let your
next interview with Miss Peele bring it all
back ; that would be, to say the least, deplorable
weakness of mind. You see an immense
deal of her now, of course ? "

** Gerald does," said Marjory, smiling.


I ought to have congratulated him long
ago ; but somehow the words stuck in my
throat. You'll forgive the confession, knowing

what you do know. I suppose your
brother adores her ? "

He thinks her too perfect for this world :
and so she might be, from her face."

"Ah, faces are unsafe guides ! I learned that
long ago, in a lesson I shan't easily forget."

From Lina ? "

'* Oh, no. She was too exact a copy of her
father to endanger me ! No, I learned that
from another face, more beguiling than hers,
because more childish and innocent. It looked
almost like an angel's face, and proved —
more like a demon's."

Miss Stanhope, cary I prevail ? " said
Mrs. Carberry, extending in one hand a roll
of music, and pointing with the other to the
piano : "Or are the charms of conversation
such conversation — too powerful ? "

Marjory started up, and hastened to the
music-stool. She saw no more of Hugh
alone that evening ; but her mind was very
full. She did not like to think of that mysterious
face which had deceived and undeceived
him ; but her prevailing impression
was certainly not one of pain. Certain words
rang on in her ears, — " I do care terribly ! "
The unpremeditated manner of their utterance
heightened their effect.

VOL. II.

CHAPTER XV.

weary heart of mine,

Is there ever a truth for thee ?
Will ever a sun outshine

But the sun that shines on me 1
Away, away through the air

The clouds and the leaves are blown ;
And my heart hath need of prayer,
For it sitter alone, alone."

George Macdonald.

The sad autumn days rolled by, and merged
into winter. In the country, the change was
plainly marked. Stacks of bare hop-poles
rose from the heavy soil ; the trees spread
long-branched and bleak. A little late apple-picking
and '' swede " gathering lingered
on : whence the women returned half frozen,
with faces red and rough under their cotton
bonnets, and chilled limbs which would long
avenge themselves in rheumatism and other
aches. For the rest, there was little fieldwork
; dull brown ridges stretched for many
an acre, in the place of pleasant clover or
golden corn. Mud lay ankle-deep in all the
lanes ; the cottage gardens had lost their

gaiety ; only a few clirysantliemums or
Christmas roses brightened some, — and the
holly berries were ripening.

There was no such striking difference in
Alton. Work there went on much the same —
buying, and selling, and manufacturing, from
morning to night. Bat the gas was lighted
early ; the streets were less crowded ; and
in the College Green the elms stood, like
the country elms, bleak and bare ; the decay,
at first so lovely, had finished its work, and
only one or two dead leaves were left, to
flutter in the heights when east winds were
blowing. The river was now no more a refreshing
contrast to heat and dust ; the air
that breathed from it was cold, as though it
had swept over fields of ice. Yet it was
beautiful still, that mighty river ; its tide
flowed on, regardless of change : still it reflected
the lights of sunset and of sunrise,
and the moonbeams at night ; and still Marjory,
now wrapped in winter garb, liked to
walk beside it and listen to its music.

The long evenings were very favourable to
the progress of her story. She wrote for
hours at a stretch, in the little sitting-room,
by lamplight. She had grown accustomed
to Gerald's absence. When his evenings


were not spent in Albion Square, lie was
working in his attic, where of late his time
had been occupied on a statue of Lina,
modelled from clay : Lina standing, a book
in her hand, her face half raised, as if she
caught the sound of music. The book was
one of devotion — such was his idea ; in studying
it, her ear had become attuned to
heavenly harmonies ; " she heard what is
not granted to souls more earth-bound.

But this was not his only study of Lina.
Marjory in these days was almost weary of
the incessant reproduction of that countenance,
to him so peerless. He painted
Lina looking down, Lina working, Lina
gathering flowers, Lina — as he had found her
once — reading German with her young sisters,
Lina walking in a moonlit garden, Lina
as an angel, reflected against a sunset sky,
Lina everlastingly. And Lina was quite content
to be thus pourtrayed, to be thus adored
and idolised by this gifted boy. Some day, she
thought, a serene smile hovering around her
classical mouth, her name would shine in
stories told of the great painter's early life,
as his guiding-star, his inspiration. She
thought of it calmly, with no conscious
vanity, as a fact of the future.

These were halcyon days to Gerald, one
long bright dream — a poet's dream of paradise.
Even Marjory had no conception of
the intensity, the still rapture, of the romance
in which he was living. Its charm was too
entrancing to admit any fear as to the stability
of such a condition. He was enfolded in an
atmosphere of one idea, too happy to question
his happiness. That November had passed
into December, was nothing to him. He
had a summer of his own, safe from external
changes. Night after night he worked on,
in the fireless attic, kept warm by the glow
of his inner life — so that he laughed to scorn
Marjory's remonstrances.

Meanwhile, the dull sky brightened into a
frosty blue. There was sliding and skating
upon Heathcroffc, — which had been lately
flooded, and then crusted with ice, — in the
meadows where hay was made a few months
before. The weather was very seasonable,
said every one; the shops were gay with
Christmas decorations, rich with Christmas
fare ; the old bells rang continually in the
city, welcoming the joyous season ; and thus
Christmas Day came and passed, and the
days went on to the New Year.

Mrs. Myers and Miss Pilkington were

spending their vacation with ricci relatives,
Benjamin and Ambrose in train. The two
houses were very silent now : on many an
evening they had no inmate but Marjory
upstairs ; and, below, Priscilla and Priscilla's
mother — to whose charge the establishment
was temporarily committed. The other servants
were gone like the rest. Gerald and
Marjory had been invited to spend Christmas
at Rockswold ; but they had no money to
spare for travelling : every penny now, with
jealous care, was hoarded or made much of.
Nevertheless, Marjory enjoyed her holidays,
making diligent use of the long spare mornings
in reading as well as in writing, playing
and singing for her own benefit, and dreaming
over her story — composing no less at such
times than when she sat at her desk.

On the last day of the year, after her early
dinner, she started for a walk by the river.
The towing-path was deserted now ; she
wandered, with increasing pleasure in the
loneliness, into the empty fields. It was
something of the pleasure felt long ago in
that summer's day walk to Thorne ; she went
on all alone, meeting no one. The river,
flowing with its quiet ripple at her side,
seemed somehow to deepen the stillness ; the

fields stretched out before lier, bare and cold
beneath the winter sky. The day was very
calm ; a robin's clear note resounded from
a hedge ; all else was silent.

It was long since Marjory had found herself
so far from the stir of numbers. She
strayed along, watching the river, thinking
of its ceaseless tide, of the quiet continuance
of its journey, ever on, to the great sea, —
the same in these solitary meadows, as in
the life-teeming town. Why, on a sudden,
did she remember that pause in the lane near
Thorne — when she had listened with vague
awe to the approaching horse-hoofs ? Why,
but by one of those mysterious influences
which affect us all, though, as yet, from a
source beyond our fathoming. Here, unobserved
before, in her musings, sitting on the
stile which divided this meadow from the
next, was Hugh Vivian, deep in thought.
Marjory hesitated, ready to turn back;
but he saw her, and sprang from his
seat.

He had looked gloomy and miserable
before ; now, as he raised his hat, his whole
face brightened ; and something in the glance
of his dark eyes brought the colour to Marjory's
cheeks.

I did not expect to meet sou, Mr.
Vivian ! "

I am not so happy, or so conceited, as to
suppose that. But what brings you all this
way from home ? Do you know that you
are between two and three miles out of
Alton?"

'' Am I indeed ? I came on and on without
considering."

'' An old habit of yours, I remember."

One can think so nicely in a long walk.
But I must turn back now, or it will be dark
before I get home."

'' I'll come a little way with you, if I may.
You rouse my curiosity ; but I suppose you
would not gratify that for the world ! "

What are you curious about ? "

"Your late remark respecting a long walk.
I wonder what you can have to think so
much of."

'' Just like a man, especially a critic, to
wonder that a girl can think ! "

I was not questioning the possibility —
only inquisitive about the subject."

"As to that, I have more subjects for
thought, perhaps, than you know of ! but I
don't see how they concern you. Still, if
they were fewer, there is surely nothing

strange in any one's being thoughtful today."


The last day of the old year ! " said
Hugh : " A melancholy day, isn't it ?"

That depends," said Marjory.

Well, after all, it is not more so than
tomorrow will be — the first of the new one.
Another step into fate, another plunge into
the unknown — there to be made a sport of —
by what?"

Is this only talk ? " said Marjory : " ordo
you really feel as you speak ? "

If you mean, do I really feel that life is
a mistake, and every renewal of it a pity, I
must plead guilty. What will happen in
this coming year ? how many hopes will
come to nothing ? how many happy young
fellows will wake up, as I woke once, to find
themselves ruined — not only in money, mind !
And these are only a small part."

And how much happiness there will be
too," cried Marjory : " how many joyful surprises
! how many deliverance of all kinds
how much cause to thank God ! "

Hugh looked at her, smiling to himself.


"It is a good thing to be hopeful, at any
rate," he said : " Were you anticipating all

this pleasant fortune, as you walked on in
that rapt sort of way ? "

I did not know that I seemed rapt," said
Marjory, blushing : ''I was thinking how
much this past year had brought— to Gerald,
and to me : and how much more may come
in the next, if only I succeed."

The words had slipped out unawares.
Hugh took them up.

I wish I knew what you are so anxious
to succeed in ! "

«« Why should you care ? "

'' Perhaps I am of an inquisitive turn of
mind. I have seen for months that you have
an object in life : and I guess "

'' Well ? "

'' Don't be angry ! I guess it is a literary
object."

Marjory hung her head in some confusion,
as she felt the scrutiny of keen eyes.

Not exactly," she faltered, with no more
"proper pride" than she had known eight
and a half years before.

'not exactly, because its ultimatum is
help for your Juggernaut, Gerald. You are
writing a book to get money for him."

At this plain statement of the fact, a
strange mixture of feelings swept over Marjory.

Partly vexation, partly shyness, partly
a sudden hopelessness of success. Her
ambition, thus embodied in words, by other
lips, sounded absurdly daring. How would
her poor venture seem, when tried in the
unsparing balance of the critics ?

"You are not offended?" said Hugh, as
she continued silent.

'' I don't know. I don't care that all the
world should know my private affairs."

"Am I ' all the world ?' "

You are a man of the world. This,
which I spoke of by mistake, concerns only
Gerald and myself."

Don't be afraid, I'm not given to gossip ;
and least of all could I gossip about you ! I
only wanted to say that, if I can ever be of
use to you, in this or any other matter, I
hope you will let me know."

I should not dare to show my writing to
you. I did so pity the authoress of that
book in your last review ! You see things ina
jaundiced light."

I hope you won't take me off in your
story ! "

Don't talk about it any more, please ! "
cried Marjory, imploringly : " No doubt you
think me ridiculously vain ! but I should not

dare even to dream of success, if it were not
for one hope."

'' You make me curious again ; but I will
ask no more questions."

A sudden thought struck Marjory. Should
she indeed succeed, in spite of all her ignorance
and inexperience, of the many chances
against her, might he not be forced to own
that God does answer prayer ? "

I will tell you what I mean," she said,
after a momentary hesitation. " I am praying
for success, night and day."

Is that your hope ?" said Hugh, With a
mingling of compassion and amusement :
If you choose to pray for the moon, then,
I suppose you will expect to get it."

I didn't tell you, to make you scoff, either
at me or at sacred things," cried Marjory,
pained : '' But you won't understand, — not
can't, but won't."

'' You do me injustice," said Hugh : '' I
had no intention of ' scoffing.' It is only
that I know what disappointment is, after
months of hope — hope bordering on certainty;
and I should not like you to know
the same."

It seems impossible, then, to you, that I
could write well enough to succeed ? "

*' Not in the least," said Hugli, warmly :
On the contrary, from my knowledge of you,
though I never had the honour of seeing
your writings, I should think it very possible
indeed that you might, in time, have great
success. Only mind ! it would be in time.
If you are counting on success at once, it is
a risk, to say the least. In publishing, the
first steps are hard to achieve at all, and, when
achieved, uncertain. Don't misunderstand
me : I say this only that you may know the
dark side as well as the bright one."

Thank you, that is very kind," said Marjory
: '' But I knew it all before ; and indeed
my heart would sometimes sink altogether,
if it were not for what I have told you. I
do hope — I may say, I do believe, that my
prayer will be heard."

"I prayed once," said Hugh. His face
changed, became dark and gloomy again;
a crowd of painful memories seemed to pass
like a storm across his mind. — "Yes, I prayed,
as you say you are doing, day and night, for
something that was life or death to me, and
the heavens were like stone to my prayer.
IVe given it up now."

Perhaps what you asked was not God's
will," said Marjory, gently*' God's will isbest."

But, even as she spoke, a sudden quiver
ran through her. Oh, what if that Will
should run counter to the desire of her own
heart ! But it must, perforce, be the Creator's
Will that the thing created should fulfil the
purpose of its existence ; and Gerald was
a Heaven-made artist. Thus by a rapid process
of reasoning, so often repeated that it
had now become habitual, the momentary
dread passed from her.

** Yes, yes,— those hackneyed phrases — I
know them by heart," said Hugh, with something
of his old fiery impatience. " ' God's
Will,' ' All for the best,' and so forth. They
are easy enough to echo, and cost nothing :
no efibrt, no struggle, no heart's blood, drawn
by drops. You have heard them from childhood
upward, and therefore you accept them
as truths. It does not occur to you to question
their foundation ; I hope you will never
be forced to do so."

Forced ? " said Marjory.

*' Forced by some practical contradiction
of them, turning upside down your life and
all you had taken on trust in it. After that,
you might not be so positive in asserting
what you have not proved. I hope this will
never happen to you. But I can tell you,

all you peaceable religious people, ' there are
more things in heaven and earth than are
dreamt of in your philosophy.' "

No doubt," said Marjory ; '' I feel it.
Infinitely more. But nothing really, whatever
in appearance, to shake our faith in God."

Isn't there ? " said Hugh, half to himself,
still with that bitter smile.

'nothing; nothing at all. I am certain.
I would lay down my life for that certainty."

As she spoke, her eyes shone with that
half-inspired light which kindled them at
times — that light which had often strengthened
Gerald. She looked like a young enthusiast,
who would verily, as she had said,
lay down her life for her faith.

*' You put things in your own way," said
Hugh, glancing at her with a kind of gloomy
admiration : '' You have just the same old
stock of assertions as all other religionists ;
but they don't irritate me so much, from you."

'rand why should they irritate you at all? "
cried Marjory.

For the reason I mentioned. Because
most of those who utter them know nothing
of the other side. You yourself know nothing
of it. I don't suppose, though, that will
make much difference in the end."

*' Meanwhile, do you think it kind to 
shake my faith ?"

'' I am innocent of any such endeavour.
I merely said what occurred to me, in answer
to your remarks. That might not have
been ' kind ' exactly ; but I don't know.
Your faith may yet be shaken more roughly."

Have you any faith at all, Mr. Vivian ? "

^' In the accepted notions of religion ?
ISTot much, I fear ; and what I have is negative.
For instance, I believe that the world
did not come from ' a fortuitous concourse
of atoms ;' but exactly how, or why, it came,
seems a mystery to me."

What a miserable state to be in ! I
don't wonder you are unhappy."

It is rather dreary, certainly," said Hugh,
with a dreary smile.

'' How did you get into it ?"

'' Ah ! that would be a long story. I got
into it through circumstances — the circumstances
which formed my views on Providence,
so horrifying to Miss Peele."

'' And to me too."

'' Yes, I see that. But I have had to toss
about the world as best I could ; and, if I
had been sure of the other side, I would
long ago have been out of it. There, I suppose,

was a bit of my negative faith : I
never did dare to take the final plunge.
But as to 'a kind Providence — any Being
who cared one atom whether I fought through
or perished like a dog ; or worse, how
many of my poor mother's nights and
days might be consumed in anguish unutterable
— I can't say I saw much sign of that."

'* We are told that we must ' walk by
faith, and not by sight,' " said Marjory.

Oh, yes, I know all we are told. But
meanwhile, unfortunately, we are blessed,
or cursed, by the possession of brains and
hearts — ingenious compounds of nerves and
other capacities. If those could be suspended
at will, ' walking by faith ' might be another
matter. But, as it is, when the heart compound
has endured to a certain point, the
brain compound cannot help beginning to
reason; to wonder why this should be; if
there be no way of stopping or alleviating ;
if an Almighty Power could not find a way ;
whether, if that Power be Almighty, it can
be kind ; if kind, Almighty : and so on to
questions more complicated than any one
who had not thought of them could imagine.
And the end of all that is, one does not
know what to believe; and one feels — at least

VOL. II. p

I feel — that the enigma of our existence remains
yet to be solved. The Sphinx derides,
if it does not devour, those hapless mortals
who attempt to solve it."

*' Do you ever read the Bible?" said
Marjory.

*' Not often now. I have read it."

'' And how did it strike you ? "

I believe it is a collection of very remarkable
books, written by various remarkable
men — enthusiasts chiefly."

*' Have you ever studied the evidences for
their inspiration, and weighed both sides ? "

I can't say that I have," said Hugh,
smiling.

"Would it not be worth the trouble to
study them, praying all the time that, if there
be a God," said Marjory, shuddering at her
own words, '' He will reveal the truth about
them to you? "

'' I am afraid of being duped. I have suffered
so much. I have gone down into such
depths — if there be a God, He forsook me.
I am afraid of coming to a false conclusion,
and having it all over again. I tell you, I
did pray," he repeated, gloomily : " I did at
least try to believe in prayer ; and it was all
of no use — and worse, because it misled me."

I can't tell what to say to all that. I
wish you would go to a clergyman."

'' Heaven defend me ! No, thank you,
I'll fight out my own battles. You don't
know half how bad or rebellious my spirit
is. Miss Stanhope. I am beyond the help of
any parson."

It did, indeed, seem that he was beyond
help and hope. Marjory was silent. For the
first time she realised man's impotence to
reach his brother's soul.

'' Don't vex yourself about me," said Hugh,
in a softened tone, as, observing the pause,
he looked at her, and saw the trouble in her
face : '* You are too kind to be happy, I fear,
in this world. I'm sorry I've been such a
fool as to talk so to you."

'' I wish you could be happy ! " said March,

I had settled down into a state
endurable enough — stagnation, calm at any
rate. I shall get back to it, I hope, some
day. I'll confess that seeing you has unsettled
me. Your face is so exactly the same ;
it has seemed to bring back old times, and
made me think of all that might have been,
and all I have lost — possibilities as well as
realities. Never mind. I am like a spoiled
p 2

baby, crying for what can't be. I stall get
over it soon."

He stopped abruptly, said '' Good-bye,"
and turned back across the wintry fields.

Marjory went on alone, pondering. She
could not fully understand bis last words.
"Why, as he uttered them, had his dark eyes
met hers with that strange, yearning, yet
bitter look? She ought not to feel this
attraction for him : it would surely be wrong
to admit him, holding such views on the most
sacred of all concerns, to any intimacy beyond
mere acquaintance ! And yet had he
not already — by virtue of old times, she
supposed — come to occupy in her heart and
interests a place far closer than that ?

Well, it would not do to Analyse ; she
only became thereby more puzzled as to
right or wrong. As to liking him, she could
not help it ; her pity for him amounted to a
passion ; and, so long as she continued that
nightly prayer, how could she feel toward
him as to a stranger ? The Saviour Who ate
and drank with publicans and sinners, would
surely not condemn her for not altogether
separating herself from this lost child of
His, this prodigal son who had suffered so
deeply.

And now lie seemed bound up with that
other object so near her heart — her work for
Gerald. They were linked together now.
She had seen that, but for his peculiar feelings
towards her, his full powers of satire would
have been brought to bear upon her presumptuous
hopes. If success were granted to
her, must he not be forced to confess what
she owed to prayer ? She remembered how
of old the Israelites went forth, few and
feeble, against mighty foes, and yet came
home in triumph.

In Thy lame, Lord, we go forth
against this multitude." Such was the feeling
in her heart.

Later, as she sat alone in the bright little
parlour, she thought over all the past year.
How it had opened at Rockswold, in the
usual monotony; Gerald far away in the
north, only a dream as yet. She had regarded
the outer world then as something in which
she had no part : that one quiet corner was
all she knew, except from books, of the great
universe. Now she was here, in the swarming
life of a city, surrounded by human beings
and their relics ; working, in the midst of
workers. The star of her hope had risen ; it
was rising still. She looked no more for

unclouded happiness, even in Gerald ; lie
had learnt of late that she must give up a
good deal, suppress a good deal, if she would
be to him, under present circumstances, half
that she had desired. But the fortitude
which had characterised her childhood was
strong within her now ; and she looked into
the coming months through the halo of her
purpose.

Was it not even possible that, when the
new year closed, she might be with Gerald
at Eome, in some quaint artist's lodgings,
such as she read of? Among such inspiring
associations, how well she could write, and
how much better her writings would succeed,
coming from Rome ! Lina would be here,
contentedly waiting till he could return to
bear her off in triumph ; and meanwhile,
Marjory thought, with self-reproaching happiness,
she would have him all to herself. It
would be over — the uncongenial work, the
hardship, the long waiting : only progress
would be before him. Marjory sat in the
window, alone, and without light save such
as the myriad stars imparted, gazing on this
blessed dream-land, and hearing the bells
ring out the old year.

They were sad, no less than sweet, those

bells. They told not only o£ joy, but also
of death and parting. But '' things always
turn out better than one expects," thought
Marjory : and so the old year died out. The
bells paused; the cathedral clock struck
twelve with its deep note : then out clanged
all the bells again, — and the new year was
begun.

CHAPTER XVI.

*' There is none like her, none.
And never yet so warmly ran my blood
And sweetly, on and on,
Calming itself to the long-wish'd for end.
Full to the bank, close on the promised good."

Tennyson.

An't Gerald was with Lin a. They were
sitting over the dining-room fire, in the house
at Albion Square, while here, as at the
cathedral end, the bells filled the air with
music. A midnight service was going on at
St. Philip's ; but Lina had a slight cold,
which she would not run the risk of increasing,
and therefore she remained at home.
Punctilious regard to health was one of her
points of conscience. She felt quite well,
however, and graciously acceded to Gerald's
request that she would see the old year outwith
him. So they sat by the warm fire,
hand in hand. At least Gerald held her
hand in a strong clasp, where she suffered it
passively to lie. A beautiful and shapely
hand it was : and always cool.

Gerald's heart and mind, like Marjory's,

were full of thoughts to-night. He sat long
silent, looking into the ruddy coals, and
clasping that hand which he loved.

'' This next year will probably decide my
fate," he said at last. His tone had a strange
solemnity.

Yes, if you find means to free yourself
from the bank, you will be, this day year,
with Mr. Harding. I quite expect it," said
Lina, in a matter-of-fact manner.

'^ I hope it, inexpressibly," said Gerald ;
'' but, if not, Lina — how then ? "

'' Is there any particular use in thinking
of that before the time ? " said Lina,
cheerfully.

*' How can one help it ? Lina, I hope I
have not been selfish."

Selfish in what way ? "

In asking you to bind yourself to me.
My whole heart was so full of you — perhaps
I did not give due weight to the other side.
I must not let you forget that, after all, it is
only a chance. I may be obliged to decline
Mr. Harding's osier, and go on here at the
bank."

You may. I am quite aware of that."

But, in such a case, how would it be, Lina?
Do you," he hesitated, and went on with

heightened colour — ''do you love me enough
to bear poverty with me ? or should you give
me up ? "

What would Marjory have done in Lina's
place, had she been Marjory still — only not
his sister, but his lover ? Would she not
have thrown herself upon his neck, and cried:

Better death than to give you up !"

But Lina pondered calmly, weighing the
question ; and finally replied :

It would depend on circumstances."

The blood rushed up into Gerald's face ;
he was silent, still looking into the fire. He
did not relinquish the unresponsive hand, but
his hold on it relaxed. Then suddenly he
clasped it tighter ; the light returned to his
eyes.

She does not love me, yet, as I love her.
But it will come," he thought : — '' I will
conquer her. I will make her love me."

'' If only I am not selfish towards you,"
he repeated, aloud.

"Certainly not," said Lina, reassuringly;
I have told you the same before."

'' The goodness of your heart makes you
say so."

Once for all, understand me, Gerald. I
never allow my heart to conquer my reason.

And in this special matter I am quite old
enough, and experienced enough, to judge
for myself. I have weighed all the pros and
cons. It is my belief, founded on observation,
not on fancy, that a distinguished career is
before you. We are both young ; I have a
comfortable home to wait in, and plenty of
work to fill up the time. Eight-and-twenty
is, in my opinion, quite soon enough to enter
on the cares of married life."

Eight-and-twenty ! " said Gerald, laughing
; " and you are just twenty-one. Seven
years ! Why, seven years seems an eternity.
I shall have a home for you long before then,
if I am to have one at all."

"Not so very long," said Lina, quite seriously
; '^ I shall expect it to be five years, at
the least, before we can prudently begin."

Well, I am glad that you have made up
your mind to the worst ! " said Gerald,
smothering a sigh : "It is being on the safe
side at any rate. But, when 1 once get a
start, I shall not be long in making my way.
Only — suppose I don't get a start, Lina!"

We won't suppose anything of the sort,"
said Alma ; and with this he was obliged to
be satisfied.

There is something I have not yet

fathomed in lier," lie thouglifc ; " I wonder if
I shall ever attain to that sublime patience!"
Then again he was long silent, still holding
fast her hand ; and the bells rang on.

'' Perhaps a day will come," he said at
length — some New Year's Eve like this,
when I shall look back to this suspense as a
dream that is gone, and you will be my wife :
wholly my own for ever. I can hardly
imagine such blessedness; or that I could
feel it and live. Have you ever thought,
Lina, what a wonderful thing joy is ? I have
borne a great deal of trouble ; I don't know
whether I could bear joy so well."

'' It is better neither to allow oneself to
be unduly elated or depressed. The middle
path is the safest."

Can you always govern yourself so ? "

Certainly, if I make an effort," replied
Lina; "And I always do make the effort."

*'I don't know," said Gerald, thoughtfully ;
I doubt whether such matters depend upon
effort entirely. You are of a high, serene
nature, my darling; you are like an angel.
The heights and depths of this lower life are
alike beneath your atmosphere."

It is not that. It was my father," said
Lina — '' who taught me to be reasonable and

well balanced. You could learn the same,
if you would try."

'' At least I may hope to grow less unlike
you, when I am with you always. Meanwhile,
you must not despise me — only bear
with me ; and some day I will try to make
things up to you. Some day," he repeated,
rising, and pacing the room. ** If I win
fame and glory, Lina, — and I may — yes, I
may ! — the chief joy will be to offer all to
you. I dreamed last night that some one
crowned me with a laurel wreath, and I knelt
at your feet, and laid it there, and left it."

"What a foolish dream ! " said Lina, not
ill pleased.

'' Perhaps less foolish than you think.
When I awoke, it seemed a prophecy."

One is often not quite oneself on first
awaking. You must not let yourself live forme,
you know. You must work, not for me,
but for duty."

That is the joy ! they will be blended,"
said Gerald : *' My wife and my duty will be
one. You will be, even more than now, my
guiding-star. What may I not become ! "

shark!" said Lina: 'the bells have
stopped ; the hour is going to strike."

Then the twelve strokes which Marjory

heard alone, pealed more faintly on the ears
of these two lovers. Not from the great
cathedral only : all the clocks, on all the
churches in the town, struck one after
another. The last farewell of the dying
year. Out clashed the bells again : they
had sped the parting, they must welcome
the coming, guest.

'' A happy new year to you, Gerald," said
Lina, rising. He came up to her, and suddenly
clasped her in his arms.

Let us begin it so," he said : " Close
together : — my darling — my beloved ! "

Lina permitted his embrace, passionate yet
reverential. His gray eyes gazed at her as
if he adored her ; well satisfied, Lina noted
their expression, which lighted all his face.
It was the face of a poet, of a divinely inspired
artist : of one whom the Gods love.

'* You are too vehement, Gerald," she
said ; but her tone was sweet and gentle :
*' And now you must just wish mamma a
happy new year, and go."

'must I go?"

Of course you must. Think of your
work tomorrow ! and I, too, am quite
sleepy : and then mamma must not be kept
up ! "

So they went, Gerald reluctantly enough,
to the drawing-room : where Mrs. Peele was
slumbering on the sofa.

Is it so late ? " she cried, starting to her
feet : ''I have been thinking of old times."

Dreaming of them, you mean, mamma,"
said Lina. Then Gerald wished her both in
one a happy new year and a good night :
and quietly took his leave.

Eut, an instant later, he reappeared in the
doorway.

** Lina ! one moment."

She went out to him in the dark passage :
and found herself again in his arms.

Do you know," he said, " suddenly the
thought came to me, ' Where shall I be
when another year begins ? ' and then I felt
that I must wish you good night once
more."

'' Good night, you foolish boy," said
Lina.

All the way through the streets, as he
walked home, the bells were ringing, the
stars were shining.

I shall be at Rome, perhaps," he said to
himself, answering that sudden question :
A thousand miles between us — and how I
shall crave for her ! But it will be paving

the way to have her always with me. I shall
look at those same stars, and think of tonight.


So he returned to his lodgings, and found
Marjory still up, waiting to wish him a happy
new year.

CHAPTER XVII.

Good name, in man and woman, dear my lord,

Is the immediate jewel of their souls :

Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing.

But he that filches from me my good name

Robs me of that which

makes me poor indeed."

Shakespeare,
i

"I SHOULD have thought," said Marjory,
that you were superior to the gossip of the
town."

*' It is one thing to countenance gossip,"
said Lina, '' and another to remain indifferent
while the name of one's future sister-in-law
is bandied about."

But, after all, what have they said ? "
cried Marjory, indignant and excited : '' Only
just that — that "

*' That Mr. Vivian is paying you marked
attention ; and that you do not repulse him.
This, in my opinion, is equal to saying that
you encourage him. In fact, he probably
takes your manner for encouragement. Just
hear me out, dear," as Marjory, crimson,

VOL. II. Q

and on the verge of angry tears, was about
to speak : '' Do not excite yourself. I will
tell you the facts of the case. It is remarked
that Mr. Vivian, who, before you came,
seldom went out at all, is now to be met
wherever you are invited. If you are not
present, he looks black, is barely civil, and
takes the first opportunity to escape ; if you
do arrive, he brightens visibly, talks to no
one else, and, in short, makes his feelings
universally apparent. Mind ! these are not
my own words — I am repeating what I have
heard, not from one alone, but from many.
I should have mentioned it sooner, only I
was afraid of putting notions into your
head."

Why, despite the unpleasantness of forming
a butt for the Alton gossips, did a sudden
thrill of wild joy rush through Marjory's
heart? If she guessed the reason, she did
not own it, even to herself.

Well, unless I altogether give up going
out, Lina, I really don't know how I am to
help Mr. Vivian's talking to me ; and if
people choose to interpret it so, I cannot
help that, either. You confess the worst
thing said of me, is that I do not repulse
him?"

Yes, I rejoice to say I have heard nothing
worse. You are popular, fortunately ; and
therefore you have not been accused of
flirting."

That is not the only reason," cried Marjory,
warmly : " I have not flirted with him,
or with any one ; and so I could not be
accused of it."

When you have more knowledge of the
world, dear Marjory, you will see that persons
are sometimes accused unjustly. I am
warning you only as a true friend. Lookers-on,
you know, see most of the game. If
there were no other objection to Mr. Vivian,
he is much too poor to marry ; and I don't
suppose that he has any prospect — like
Gerald — of increasing his income."

'^ Lina, do stop ! I hate it. I hate to
imagine and speculate on such objects. Why
will you go on in this way ? "

'* Because I think it is time that you
should decide in your own mind what attitude
you ought to adopt towards Mr. Vivian. I
do not say * wish ' — but ' ought.' "

Oh, dear ! " cried Marjory, with a hunted

feeling : "I wish to adopt no attitude

towards anyone. I wish to be free, as I feel

at the moment ; and to take people as they

Q 2

are. I don't consider all mj conduct beforehand,
as if I were acting a part."

'' It might be better, if you did. In this
at least, I will try to make you consider. I
am really seriously afraid, Marjory, of some
entanglement between you and Mr. Vivian.
You are little more, in many ways, than an
inexperienced child ; and I regard myself at
present in the light of your elder sister. I
shall stand by you as long as I can'*

'' I would rather stand alone' said Marjory,
proudly.

Very probably ; but that is not desirable.
To save you from what might end in lifelong
repentance, I will tell you what I have
never before told anyone — even Gerald. It
seems that only facts will convince you."

The girls were walking towards a suburb
of the city — an uninteresting walk enough ;
but Lina had business with a dressmaker in
this quarter, and had called in the College
Yard on her way to request Marjory's company.
It was eleven o'clock on a frosty
morning ; Gerald was at the bank : Lina, in
making the request, had announced that she
had something to say. Marjory's heart began
to beat with passionate quickness. What
was she about to hear ? Was it anything

that must separate her altogether from —
but she must steel herself, and listen.

You have heard of my brother Richard,"
said Lina, after a momentary pause, paler
than usual, her head very erect, a proud
determination on her features : " Your affection
for Gerald has often reminded me of
mine for him. In looks I have heard him
compared to the Apollo Belvedere ; he was
like an old Grecian statue — tall, finely formed,
a beautiful face. He was exceedingly clever,
too ; but unfortunately he could not makeup
his mind in the choice of a profession.
After he left Oxford, he was at home for
some time, helping my father in the bank,
but otherwise in a state of indecision."

Be it observed that Mr. Richard Peele was
probably not the only person, born to earn
his bread, who has found it difficult to decide
how to combine a maximum of enjoyment
with a minimum of work !

He was much older than you, was he
not ? " asked Marjory.

Nine years. You will imagine how I
looked up to him ; and my father, no less
than I, thought him perfect. It was a blow
when he resolved to go to Australia ; but he
had a fancy for travelling, and my father

hoped that he would return some day, with
sufficient capital to settle down comfortably
at home. So we made all preparations for
his going, and — it will be six years ago, next
April — he bade us good-bye, and sailed, as we
believed, from Gravesend."

What a trial it must have been ! "

'' It was, indeed. We little knew that
worse was to follow. The month before, Mr.
Vivian had left Bullingham. His mother had
died in February, and he went in March :
disappeared, as I told you."

'' But what had that to do with your
brother ? "

'' Wait a little while ! There was a certain
Mr. Bulkley, a large shareholder in our
bank "

'' Mr. Bulkley ! I saw him at Thorne.
Poor Jessie was with his sister."

'^ Yes. He was exceedingly rich ; and
almost equally careless in money matters.
I often heard my father complain of his 
habits, and say that he might
be robbed three times over, and not discover
it till too late. The clerks were all aware of
this ; it was a proverb among them. No
one can tell what harm such a person may
do ! "

'' Mr. Bulkley would never do intentional
harm, I am quite sure. He was the kindest,
most generous old man."

'too generous : lavish, I should imagine,"
said Lina, coldly. " Well, a fortnight or so
before Eichard left us, Mr. Bulkley had been
suddenly summoned to his brother — another
oddity, like himself, from all accounts — who
lived at St. Petersburg. He was detained
some months in Russia ; first through his
brother's lingering illness, and then to wind
up affairs after his death ; and all that time,
I suppose, he never looked at his banking-accounts,
although they were forwarded to
him regularly. If only he had found out the
the — mistake, as he should have done, at
once, how much misery might have been
spared ! "

What mistake was it ? "

'' One day in the August of that year, Mr.
Bulkley called upon my father. They were
closeted together for a very long time. It
was in my holidays ; papa and I were just
starting for a walk, when this interrupted us.
I shall never forget my father's face, as he
came away from that interview. There had
been a robbery — " Lina paused for one moment;
afterwards her tones seemed more

distinct, as though she were forcing them to
calmness. " Several forged cheques had been
presented at the bank in Mr. Bulkley's name.
Some were for small, and some for large,
amounts ; the whole affair had been most
artfully contrived. The total sum came to
seven or eight hundred pounds''
How annoying for your father ! "
The whole business seems indelibly
branded on my mind. I shall never forget
what we felt concerning it, he and I. He
had always been unimpeachable as a manager;
everyone had depended on him, had
looked up to him. The bank directors honoured
him inexpressibly; there had never
been a blot, not on his name only, but on
his business capacities. And now for this
to happen ! He was most anxious that the
matter should be thoroughly sifted ; and it
was placed in the hands of detectives. The
forgeries were traced to — Richard."

Lina's voice did not tremble, her resolution
did not flinch, as these words were uttered ;
but no one looking upon her could doubt
how terrible such utterance was to her. A
momentary spasm contracted her features ;
her colour had faded; her lips were pale;
but she held up her head, like a queen defying
the world.

"Yes, it was proved' she went on, steadily,
looking straight before her : " We would not
believe it at first; but it was said to be
proved beyond a doubt. I did not understand
the details ; and now I cannot recall
them ; but even we were obliged to confess
that there was every cause for suspicion.
You have no lack of imagination, Marjory ;
I need not try to describe what this was tous."


Something beyond words," said Marjory,
whose heart ached in sympathy.

My father was always just and honourable
; it was his death-blow, but he made no
resistance ; he placed both Richard and himself
in Mr. Bulkley's hands. Mr. Bulkley,
however, remembered all his services, and
would not lay on him unnecessary shame.
He did his utmost to hush up the affair, refusing
to prosecute ; I need not say that my
father insisted on refunding the full amount.
There, as concerned the outside world, the
matter ended. Mr. Bulkley was as cordial
as ever, and made a point of being peculiarly
civil to my father."

Just like Mr. Bulkley — like my remembrance
of him, I mean : so noble and generous
! " cried Marjory.

'' But sadly lax. He was so easy, I believe
lie felt it no effort to pass things over. My
father lead written instantly to Richard ; and
we could not help hoping that he might be
able to clear himself — if not to the world's
satisfaction, at least to ours. We felt, as I
feel still, that the circumstances were not
fully known to us. But they may be discovered
yet."

The peculiarity of Lina's tone, as these
words were spoken, struck Marjory with a
vague apprehension.

'' What do you mean ? " she asked.

'' My father was firmly of opinion that
Richard was not the only one concerned in
the forgeries. Indeed, knowing him as I did,
I often think that his share may have been
infinitesimal, compared to that of another
person. We cannot tell how his kindness
may have been wrought upon; or perhaps,
even, the supposed proofs of his guilt were
raised on a false foundation. My father's
justice was so uniform that, even in behalf
of his own son, he would not have imputed
blame to any one, without good cause. Marjory,
the person whom he suspected, was Mr.
Vivian."

'' Lina ! "

*' I knew you would look horrified, but you
must listen a little longer. We were all in
such grief, that I was allowed to remain at
home for one quarter, instead of returning
to school. Poor mamma is not much of a
companion, you know ; and I was my father's
confidante. We went long walks together,
when he told me much that he uttered to
no other being. He spoke continually of
Richard, and the disgrace ; his mind was
full of it ; but he looked forward with increasing
hope to Richard's reply to his letter.
He felt, he said, sure that it would bring us
comfort ; perhaps Richard might even return,
and clear himself in person. My father had
begged him to spare no one from false
generosity, saying that truth, for all parties,
was best. Always, after talking about this,
I observed that his mind would turn to
Mr. Vivian. He would wish again and again
that he could obtain some clue to his whereabouts.
His extreme dislike, and even contempt,
for him were evident. One day I
inquired their cause."

'' What did he say ? "

'' He said, most emphatically, that he had
solid reason to distrust the young man, and
to think badly of his general character. Also

that, montis before, he would have been
publicly exposed, but for a weak leniency on
Mr. Bulkley's part. Papa could not tell me
the facts of that case, having promised Mr.
Bulkley — which he now regretted — to conceal
them ; but he felt that they fully justified
his present suspicion, which was heightened
by Mr. Vivian's disappearance."

'' Some day I will ask him where he was
at that time," said Marjory.

*' No doubt he would give some plausible
account of himself; but that would prove
nothing. Well, to go on : by Christmas time
we had begun to expect Richard's letter.
We had heard of the safe arrival of the ship ;
but no letter came. My father was almost
ill from anxiety. He went steadily on about
his work, hiding all he felt, lest it should increase
the harsh judgments on Richard. At
length we heard that an Australian mail was
lost; and this lightened the load a little.
Then I went back to school."

It must have been a terrible time."

*' It was, indeed ! A fever broke out at
school, early in the spring, and we were all
sent home. One day, about a week later, I
was reading in my father's study, when the
afternoon postman went by. Some minutes

later the hall-door opened; I heard papa
come in. He paused outside the study,
fumbling at the lock. I jumped up to open
it, and he entered, and crossed the room to
the mantelpiece. His face was flushed, and
strangely altered, drawn down on one side.
He rested his elbows upon the mantelpiece,
his head upon his hands, and said, without
looking at me : —

'' ' Lina, I have heard from Eichard ; his
letter has been sent to me ; he is dead — at
Capetown. The letter tells me all — I consider
it all owing to Vivian.'

*' He said this, Marjory, in a thick, confused
tone, and then fell down unconscious.
It was paralysis ; he was carried to his bed,
and never rose again."

Was he ill long ? " said Marjory, softly.

*' Ten days. He was never quite himself;
but he talked a good deal, and often very
connectedly. As I sat all day by his bed, I
heard much that I have treasured in my
mind. Again and again he would say such
things as these : — ' I knew it — I warned
Bulkley ; I told him it would be a bad precedent
— exposure was his duty.' Then, ' I
felt sure it was Vivian's fault — Vivian's fault
he ought never to have come into the

bank.' Or sometimes, ' Never mind, it shall
be known, Billiard; they shall hear your
excuse. It was a strong temptation.' That
particularly, I often observed: 'It was a
strong temptation.'

'' Once he was so coherent that I asked him
one or two questions ; but he only looked at
me, and said : ' It was as I suspected, Lina
that affair of Vivian's ' — He never finished
the sentence."

But had he really heard from your
brother?"

'' Undoubtedly ; but one of our chief trials
was that we never found the letter. He was
not sufficiently himself to tell us where he
left it. I think now that it must have been
accidentally burnt, since he was standing close
to the fire."

'' Then you could not even know how it
was that your brother died at Capetown ? "

'' Yes. Enclosed in the envelope, which
we found upon the study floor, was a note
from a Capetown clergyman to my father,
breaking the news of Richard's death. It
said that he had been put ashore, from a
French trading-ship, two or three months
previously, ill of fever; that he had lain in hospital
ever since; that the fever was followed by

rapid decline, of which, in January, he died.
At first lie bad been most uncommunicative,
and had not given his true name ; but a fortnight
before his death his state of mind had
changed ; he had seemed overwhelmed with
grief, the cause of which he would not disclose
; and had written by degrees the letter
to my father, which the chaplain had sealed
in his presence, — although, by his own
request, it was not posted till after his
funeral. How he came to be on board a
French trading vessel, instead of, as we supposed,
in Australia ; or what had become of
his outfit and other possessions, we had no
idea. The chaplain mentioned nothing as
belonging to him. You may imagine how
earnestly we searched for the letter, and
what a bitter disappointment its loss was tous.
In a 'few days my father had another
stroke : after which he spoke no more.

Did you write to the Capetown chaplain?"


Mamma wrote, begging for more particulars.
My married sisters and I saw that
she asked all we desired. We had a very
kind note in reply; but he could tell us
nothing further. Richard had not spoken to
anyone of his private affairs. It was evident.

the chaplain said, that he had much on his
mind, but he would answer no questions.
About the same time my father's letter
to Australia was returned from the Dead
Letter Office."

'^ I cannot bear to think of such dreadful
sorrow."

'yet in some ways I now feel thankful
for it. My experiences of those months did
much to strengthen and mature my character.
I learned to stand alone, to command myself
in trouble ; for, during the whole time, we
had to show a brave front to the world.
Everyone, of course, had heard reports
about Richard ; we did our best to silence
them by our manner and conduct ; and in
this way many came to conclude that they
had no real foundation. I longed from the
first to leave Bullingham, and mamma would
have gone when my father died ; but I persuaded
her that it was best to stay till we
had lived down the storm."

And you were only sixteen ? " exclaimed
Marjory.

I was always old of my age ; and constant
intercourse with papa had given me more
wisdom than is usual. Before we came here,
the affair had ceased to be mentioned. But,

Marjory, it lias all made, as I said, an indelible
impression on me. The disgrace was
the worst part. It was hard to lose my father;
but his life had been blameless ; he died
respected by all, and I knew that he was at
rest. Besides, the loss of parents is in the
nature of things ; the blow must have fallen
some time, if not then. And again, Richard's
death alone would have been a great sorrow ;
but we should have got over it, as people do
get over bereavements. But the disgrace !
that was beyond bereavement. The blot on
our stainless name'*

She paused. In that face, usually so passionless,
the stab o£ wounded pride was
plain.

It had been our glory that ' a black
sheep,' so called, had never been known
among the Peeles. We could not boast, like
you and Gerald, of high ancestry. We were
always a middle-class family, and aspired to
nothing more. Our respectability was our
escutcheon ; and that had been unimpeached.
Marjory, it was the disgrace which killed my
father, and which sank so deeply into me.
And I have always felt, as I told you, that
part of it, if not all, might be wiped off, could
we know the whole truth. If ever an oppor-

VOL. II. R

unity soult come, Marjory, you may be
sure that Mr. Vivian will not be spared at
Richard's cost."

Hard, frigid, fixed in resentment — was
this the face of Gerald's angel, thought
Marjory ?

And lately — I will tell you all, while I am
about it — I have thought that I might find
a clue. Jessie Bellhouse disappeared from
Eipley a little while after Mr. Vivian left
Bullingham. It is evident that he knows —
or knew — something, painful to himself, concerning
her. In Bullingham he was penniless
; he and his mother lived in the poorest
way, in inferior lodgings ; how could he afford
to throw up his appointment, and go — no
one knew where ? We don't know how he
may have tempted poor Richard, to secure
his own ends ; or, on the other hand, how
craftily he may have contrived that the blame
should be thrown on one who, when discovery
came, would not be on the spot to defend
himself. I repeat, Marjory, that I owe it to
my own name, my father's name, Richard's
name, not to spare Mr. Vivian, if my suspicions
should ever be proved true."

She ceased ; and, finding Marjory still
silent, added proudly :

That is all. Only remember, I have
warned you to be careful how you are drawn
into increased intimacy with a bad man."

'' Lina," said Marjory, gently, after a
lengthened pause, " it pains me more than I
can tell, to think of all you have suffered.
But yet it cannot be right deliberately to
condemn Mr. Vivian when there is really no
proof that he was at all concerned in the
affair."

'there we differ. My father's word is
proof to me."

'' But it does not seem clear what your
father meant. That is a mystery. I think
we ought to be content so to leave it."

'' We shall never agree upon this subject,"
said Lina; "It may as well be dropped."

Have you told Gerald ? "

All this ? Certainly not. I have only
told you from a sense of duty."

May I tell him ? " asked Marjory.

'you may do as you like. To me the
subject is too painful to be gone all over
again ; and perhaps it is fit that he should
know the blot on our name."

Oh, Lina ! don't say that. Your name
is stainless."

"No," said Lina, firmly and proudly;
R 2

'' Not at present. It was stainless ; and it
may be so again. But that time is to
come."

Then, with an ease simply inexplicable to
Marjory, she passed to other subjects.

CHAPTER Xvii

"A growing fear possesses me,
An anxious thought distresses me ! —
'Tis but a look, a tone, an air,
And yet I wonder what is there ! —
Is it a cloud that's creeping up !
A dash of bitter in the cup ?

# # # #

Yet if I ask me what 1 or why ■?
No ready words give quick reply."

John Jerningham^s Journal.

As for Marjory, she was miserable, sorely
perplexed — indignant, yet afraid.

'' If I could know," she cried ; '' if I could
know the truth ! I may be deceived in him ;
and yet, I cannot believe it."

She was in her room alone as these words
broke from her; but solitary musing brought
to her no relief. She mistrusted her own
judgment, and felt that she could not rest
till she had talked all over with Gerald. On
Gerald's opinion she would rely. He would
be at least equally partial to Lina's side of
the question as to that of Hugh Vivian;
and yet he would not be unjust.

That very evening the opportunity came.
Lina was gone out to dinner ; and Gerald,
being not in a mood for work, settled down
with a book in the cheerful sitting-room.
Marjory established herself in her favourite
place at his feet, and poured out the whole
story.

He listened with deep interest : that interest,
full of sympathy and of intelligence,
yet silent, which was peculiar to Gerald. At
the end followed a pause of some moments,
during which he sat deep in thought. At
length he said, —

'' How she has suffered ! Oh, that I could
make it all up to her ! "

You think only of Lina, Gerald."

Who could help it ? " said Gerald,
colouring. " No one who knew her could
doubt what an awful blow this must have
been to her, especially when she had all but
adored that brother."

" You think, then, from the circumstances,
there could be no doubt of his guilt ? "

None whatever, it seems to me. You
say it was hunted out by detectives ; and
then — his pretending to go to Australia, and
the rest." — '' My poor darling ! " he was
adding in his heart.

*' But what do you think of the part about
Mr. Vivian ? "

Vivian ! That must be a mistake. If
there had been any evidence against him,
the detectives would have scented it, and
Mr. Peele would certainly not have hesitated
to expose him'*

'' Then why should Mr. Peele talk of him
as if he must have been mixed up in it ? "

I pity Mr. Peele more than I can express.
No doubt it was natural that he should catch
at any straw to excuse his son."

'' And you think that was all ? "

Anything real must have been discovered.
Mr. Peele seems to have had — or fancied he
had — some previous cause to distrust Vivian ;
but that proves nothing."

I wonder what that cause could have
been ? "

Something connected with Mr. Bulkley's
affairs, I imagine, from what you tell me ; no
concern of ours, at any rate, and long gone
by. If Mr. Peele were alive now, he would
no doubt confess that he had been wrong in
indulging such a suspicion, and still more
so in talking of it, though only to Lina.
But he must have been ill and harassed, and
his nerves unhinged by the blow."

I wish you would say this to Lina."

Why should she be reminded of all those
details ? I shall try to help her to forget
the whole business."

"Yes, if she only will. But she is relying
even now on those suspicions of her father's,
and hoping that some day she may succeed
in transferring the guilt to Mr. Vivian."

You put it in too hard a way, Marjory,"
said Gerald, warmly; "you mean, she cannot
help hoping that her brother's memory may
yet be cleared."

Cleared at Mr. Vivian's expense," persisted
Marjory; " that is her idea."

Well, it is natural that she should respect
her father's opinion. In any ordinary case,
his opinion was no doubt of great value."

"But, you think, not in this ? "

In this, at least, we have one rule : England
holds every man innocent till he is
proved to be guilty."

That is just what I feel, Gerald ; only —
it makes me nervous to remember what Mr.
Peele said after reading Richard's letter."

Of course, it is now impossible to know
his exact meaning. But when he said that,
he was on the point of paralysis ; we should
be very wrong to accuse Vivian, or anyone

else, even in thought, on no better
ground."

*' That is really your opinion ? "

It seems to me the only opinion possible
to any impartial person."

I wish Lina would think so," cried Marjory.


*' She will, in time. In such deep natures,
wounds strike deep ; and then consider her
faith in her father ! I have often thought
how beautiful that is."

I should hardly call it beautiful in this
case."

Gerald looked hurt.

*^ You are not like yourself to-night," he
said, with a vexed frown.

Dear Gerald, don't be angry — I will confess
the truth — I think Lina is unjust to
Mr. Vivian. It is Mr. Vivian I am thinking:
of ; I can't help liking him : you know I
have liked him for years and years. Whatever
his faults may be, I have felt sure that
he was kind and true — a noble character
wrecked by trouble, but perhaps yet to come
safe to shore. But if he were what Lina
thinks him, he would be neither kind, nor
true, nor noble, — but a coward, mean, and
cruel — to speak plainly, a blackguard altogether.

Lina believes all this of him ; and
she wishes me to believe it: and I — I —
cannot."

Her voice broke off on a sudden; but
Gerald could not see her face.

I don't know why you should vex yourself,"
he said, kindly. " If she be mistaken,
as I cannot but think, she will some day bethe
first to own it."

"And meanwhile ?" said Marjory, anxiously.

'meanwhile, you must agree to differ."

Marjory was silent. How could she make
Gerald understand the magnitude of that
difference ? She sat for a long time speechless,
gazing into the fire. The red coals
burned ; the clock ticked ; Gerald had gone
off into a dream.

Gerald," she said at last, " I
wonder "

'Lyell?"

'' I wonder if you really know Lina ? "

'' I have known her better every day since
our engagement," he said, with a sudden
glow ; '' And the more I know, the more
admirable she seems to me, and the less
worthy I feel myself of her."

A chill passed through Marjory's spirit —
the chill of separation, of a gulf beginning

to widen between herself and Gerald. She
must not speak out all her mind to him. She
dared not — would not if she dared.

*well!" said she, with a forced laugh;
I am glad, at any rate, that you don't think
it my duty to cut Mr. Vivian."

To me it seems much more your duty to
forget those suspicions, and thank God that
you have not to battle with them, as my poor
Lin a must. They are a temptation, to be
resisted."

You speak as though even to you it were
a temptation to hope he might be guilty ! "

Gerald paused : then, very quietly and
gravely — " It might become one in time," he
said, " if I dwelt upon it, in my longing to
clear her brother. But in that case my eyes
would be blinded, and I should not see facts
as they are. Now, let us try to put this subject
altogether out of our minds."

As he spoke, he turned resolutely to his
book. Marjory went to the piano, and began
to play snatches of airs, stray chords, remnants
of songs, just as they came to her.
Only music suited her present mood; she
could not settle to any occupation.

Every one was against him, she thought :
every one except herself — even Gerald. That

which he called a temptation, which to
Lin a seemed a duty, which to herself was
simply horrible — for Gerald it had attractions
! It was evident that he would be glad
if the dead man's guilt could be found to
appertain to Hugh Vivian. He was
nothing to any of them ; nothing, it
appeared, to any one in the world — only
to her.

As she listened to the wild sounds which
rang from beneath her fingers, it seemed
to her that life also is a medley of disconnected
notes, of discords that should be
harmonies, of melodies separately full of
beauty, but hateful in their clash. She had
heard, as from afar, of life's conflict; she
beo^an to realize it now.

But gradually, as she grew calmer, she
felt comforted by Gerald's judgment, and all
the more from its variance with his feelings.
It would apply equally, she felt assured, to
those other suspicions touching Jessie, which
she could not bring herself to breathe to
him, but which had still, at times, a nightmare
power to trouble her. He would dismiss
them, as he dismissed the rest; and
her determination to despise them would be
strengthened.

Thus, as before, she fortified her faith in
accordance with her desires ; and awoke from
a night of youthful sleep, resolved to make
no change in her intercourse with Mr.
Vivian.

Chapter XIX.

Out of the mist into sunlight,

I have sent a white-winged shaft ;
Out from the shore on the ocean,

1 have launched a tiny raft." — Edith Flower.

Line said nothing more on the obnoxious
subject; and Marjory carefully abstained
from mentioning Hugh's name in her presence.
The holidays came to an end ; the little
boys returned; and the mill of work went
on busily as ever. In these days work was
Marjory's life; she was almost unnaturally
active. Her story was approaching its close ;
her characters were continually with her;
she saw their faces, heard their voices, felt
an intimate acquaintance with them and their
concerns. Meanwhile, the winter merged
into spring; the air was gradually milder ; the
elms in the College Green began to sprout ;
the grass grew, and brightened into green,
in the meadows beyond the river.

Marjory fancied, when she had leisure to
observe them, that Gerald's spirits were less
even than they used to be. He was not so

much with Lina, more frequently slit up
in his attic : often he lost himself in fits of
dreamy thought — not happy fits, judging
from his countenance. It might be, Marjory
fancied, that he was anxious about her book :
the supposition doubled her energies.

She seldom now spent an evening from
home ; her evenings were too precious !
Some invitations, however, she was obliged
to accept ; and sometimes she still met Hugh
Vivian. But whether the reports mentioned
by Lina had reached his own ear, or for any
other reason, he no longer sought opportunity
for tete-astute conversation. She
might, indeed, have feared that she had
offended him unawares, and she would certainly
have concluded that he felt for her no
peculiar liking ; — but that at times, looking
up suddenly, she met his dark eyes fixed on
her from some lonely corner, with an expression
which, though she did not fathom it,
quickened her heart, and sent the colour in a
flame to her cheeks. He always looked away
when their eyes met ; that gaze was clearly
involuntary, and not intended to attract her
attention. But she could not help thinking
of it afterwards, when she was alone at home ;
and then she would see it again, and again

would come the quick thrill and the rush of
colour. She did not know how much of
piquancy that recollection added to her daily
toil.

One evening, early in March, when the
wind was howling round the cathedral,
making strange wails and moans through
the arches and in the cranks of the ancient
doors, driving wild gusts of rain against the
windows, Gerald, painting alone, heard Marjory's
steps fly up the attic stairs, — she
burst in upon him, a large roll of foolscap
in her hand, crying :

'' Gerald, Gerald ! it is finished."

"Your story?"

I have this moment written the last
line. Can you listen ? I must just read the
end."

She sat down on an old box, as she spoke,
and began forthwith. In this final chapter,
she had felt " the spirit " strong upon her ;
and with her joy mingled a pardonable pride,
as she saw the impression produced on
Gerald. He had laid down his brush, and
was seated on an opposite box to her own.
As she finished, her eyes wandering from the
page to his face, he exclaimed : —

Marjory, it is beautiful ! "

Gerald ! that repays me for all."

** And now comes the tug of war ! I
wonder when our fate will be decided."

I must correct and copy the whole, you
know, before I send it off. But that work
will only be mechanical."

I do, indeed, hope for success now. Yes,
that last part is really beautiful. Just let
me see it."

He took the manuscript, became interested,
and pored over it for half an hour, while
Marjory, tired out, rested on her oars. That
half-hour seemed but five minutes to her, in
its multitude of glad visions. The wind
raged, and the rain beat ; in the intervals,
the river, swelled by recent floods, flowed
with a rushing sound. But Marjory heeded
nothing of all this. It was as though Eden
had dawned again in this dusty attic.

For a month from that day she worked
harder than ever, perfecting her task. Towards
the end she was visibly thinner and
paler ; and Gerald had often to compel her
to rest. But always at night she slept the
sweet sleep of girlhood, awaking refreshed ;
and by day she was constantly saying in her
heart :

God helps those who help themselves."

VOL. II. s

So, at the month's end, the book was
ready.

It was on a soft spring afternoon that she
set forth, with her own hands to post the
manuscript. Her publisher had been long
chosen — one whom, from literary biographies,
she knew to be merciful to young authors,
quick to encourage all that seemed worth
encouraging. A short note, requesting his
consideration, had been speedily written;
she walked swiftly through the busy High
Street, for once seeing, without observing,'^the
conflicting streams of men, women, children,
each with an individual history, a separate
purpose in life. As she passed among them,
the names of great masters, whom Gerald
aspired to follow, were ringing in her ears ;
before her eyes was '' the eternal city," with
its halo of fame, and Gerald working in the
studio they had dreamed of.

Still thus absorbed, she reached the postoffice,
and went mechanically through the
commonplace matters of weighing and stamping.
Then, with reluctance, she had to leave
her precious burden to the tender mercies of
a clerk — since it was too bulky for ordinary
postage.

You will be sure that it goes ? " she said.

All right, Miss," said the clerk, transferring
his attention to another customer.
Marjory gave one more anxious glance, and,
with lingering step, passed back into the
street. Some one followed her. Looking
up, half startled, she intercepted an amused
twinkle in two dark eyes.

''So the great undertaking is launched ! "
said Hugh Vivian, shaking hands.

*' Mr. Vivian, you are very impertinent."

You must forgive me, — I couldn't resist
it ! I have been intensely interested for the
last five minutes."

I hope he won't forget to post it," said
Marjory, still thinking of the clerk.

'' I hope he won't be tempted to look into
it ! " returned Mr. Vivian : '' There would be
no saying what he might not forget, under
such fascination."

'' I wish I could think it were half so
taking ! However, if it will only sell, fascination
may go to the winds."

'' If I could secure a sale, it would sell by
wildfire. But you have scorned even such
small aid as I might have given ! "

I dare say that, so far from aiding, you
will hinder it some day, by cutting it up ina

reviews

2

Now that is too bad, Miss Stanliope.
More probably it will cut up me ! I shall
look out in it for a sinful quarter-master,
who had known better days."

'' I would rather not talk about the book,
even in fun*' said Marjory ; ''I cannot tell
you what anxiety, hope, and fear, are mixed
up with every thought of it. I dare not
realise all that depends on it ! that frightens
me too much."

She looked up with something of entreaty,
as she spoke ; and Mr. Vivian's expression
changed.

'* Well ! I wish it all success. I cannot
say more. If I had your belief in prayer,
I would join you in praying."

He pitied the wistful young face, which
told the old tale of the battle with the world
so often apparently a losing battle. He
felt a sort of anger, of despair, that such
earnest spirits should be left, as it were, to
their fate, to suffer with the guilty.

Perhaps you will believe in it some day,"
said Marjory, looking full at him, and smiling.
He thought that it was almost a heavenly
smile ; it seemed to rest his wearied heart.
The wistfulness had faded ; in its place was
a radiance not of earth. AVith that smile she

left him, saying a hasty " Good-bye," as her
rapid young feet sped away. He stood still,
and watched till she was out of sight; and there
was something almost of adoration in his eyes.

Marjory went straight on to the cathedral.
The nave was empty. She knelt down where
she could see that crowned figure who had
conquered, that other figure with face upturned
from his book. "Help me! help me,
God ! — and glorify Thyself ! " she cried ina
passion of supplication. Gerald, and all
lie prized on earth — Hugh Vivian, and all he
might yet gain in Heaven — herself, her aims,
her longings, were bound all together in that
prayer. All in His Hands ! the Hands of the
Great Ruler, Who has said that He will grant
the prayer of faith. The spirits of men as
reeds under His control — He could bless her
labours, He could guide that publisher's
judgment. She asked no miracle : other
works, far inferior, had been accepted, sold,
had earned that precious money which she
could gain by no other means.

She had never prayed so earnestly before ;
she felt sure that God would hear her. Peace
was in her heart when, an hour later, she
rose at length, and went home. Yes, without
doubt, she must be heard.

In the course of a few days, arrived a
formal note, acknowledging the receipt of
her manuscript. That the final decision
should be delayed, was a relief; she waited
willingly, and rested. The Easter holidays,
suspending lessons for a fortnight, came at
the nick of time. Marjory quickly recovered
the strength impaired by her month's hard
labour ; and Mrs. Myers ceased to remark, in
dismay, that Miss Stanhope was growing
thin.

CHAPTER XX.

What a day it was that day !
Hills and vales did openly
Seem to heave and throb away
At the sight of the great sky :
And the silence, as it stood
In the glory's golden flood,
Audibly did bud and bud."

Elizabeth Barrett Browning.

During this period, as if to reward her spell
of toil, came a day, ever remembered by
Marjory as a halcyon day — though in after
times much saddened the recollection. The
brother and sister had long looked forward
to spending the Bank Holiday, Easter
Monday, upon the Shelburn Hills; an anticipation
only clouded by possibilities of cold or
wet. But nature favoured them. No cold
or wet marred this day : it was the perfection
of a day in spring — warm, but without oppression,
the atmosphere a joy to all living things.
The sky was one expanse of blue— blue soft
and serene — as if unfolding a warm heart
above its new-born world. Gerald and
Marjory met Lina at the station, each armed

with various materials for employment.
Lina had a roll of lace work, designed for
sale in behalf of St. Philip's ; Gerald, his
sketching tools, also sandwiches and similar
provision for the outer man, in his knapsack:
Marjory had Carlyle's " Heroes'' Palsgrave's
Golden Treasury," and a little MS. book
in which to dot down any ideas suggested by
the hills.

The railway journey was short — too short
for Marjory. She sat in a corner of the
carriage, absorbed in the landscape, meadows
of fresh young grass, and hedges renewed in
bloom, little lambs frisking beside their
mothers, trees, oak and ash only in bud as
yet, the rest clad in spring's exquisite green
cottages, scantily sprinkled, with gardens
beginning to be gay, and orchards all in
blossom. Marjory was sorry when, after
some minor stoppages, the train steamed
into the Shelburn station. The platforms
were crowded with excursionists; the trio
threaded their way through a loud-voiced
and elbowing multitude, passed a throng
engaged in clamorous bargains with cabs and
omnibuses ; and went quietly on towards
the hills.

There, beyond the straggling houses and

climbing terraces of Shelburn, the hills rose,
grand and still. Changeless, above the world
to look at them raised the heart. The air,
too, was not like other air; it was life-giving,
fall of vigour. All the three felt ready for a
walk of fifty miles, as they started from the
station ! It was one continuous ascent : first
a road, bordered by villa-like houses, with
gardens, conservatories, and a general bright
air of well-being ; then the town, with its
fashionable shops — not one shabby or dingy
among them ; then bona fide hills, where the
party were beset by donkey-boys, vendors
of local photographs, and the like ; then,
leaving all these, a narrow sheep-path, winding
into loneliness and silence.

Here they scrambled on, the way at times
so steep, that all attention was absorbed in
maintaining a footing, until at length they
reached a spot where was no sight or sound
of man — only a stray sheep grazing peacefully,
looking up as they approached, and
moving a step or two, then pausing to graze
again. A knoll of heathery moss formed a
tempting resting-place, where, by mutual
consent, they sat down. The mountain air
made them thankful for the luncheon which
kind little Mrs. Peele had provided. The

limits of Gerald's knapsack alone lead
restrained her generous contrivance ; and, as
it was, Marjory exclaimed that this repository
must have changed into Fortunatus' bag, as
its stores were unpacked and spread upon
the grass.

It was a merry meal. Marjory chatted
wildly, in excitement and delight ; even Lin a
made one or two quiet jokes ; and to Gerald
all was elysium. Hunger and thirst appeased,
Lina took out her lace, and, leaning back
against the green hillside, applied herself to
her task. Gerald, full-length on the turf
beside her, rested his tired young limbs, free
for a while from cramping desk-work ; gazing
sometimes at her deft fingers, as the needle
sped to and fro, sometimes away, to the
surrounding loveliness. Marjory sat on his
other side, drinking in all the fair sounds
and sights. The grass was very short and
soft ; wild bees hummed over the thyme ; the
silent hill rose behind, and sloped below ; ina
narrow valley, far beneath, a wild brook
babbled over rough stones. Beyond it a
sterner hill towered, craggy and steep, a
mass of gray rock jutting at intervals from
the green, a coppice of young firs slanting
towards its base. Beyond, again, were other

hills — all around were hills, wonderful in
repose. What was it to them that '' the
busy world, a thousand ways," hurried below?
Their business was not to hurry, but to be
still, taking counsel of no man, fearing no
man. Between came visions of the surrounding
plain ; very fair, like the plain that
tempted Lot ; rich in meadow-land, in flocks
and herds, in orchards, in wood and water.
Amid these the tower of Alton Cathedral
rose afar, conspicuous in a small cluster of
spires and chimneys. Smaller towns were
dotted here and there in the blue panorama ;
and villages, with farm ricks, and curing
smoke rising like threads into the air. Marjory,
as she gazed, saw ever more and more
etherealized, as objects in a dream.

'' I can understand," she said, musingly,
the feelings of the old monks who shut
themselves in on some mountain, alone with
nature. One almost forgets, up here, that
one is in the world."

And worldly cares seem trifles," said
Gerald. " Why do we feel in our element, I
wonder, in peace and beauty like this, — and
yet have to wrestle our way down yonder
among smoke and sordidness ? "

*' All is rightly ordered," said Lina, sententiously.

" These things are meant to rest
us, not to live in."

"And the world is too full of work for one
to stay here long, contentedly," said Marjory
; '^ Only I meant that I could understand
the old idea, selfish perhaps, of such height
and solitude being best for one's own soul."

*' One would soon lose all ideas in it,"
said Lina.

Oh, no — no ! " cried Gerald ; " Ideas
would grow here. In this stillness, one
could think."

*' And what would there be to think
about ? " said Lina. " We could hardly think
of this hill, for instance, or the sky, or the
plain there, for ever ! "

'' It would certainly be some test as to how
far our minds were kingdoms," observed
Gerald, smiling.

But if they were kingdoms at all, those
kingdoms would enlarge," said Marjory.

'' Suppose we were the first people in the
world ! " said Gerald, after a pause, " come
to life here on this silent hill-side, on just
such a morning. What strange imaginations
would visit us ! It would be just the place
to inspire a whole mythology."

Such a mythology as the old Scandinavian

one, perhaps," said Marjory. 'doesn't
it seem to you, Gerald, as if one could lookup
at these hills, and all but see one of those
mighty giants, resting after battle? And
there beyond, in the plain, when the sun is
setting, and bathing it in yellow light, might
be Asgard, the city of the gods."

"I see a vision now," said Gerald : " A
young man, with fair hair, flowing over his
shoulders, and wild eyes : he is looking out
from that height, towards Asgard. The
giants stole him from Asgard in his babyhood,
and reared him among them, until he
is almost a giant himself. But in soul he has
remnants of a god, and he is watching the
yellow light; and wondering why it makes
him crave, as though it were his home ? "

"How fanciful you are, Gerald?" said
Lina.

Her tone had something of affection, but
something also of superiority.

But I see it ! " said Gerald, with so intent
a gaze, that Marjory, half startled,
glanced in the same direction. Then their
eyes met ; and they laughed merrily.

Listen to the echo ! " cried Marjory.

The giants are laughing back from their
cave under the hill," said Gerald.

'' I propose," said Lina, " that we each
repeat a piece of poetry; to keep us from
talking nonsense."

The suggestion was favourably received ;
although scarcely, perhaps, from the motive
supplied by Lina. Gerald began with a
sonnet which, he observed, had been long at
intervals running in his head —

*' sing, clear Brook, sing on, while in a dream
I feel the sweetness of the years go by !

The crags and peaks are soften'd now, and seem
Gently to sleep against the gentle sky ;

Old scenes and faces glimmer up and die,

With outlines of sweet thought obscured too long ;

Like boys that shout at play far voices cry ;

sing ! for I am weeping at the song.
I know not what I am, but only know

1 have had glimpses tongue may never speak ;
No more I balance human joy and woe,

But think of my transgressions, and am meek.
Father ! forgive the child who fretted so, —

His proud heart yields, — the tears are on his cheek !"

Is not that by Robert Buchanan ? " asked
Marjory. " Do say it again."

Something in those last lines had brought
to her mind one who, indeed, was seldom
long absent there.

Father ! forgive the child who fretted so, —
His proud heart yields, — the tears are ou his cheek !"

Wlij, what an impressionable thing you
are, Marjory ! " cried Gerald, catching the
hand which she had raised to brush away a
sudden tear of her own. She shook her
head at him, and turned her face aside, that
Lina might not see.

"Do you know 'My Kate,' by Mrs.
Browning ? " asked Lina, quite unconscious.
'' 'Tis a simple little thing, but you may
like it."

She was not as pretty as women I know,
And yet all your best made of sunshine and snow
Drop to shade, melt to nought in the long trodden ways,
While she's still remember'd on warm and cold days —

My Kate.

Her air had a meaning, her movements a grace ;
You turned from the fairest to gaze on her face :
And when you had once seen her forehead and mouth,
You saw as distinctly her soul and her truth —

My Kate.

Such a blue inner light from her eyelids outbroke.
You looked at her silence and fancied she spoke :
When she did, so familiar, yet soft, was the tone,
Though the loudest spoke also, you heard her alone —

My Kate.

She never found fault with you, never implied
Your wrong by her right, and yet men at her side
Grew nobler, girls purer, as through the whole town
The children were gladder that pulled at her gown —

My Kate.

None knelt at her feet confessed lovers in thrall,
They knelt more to God than they used — that was all;
If you praised her as charming, some asked what you

meant.
But the charm of her presence was felt as she went —

My Kate.

I wish I could know some one just like
her," said Marjory. Gerald appeared to
marvel at his sister's obtuseness !

Sometimes angels are entertained unawares,"
he said, dreamily gazing at Lina.

Such heroines are more plentiful in fiction
than in real life, I fear," observed Lina, in
her matter-of-fact manner ; "I learned the
piece at school. Now comes Marjory."

The other day I read a little translation
from Uhland, which took my fancy wonderfully.
Gerald, I wish you would illustrate it."

Well, let me see whether it takes my
fancy, too," said Gerald.

Marjory paused a moment, looking towards
the plain. When she spoke again, her voice
had an undertone of almost passionate sympathy.


In a sunlit garden walking,
Two lovers go hand in hand.
Two shadowy forms, uot talking,

They roam through the flowery land.

They sit 'neath the trees together,

They kiss on the hands and mouth,
They clasp in their arms each other —
And back come their health and youth.

Two little bells ring shrilly —
The vision is gone and fled ! —
She lies in the cloister chilly —
He far on his dungeon bed."

All were silent for a moment or two, when
the pathetic young voice had ceased. It was
like a discord clashing upon music, when
Lina impassively inquired :

Where can be the use of writing, or reading,
such a melancholy thing ? "

Is it melancholy ? " said Marjory ; " what
an idea that is — of spirits meeting in a dream !
If it be really possible, what an assurance of
immortality ! "

'^ I trust that we need no such fancies to
convince us of our immortality," observed
Lina.

Marjory glanced at Gerald. It seemed to
her that he winced ; but he said nothing.

The party were soon on the move again,
exploring and resting by turns. The day
sped by like magic. When the bells of Hepburn
Abbey Church rang out five o'clock,
even Lina was taken by surprise. A band

VOL. II. T

was playing in the distance, as they went back
down the hill ; the long horn-blasts wound,
mellowed, through the still air. The herald
glow of the spring sunset pervaded all things,
and made the sky, as Marjory had said, like
Asgard, city of the gods. Through the windows
of the railway carriage, Marjory watched
it, kindling trees and meadows, transfiguring
quiet sheep and homely cottages. But before
the short journey was ended, it had given
place to the first subdued tints of twilight
; and the air was growing chilly.
The trio felt all quite ready for the comfortable
dinner which awaited them at the house
in Albion Square.

CHAPTEH XXI.

O God, God ! The great floods of the soul
Flow over me ! I come into deep waters
Where no ground is !" — Arthur dough.

'' I WONDER when you will hear from that publisher,"
said Gerald, one morning.

The Easter holidays were over ; it was a
month since the manuscript had departed :
but the delay caused no alarm to Marjory, —
she regarded it as a favourable sign.

'' A refusal would have come long ago. He
is considering the matter. I feel more hopeful
every day."

'' I am the same," said Gerald, smiling.
You have infected me ; at least I have
more hope now, than fear."

Marjory laughed for very lightness of heart,
as she went off to her little boys. The three
hours of steady teaching did not sober her ;
when they were over, she ran back with the
same joyous step. In the doorway of the
sitting-room stood Priscilla, a letter in her
hand.

T 2

'' If you please, ma'am, I was just bringing
this," said the high-pitched voice. " The
postman overlooked it."

Upon the flap of the envelope a name was
stamped. The answer was come at last.

Marjory passed on into her own room,
closed the door, put down her books, and
paused. Now that the die was cast, she
dared not open this cover where her fate lay
hidden. The distant roll of the town came
through the open window ; the soft air stole
in, stirring the blind. Marjory could hear
her own heart wildly thumping; her hand
trembled as she severed that ominous flap.

No. — , Paternoster Eow,

May — , 18—.
Madam,

*' We beg to thank you for the offer
of your manuscript, which we regret that weare
not able to accept. We trust that you
will pardon our delay, caused by an error.
The manuscript is this day forwarded, per
rail, to your address.

^* We are, madam,

Yours obediently,

Was the world the same — was the sky the
same — was she herself the same girl as one
half-hour before ? Oh, what a sudden blow !
forth moment dulling all sensation, — what
a heavy cloud, blackening all life ! Where
could she go to hide herself and the note from
Gerald ? Gerald would be at home very soon.
She thought of his countenance as she saw
it last — the shadow lifted, the look of hope ;
his voice, with that cheerful ring in it, sounded
in her ears. Instinctively she snatched up
her hat and jacket, crushed the letter down
into her pocket, and went out. She could
not face him.

Quickly, past the cathedral, to the towing-path,
she sped on by the river-side, towards
Heathcroft. Her heart and mind were filled
by a blank despair ; all that she had relied
on seemed to have vanished, snatched from
under her feet. She was alone in a sea of
doubt, amazement, misery. She had made
a mistake, a life and death mistake. All
this time she had thought that God was supporting
her, was giving her hope and courage.
Had He not pledged His Word to answer
the prayer of faith ? and had not she faith ?
blind, unquestioning — which had been deceived,
awfully deceived.

Where was God ? Where ? Had he heard
her, indeed ? What did those Words in
which she had trusted, mean? Was all a
mockery ? Oh hollow world ! Oh, coldly-smiling
sky ! Oh for a voice, a hand to help
her ! On and on, beside the ever-flowing
river, she went, past the warehouses and
factories, past the stream of human beings
who met her, one after another, one after
another. Surely each of those faces had a
stamp which she had never observed before ;
care — anxiety — sickness — sorrow — hardly
one was utterly free. She thought of Hugh
Vivian. She was very near him now, very
near the black floods which had engulfed
him. She heard their roar; she saw their
hopeless depths. Where was God ? How
could she live without Him ? She had
trusted in His Word ; and she had been disappointed.
The world might say, " No wonder!
" might call her fanatical, presumptuous ;
but her guiding-star had not been of the world.
Far beyond that cold, hard world, that star
had shone : had it shone only to deceive her ?

All this while, to passers-by, she looked
like one walking with an object — hurrying,
perhaps, to keep some painful appointment.
She was pale ; a blank despair had chilled

the blue eyes usually so radiant. Presently,
she had reached Heathcroft, following a
narrow path which skirted the railings, enclosing
a wide space destined for hay. To
her left flowed the river, passing her — away,
away. The human beings were left behind ;
here was only the still grass, slowly ripening.
She paused under the friendly shade
of a great tree which stood alone on the
bank. Two hours ago, those fresh young
leaves, musical with the hum of busy insects,
would have spoken to her of joy, of hope, of
never-failing renewal. But now nothing was
joyous, nothing hopeful. As she rested
against the trunk, her heart was like a stone
within her. ,

Oh that she could plunge into the water,
and be hidden, while the world went by
above, and took its own course — which she
had no power to alter. To lie still and forget
her pain ! and perhaps Gerald would
work his way without her ; and if she knew
anything in those depths, she would know
some day, it might be, of his fame. Such
wild thoughts flitted through her brain,
followed at length by tears ; she had never
shed tears so bitter. There was no healing
in them ; they were but misery embodied.

Presently, through their mist, she became
aware of an advancing figure ; a moment
later, she saw that it was Mr. Vivian, in his
quarter-master's uniform. He had distantly
recognised her, half an hour ago, as she
passed below the militia drilling ground ;
and the instant that he was free, yielding to
an attraction which kept him always hankering
for her presence, he strolled down to the
river, pursuing the path by which she had
disappeared. Now, as he approached the
tree, he saw her fair hair shining in contrast
to the gnarled old trunk, her face at first
hidden, as in uncontrollable grief. He was
about to turn, and go back in silence ; but
at a second glance, he paused — hesitated —
went forward.

Marjory looked up, met his eyes — those
kind, dark eyes of a vanished fairyland ; "a
flood of thoughts *' rushed over her at the
sight ; she turned away, struggling for self-command.


'' Marjory — Miss Stanhope ! " said Hugh
Vivian, with a quick movement towards her,
but instantly drawing back, his hand falling
to his side, and clenched with an iron firmness.
" Can I — how can I help you ? — what
can I do?"

*' You can do nothing," said Marjory, low-but
passionately; " Please go."

But — but I can't leave you like this.
Are you sure ? — I would do anything — anything
in the world ! "

Through all her wretchedness, his tone
brought the blood to Marjory's cheek, and
quickened her heart.

Forgive me — I don't mean to be impertinent
; but couldn't you tell me what is the
matter ? Indeed, I might find some means
to help you."

Tell him ! and how would he answer ?
Would he not say : '' It is as I foretold.
Prayer ! that old woman's fable ! Did I not
warn you that it would prove a broken
reed ? " Yes ; thus he would say in his heart,
if not aloud. And she had hoped to convince
him, to prove to him his error. How could
she tell him, and sink him lower ?

'' No," she said, looking towards the

river : '' I must bear it alone. At least "

she paused, and her eyes, still wet, had unconsciously
a wild appeal : "I and Gerald
must bear it. If I could but keep it from
Gerald ! "

She mastered herself by another strong
effort ; then glanced at Hugh, trying to smile.

*' Never mind," she said, as he still stood
watching her, with a look as of some struggle
at work within his own breast : "You are
very kind; but don't trouble yourself. Please
go home ; and forget all this."

'' And you — where are you going ? "
'' I must stay here for some time longer —
till Gerald is safe in the bank again. I cannot
meet him yet ; he knows nothing of this
trouble."

But you will be faint from want of food."
Oh, no, I shan't ; I can wait. I shall sit
down and rest."

She turned as she spoke, nodding goodbye
to him, and went on a little way — only
a little way — for she felt almost worn out.
Very soon she sat down, as she had said, on
the bank of the river. It was very still ; all
the Alton folk who were not at work, were
at dinner or luncheon ; she sat in a stony
quietness — not weeping any more, only thinking.
Now and then a water-hen splashed,
or a fish rose and made a circle ; birds chirped,
insects hummed, a cow lowed in the distance.
The sky looked very blue and soft, amid a
rippling of gentle little clouds. On the surface,
peace and beauty ; beneath, misery and
conflict : that was life, thought Marjory.

Ste did not know how long she had been
resting, when quick steps came down the
grassy footpath ; and here again was Hugh
Vivian, flushed and breathless, still in his
uniform. He knelt on one knee beside her ;
and before Marjory, taken by surprise, could
speak, a paper of sandwiches and a little flask
of wine were unfolded, and laid in her lap.

Mr. Vivian ! How did you get these ? "
she cried, as he rose, and, pausing, looked at
her with the kind smile that she remembered.

'' I have not stolen them ; so don't suspect
it," he said, lightly : '' I went up to the town.
Now, at any rate, you won't be famished."

"But how good of you ! and how quick
you have been ! how could you manage it so
quickly ? "

'' Well, I ran part of the way ; you see I
was short of time, — and now I am due at
the depot."

He was off* before Marjory, between confusion
and gratitude, could utter another
word ; only turning to cry :

Mind you eat every one of those sandwiches
; or I shall find some way to punish
you."

A real smile came in reply ; and her heartfelt
a little, very little, lightened. It was a

commonplace matter enough ; yet it recalled
to Marjory that cherishing tenderness of
devotion which had charmed the child of
nine years before, in Mr. Hugh's intercourse
with his mother. As the food and wine
refreshed her, her thoughts recurred again
and again to his long walk — run, rather — of
two miles each way, through this heat, and
in his heavy uniform. Afterwards she felt
less utterly cast down ; a spark of the old
fire revived and stirred, though feebly, among
its ashes. She sat long by the quiet river,
thinking, thinking. It might be that this
disappointment had been sent to " try her
faith." She had read much in religious books
of such trial, without perhaps deeply considering
the meaning of the phrase. Perhaps
this temporary failure was only intended
to enhance the joy when the blessing came
at length !

All at once she started to her feet. A
sudden thought had struck her. She would
go herself to the station, fetch her parcel,
and send it straightway on another venture ;

and she would say nothing to Gerald.
« « « «

Well, Marjory ! You are a nice young
woman. I come home late for dinner, and

find only Priscilla, who informs me that
Miss Stanliope is out. I dine alone ; then
wait to the last moment — but no Miss Stanhope
! I began to think you had gone back
to Eockswold.

I only went a long walk," said Marjory,
smiling faintly.

You are tired to death, I can see. I
hope you had your dinner comfortably, when
you did come home. And now I've something
to tell you: I've heard from Mr.
Harding ! "

Oh, Gerald ! What does he say ? "

"Marjory, you shall go no more such
walks. Do promise ! You look quite ill,"
said Gerald, anxiously.

*' Never mind — I want to hear about Mr.
Harding. I'm only tired, Gerald dear," she
added, as he looked at her, still anxious, and
somewhat puzzled.

Well, you mustn't do it again, mind !
Here's the note. It is to remind me of his
proposal. I was half afraid he might forget,
but he seems really to wish to have me."

Marjory contrived to smile once more ; but
the effort to speak seemed to choke her.

I need not send a decided answer till
September. That gives us plenty of time.

you see. Long before then you will have
heard from the publisher. I think, after tea,
I'll go down to the Square, and show the
note to Lina."

"It is very kind," said Marjory, handing
it back. She longed to be alone ; her spirit
was sick with a deadly sickness.

*' Perhaps next spring," said Gerald, looking
out — " Marjory, who knows ? — I may no
longer be cooped up at a desk, through all
this heavenly weather."

No ; you may be free. I hope it — I do
hope it," was all that she could answer.
Within herself, again she was praying that it
might be, — that it might be.

When the next spring came indeed, Marjory
remembered sitting there, and breathing that
agonized petition in her heart, while Gerald
gazed into the calmness of the evening.

CHAPTER XXII.

Ruins ! Ruins ! let us roam
Through what was a human home,
What care we

How deep its depths of darkness be ?
Follow! follow!
* * *

Ruins ! Oh ! ye have your charm ;
Death is cold, but life is warm ;
And the fervent days we knew
Ere our hopes grew faint and few,
Claim even now a happy sigh,
Thinking of those hours gone by."

Hon. Mrs. Norton.

It was she very weather for a pic-nic, declared
Mrs. Carberry, — moreover, the very
time — just as the militia was disbanded. A
pic-nic was accordingly arranged by her for
the day following the review, about a week
after Marjory's poor story had again gone
forth to try its fate. The officers were all
invited — some of the younger ones postponing,
solely on this account, their return to distant
homes. To meet them mrs. Carberry collected a
large party, the Peeles and the young Stan-hopes
among the rest. A ruined castle, some

six miles from Alton, was the rendezvous
appointed, whither it was decided to drive
in the morning, returning by water at night.
Mrs. Peele would chaperon Marjory ; Gerald,
with a fellow clerk, was to row up the river
after bank hours.

When the carriage, lent by some friend of
the Peeled drew up in the College Yard, it
proved to contain not only Mrs. Peele and
Lina, but Mr. Throckmorton, whom Mrs.
Carberry, through divers manoeuvres, had at
length triumphantly secured. Foolish Marjory,
always living for Gerald, seeing with his
sight, feeling with his feelings, felt a sting of
vexation, as she remembered that the carriage
must have passed the bank, and that Gerald,
like herself, had perhaps observed Mr. Throck-
morton and Lina deep in conversation.

'' Welcome, Marjory ! Now I shall have
some one to speak to," said Mrs. Peele, as
Marjory, very fresh and charming in her white
dress and brown straw hat, came to her place
in the carriage.

Why, mamma ! what a poor compliment
! " said Lina.

Not at all, my dear. I never presume to
interfere with you and Mr. Throckmorton, —
you have so many important subjects to

discuss. Yery proper, I am sure ; but meanwhile
I shall enjoy a little chat, less elevated,
with Marjory."

You'd better turn into an orphan,
mamma, and then they would attend to you,"
observed Johnny Peele, from the box. '' I
forgot, though — you are one already ! so, if
I were you, I'd claim my rights."

*' Johnny ! " said Lina, severely.

You must forgive me, Mrs. Peele, if I
talk shop too much," said Mr. Throckmorton,
with a pleasant smile. " One seldom finds
so congenial a companion in Church matters,
as Miss Peele ; and perhaps I presume upon
this."

Not at all— not at all," said Mrs. Peele ;
"I'm sure I never meant my trivial remark
to be noticed," she added, nervously; for
Lina was regarding her with rigidity.

'isn't it a lovely day?" cried Marjory,
changing the subject. " The first of June !
I hope the whole month will be the same."

One can hardly expect that," said Mr.
Throckmorton, smiling again at the eager
girl. Something in his tone made her look
at him more closely than before ; and, as she
looked, she ceased to wonder at Gerald's
sensitiveness concerning him. His face was

VOL. II. u

very kind, self-controlled, earnest — thin and
a little worn, but with an air of rest to-day,
as if he were glad of his holiday, and meant
to make the most of it.

How you must enjoy getting out into
the country for a few hours, Mr. Throck-
morton !" said Mrs. Peele. " Those horrible
Branksome back streets must be so trying
in this weather."

'' And yet I don't know that I could have
a much worse trial than to be offered a
country church," said Mr. Throckmorton.

A trial ! " exclaimed Mrs. Peele.

'' Because I might feel, or fancy, that I
ought to accept it ; and life in the country
would be very painful to me."

'' But why ? " said Mrs. Peele.

*' For one thing, from the stagnation in
church affairs ; and, for another, I could not
get on without plenty to do."

But would not you have plenty to do ? "
asked Marjory, with diffidence.

"As to that," said Mr. Throckmorton,
smiling again, *'I suppose one might make
plenty anywhere ! But this would seem
strange to me, fresh from the problem of
how to keep the work from treading on one's
heels."

Yes, it would be sad indeed for you
to be thrown away on the country ! " said
Lina.

Marjory was of a different opinion ; but
took it not upon her to speak.

*' I suppose the military element will muster
strong to-day," said Mr. Throckmorton, byway
of passing to lighter topics.

*' If you call the militia military," said Lina.

'' By-the-bye, I hear that they will have to
find a new quarter-master," said Mrs. Peele.
** Mr. Yivian is going to leave Alton."

Marjory exclaimed involuntarily, then cut
herself short. Lina refrained from more
than a glance at her.

It is merely a report, mamma. We have
no authority to state it as a fact."

Well, my dear, I heard Captain Morris
lamenting it at the review ; and saying that
the whole regiment regretted it."

*' There must be some good stuff in
Vivian," said Mr. Throckmorton, who was
chaplain to the militia. " He has certainly
the power of attaching people ; the men of
the regiment are devoted to him."

** That is hardly desirable, I should fancy,
his opinions being as we know them," said
Lina, coldly.

u 2

I have never found that he tries to spread
his opinions," said Mr. Throckmorton.

What a blank there would be when he was
gone, Marjory was thinking ! Would their
paths ever cross again, in the desert of the
world ?

At Mrs. Carberry's gates had gathered a
motley throng of vehicles ; a large break,
rapidly filling, a high dog-cart with a freight
of young officers, a wagonette, Mr. Car-berry's
barouche and pony-carriage, and two
or three open flies. Mrs. Peele's party drove
into the midst of a tumult of chaff and
laughter, greetings and introductions.

So delightful to see so many young
friends ! " Mrs. Carberry was reiterating.


'' My dear, have we got all the hampers ? "

'' I don't know, I'm sure ; ask Baker,"
said Mrs. Carberry. " You good Mrs. Peele,
here you are ! And my dear Lina too ! We
could not enjoy anything without Lina. And
dear Marjory Stanhope! Oh, and Mr.
Throckmorton ! That is an honour. Truly
kind. Welcome all."

Jack," cries a young lady ; " where's my
sketching-block ? "

Mrs. Carberry," says another, '' we've

brought our croquet set. There's a capital
flat place in the old banquetting-hall."


'every well, my dear, anything you like !
We'll take another set. Baker ! a box of
croquet ! Captain Andrews, you promised
to bring Mr. Vivian — faithfully, faithfully ! "
cried Mrs. Carberry, shaking her finger at
the dog-cart.

If I could get him, I said, Mrs. Carberry ;
and I couldn't get him."

You naughty man, I wish I hadn't trusted
you ! " said Mrs. Carberry.

The whole party were quickly in motion,
a gay cavalcade, exciting interest among foot-passengers,
and followed for some distance
by a train of street-boys, cheering and shouting.
Soon they had reached the country
lanes, making strange clatter in the quiet
places. All things were beautiful, with the
beauty of early summer. It was too early
for wild roses ; but the hedges were white
with may; the scent of lilacs floated from
cottage gardens ; and the orchards were pink
with apple-blossom. Suddenly there was an
outcry, and a clamour of voices.

<« Why, there he is ! " '' What a sly dog you
are, Vivian ! " — and, from Mrs. Carberry —

"You naughty fellow, to steal a march upon
us in this way ! '*

Hugh Yivian was walking leisurely along
the foot-path. He stopped at the cry, and
looked up, laughing, raising his straw hat.

I'm sure you ought to be much obliged
to me — or the horses ought. They are pretty
well laden, as it is."

No, no, nonsense ! get in, Mr. Vivian, I
beg ! " cried Mrs. Carberry, her hand on the
carriage door. " There is abundance of
room, indeed."

'' Thank you, I'd rather walk. I shall be
there almost as soon as you are. I know of
a short cut."

So, with many waving hands and nodding
heads, they passed on, and left him behind.
But Marjory had seen him look from carriage
to carriage, until his eyes met hers. Lina
had seen the same ; she glanced at Marjory
again ; and, this time, her glance spoke
volumes. Marjory did not much care ; it was
with a strange mixture of joy and pain that
she drove on through the peaceful landscape.

Presently the road, crossing a bridge,
turned to follow the windings of the river :
overlooking which, on rising ground, appeared
the hoary pile of ruins. The castle had been

of JSTorman architecture, commanding a wide
view of the surrounding country. One massive
tower still remained in good outward
preservation, although ivy had almost choked
the loopholes which lightened the winding
staircase within. To the left of this tower
the massive gateway, once containing the
portcullis, and still almost intact, framed
in the further view of ancient halls and
chambers, laid open to the light of day.
Their floor was now the green grass, their
roof the sky ; and the walls, which had once
seemed eternal, were slowly crumbling.

The carriages drove into the field which
sloped from the grassy ditch, once the moat,
to the river, and disembarked their load.
The silent place was soon dotted over with
gay figures, and resonant with mirth, as the
whole party mounted the hill, and passed
beneath the gateway into the ruined court.
Lina walked beside Mr. Throckmorton, Marjory
with Mrs. Peele.

*' How dreary ! " said Mrs. Peele, looking
about her with a shudder, " I should be
frightened to death to come here at night ! —
or even by day, alone. And one feels as if
the walls would tumble on one ! "

"It is solemn," said Marjory. She paused,

looking up and around. These walls, grand
in decay, seemed alive, though dumb. A
presence, indescribable yet real, encompassed
the place.

*' I wonder what the old barons would say,
if they found us making free of their fastnesses
in this way?" observed a young lady.

They would invite you all to luncheon,
I feel sure," said Mrs. Carberry, waving her
hand to where the servants were spreading
cloths and unpacking hampers. " I have no
scruple in using their dining-room ! "

Meanwhile Mrs. Peele had been joined .by
an acquaintance, and Marjory stole away
alone. Her mind was busy in the far past,
amid possible scenes enacted in this very
spot, centuries upon centuries ago. She
tried to hear the voices, to see the bygone
forms ; she wondered it should seem so hard
to realize that they had been.

'* You are in your element, aren't you?"
said Hugh Vivian, at her side. '' You can
dream and moralize as much as you like
here — plenty of material ! "

I didn't see you come," said Marjory,
colouring.

"I came this way," said Mr. Vivian, pointing
to a low archway in her rear; *' Just

beyond lies the entrance to the turret staircase,
which is wonderfully complete, leading
up to a small octagon room, once some lady's
bower. I'll take you there, after luncheon,
if you like ; it has a glorious view."

You know this place, then ? "

Rather ! " he said, smiHng. " As to that,
there are few places I don't know about
Alton. I might turn cicerone to the county,
perhaps, if other trades failed."

Luncheon ! Luncheon ! " cried Mrs.
Carberry, tinkling a little bell. "Mr. Vivian,
you seem bent on surprising us ! I had no
idea you were arrived."

Really I had no idea that I was of
sufficient importance for Mrs. Carberry to
notice whether I arrived at all — much less
the exact moment," said Hugh, as he moved
towards her.

"You not of importance ! Naughty man !
when you know quite well that, seldom as
you deign to oblige me, I think no party
complete without you."

I ought to feel highly honoured, I am
sure," said Hugh.

Sit down, then, and make yourself
agreeable. We are all dying to hear whether
Mr. Carberry is right in saying that these

interesting ruins were built by an ancestor
of your own."

I believe lie is," said Hugh, carelessly.

Every romantic young lady of the party
gazed with new interest upon him. Marjory
gazed also, in surprise.

*' To think of your never telling us ! "
cried Mrs. Carberry.

Was there any particular reason why I
should tell you ? " inquired Hugh. *' I give
you a hearty welcome to my former domains,
if that is your desire."

'' Hugo de Vivian, elder brother of the
de Vivian who settled at Copeland," said
Mr. Carberry, from the end of the long table.
At the name of Copelandss, a slight shadow
crossed the present Hugh Vivian's brow.
It passed in a moment ; he looked up in
answer to Mrs. Carberry.

'' Yes — that branch of the family was here
till the Wars of the Roses, when the castle
was taken by Yorkists, and the baron killed."

'rand wasn't there some romance?" said
Mrs. Carberry. " The Baron left a baby son,
who eventually married "

His second cousin, the heiress of Cope-lands,"
said Hugh, as all looked to him for
reply. " He was smuggled off to Copelandss

by an underground passage, when the castle
was stormed ; and the family there adopted
him."

And so he got the Copelandss estate — a
splendid one in those days," said Mr. Car-berry.
" If he fell, he fell on his legs, that
youngster ! He was not without compensation."


Hugh's silence plainly signified that he
found the subject distasteful ; whereupon
several tongues, which had been painfully
mute, snatched their opportunity, and the
conversation became general. Marjory's
neighbours did not find her an entertaining
companion ; she had more than ever to think
of now, as she looked at the ruined
walls.

For the rest, as always in Mrs. Carberry's
parties, care and sorrow seemed like things
of a dream ; she certainly had the knack of
banishing their outward aspect. Chatter,
merriment, and flirtation, was the order of
the hour. Luncheon over, indefatigable crop
hastened to plant their hoops ;
chaperones pitched their camp-stools, and
sat down to fancy-work and gossip; sketchers
hunted for picturesqueness ; others explored
the ruins ; a musical minor canon produced

a portfolio of glees, and enlisted a party for
their performance.

Meanwhile Hugh, escaping from Mrs.
Carberry, repeated his proposal to shew
Marjory the view from the turret. She had
a consciousness of Lina's eyes bent on her
from afar, and knew that a lecture was in
store. But if he were going indeed, she
might never more be with him in this way.
She would be happy while she coukl, she
thought in a kind of desperation. Without
so much as a glance at Lina, she strolled by
his side, towards the archway.

The staircase, once vaulted, was now
unroofed like the rest ; and although on the
side of the banqueting-hall, the wall rose to
great height, on the other it was partially
ruined, revealing, far beneath, a network of
chambers, with here and there rough steps
leading down to dark hollows — cellars or
dungeons. Marjory, with her fancy for adventure,
enjoyed the climb, aided on occasion by
Hugh Vivian's strong hand. Presently they
emerged on the octagon landing-place of
which he had spoken. In front the stonework
had crumbled away ; a vast extent of
country lay open. They might have thrown
a pebble into the river, as it flowed immediately

below them; they could trace its course,
a silver thread," far on through the well-clothed
meadow land. At some distance, a
singular feature in this pastoral landscape, a
tall chimney rose, surrounded by low buildings.
Around these, for some space, the
trees had been felled : even here, their forlorn
aspect was evident.

That is Copelandss," said Hugh, quietly.

Marjory could not answer. She could only
gaze, her eyes filling, a choking in her throat.
She saw again, as if with physical sight, the
fair mansion of other years ; its park sloping
below it to the river, its woods flanking it in
summer glory.

Do you see how the trees have been
butchered ? I remember, just about the
time when you were a child at Thorne, I
fancied that my father was too reckless about
the timber, little guessing what was to come !
I never knew, in those days, that he wanted
money ; he let me have all I asked for, and
I squandered it without any thought. If you
were there now, you would find a great bare
place, dotted with hideous sheds and huts,
the grass gone as well as the trees. That is
a ruin of the present age, as this of the past.
I fancy, if my old ancestors could come back

to their castle, the sight would pain them less
than it would pain my father and mother to
rise, and wander back to Copelandss."

This world is a strange mystery' said
Marjory.

*' You have found that out at last ? Yes,
Copelandss is done for ; and there is Thorne,
the same as ever, and no one of the name to
inherit it ! Do you see it ? — that white
gleam among the trees."

And the gray church tower. Yes, it all
looks just as I first saw it from under the
sycamore tree on the Alton-road."

'' After Copelandss, there has been to meno
place like Thorne," said Hugh, musingly.
'' Even now I feel the better for standing
here, and seeing it in the distance. But I
must try to cast off this foolish clinging to
old associations."

"It is true, then. You are really going
away?"

"Yes, I am going. I have thought of it
for some time ; and now I have made up my
mind. This very morning I sent in my
resignation."

Oh ! " said Marjory, blankly.

She felt vaguely that a chilling change
was coming upon her life ; that the assertions

which she had read and heard of earth asa
desert drear " were true ; that joy was a
passing dream, after all. She stood silent,
gazing towards that place so long her Eden.

'rand you will stay on here, I suppose,
with Gerald, and marry some fascinating
Alton parson, who will teach you to look
back on me, if at all, with a pious horror."

'' I don't suppose I shall ever marry," said
Marjory ; " I never think about marrying."

"You are something of a child still, I
verily believe ! but every year you will grow
older. Well, I hope, at all events, you will
have a happy life, if I cannot. I hope I
have not taught you to mistrust happiness?"


Why do you say that ? "

"Because I have noticed in your face
sometimes, of late, a kind of response to my
gloomy speeches, which is new to it. You
must not pay any attention to my experiences
of life ; very likely yours will be quite different.
I fear I have been wrong to talk in
such a manner before you."

No ; I have liked you to talk freely. It
is not that — we must all have troubles of
some kind."

I hope that special one of yours has

blown over?" said Hugli, after a slight
hesitation.

I — I don't know," said Marjory. Her
tone was less hopeful than she intended.
Raising her eyes, she met his own, looking
down on her with real solicitude. It struck
her suddenly, that she would lose a true
friend when he was gone.

*' How soon are you going ? " she asked,
somewhat abruptly.

'' I can't tell ; I suppose it will depend on
how soon they supply my place. Shall you
ever think of me, I wonder ?"

''I thought of you often at Eocks-
wold."

'' And your thoughts now will be just of
the same kind, I suppose. Well ! I ought
not to wish them otherwise. Never mind,
we'll talk no more about my going ; it is a
hateful subject to me."

'' Then why will you go ? I have heard
that the militia will be so sorry to lose you."

"The fact is, 1 ought to have gone months
ago," said Hugh, sternly. " I have been a
fool, and if I stayed I should be worse. There
is no help for it but going."

'• And where ? " asked Marjory.

Where ? I haven't thought of that. Too

far to come back. You and I will probably
never meet again."

I hope we shall meet in Heaven, some
day," said Marjory.

A vague prospect ! "

It need not be vague."

"Vague or not," he said, with sudden
passion, " it cannot save me from the craving
to be with you here."

The words had escaped him ; they were no
sooner spoken, than he coloured hotly, even
to the roots of his hair. Marjory, with quick
instinct, seemed not to observe him, and
turned in another direction.

Some one is calling me ! " she said.
"It is Lina's voice. We had better go
down."

All right," said Hugh, shortly.

He led the way, and she followed — the
descent, more difficult than the upward climb,
precluding conversation. Below, Lina, detached
from her satellites, was perambulating
the court, in search of Marjory.

How can you be so imprudent ? " said
she, low but censoriously, drawing the girl
aside ; "I have far more regard for you than
you have for yourself."

'* I don't know what you mean, Lina," said

VOL. II. X

Marjory. " Don't come with me — let me go
^-I want to be alone."

She shook off Lina's serene hand, and
darted away, as an arrow from a bow. Hugh
Vivian had disappeared, and Lina, having
effected the separation, made no attempt to
detain her. She ran off, round an angle of
the ruins ; a low wall stretched before her ;
she passed through a gap to its other side,
and sat down out of sight. Here tears, of
which she knew not the source, came thick
and fast ; the whole world seemed bitter.

*' How can I live with Lina ? " she thought.
'* How can I stay at peace with her ? Either
I must cramp myself up into something that
is not myself — unutterably icy and narrow —
or else we must be constantly disagreeing.
And Gerald adores her ! I must choose either

to be separated from Gerald, or to — to

Well, it is better that he should go away !"

He " did not mean Gerald. The look in
her eyes, the throbbing of her heart, the crimson
on her cheeks, were not for Gerald. She
felt a wild craving, a consciousness that she
had it in her to give up everything — Lina's
good opinion— Lina's ? that was a small
matter! — the whole world's — all that she
had ever cared for, short of Heaven — only to

be near him, to comfort him, to cast in lier
lot with his ; here, or at the antipodes, it
mattered not.

For the moment, she had a glimpse of her
own heart. She shrank from it, trembling.

X 2

CHAPTER Xxii.

"0 cold one, and I round thee
Revolve, round only thee,
Straining ever to be nearer
While thou evades still,
Repellent still, O cold one.
* * *

The inevitable motion
Bears us both upon its line
Together, you as me,
Together and asunder
Evermore. It so must be."

Arthur H. Clough.

When the scattered party reassembled for
tea, the hush of evening was stealing over
the place. The cows in the field below the
castle were being driven home; the birds
were gathering to their nests, the bees to
their hives. The deep blue of the sky was
softened ; the ivy on the ruins was stirred
by a gentle breeze ; the prevailing spirit
seemed to have inspired the wood-pigeons
of a neighbouring coppice, so full of rest
was their cooing.

'but where is Mr. Vivian?" said Mrs.

Carberry, surveying her flock with small,
benevolent eyes.

'*I forgot to tell you, my dear— he is
gone," said her husband. *' He commissioned
me to make his apologies, as he could not see
you at the moment."

"Oh, but how ungallant!" cried Mrs.
Carberry. " Why did he not wait to help in
escorting these young ladies ? "

He had business at the depot," said Mr.
Carberry. "You know even young ladies
must yield occasionally to business, my dear."

Even, it appears, the one young lady
whom Mr. Yivian does not consider beneath
his notice," observed Miss Return, in a
pointed aside, intended for Mrs. Carberry
alone. But Marjory, at a little distance,
heard no less plainly, and bestowed inward
benedictions on an awkward boy who, at this
instant, spilled his tea over her dress. The
slight bustle thus occasioned might account
for the blush she strove vainly to repress.

Is that Mr. Vivian anybody in particular?"
asked a loud-voiced girl, a stranger in
Alton. " He seems an awful swell."

Eight years ago his family was one of
the first in our county," said Mrs. Carberry,
in a sepulchral voice.

A fact that lie never forgets," observed
Miss Hepburn. " He can be pleasant enough,
when it suits him ; but he has always the
heavy swell air."

Poor, poor fellow ! his reverses have
been great indeed," said Mrs. Carberry, still
exceedingly sepulchral.

'^ Is not your pity rather lavish, Mrs.
Carberry ? " said Lina, who sat opposite
Marjory. " People have seldom any but
themselves to thank for reverses of that kind."

Oh, my dear Lina ! is there no such
thing, then, as misfortune ? " cried good-natured
Mrs. Carberry.

Persons are self-indulgent and extravagant,
and attribute the result to fortune,"
observed Lina.

True, true, every word ! " cried Mr. Car-berry,
from the other end of the table. " But,
surely, a little severe for so young and
charming a judge ! "

Our dear Lina is somewhat misanthropical
just at this moment," said Mrs. Car-berry,
nodding and making signs. '' Never
mind ! I feel sure it is all right, my love,"
she added ia a stage whisper to Lina.
'' Baker ! do go and see if there is any
token of a boat."

Lina turned sublimely away.

Oh, by-the-by ! Surely Gerald should
have been here ere now," said Mrs. Peele to
Marjory.

Marjory looked across at Lina, wondering
if it were any subject of real concern to her
whether Gerald came or not. Gerald himself,
as Marjory knew, had for days looked
forward to the quiet hour among these
picturesque old ruins with his idol, and to
the homeward row afterwards in the cool.
Lina was listening to Mr. Throckmorton,
who was recounting old traditions of the
neighbourhood.

'' A colony from the monastery at Evesham
— " Marjory heard. '' Part of the chapel
is still perfect."

Ten minutes later she became aware that
various enthusiastic young ladies were beseeching
Mr. Throckmorton to take them — •
somewhere ; she had not caught the word.

We shall have time, Mrs. Carberry,
shan't we ? Oh, it will be so nice ! "

'' Plenty of time, my dears," said Mrs.
Carberry, '' if you don't go rhapsodizing, and
forget that daylight won't last for ever. Mr.
Throckmorton, I can trust you, I know. It
will do if you are back in an hour."

'' Where are tliej going ? " asked Marjory.

I thought you were somewhere in the
clouds. Miss Stanhope ! " cried Miss Return,
with a significant laugh. "So you never
heard Mr. Throckmorton's description of the
dear, delightful, old, ruined chapel in the
fields ? He is offering to take us all over it,
and explain its history."

Throckmorton, you won't be mean
enough to leave us behind ? " said one of the
young officers. " I vote we make a party of
it, and hear him hold forth."

Let the party be as large as it will," said
Mr. Throckmorton, pleasantly, " so long as
we don't forget what place we are going to
see."

Marjory looked at him with growing
respect, as he turned again to Lina, in Avhom
alone he appeared to find congenial company.
A general movement followed ; every one
left the table; and Mrs. Carberry's voice
arose, lamenting loudly, as at this instant
Gerald appeared.

'^My dear Mr. Stanhope, come at last ! How
can I express my apologies ? Here have we
finished tea without you ! but really we had
all but given you up. And where is good
Mr. Allen ? — no — naughty Mr. Allen ! for

he is not with you, I see. What ! walked
all the way ? No ! — Lina, Lina, come here. I
commission you to scold Mr. Stanhope. Here
has he walked all the way ! "

Gerald, very hot and tired, was fresh
from a series of contretemps. First he had
been unusually detained, burning with suppressed
impatience, in the bank ; then, when
at length he and his fellow-clerk had hurried
to the quay, they found their boat gone on
in mistake, with those bespoken by Mrs.
Carberry, and no other disengaged. It was
growing late ; and Mr. Allen, who had no
Lina to attract him, fought shy of the long
walk ; therefore, Gerald had come alone,
fearing the while that he might, after all, be
too late to row his divinity home. He had
forgotten the existence of tea, and had tasted
nothing since his mid-day chop at an eating-house.
Now, as his looks made evident, he
needed both food and rest.

You are sadly tired, dear Gerald, are
you not ? " said Lina. " Foolish boy ! why
did you come, when the boat was missing ?
You should not have attempted it."

Never mind," said Gerald, smiling. " I
would do it again, six times over, for the
same reward."

Yes, this was amends for all ! How
beautiful, how cool, calm, sweet, she looked !
only to see her was refreshment.

'all's well that ends well," cried Mrs.
Carberry, bustling about the table. '' Now,
come and refresh yourself — Baker, the claret-cup
! or here is cider-cup, if you prefer it.
Boiling water, Baker ! — Lina, my dear, I
must turn over the tea-making to you.
Mrs. Peele and I have to compare notes in
this new stitch."

Mrs. Carberry thought herself very clever
in thus paving the way for the lovers to meet
in comfort. She and Mrs. Peele would sit
near, to appease propriety; and, Gerald's
hunger satisfied, there would still be time to
steal away for a brief ramble among the
ruins. She was thinking sentimentally of
very old days, when she and Mr. Carberry
had been glad of such small opportunities ;
and Gerald felt quite affectionate to the good-natured
lady. She had turned to Mrs. Peele
as she spoke ; he and Lina stood alone beside
the table.

"Baker is an excellent tea-maker," observed
Lina. " Mrs. Carberry shall commend
you to his good offices. The chapel party
are just starting; and I must go."

The chapel party ! What chapel ? " said
Gerald, blankly.

'' A ruined chapel, half a mile on, formerly
served by a branch from the monastery at
Evesham. Mr. Throckmorton has promised
to escort us. I shall find you quite rested
when I come back."

'' And then it will be time to start, — and
I shall have seen nothing of you ! Why did
you think I came ofi* here, in the heat and
dust ? Lina, I was counting the minutes —
and now are you going off with all those
people?"

'' I cannot lose Mr. Throckmorton's information,"
said Lina, with that quiet feature
of her character which she mistook for firmness.
" You are unreasonable, Gerald ; but
it is owing to your fatigue. Here, sit down,
and Baker shall make your tea."

What do I care about tea ? " said Gerald,
passionately. '' I shall come with you."

He hastily filled a glass from the claret-cup,
and drank it off.

There, that's all I want," he said bitterly.
'' Now I'm coming."

'' I think it is very imprudent," said Lina,
with a serene expression.

Then, stay with me, darling," he said,

his tone changing to entreaty. "Dearest
Lina, stay nth me, and let us have one hour
at least together among all this beauty ! Or,
if you like it better, I'll take you to the
chapel ; only let it be alone, — let us wait a
little, till all this crowd are gone."

My dear Gerald ! We see plenty of each
other at Alton. I would not for the world
lose this opportunity of valuable information."

Yery well," said Gerald, proudly.

Lina glanced at him in gentle concern, and,
murmuring once again the name of Baker,
repaired to Mrs. Carberry. A moment or
two later, Gerald became conscious that this
worthy lady was pirouetting about him, and
talking — he did not hear what she said.
The chapel party were walking away, in a
business-like manner. Gerald watched them
as figures in a play; Mr. Throckmorton's
long black coat and clerical wide awake — the
young men in their light summer suits ; the
merry girls. Lina had vanished in the crowd.
Off they all went, across the grass, in the
still evening air ; soft hues were deepening
in the west ; a blackbird was singing among
the ruins. Baker, the excellent tea-maker,
appeared in an archway, with a kettle of
boiling water.

What ! No tea, Mr. Stanhope ! No tea ?
Oh, let me persuade you. You will really be
quite exhausted, — tired Nature cannot endure
for ever. At least some cold chicken and
claret ! "

But Gerald refused everything. Mrs. Car-berry
would have suspected a lovers' quarrel,
only that he smiled, and was unusually pleasant,
chatting — a little at random — upon
casual subjects, with her and Mrs. Peele.
She had never before seen the dreamy, silent
young fellow so generally agreeable. She
did not know that he had but little notion
of what he was saying. He wanted only,
by a proud instinct, to hide his pain from
the world. Presently he said that he would
go and scramble about by himself. Mrs.
Carberry suspected a secret rendezvous, and
signed and nodded, somewhat to Gerald's
surprise.

He was resting, half leaning, half sitting,
against a gray old buttress, a strange fire
glowing on his cheek, and lighting his eyes,
when near him, a little timidly, a voice
said—" Gerald ! "

He glanced in its direction, and saw Mare

Gerald, don't be vexed — I followed you.

I saw what happened ; at least, 1 guessed.
Gerald, pray don't be unhappy ! "

'* Unhappy ! what does that matter ? I
don't care about that. It is "

He stopped short, looking out over the
fields.

' I'm not a baby, Marjory — nor a mere
lovesick boy. I have borne plenty in my
life ; I hope I can bear plenty yet. But it
is the fear lest I have been mistaken that
drives me mad."

Mistaken in — in her ? "

Don't ! " he exclaimed, starting up suddenly.
'' I must battle with this thought !
I can't stand it — it's a fancy of the devil.
Marjory, you're very good ; but I must fight
it out. Go back — I'U come soon — go to the
others."

As he spoke, he turned from her, and
strode away ; and she was left alone by the
buttress. Of all the varied emotions of the
day, this was the most painful — this heartache
for the brother whom she loved. She
felt like a bird in a snare, which sees its
young ones taken, and flutters, and strains
its wings, but cannot reach them.

When the missing party came streaming
back over the fast-closing daisies, they were

all somewhat subdued, fresh from the combined
influences of the sacred ruin and Mr.
Throckmorton ; who, all unconscious of the
storm that had raged in his absence, looked
full of meditative calm. Lina had expected
to find Gerald watching, slave-like, for her
return ; but it was not until five minutes
later that he came up in another direction,
and, without noticing her, proceeded to relieve
Mrs. Carberry of various unimportant
items which, for reasons not easy to divine,
she had seen fit to bring ; and to transfer
them, from the camp-stools and stones where
they lay strewn, to a capacious bag.

Gerald, dear, how sadly imprudent you
have been ! " said Lina, at his side. " Mrs.
Carberry tells me you would eat nothing."

It would have choked me," said Gerald,
shortly, " Lina, I have something to say to
you."

Can it be that you were so childish as
to take offence because I did not make your
tea ? "

Now then ! Now then ! " cried Mrs.
Carberry' s voice. " Young people all ! You
will every one catch cold. Not one will
escape. There will be a perfect hospital
tomorrow."

They trooped away, like a flock of sheep,
to the river, where the boats were waiting.
One after another, as it was filled, pushed
off. Marjory went in a large " four-oar,"
with a merry party, who did her good despite
herself, distracting her attention. The river
was like a poem, she thought ; a bright sunset
glowed behind the trees, and cast crimson
reflections on the water. The oars sped
lightly with an even splash ; from the banks
came more decided music — the notes of
sweet birds, welcoming the hush and cool.
The rich glows faded into softer lights ; the
evening star shone out ; the moon rose.
Some of the party struck up a round, which
rang with unwonted clearness over the water.
Marjory preferred to listen, sitting in the
bows, in a dreamy stillness which, after the
burden and heat of the day, seemed rest
unutterable.

Meanwhile Gerald, far behind, was alone
with Lina. It had been arranged, the day
before, that Mrs. Peele should accompany
them ; but Mrs. Peele, being pleasantly engaged
in conversation, had forgotten this,
ensconcing herself in a larger boat with her
friends. She remembered when too late,
and looked back in perplexity at the receding

bank ; but seeing Gerald in the act of assisting
Lina's stately footsteps into the boat —
which seemed to her alarmingly small — she
supposed that all was right, and congratulated
herself on her safer position.

Lina, however, had no desire for a tete-tete
with Gerald. She would rather have
left him alone to recover himself, as, in her
mind, she expressed it. But while she looked
calmly around her for Mrs. Peele, that little
lady, at some distance, was embarking.

'' Mamma has gone on, I see," said Lina,
with perceptible annoyance.

"Yes, I am glad of it," said Gerald. " I
should have no other chance of getting you
alone."

Lina made no reply ; and they were presently
on the river — Gerald sculling in so
leisurely a manner that the other boats were
soon out of sight.

'' That peep would make a pretty sketch,"
observed Lina, looking towards the bank.
I shall come again, and attempt it, some
day."

Lina, I told you that I had something to
say. I shall be glad if you will listen, and
take it in."

She glanced at him, struck by his tone,

VOL. II. Y

and met this gray eyes gazing on her, not
with their usual adoration, but deep in
thought — thought not untouched by sternness.


*' Do you love rae ? " he said abruptly.

Is that all ? " she returned, smiling
serenely : for this question seemed only a
new symptom of captivation. '' That is not
very hard to take in ! "

Perhaps more so than you suppose,"
said Gerald. " Lina, I don't ask foolishly.
I want you to answer. I would rather know
the truth."

'' I should not have engaged myself to you
without affection."

Affection ! I want something more than
that. I have given you my whole heart, and
I want yours."

'' You are like Marjory, romantic and impulsive,"
said Lina, calmly. " If you expect
romance from me, I cannot give it. I have
always aimed instead at common sense."

That is begging the question. It was
very good of you, no doubt, to engage yourself
to me — my best prospects being so uncertain,
with long waiting, and perhaps little
to come of it. That is the worldly point of
view, and, in one way, true enough : you

have been unworldly in consenting to such an
engagement. But then, on the other hand,
you have always seemed to me above the
world. And you may talk of romance as
you like ; but this is sober fact ; — when two
people really love each other, questions of
money, and society, and so forth, are as
nothing in comparison. What they want is
one another ; and so long as they have
enough to live upon, without debt or distress,
they will be satisfied — yes, and thankful.
And if either is richer than the other, or might
have made " a better marriage," that more
fortunate one, if it be real love, drill feel himself,
or herself, doubly fortunate, because it
is thus possible to give up something for the
other's sake ; I was going to say — sacrifice
something : but in such a case there can be
no real sacrifice. To apply all this to you
and me, Lina, that fact — for, I maintain, it
is a fact — goes far to equalize our respective
positions. — That is, if you do indeed love
me."

'' I am at a loss to understand why you
think it necessary to make these remarks,"
said Lina.

I wish to God we could change places'*
said Gerald, sternly, '^ and that I were the
Y 2

superior in outward position ! Oh, if only I
could be rich, or powerful in any way, you
would see how I should glory in laying all at
your feet !' Yes, you are smiling — it sounds
hackneyed — but God knows that I mean
every word. And there may yet come a time
if I can have fair play — when I shall have
something, even in this world's sight, to offer
to you."

He stopped suddenly, and rowed on in
silence, looking not at Lina, but beyond her.
Somewhere in that direction, however distant,
lay Venice and Eome ! Yes, there, to
him attainable, lay a treasure beyond the
reach of wealth or rank. He seemed to hear
the music of their bells, to see their streets
transfigured in the sunset. Oh for those
magic sandals which had carried Perseus so
swiftly over sea and land ! Oh, that this moment
he could start southward !

Lina's voice, cold and calm, disturbed his
musings.

I shall be glad, Gerald, to hear why you
have chosen to impress all this on me just

now."

Because, as I asked that question, it
struck me that some might say — ' You selfish
brute, what right have you to set up such a

claim ? Lie, who might marry anybody !
and you, a penniless bank-clerk ! ' I suppose
these few qualifying circumstances soothe my
pride."

*you know too, very well, that I have
never accused you of presumption. Indeed,
the idea has not occurred to me ; your family,
though poor, is good, and can be traced for
centuries before ours was ever heard of. I
have mentioned this to my friends in speaking
of my engagement. Then I always look
forward to your future renown. Your talent
is undoubted. It would be quite another
matter if you were merely, as you say, a
bank clerk. At the same time, I always feel
that there are things of more importance
than money. I should be quite ashamed to
look down on you because you happened to
be poor."

Yes, you are above such looking down as
that ! But, meanwhile, you have not understood
me — no, I can see it — and I have had
no answer to my question."

'' It is such a very foolish question," said
Lina, good-humouredly superior. '' Of course
I love you."

Not ' of course ' at all — the love that I
mean — that I want."

'' Your expectations are too liigli flown for
reality."

For ordinary experience, perhaps. But
before ever I thought it possible to meet with
one like you, I felt that it was not in me to
be satisfied with any ordinary woman."

'* Ordinary women allow their feelings to
govern them, instead of governing their feelings.
My aim is higher."

*' In one sense, yes. But height is not
coldness."

'' The highest mountains have always snow
on them," said Lina, proudly.

'' But the sun is above even those ; and
there is nothing of snow in the sun. I have
felt from the first that you did not love me
very much ; but I thought it would come intime.
Lately I have had a horrible misgiving
that perhaps it may never come. If
it does not, if it cannot, it may be best that
we should part."

Certainly, if you wish it," said Lina.

I wish it ! " repeated Gerald, with a look
of mingled reproach and passion. '' The
thought is agony to me."

Then why go on in this uncomfortable
manner ? "

'' Just listen, Lina. — I was counting the

hours, as I said, till I could get to you this
evening. I knew we should have only a
short time ; but even that seemed worth five
times the walk ; and I fancied, fool as I was,
that you were looking forward to it too.
What with dust and weariness, the road
seemed endless ; but at last I was with you ;
and there, not caring one farthing for me,
you were off to see some publishing old
ruin."

Gerald ! you speak so of a chapel ? "
I can't help it. Just to hear a dry
oration from Throckmorton 1 I tell you,
if I didn't know you were above all that,
I might have suspected you of running after
him."

'' Gerald, you are quite vulgar."
I tell you I knew you were above it,"
said Gerald, passionately. '* Above every
kind of suspicion. But why did you do it,
Lina ? Why did you raise such a storm in
me ? You might have known that it would
try me beyond endurance."

'' Indeed," said Lina, '' I had no idea that
you were so unreasonable."

Unreasonable ! Good heavens ! What
fellow would not be unreasonable in such
circumstances ! Why did you do it, I say ? ' '

'' I have already answered that question,"
said Lina, frigidly. '' I thought it a good opportunity
for variable information."

Valuable ! For one shilling I'd buy you
a handbook which would tell you all you
heard from him, and more. But it all
hinges on one point. You don't love me. —
Well ! I could bear that patiently, and wait
for it, as I have waited, if I were but
sure — if I could get rid of this horrible
doubt "

*' Pray explain yourself," said the lofty
Lina.

'' A doubt which has troubled me before —
but specially to-night, — whether you have it
in you even to understand the love of my
visions."

Visions are nothing," said Lina.

The love that I feel within me, as a fact,
at this moment. Your face — it is the face of
an angel ! there are heights and depths in
it beyond my fancy. Surely it has not
deceived me."

If you mention deceit in connection with
Me, Gerald, I shall be seriously offended. I
have never in my life deceived anyone."

Not that sort of deceit," cried Gerald,
with sharp pain in his tone. " But you won't

understand ! perhaps you can't : there is no
use in talking any more."

I think not, indeed," said Lina.

Then they went on in silence : while the
sunset paled, and the music of the rounds,
far ahead, floated back on the evening
air.

I am quite ready to break off our engagement,
if you desire it," said Lina, with slow
distinctness.

He looked at her, half mystified, half doubting
; and, looking, his expression changed.

I cannot give you up — I cannot," he
cried. " My darling, let it pass — never mind
I won't worry you any more."

"And you confess that you have been in
the wrong ? "

'' I confess nothing : except that you have
enthralled me, heart and soul."

At any rate you must remember that I
cannot submit to be cross questioned," said
Lina, propitiated by his manner. '' And now
let us go to other subjects."

Marjory was comforted, when they met at
the landing-place, to find her brother and
Lina apparently on excellent terms. It was
only afterwards, at home, that she observed
him to be still preoccupied and grave ; and

felt sure that his mind was not at rest, however
the outward dispute might be.

Immediately after supper he went to the
attic ; and Marjory, waking as the cathedral
clock struck two, heard him only then come
downstairs on his way to bed.

CHAPTER Xxii.

Truly He cannot, after such assurance,
Truly He cannot and He shall not fail ;
Nay, they are known, the hours of thine endurance.
Daily thy tears are added to the tale."

Frederic W. H. Myers.

The day of the pic-nic lead been fortunately
chosen ; the morrow was rainy, — a gentle
rain, but steady and persevering. The reaction
from strong excitement weighed
heavily on Marjory, making her school work
burdensome. It was just over, and she was
standing in the window of the sitting-room,
wishing that rain were not a necessity of
nature, when a cab, which had driven slowly
round the corner, drew up in front of the
door. Possible visions of Mr. Harding, of
her uncle, flitted wildly across her brain ; she
stood watching, and saw the driver help
some one out — some one who seemed ill or
disabled. One glance : and, the blood rushing
from her face to her heart, she turned,
and flew downstairs.

Gerald ! Oh, what has happened ? "

Don't put yourself about, miss ; the
young gent has only had a bit of a accident,"
said the cabman.

I'm all right, Marjory," said Gerald himself:
but he spoke faintly, and, having
entered, sat down on the stairs, as if in too
much pain to go further.

It appeared that he had climbed upon some
movable steps, to reach a high shelf in the
bank; the steps, which needed repair, had
given way; a quick spring had saved him
from falling, — but in springing he had somehow
hurt his knee — strained it, he thought ;
and the pain, instead of going off, had become
more violent, causing faintness. Leave of
absence was granted him, and he had felt at
first revived by the fresh air ; but, in walking,
the faintness returned, and he was compelled
to take advantage of a passing cab.

I'm so thankful it is nothing worse ! "
cried Marjory. " I was afraid you were ill.
You'll soon be better, Gerald dear, when you
get upstairs; you shall lie on the sofa and
rest."

'' I'll come at once," he said, rising, with
a firm grasp of the banisters. Aided by
these and Marjory's arm, he was soon in the
sitting-room ; but the effort had been so pain-fill,

that lie was once more quite faint, and
glad to lie back upon the sofa cushions. A
little cold water refreshed him ; and he sat



What a fool I am ! " he said, impatiently,
though with a smile : " I wish you'd just
run in to Miss Pilkington, and ask her to lend
me a pot of ointment, or something. She
doctors all the little chaps."

Marjory obeyed, and returned accompanied
by Miss Pilkington herself, who prescribed
cold-water bandages.

But, I say ! how shall I get back to the
bank, swathed up in cold water ? "

'' You can't think of going back to-day ;
'tis out of the question," replied Miss Wilmington.
" If you'll write a note to say so, I will
send it."

'' This is a bore," said Gerald, meditatively,
when she had left them. " I was
going down to Albion Square after bank
hours."

"I'll go for you, dear, and bring Lina
here to tea."

What a blessing you are, Marjory ! But
it is raining."

I don't mind rain ; you know I never
did : if Lina does, she must come in a fly.

I promise anyhow to bring her : and now
I'll see about the bandages."

The cold water relieved Gerald to some
extent ; he was soon more free from pain.
But his knee felt strangely weak, and in
himself he was languid and somewhat feverish.

If you are not better tomorrow, we
must send for a doctor," said Marjory.

*' A doctor for a strain ! He would
laugh at us. Besides, it would never do to
make a hole in my instalment for Grove and
Carter. I mustn't leave too much for your
wonderful book, you know ! "

Marjory returned his smile, though at his
words her heart sank. She had never told
him ! If a second refusal came, what could
she do ?

Lina suspended the lecture on attention to
health, with which Marjory's wet walk inspired
her, on learning its cause. She would
not, however, for her own part, run any such
foolish risk ; and a fly was ordered forthwith.
The flush of sudden joy with which Gerald
received her far more than repaid Marjory's
trouble. She retired to her own room, leaving
the lovers alone.

Out of doors the silent rain was falling,
falling ; sky and river were both of one dull

hue ; the Shelburn hills were blotted out in
mist. Which was the true type of life, —
this, or yesterday's bright summer ? Marjory
took up her Bible ; it opened naturally at the
passage she desired to see : —

'* Whatsoever ye shall ash in My Name,
that loll I do, that the Father may he glorified
in the Son '' If ye shall ash anything in
My Name, I will do it."

Yes, there it was ! without possibility of
mistake : a promise. So vivid was Marjory's
realisation of the unseen, that while she read
the words she seemed to hear the heavenly
voice speak them — as other mortal ears had
heard indeed. Taking time as a whole, it
was not so very long ago ! eighteen hundred
years and odd — less than twice the years
sincerer Norman Conquest. The same sky was
spread to-day as then ; the same sun was
shining ; the very ground on which He stood,
when he spoke, was still existing in that land
of Judas. If certain theories of sound were
correct, the very words might be still vibrating
through space. And whose words ?
Some had called Him a Deceiver ; but
Marjory would have died the most terrible of
deaths rather than doubt His truth. That
Hebrew of the Gospels, the Divine Man,

was living still. He could not have forgotten
the promises which He had spoken.

No ; all was right, — all must be right. It
was only that she must wait : just as an insect
born to-day would have to wait till tomorrow,
till the rain was past, before it could
see the sunshine of which its fellows might
tell.

When Marjory returned to the sitting-room,
she found Lina bending over her photographic
album, open at the page where
Jessie's radiant loveliness shone from among
the other faces, as a diamond among garnets.
Lina, seated at a low table near the sofa, was
looking intently at this special portrait. As
Marjory entered, she just raised her eyes, and
then continued the study.

Marjory ! " she said, suddenly : '' Do you
remember, last year, my remarking thai: I
knew this face ? ' '

'' Yes ; but I thought you were mistaken."


'' I could not feel sure about it. But now
I am quite sure that I have seen elsewhere
the very photograph."

Lina ! have you not dreamt it ?"

'' I do not take dreams for reality ! Yes,
it comes back more clearly as I think. It

was years ago — before I knew you. The
photograph was in a small album — a vulgar
album, bound in mauve. It could not have
been a lady's. Where was it ? "

She pondered, her eyes fixed in concentration.
She had evidently, for whatever
cause, an earnest wish to verify these
fleeting reminiscences. Marjory came to
look over her shoulder, eagerly awaiting the
result of her musings.

'' Could you have seen it at Bullingham ?
Jessie might easily have had acquaintances
there."

"Neo, it was not at Bullingham. I was
somewhere on a visit; and I called, with
some lady, at the house where I saw the photograph.
Of the lady, I only recollect that
she had black hair and a white bonnet ! and
that she sat on a sofa, talking to the person
of the house, while I looked through the
album. It was a little square room, clean
but common, with a small round table and
bead mats."

That reminds me of the little parlour in
Mrs. Hammond's lodgings."

Lodgings ! " repeated Lina. "Yes ! A
lodging-house it was. I remember. The
lady had called to engage rooms for a

VOL. II. z

sick servant. "Where could it have
been''

She pondered again, knitting her brows.
Had Marjory not herself been deeply interested,
she would have wondered at this
interest on Lina's part. But her mind was
full of Bellhouse, and of that terrible mystery.
What if this recognition should lead to its
being solved ?

'* Was anything said about the photograph
? " she asked, as Lina gazed on in
silence.

'' No, they were talking and did not notice
me. I remember thinking how foolish any
person must be to be taken in her wedding
dress. That is all. I can recall no more."

She closed the book suddenly, and moved
her chair from the table.

«« Why, you look ' quite in a way,' as Priscilla
says," observed Gerald, who had lain
silently watching her. He smiled as he
spoke ; but Lina did not smile.

Think of all that might depend upon these
recollections ! " she said.

'weather a weak 'might'" said Gerald.
Probably the mistress of the house, whoever
she may have been, was a friend of Mrs.
Bellhouse, or of the girl herself, and the

photograph was given to lier, as to Marjory.
It is a curious coincidence, certainly."

'' We may yet discover it to be beyond a
coincidence," said Lina. '* At all events, I
shall keep it in my mind."

'' I suppose there would be no use in telling
Bellhouse ? " said Marjory to Gerald.

'* Not without something more definite.
Unless, indeed, it were she who gave the
photograph, the doubt and mystery would
only make her restless."

Besides," interposed Lina, " if there be
any clue to search out, we had better keep
our own counsel."

Marjory failed to comprehend this speech ;
and, as Lina went on to talk about other
things, she sat thoughtfully pondering it
meaning. Suddenly an idea struck her. Suspicions
which she had striven to forget rushed
back upon her memory ; she recalled Lina's
hope of clearing her family honour — at whose
expense ? There was a plan in her mind,
Marjory felt sure, with vague foreboding.

But after tea, when Lina, entreated by
Gerald, opened the piano and sang, the foreboding
vanished. Marjory, tired, leaned back
in the arm-chair, and watched, and listened.
Almost she could have dreamed the old
z 2

sclioolgirl dream, and thought Lina once
more the personification of all that is lovely.
Every line of form and countenance was full
of grace, harmonizing to perfection with the
music ; sight and hearing alike were charmed.
Marjory could not wonder at Gerald's absorbed
gaze. He had forgotten his pain,
forgotten the thoughts which yesterday had
half maddened him. Visions of pictures, of
fair faces, Eden-like landscapes, floated before
his mind ; and Lina was their invoking spirit.
He felt full of anger against himself for having
dared to doubt her — and not last night only,
although of this no other human being was
aware.

And meanwhile Lina, on her music-stool,
was all unconscious of her power. Her
attention was solely occupied by her singing-master's
rules for correct intonation and
expression ; she was endeavouring, conscientiously,
to do them justice, despite the
inflexibility of the English tongue.

CHAPTER XXV.

Well, it is earth with me ; silence resumes her reign ;
I will be patient and proud, and soberly acquiesce.
Give me the keys. I feel for the common chord again,

Sliding by semitones, till I sink to the minor Yes,

And I blunt it into a ninth, and I stand on alien ground,
Surveying a while the heights I rolled from into the deep."

Robert Browning.

Hugh Vivian was going away ! This was
the thought with which Marjory awoke on
the next morning. It was not yet time to
get up ; and that thought filled all her mind.
He was going away. Perhaps, throughout
her earthly life, they would meet never again.
Perhaps she would never know, in this world,
whether her prayer for him were granted.
She would be left, as before, with only a
remembrance of him : but now that remembrance
would be twofold. The young soldier,
rejoicing in his youth, and in all good things
of this world ; and that dark and bitter face ;
with the cynical smile, veiling a deep heartsickness.
Which face would haunt her most ?
or would each alike appear as a dream ?

Oh, to be a little cliilcl again — able to clasp
his hand, and say, " Mr. Hugh, I want you
to be happy ! " A child who belonged to
him, to go with him, to wait upon him. She
wanted him ; she craved for his presence, —
his voice, his smile. Even that bitter smile
she had power, now and then, to lighten
it. What would he grow into as the years
rolled on ? Would he harden still more in
scepticism ? Would he lose at last all self-respect,
like some of whom she had read —
and seek in evil, forgetfulness, if not comfort?
Would he sink downward, and be
lost ? — he seemed already half lost sometimes
: — and then, what of the next life ?
If she never saw him again on earth, would
they meet indeed, as she had said, in Heaven ?
And . . . if not, would this longing ever be
stilled ? Would she ever be able to forget
him all through Eternity ?

Meanwhile, Alton was not Heaven ! and
what would Alton be when he was gone?
What interest would have passed from her
life ! She had not known till now, how
deep an interest. Always she had felt the
consciousness of his presence not far off; had
known that, whenever she went out, she
might meet him ; had hoped that some day

he might come to her and say, — " You were
right, — I begin to see that all was for the
best." Then she had been aware, though
secretly, that she possessed no less attraction
for him than he for her ; that she was to him,
as he to her, just what no one else was, in all
the world : and this inward consciousness
had imparted an unutterable sweetness to
her life. His sceptical opinions formed, she
thought, an impassable barrier between them ;
but it might be, although she knew it not,
that the idea of this barrier had obscured the
need of guarding her own heart.

Now, as she strove to realize her life as it
would be when he was gone out of sight and
sound of it, a feeling of utter dreariness came
over her. She still might, and would, devote
herself to Gerald ; and, had Gerald responded
as once she hoped, this would have given her
comfort. But Gerald was bound up in Lina ;
she could help him only by working for him ;
and her work could as well be done at a distance.
If she left him, he would miss her
very little ; and, when he did miss her, he
could go to Lina and be more than consoled.
Life and the world had grown arid, like
Branksome in that fiery summer. Marjory
longed to get away to green woods and fields.

to the speechless soothing of Nature. She
would go back to Eockswolcl, she resolved, ina
little while, and forget the past year like a
dream.

At breakfast, Gerald looked flushed and
jaded ; confessing that he was still in pain.

I shall be better at my work," he said :
'' Coddling will do no good. Pain is always
worse if one thinks about it."

But, Gerald, you look so tired ! I wish
you would let me send for a doctor."

*' My dear Marjory, I never had a doctor
in my life ; our grandmother considered them
an extravagance ! and to begin for a trifle
like this would be absurd. I can't think
what makes me so stupid ; but somehow I
did not sleep : and my thoughts were hardly
soothing. Work will be my doctor."

Marjory looked at him as he sat opposite,
drinking coffee, but his plate empty ; — and
her heart sank. The sign of care borne
silently, on that broad young brow, struck
her with a pang almost physical. If she
could but see into his mind, she thought !
But she could only guess at the musings of
that wakeful night.

If only I might hear to-day that my book
is accepted, and tell him of it this evening

when he comes home ! He will sleep rather
better, then ! "

A short time ago the strong desire would
have kindled a corresponding hope ; but now
Marjory had begun to learn something of the
sickness of hope deferred.

*' You are a Httle lame, Gerald," she said,
as he rose. *' Will not walking make it
worse ? "

'rit is not much of a walk. My knee is
stiff; but that will go off as I use it."

It did not, however. At night he was no
better, and unable to hide the pain of which
he, nevertheless, made light. He lay again on
the sofa, and began a series of small designs
for future pictures ; while Marjory read. He
was in one of his silent moods ; and she
would not worry him with chatter. When
Priscilla, with the supper-tray, broke the
monotony, he closed his sketching-book, and,
folding his arms, looked before him, deep in
thought.

"Marjory," he said, as the door closed on
the little maid, " they are very long in answering
about your book."

"Yes," said Marjory, blankly.

I would write to them, if I were you,
unless you hear within three or four days."

"Yes," said Marjory again.

'' You have not lost hope, have you ? "

** Oh, no, Gerald. Why do you ask ? "

'' You sound unlike yourself. But sometime
ago you thought the silence favourable''


*' I will write at any rate, as you say, if I
don't hear soon."

'^ I wish you would. I shall be glad for
the suspense to end, one way or the other.
It will be better for us all."

'^ For us all ! " More thoughts than one
were troubling him, through these silent
hours. In her heart she cried : "0 God !
have pity on us, and help us ! " But outwardly
she only composed her face to cheerfulness,
and talked of other things.

Gerald was no better the next day, or the
next, or the next ; and the welcome news
which would have been his best medicine
did not come. With a steady resolution
which at times seemed almost obstinacy, he
went as usual, for a full week, to his work.
Every morning Marjory hoped to find him
better ; every evening she feared that he
was on the verge of an illness. Miss Wilmington
seconded her entreaties for a doctor ;
but Gerald refused to listen, — declaring

further, that if the sent for one without his
consent he should decline to see him.

But at the end of that week, one afternoon,
when he had dragged himself upstairs
with frequent pauses, he sank down on the
sofa, his face crimson, his brow damp,
utterly spent.

*' It's of no use, Marjory," he said : ^' I've
done my best to battle it down ; but I must
give in. You may get a doctor as soon as
you please."

*' I can't tell you how glad I am ! " cried
Marjory : '' Now you will soon be well."

And she ran off to consult with the ladies.

An hour later, a cheerful man of middle
age, Eobinson by name, was ushered in by
Priscilla. Mrs. Myers and Miss Pilkington
had extolled him as infinitely the best surgeon
in Alton, — a reputation not new to
Marjory. As he entered, he looked keenly
at Gerald ; and the penetration of his eye
seemed at variance with the almost jaunty
manner. Marjory followed his glance. Even
in one week, she thought, Gerald had grown
much thinner ; he had plenty of colour, but
his gray eyes were surely brighter and
clearer than they should be.

But only when, after rapid questioning.

the knee was examined, did Marjory become
aware of its true state. Gerald had said so
little, and her touch in applying bandages
had been so light, that she had not discovered
the extreme tenderness of the joint.
Now, under the surgeon's hand, he bit his
lip and flushed, in the effort to repress any
sign of pain ; but one involuntary groan
escaped him.

That will do," said Mr. Eobinson, resuming
his seat. Gerald lay back, and the
flush faded into paleness,

He ought not to be so weak, ought
he ? " said Marjory : " It is only a strain ? "

There is some slight injury to the joint,"
said Mr. Robinson, cheerfully : '' Nothing
whatever to alarm you ; but the knee must
have rest. Poultices at night, and a lotion,
which I will send, by day. I will also send a
little mixture, to be taken every four hours ;
and the diet must not be too low, if you
please. His strength must be kept up."

*' He is not going to be ill, is he ? " cried
Marjory, in anxiety beyond control.

''HI? Nonsense!" said Gerald, with a
reassuring smile. Mr. Robinson smiled also ;
and looked the picture of good spirits.

'•' I anticipate no near change from what

we see at present. Please attend very carefully
to my directions : I will call again in
two or three days."

'' But surely I shall be all right by then ?"
said Gerald, looking blank : " I must get
back to my work."

'* You have stayed at your work rather
too long, you see," said Mr. Robinson, with
a smiling nod : " Nature will have its
revenge."

He was out of the room before Gerald,
taken by surprise, could ask another question.
Marjory flew after him.

'' It is nothing serious, is it ? " she said,
her blue eyes full of trouble. Mr. Robinson
seemed a little graver than he had shown
himself in Gerald's presence.

Don't alarm yourself," said he. '' These
injuries to the joint are sometimes tedious.
I shall judge better when I see him again.
Please keep up his strength in every way."

And how soon will he be well ? "

That," replied Mr. Robinson, smiling
again, — "it is impossible to say. Sooner or
later, according to circumstances. Good
afternoon."

Marjory turned into her own room, to
struggle for the composure with which she

would meet Gerald. The surgeon's manner,
his evasions, even his smiles, had filled her,
despite his injunction to the contrary, with
vague alarm.

It was on the following day that, returning
from foraging for Gerald's supper, she
saw at once that something had happened.
He was sitting on the sofa, his knee up,
books and drawing materials within reach,
as she had left them an hour before. They
did not appear to have been touched ; he was
very still, with a strange, fixed look. As
Marjory approached, she saw an envelope
crushed in his hand.

Gerald, have you had a letter ? "

'' It is for you," he said : " Marjory, come
here. I want you."

Without speaking, she drew a chair to his
side.

'' Marjory, can you bear a disappointment
? " said Gerald. His tone was so kind,
so full of thought for her, that she had almost
broken down. A lump rose in her throat ;
tears filled her eyes.

'' Oh, Gerald ! I know — I can guess. It
is my book."

Never mind, dear," he said gently :
Don't fret yourself. It cannot be helped."

Then she saw on his other side, thrust
into a corner of the sofa, the well-known roll
of manuscript on which such pains had been
spent. Gerald had not opened the letter ;
the parcel had told its own tale. Buta
wild hope shot through "Marjory's brain : —
it might merely have been returned for correction
or alteration ! She seized the envelope.
No ! Here was the same polite refusal,
couched in almost the same terms as that
of a month ago. She sat beside Gerald,
motionless, dumb : he had spoken to her
twice, before she heard.

'' What did you say, Gerald ? "

'' I was telling you not to give up hope.
While you were out, I thought it all over.
We will try again. Even ' Vanity Fair ' was
refused at first, you know ! "

No answer. She sat staring into vacancy,
with a blank hopelessness which never
before had been seen upon that face.

Why, Marjory ! It is not like you to be
discouraged at the first onset."

Oh, Gerald, Gerald — it is not the first. I
did not tell you — I could not bear to vex you
so — this is the second refusal."

She knelt down by him, and buried her
face.

'' Gerald, I can't bear it. It is not myself
I care for : — it is you ! And I prayed so
earnestly ! "

He said nothing at the instant ; but lie
felt his hand laid lightly on her head.

Don't fret, Marjory," he repeated, after
a long silence. " I thank you all the same.
We must make up our minds to it."

To what, Gerald ? To utter disappointment
? "

Don't call it that. It may turn out better
than we expect. I hope so. But it is
clear that we must give up all thought of
my going with Mr. Harding,"

Was it his illness — or what ? — that gave
him this strange strength ? — that made his
tone so quiet, so self-contained ? Marjory
raised her head, and looked at him, half in
wonder, half in despair.

But I prayed, Gerald — I prayed. I
should never have dared to hope so, if I had
not prayed. I can't understand it."

There are many things one can't understand.
You will have to accept that as a
fact ; I did, long ago. Your enthusiasm was
infectious," he added, with a faint smile :
I should never have allowed myself to build
on such a mere chance, if I had not caught

it of you ! At least, I think not — I hardly
know. Lately I have lived in a dream ; and
now I must come out of it."

'ris it all a dream, Gerald ? Is the real
world so dark and cold, then ? Perhaps I
have lived in a dream all my life : and yet —
Oh, Gerald, Gerald ! "

She clung to him almost convulsively. He
soothed her, stroking her hair with a touch
more like a father's than a brother's.

''No," he said: "The world is not all
dark. But we can't have our own way in
it. I fancy some of us have to be content
scarcely ever to get our own way. Don't
think of me, Marjory ; I shall manage very
well, dear. I was not quite unprepared.
I'll write to Mr. Harding at once : then the
matter will be settled. I was a fool ever to
dream of such joy ! "

The last words seemed to escape him unawares.
They struck on Marjory's heart like
a knell.

Is joy really a delusion ? " she thought.
She would not say it ; she would not, more
than could be helped, vex Gerald with her
conflicts. He had enough to bear.

Tell me all about it," he said, after

VOL. II. 2 a

another pause, with his kind smile. That
smile did not seem an effort ; it came naturally,
at the sight of her trouble.

She told him the whole history : how her
book had returned a month ago, and had
been sent out again forthwith.

And you have had this on your mind all
that time ? How brave you have been ! I
never guessed it."

'^ I meant it for the best; but now it
seems cruel. I have let you hope on, to no
purpose."

Never mind," he said quietly : " It is
just as well. It comes now when I have a
few days of rest, and time to think things
over. You must not look on this as an unmitigated
blow, Marjory. After all, though
I did hope too much, it was not all hope, by
any means ! Now, if you'll give me my desk,
I'll write to Mr. Harding."

'' Shall not I try just once more ? "

'' Another publisher ? No, Marjory, no.
There would only be another long suspense ;
and I could not stand it. Both these publishers
are just and kind, you know, as well
as wise ; don't you remember what we heard
of them ? I suspect you want more practice

to succeed in such an over-stocked market.
After all, there's nothing so very wonderful
in a young girl of nineteen's not succeeding
all at once, like a genius in a novel ! The
wonder would be the other way. I'm
afraid I forgot your age : you were so sanguine,"
he added, smiling again.

'what will Lina say?" cried Marjory,
hardly conscious that she spoke aloud.

"I don't know," said Gerald. "I must
think, — I have a very great deal to think
about."

As he spoke, he was opening his desk,
which Marjory had placed beside him. He
took out blotting-book and paper, and, with
a steady hand, addressed an envelope to Mr.
Harding.

The sight was too much for Marjory's fortitude.
She turned to leave him.

*' Marjory ! " said Gerald, as she was going
away.

«' Yes ? "

Don't lose heart, dear — and don't give
up your work. Perhaps it will thrive all the
better if you do it for its own sake, instead
of for mine. You may be a great author
yet. Who knows ? " he said smilingly.

'*I don't care to be a great author," said
Marjory, sick at heart : " I wanted only to
help you."

She shut the door without another look at
him ; and went away alone.

END OP VOL. II.

WTXIK i.ND sons, fBIKtEES, G&BA.T QtEBy STSEBT, t.OIfDO:f.

3 0112 041680148

i i i

^ I i

I I

(J i

OF THE
UN IVLR.5ITY
or ILLINOIS

8 as
cGasam

V.3

A STUDY.
IN THREE VOLUMES.

BY

THE AUTHOR OF "JAMES GORDON'S WIFE."

Do not fear to hope ! Can poet's brain
More than the father's heart rich good invent ?
* * * * ^

Be bounteous in thy faith, for not misspent
Is confidence unto the Father lent.

George Macdonald.

VOLUME III.

LONDON :

WYMAN & SONS, 74-75, GREAT QUEEN STREET,

lincoln's-inn fields,

1880.

ALL BIGHTS Reserved.

Marjory.

CHAPTER I.

my own Lord,
What is it we must do ^
Is it, then, all untrue ?"

Arthur H. Clough.

I CANNOT bear it — I cannot bear it," cried
Marjory, throwing herself upon her bed.

I cannot bear it," she repeated aloud —
that vain cry so often uttered by young hearts.
It went out disregarded into the summer
air ; and found nothing to soothe or stay it.
As Gerald said, she must accept the fact.
The fact that her hope had failed. That her
prayer had been refused. That she could
not help him. That he must continue plodding
here, that gifted spirit fettered, — for
how long ? who could tell. It would have
been better, she thought now, that Mr.
Harding's offer had not come. It had but
served to brighten a mirage which had seemed

VOL. III. B

reality. Now that the mirage had faded,
what was the world to her ?

What was the world ? Had she ever truly
known it ? or had she seen it, all her life,
through her own colouring ? She had known
trials before — outward trials ; poverty, and
privation. But these things had not disturbed
her confidence that the universe was
ruled by love. Now an avalanche had overwhelmed
all to which she had clung. She
knew no longer what to believe ; or where to
turn.

Hugh Vivian had smiled at her credulity
in building literal hopes upon prayer ; and
she had prayed the more, that thus his error
might be proved to him. But now — had he
been right ? What did those words of promise
mean ? They must mean something, if worthy
of credence at all; something definite, dependable.
If, as some said, they could be
explained away into some misty emptiness of
metaphor, where was their use ? If they
were not to be relied upon in the practical
life of this world, the daily life where help
and guidance are so sorely needed, why were
they spoken ? Could a Saviour delude us
so ? Or were they a cruel fable, of human
invention ? was the Bible a merely human

composition, a tissue of lying philosophies ?
Marjory's whole soul cried out against the
possibility ; and yet — where was God — the
God in whom she had trusted ? It was as
though God did not care ; as if He had left
them to themselves : — Gerald's whole life —
her anxious toil — Hugh Vivian, and all he had
valued. As she lay in tearless anguish,
looking mechanically towards the sky, she
realized suddenly, with awful force, as a fact,
all the sorrow, pain, care, sin, of this mysterious
world. And God could help it all, if
so He willed 1 for He is omnipotent. As this
thought pierced her mind, she almost wondered
that some voice from the world of
spirits did not answer it. She raised her
head ; but all was silence in those far blue
heights. Hearts break, reasons give way,
souls go on to destruction : and still silence !
A kind of terror came over Marjory : terror
of life, of fate.

She remembered all that she had learned,
of " all for the best," and so forth. But this
trouble seemed all for the worst. The whole
purpose of Gerald's existence seemed to be
thwarted ; his powers wasted, his work shut
up out of his reach. All his life he had been
disappointed. He had not rebelled ; he had
B 2

nerved himself, shouldered his burden, and
struggled on : and yet all things were against
him.

And how could Hugh Vivian's sorrows befor
the best ? His whole nature had suffered ;
he had lost hope, faith, love ; and none interfered.
And herself — was it for the best
that her acceptance of Christ's words should
end in doubt and fear ? Was she in a better
or a worse frame of mind now, than this time
last year, when she had cheered Gerald, and
encouraged him to trust in God ?

No — she could not understand ; she could
not see. She was alone in thick darkness.
Now she understood, as never before, Hugh
Vivian's experiences. It had been easy
enough, he told her, to preach and theorize.
Now her turn had come. God had not helped
him, he said : God was not helping her.

Then followed wild rebellion. Why was
the world thus ? If Gerald had not been
within hearing, she would have wailed and
moaned aloud. It was hard, it was terrible.
She tried to pray; but no comfort came.
She did not know how to pray to this inflexible
God ! He could not really love the
world, she thought : or how could he leave
it so ?

Until now, she had had no notion of the
depths of her own nature. She found in herself
capacities of hell, of which she had never
dreamed. After all, she thought, the happiest
way might be to let everything go ; to believe
in nothing, hope nothing, fear nothing, and do
the best one can for oneself. Presently she rose
and went back to the sitting-room, and rang
for tea, as though nothing had happened ;
but all the while her warm life and hope and
faith seemed to have turned into a cold and
heavy stone, dragging down her heart.

Gerald, meanwhile, was very silent, still
with that strange, fixed look. Later, when
all was quiet, Marjory perceived that he had
fallen asleep. Seen in repose, his face seemed
very wan and thin ; his stern command of it
relaxed ; that stone within her grew colder,
as she marked the careworn lines of his
mouth. Presently his countenance brightened
; he was evidently dreaming. He
smiled, and murmured some word which
sounded like " Wonderful ! " Awakened by
his own voice, his eyes opened, full of a
blessed peace ; he looked dreamily round ;
then the peace faded, as a glow fades on a
landscape, and the resolute fixedness returned.

Gerald ! what were you dreaming ? "

I thought I was at Venice. A passage
which I read once, and have never forgotten,
shaped itself into a vision. This passage said
that ' an all-pervading presence of light
and ' a suffusion of rich colour glowing
through the deepest shadows,' were ' the
very life and soul of Venice.' I saw the
light, and I saw the colour — a sunset glowing
on the water, gondolas floating slowly, a
vine-tree climbing round an ancient archway,
a great hall, golden in the evening rays, hung
with Titian's pictures. Our disappointment
seemed like a dream ; all my hard work was
over : I stood in the hall with Mr. Harding,
and he said — 'Here we will learn the secrets
of the great master ! ' "

'' It is a great mystery, Gerald."

"What?"

That life is so against you : I mean, not
looking at second causes, but at Providence.
Why IS it?— 'Why?"

We may say ' Why,' for ever. These
things are beyond us. It is waste of time
and energy to dwell upon them."

'' But suppose one cannot help it ? "

You don't know what you can do till
you thy, Marjory," said Gerald, with rather a
wintry smile ; " I advise you to strive your

utmost to make up your mind to the
inevitable."

«' But how ? "

'' To begin, don't waste your strength in
railing at it. Complaints can do no good.
And don't invent bright visions, and mistake
them for truth."

'have I done that?"

I fear so ; and I blame myself for
encouraging you in it. I should have
remembered that long ago I had resolved to
give up castles in the air : — years and years
ago, when I left school."

When first you were sent to the bank ? "

'' Yes, I fought out the battle, and thought
I had conquered ; but the same delusions
crop up again in different forms. I shall be
more on the watch for them now. At that
time I spent one whole day alone in the
woods, and faced my future ; and I determined
— once and for ever, as I fancied — to
take life as it came, whether it came as I
would have it, or no."

You might determine ; but people cannot
crush out their individuality in that way."

''No, but they can keep it under. They
can submit. Looking at life as a whole, one
can't help seeing that there are bright lots

and dark lots. It seems appointed that certain
people should never succeed. Till I
talked to you last year at Rockswold, I felt
convinced that I was one of those."

He did not speak despairingly, or with
self-pity ; there was nothing unmanly or
mawkish in look or tone. On the contrary,
he had never, to Marjory's eye, seemed more
manly, more courageous.

'' But what a paralyzing creed!" she cried.

Not at all. It has never paralyzed me.
I have never been any less determined to do
my best, so far as Fortune would let me.
But I believe that the truest wisdom lies in
calm acceptance of one's fate — not turning
away and repining, like a spoilt child, but
facing it like a man."

'' But you would escape such a fate if sou
could ? "

If I could ! " repeated Gerald, a little
impatiently. A momentary fire flashed in his
gray eye, but it was as speedily quenched. —
I cannot : and that is enough. It is those
ifs ' that make it so unbearable. I have
returned to my old conviction, that life is not
to be a success for me. If I should find the
contrary, I shall be too glad to own the
mistake 1 But I have made up my mind to

the worst again; and I have done with
dreams."

His tone was cold ; but a slight, a very
slight, quiver of his lip did not escape Marjory.
She felt that she could not rest without
knowing more.

Gerald," she said, timidly, "Don't answer
if you would rather not : but I should
like to know — Will this have any effect on
your engagement ? "

He was silent for a minute, shading his
face with his hand.

'' I am not sure," he said at last : " That
must depend on circumstances. It may be
I can't count upon it — but it may be, that
I shall find other means, more certain, of
getting sooner free from the debt. Perhaps
your friend Vivian might find me a little
work in the way of illustrating books or
magazines."

I am sure he will, if he can. Only he
is going away."

Yes, but if he could get me a start, that
might open the way for more. And I might
hit upon one or two other ways of turning an
honest penny in my evenings. Altogether,
I don't despair of shortening my payments
by a couple of years."

"Well," said Marjory; for he had paused
suddenly.

Well ! if Mr. Harding should not have
forgotten me by then, I might yet win some
sort of footing. I could never be a great
artist, without travel or cultivation ; but I
might make enough to keep the pot boiling,
as they say."

'' And the point is, whether you and Lina
think all this sufficient certainty to wait
for?"

He paused again.

The point is," — he returned, his tone
very low and firm — '' whether she loves me
enough to make it worth her waiting."

Marjory knew not how to answer. She
had never felt more strongly that Gerald's
ideal was scarcely less of a dream, than the
success of her own story had been. He
waited for a reply ; but, when none came ;
'' I shall find out some day," he said, in the
same low tone : " Don't mention this anymore,
Marjory. I shall find out."

CHAPTER II.

If e'er, when faith had fall'ii asleep,
I heard a voice, ' Believe no more ;'
And heard an ever-breaking shore
That tumbled in the godless deep ;

"A warmth within the breast would melt
The freezing reason's colder part,
And, like a man in wrath, the heart
Stood up, and answered, ' I have felt.' "

Tennyson.

So long as thou doest well unto thyself,
men shall speak well of thee." Marjory's
hopefulness had inspired even Lina with corresponding
expectation. But now, when informed
of the failure, she expressed no surprise,
rather censuring the presumption of
building hopes upon so insecure a basis.

'' Your usual way, you know, dear Marjory
! jumping at conclusions. You would
be less disappointed, had you remembered
that possibilities are not certainties."

'' But, Lina, you yourself encouraged me !
and I thought the more of that, because you
are really qualified to judge."

"Well, there was certainly promise in your
story ; but so, I dare say, there may be in
many other writings whose authors come to
nothing. Just think of the competition in
the literary world ! And competition proves
one's level."

Marjory felt too utterly cast down to reply.
She bore in silence the half contemptuous
verdict.

Was Lina disappointed likewise ? Marjory
could not tell ; she doubted whether
Gerald could tell, either. He made no further
confidences ; and, only when all was
settled, did she discover that he had written
to Hugh Vivian, receiving first a kind answer,
and shortly afterwards an order for
illustrations. The sum offered appeared to
Marjory poor payment for so much labour ;
but Gerald made no objection.

"Every little helps," he said: ''I must
creep before I can fly."

His visible feeling, that he had now no resource
beyond his own unaided exertions,
vexed her to the heart. But this also she
bore in silence.

It was the harder to bear, since exertion was
evidently an efibrt to him. He never complained
; and to guess how much he suffered

was not easy; but that lie did suffer continually,
Marjory felt certain. Now and then, as day
followed day, and yet there was no relief, he
would express a languid doubt as to whether
Mr. Robinson understood his case : but he
said nothing further. Only he obeyed every
direction with a care in itself significant,
consenting without remonstrance to sit hour
after hour, his knee supported on the sofa ;
an involuntary contraction of his brow
showed movement to be painful.

One evening the bank manager called upon
him ; and, from their conversation, Marjory
learned that he had written to request employment
at home. For the present the
request was granted ; and thenceforth he
was laboriously occupied during the greater
part of the day. How long such an arrangement
could continue, Marjory dared not
question. Surely, surely, it would not belong
needful !

Meanwhile Mr. Robinson did not commit
himself to any positive verdict. He paid
frequent visits, short and cheerful, leaving a
cheerful impression : but when this had
faded nothing solid remained. To Marjory's
questions he always replied : " We must
have patience;" "These cases cannot be

hurried ; " or, *' Keep up his strength, if you
please." She had as yet no definite understanding
of the ailment — beyond the fact,
reiterated by Mr. Robinson, that there was
some slight injury to the joint."

In these days Gerald saw but little of
Lina. He could no longer in the evenings,
after hurrying through his tea, stride away to
Albion Square ; and perhaps it was more
seemly that Lina should not too often visit
him. This, however, was not her excuse
to Marjory — or to Gerald himself. To them
she pleaded her avocations at St. Philip's ;
the daily services, with additional ones on
Wednesday and Friday, — the orphanage,
the day and night schools, the decorations
and altar-vases, — besides church needlework,
cassocks to be made or mended, altar-linen,
and the like. Undoubtedly she had abundance
of such work on her hands ; the question
was, whether a part of it could not be equally
well done by some one else. Lina herself
thought not.

She had besides to superintend Mrs. Peele,
and the household generally, to attend Philharmonic
practices, to pay calls, and accept
invitations — conferring thereby honour and
benefit of which she would have been sorry

to deprive lier acquaintance ! Altogether but
little space in her life was left for her betrothed
husband, now that he could no longer
make it for himself. She had no time to
cheer his imprisonment, or to dispel his
dreary thoughts — drearier from loneliness
and weakness. Gerald would not for the
world have hindered her in any duty ; it was
not at first that he questioned how much of
her routine came from duty, how much from
something else. Only every day and every
night he felt it less bearable to lie craving
for her, dreaming of her, tormented by doubts
concerning her and their prospects.

Meanwhile the glorious summer had expanded
into fulness of beauty. Again, as
last year, in the long evenings, Heathcroft was
thronged ; boats full of youths and maidens
sped up and down the river ; the toilers of
the great city found sweet refreshment, after
the heat of the day, upon its banks. Marjory
was to have spent her summer holiday at
Eockswold ; but when the time arrived Gerald
was still confined to the sofa ; Mr. Robinson
was still repeating that these cases required
patience. She could not leave him : and
would not if she could.

As at Christmas, Mrs. Myers and Miss

Pilkington departed with their pupils ; and
the two houses were once more very quiet.
The good ladies left Marjory carte-blanche to
read their books, gather their roses, and make
free use in every way of their possessions.
Others were also kind, sending fruit and
similar delicacies ; and carriages were offered
for Gerald, He did drive out once ; but
with such increase of pain, that the experiment
was not again attempted. Gradually,
the utmost that he could do was to get out
into the strip of walled garden behind the
house ; but the exertion of dragging himself
up and down stairs seemed to counteract the
benefit of the air. One evening the pain
which followed was so violent, that he would
not risk its repetition. After this Marjory
went out, in the garden, as beyond it, alone.
Yet he would not hear himself called ill.
The '' strain " was exceptionally troublesome;
but it was only, he said, the confinement and
the lack of fresh air which made him weak
and out of sorts. Lina appeared to be of
the same opinion ; at all events, she was not
anxious, or fretted in any way by his condition.
In her occasional visits, she seemed
no less immovable than ever. " How are you
to-day, Gerald?" she would say with her

usual serenity ; and sit composedly down to
chat like any ordinary acquaintance.

And meanwhile, Gerald's gray eyes would
be fixed on her with a gaze which had in it a
whole world beyond her powers. After she
was gone, he would seem still to see her,
looking silently towards the window, as if
she had flown from the chair vacant by his
sofa, to the cathedral roof. When she was
long absent, he would write to her. Marjory
would have given a great deal to read those
letters ; they would have told her infinitely
more than they told Lina.

So the summer days went on. In the
evenings, while Gerald worked at his illustrations,
Marjory sang and played. All her
heart found vent in that music ; she was not
of his silent nature, — a vent of some kind
she must have. Those songs were voices
crying in vague language ; some were French
voices, Italian voices, German voices, — the
deepest these last. How wonderful that they
spoke for Marjory, that they uttered her
soul ! she would sing on, forgetting where
she was, almost what she was ; and Gerald
would not notice how time was going. Only
at last the twilight would grow dimmer ; and
a star would twinkle out above the cathedral

VOL. III.

tower. And then lie would stop, wish a
craving, not all painful, in her heart.

The beauty of a summer's evening has in
it something mysterious, suggesting infinite
possibilities. We reach vaguely towards
them, but they cannot be grasped — or even
comprehended : yet, as we turn away, the
work-a-day world seems cold. Often, on
these special evenings, Marjory's young heartfelt
like a bird imprisoned within her. At
last, on one of them, when Lina was with
Gerald, she took some paper, and began to
write once more : hardly, at first, knowing
what she wrote. But by degrees it shaped
itself; and thenceforth, frequently, she sought
the same relief. Soon a new story grew
beneath her hand, reflecting her own experiences.
All those terrible doubts and fears
flowed out in it. This time she did not
dream of publication or success : she wrote
because her heart was full.

One morning, Gerald had retired to his
own room to avoid the sun which, before
mid-day, shone too powerfully upon his sofa ;
and she, in her turn alone, was sewing at a
set of new shirts for him, when Priscilla
announced " Mr. Vivian."

Marjory's first glimpse of him revealed a

deepening of the old bitterness. He looked
careworn, thin, and sick of all things : far
more so, than when she had seen him last.
But his brown face flushed a little, his eyes
flashed with sudden brightening, as they met
hers.

'' I did not expect to see you at this time!"

You forget that these are my holidays.
Do you want Gerald ? "

'* I have some instructions for his pictures,"
replied Hugh, drawing a note from his 
: '* I hope he is better, as I don't
find him here ? "

Marjory shook her head.

'* He is working in his own room. Til tell
him."

She returned almost instantly, saying that
Gerald would be thankful if Mr. Vivian
could wait a little while. Then she took up
her shirt again, and hemmed busily.

He has some pressing work this morning,"
she said, to break the silence, while
Hugh Vivian sat watching, as in a dream,

'' I think his pluck is wonderful. I suppose
he is patient by nature ? "

I don't know. That hardly describes
him. I think it is more that, for so many
years, he has forced himself to be patient."
c 2

*' And now lie finds it easy ? "

I don't know," repeated Marjory : " He
is very silent. He has had trouble and disappointment
all his life." She bit her lip to
check the rising tears.

Have your prayers been heard yet ? "
said Hugh suddenly.

Was it he, the Mr. Hugh of old, or a
scoffing demon, who spoke ? The very tone
seemed in itself to say : '' Where is now thy
God ? *' Yet something in Marjory's own
heart echoed it. She could not look up and
answer him, as she had done before. This
was the time of which he had spoken, some
months ago — a time when all foundations
seemed to be overturned. She did not look
at him directly; she turned towards the
window. There was the silent sky, — so blue
and hard.

Ah, your turn has come now ! " said
Hugh.

Then she did look. His eyes were reckless,
mocking.

Are you yourself? " said Marjory, involuntarily
: " I can hardly believe it."

'' What self do you mean ? The self of
that old dream at Thorne ? — or the one you
have known lately ? They are two."

^' I could almost think so, now," said Marjory.
'' But I will not. The old self— that
kind, happy, pleasant nature — you try your
best to kill it ; but it is not dead."

Yes, it is," he said, almost rudely : *' I
am altogether another man from the fool you
knew. I have learned wisdom — in a hard
enough school."

Is despair wisdom ? " said Marjory.

He went on as if he had not heard.

'' One wouldn't wonder so much, perhaps,
at a selfish young dog, such as I was, having
to suffer. But a fellow like your brother —
whose life has been perfect ! And you ! " he
added, with a sudden change of tone —
'you!"

He rose, and walked to the window.

'' Yes, if prayer had any reality, yours
must have been heard," he said moodily.

A battle was fighting itself out in Marjory's
heart. She was thinking of the triumph, the
blessing to him, which she had anticipated,
when she should tell him, that she, so young
and crude, had succeeded — of this, and of her
prayer for him, of so many years. Blackness
of darkness seemed around her. But her
glance fell upon that bitter and hopeless face.
She had wished to raise him, — and should

lie sink him instead ? For his sake she
would gather courage.

'' Mr. Hugh ! "

He smiled faintly.

'' That old name I " he said : '' I had half
forgotten it."

*' I forgot, too — Mr. Vivian, I meant. — Will
you listen for one moment ? "

For any number of moments."

It is quite true that my prayers seem not
to have been heard. I — I had better confess
it : my plan has failed."

*'Yes!"said he, gently, too delicate to
question, but comprehending at once, as she
saw.

'' I have disappointed Gerald, as well as
myself. It is very painful."

She paused, to choke down a sob.

'' And you had entire faith," he said.
'' You took those promises literally — that
according to your faith so it should be : and
found them a mockery."

''I cannot understand it," said Marjory;
But it IS mystery, not mockery. I cannot
understand. But I loll go on tripping to
believes

This was all she could truthfully say ;
and hitherto she had not been able even

to say this. It was the fear of adding
to his despair that strengthened
her.

Yes — for his sake, she would go on trying:
to believe.

CHAPTER III.

Oh for a draught of vintage, that hath been

Cool'd a long age in the deep-delved earth,

Tasting of Flora and the country green,

Dance, and Provencal song, and sunburnt mirth I
# * * *

That I might drink, and leave the world unseen,
And with thee fade away into the forest dim :

Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget

"What thou among the leaves hast never known."

Keats.

'^ If I had you out at Thorne, sir, begging
your pardon, I think I could do you more
good than doctors. Miss Stanhope here
will remember how clever her ladyship
was, in herbs and them. 'Tis wonderful
what healing the Almighty has put in the
fields and lanes about our feet, if we will
just take pains to seek it ! "

Thus Bellhouse : who had called to see
Marjory, after a morning's shopping in the
town.

And the old place, ma'am, is looking

lovely. There's nothing like the country,
sir ! and upon times I think there's no
country like the country about Thorne. Her
ladyship's garden — it is a picture ; all the
roses out ! I don't know when her Gloire
de Dijon in especial — you've not forgot it,
Miss Stanhope, my dear ? — has come to such
splendour. And the birds do sing beautiful
of evenings, in the grove. You'll remember
the thrushes, ma'am, and the wood-pigeons,
no doubt."

"Don't talk of it any more, Mrs. Bell-house,"
said Gerald, " or you will start me
off forthwith ; and the walk would hardly
improve my strain."

*'No, sir — and I'm hindering your writings,
too. But if you should find yourself a little
weakly, when you get about again, and feel
a fancy for country air, I know of a good
lodging in Thorne village; and not out of
the way expensive, neither."

'i'm afraid it is more than a strain. Bell-house,"
said Marjory, when she had taken
her old friend away for a quiet talk.

You're not anxious about him, ma'am, I
hope?"

Yes, I am ; very anxious. I may tell
you ; I have had no one to tell anything of,

lately. It is six weeks since Ms knee was
hurt ; and he is worse, not better. I know
he is worse, though he tries to hide it.
Bellhouse, isn't there some dangerous complaint
which comes in the knee ? "

You're not fretting yourself, thinking of
that. Miss Stanhope, my dear ? " said the
old servant, tenderly. Her motherly heart
yearned over the girl, in whose face she had
quickly read the signs of trouble.

'but isn't there ? I would rather
know. I have not dared to ask any one,
before."

I knew a young boy, many years
ago, who had a white swelling, my dear.
But he was weakly from birth ; and
it was a mercy, every one said, when the
Almighty took him. Your brother's not
like him. Miss Stanhope, my dear."

We won't talk of this any more," cried
Marjory.

She left the subject, resolutely.

And everything is going on well at
Thorne?"

*' Yes, ma'am. It's very quiet, — but allas
natural as ever ; and often of an afternoon,
when I am sewing, it seems as if they was
only gone out, and I should hear their voices

presently in the passage. I sit in that old
room you remember, ma'am, and live things
over again, like reading an old story. And
many lessons I learn so, which I missed at
the time. Yes — it will be a sore trial to
leave the old place ; but I must make up my
mind to it."

Why ? What has happened ? "

Mr. Crawford wrote word, ma'am, a week
ago, that the estate was put up for sale, and
I must hold myself in readiness to show the
house, at any time required. When I remember
Copelandss, Miss Stanhope, my dear,
my heart sinks within me. To be sure, Mr.
Crawford did say, when he was over, that
he would never sell the place but to those
who would know how to value it ; but no
one can say how money might tempt him !
It's a pity but he could be content to live
there, himself. Her ladyship is sorely missed
in the village ; a squire's family would be
welcomed by one and all."

To think of Thorne for sale ! " said
Marjory, musingly. It seemed another mark
of the dreariness of the world.

Does Mr. Vivian know ? "

"Yes, he knows — poor young gentleman !
He was over the other day, and he said he

supposed he must find some other place for
his pictures — those her ladyship left to him,
ma'am. I thought he seemed thin and worn ;
my heart grieved for him, when I remembered
the petted boy he used to be. Why, Miss
Stanhope, my dear, if he but scratched his
finger, Mrs. Vivian was all anxiety ! and
every wish he had, be it costly or cheap, it
must be satisfied to the minute. I fear he
don't look to the Almighty as he might ; and
he has no one else, now, to care for him.
He didn't say much about Thorne; but I
saw him leaning on the terrace wall, watching
the house, and thinking, ever such a
time!"

You know that he is going away himself?"


Yes, ma'am. I asked him if it was true,
and he said he was bound to go, — that he
hated it, but couldn't help himself. It struck
me. Miss Stanhope, my dear, to wonder if
there was a lady in the case ? I hope you
won't think me very bold for such fancies ;
the thought flashed into my mind, of a
sudden."

'' How hot it is ! " said Marjory, bending
fi:*om the window.

Yes, ma'am, a very sultry day — and.

begging your pardon, you're heating yourself
the more by leaning out in the sun. I wish
I could get you to Thorne, — you and your
brother. But, as I was saying — poor Mr.
Hugh, he has looked that wretched of late,
and reckless with it, as if he tried not to
care, and yet his heart was half broken ! He
always was a boy to crave after anything he
set his mind on. Whether it was a dog, ora
pony, or what not, he'd think of it night
and day. Partly his parents spoiled him sono
doubt, because he couldn't brood denial ;
and partly, too, if I don't mistake, that's
why the Almighty has seen fit to try him.
But I should be glad if he might be spared
any more. 'No one can tell what that proud
and masterful young spirit of his, Miss Stanhope,
has suffered ! "

No," said Marjory.

And it seemed to me, the other evening,
I saw a look on his face, uncommon like
what I remember long ago, when he was seton
anything, and — seldom enough — by some
mischance, couldn't have it. A deal more
hopeless than the old look, but yet the same
in kind ; and that, and the way he spoke,
set me wondering."

Does he often go over to Thorne ? "

'i've often heard of his being about the
park, and places, when I've not seen him
myself; and upon times he comes to the
house. Maybe he's fretting to think that
he will soon be no less of a stranger at Thorne
than at Copelandss. It will be a sore trial to
him, if Thorne is sold : he has known every
inch of the ground from his babyhood. I
remember, ma'am, as if it was yesterday,"
said the old servant, rambling from one topic
to another, " when Mr. Hugh was born : and
the grand doings over at Copelandss. It was
shortly after I married, when I was living in
Thorne village. Yes — that little house where
Bellhouse and me lived so happy, and where
my Jessie was born, — that is gone like the
rest — pulled down these three years. Else I
should have been very well content, if I was
turned out, to go back there."

All is vanish'd now, and fled —
Some are married — some are dead !"

The plaintive little song resounded in Marjory's
mind. Bellhouse was wiping away a
few patient tears ; when they were gone, she
looked out quietly, with her usual calm
gravity, over the river.

Perhaps Thorne may be bought by some

nice family who will be only too glad to keep
you."

'' I don't know, my dear ; some has a
great objection to old servants situated like
me — and I won't deny but with reason, — as
I myself have seen in former days, when
young brides have first come home, and suchlike.
Airs have been shown, and liberties
took, that I have been grieved to see, ma'am,
particular in respectable servants : but I
hope the Almighty's grace would keep me
back from that. Still, the family oughtn't
know but I should be so : or they themselves
oughtn't be such as I could bear to see in my
lady's old rooms, using her furniture and
picking her flowers. Oh, that would be a
bitter pill to me, Miss Stanhope, my dear !
Strangers couldn't be expected to reverence
her ; but I doubt I should be best away."

*' I wish I could save you this fresh trouble,
Bellhouse," said Marjory earnestly.

Thank you, my dear : You were always
pitiful, from a child. But I leave it with
the Almighty."

That strong and simple confidence in '' The
Almighty ! " no canting form of speech, but a
living truth. Somehow, when Bellhouse was
gone, Marjory no longer felt that doubt, to

her so terrible, of the very existence of the
God to whom she had prayed. To " walk in
darkness, and have no light;" and yet to
believe : — some such possibility dawned other.

In the evening, her thoughts found their
usual vent : she sat in her window, and
wrote. All the town was out of doors, after
the long day's heat; voices and footsteps,
and the splash of oars, came up from below.
Marjory longed to be walking with Gerald,
as in the happy evenings of last summer.
As she watched the river in the crimson light,
she thought of Paradise, and '' the river of
God," and wished that all were over, and
they safe there. When would they walk
again on earth together — she and the brother
whom she loved ?

Bellhouse's suggestion of a visit to Thorne
had taken a strange hold of Gerald's fancy.
By degrees it gathered all the strength of
a sick man's feverish craving. But, when
Marjory spoke of possibilities, he said he had
already been so troublesome to the bank,
that he felt it out of the question to ask fora
holiday, before his time. If he lost his

situation, what would become of him and

He stopped short, with a heavy sigh : most
painful to Marjory.

A season of dry and sultry weather had
set in, like the Branksome summer, years ago.
All who were able went off to the sea or
other seasonable resorts ; those too busy or
too poor to leave the town, panted and endured.
The streets seemed baked to scorching
; every one longed for the evenings, when
at least the sun went down : but earth and
air were often so thoroughly heated, that
even these were oppressive. To look at the
river was to desire to plunge into its dark
depths ; and Marjory thought with envy of
Kingsley's "Water Babies." Below her
windows, however, it had become shallow,
and was less refreshing than elsewhere ; and
boats ran aground, and boys waded from
shore to shore.

But this limited tract was all that Gerald
could see of it, or feel of the cool air from its
waters. For him there was no escape from the
imprisoning house. He bore it very patiently,
until the Peeles departed to Aberystwith.
Lina said that she was too busy to remain from
home beyond a fortnight ; but that fortnight
seemed in anticipation an eternity to Gerald !

I suppose I shall get through it somehow,"
he said drearily, as she sat, on the
last evening, beside his sofa.

VOL. III. D

Oh, yes ; it will pass in due time. You
used not to be so impatient ! "

I don't know. Perhaps I was much the
same : only I could keep it under. I suppose
this long confinement tries my nerves ;
and you are my one gleam of brightness."

Marjory, at the other end of the room,
looked at him, and then at Lina, with swelling
breast. If she had been Lina, could
she have borne to leave him, to add to his
trial ? He looked very thin to-night, with a
brightness in his eye, a fever on his cheek,
which troubled Marjory. The physical pain
alone, which her watchfulness knew to be
incessant, — how would his constitution bear
it, if it went on ?

'' Well, I shall hope to find you better
when I return," said Lina ; " perhaps you
will be at the station to meet us."

'' I don't know ; a month ago, I should
have said. Of course : but nothing moves
this aching. What a log I am ! To think
I can't see you off tomorrow ! — You're not
going ? "

I have to look in at the orphanage," said
Lina, drawing on her gloves imperturbably,
with a sweet smile.

I wish I were an orphan — in the

hospital ! Do stay just ten minutes — only
ten minutes ! I'll look at my watch."

Marjory was discreetly leaving the room,
and heard no more ; but it could not have
been two minutes later, when the door again
opened and closed, and she heard Lina's step
on the stairs.

'' Oh, Lina ! You are really going so
soon f

My dear Marjory, it would be foolish to
encourage Gerald in the habit of such constant
intercourse. It cannot go on through
all our long engagement ; and it is false
kindness. My duties must not depend on
impulse : I should soon lose all method."

"You don't realize what it is to him to lie
there all day; and he listens so for your step ! "

Every one is ill sometimes, dear ; and
Gerald is not a child. I shall be late, as it
is, at the orphanage. Good-bye.'^

She kissed Marjory, smiled another sweet
smile, and went gracefully away. Gerald,
painful though movement was to him, had
dragged himself to the window."

'' Let's see, — what did old John of Gaunt
grant to Sir Roger Burgoyne ? " — he said,
with a strange smile, when the vision was
gone by :

D 2

All Sutton and Cotton,
Until the world's rotten.'

The world's rotten already, I think."

'' I hope not ! " cried Marjory.

Perhaps only my corner of it," said
Gerald.

The next morning she found him, with
Bradshaw's map spread open, studying the
route to Aberystwith.

"What a log I am!" he repeated, as
Marjory poured out his tea; "or, rather, I'm
shut up in one. My mind is all alive, and
craving to be out and away : and my body is
a log."

"You will forget all this, when you are
better."

When ! " re-echoed Gerald.

He was very silent during breakfast ; but
afterwards he plodded as usual through his
day's work. In the evening, when work
was over, he leaned wearily back against the
sofa cushions. Upon his face was written
heartache, and anxious thought.

"You are tired, Gerald," said Marjory,
gently smoothing the fair hair from the careworn
young brow. He turned his head restlessly
away.

Tired ! Yes — tired and sick, of the

world and everything in it. Things were
bad enough before, Marjory ; but at any rate
I wasn't a log."

How that horrible word haunts you ! "

"I have horrible dreams, sometimes. I
dreamed last night that I vas a cripple for
life."

'' Oh, Gerald ! — it was nothing but a
dream."

I hope so. After all, Flaxman

But no, that's a delusion. What time is it,
Marjory ? "

The cathedral clock was striking.

*' Only eight ! How this day has dragged !
Fourteen more, — to say nothing of the
nights."

Good times, and bad times, and all times
pass over," quoted Marjory, as cheerily as
she was able.

All times," repeated Gerald, with another
strange smile : " Lifetimes amongst the rest.
But, if a fortnight seem so unendurable, what
of a life ? "

Why will you worry yourself with
fancies ? "

'' I am a coward," he said suddenly :
Marjory, are you going to play ? Just hand
me that book at your elbow." And while

she strove by her music to charm him back
to peace, he read steadily, as since morning
he had worked steadily. The habit, strengthened
by necessity, of self-command, had
imparted to him, throughout the past weeks,
a fortitude which filled her with wonder.
But now, from day to day, during Lina's
absence, she saw that he was failing. Whether
the excitement of those visits — few and short
though they were — and their anticipation,
had helped to sustain him ; or whether he
were harassed by thoughts in connection
with her, Marjory could not tell ; but a
constant fever, physical and mental, consumed
him. The hot weather seemed intolerable to
him ; his work was performed amid painful
pauses for rest, which yet was not rest.

Lower and lower into the depths, Marjory
felt herself sinking. She was alone; Gerald's
silence was one of her trials ; if only he
would tell her of his mind, she thought, she
could bear all things better. Or if she could
talk to him ! He had always been kind,
sympathising as any woman, in all that
troubled her ; but she would not add to his
present misery by speaking of her own share.
Neither would she write gloomily to Rocks-wold.
Her uncle was fully occupied by

parish cares, and her aunt was always
delicate. She was alone : she must bear on
alone, as best she could.

She too, in this scorching weather, pined
for the country. If not sick in body like
Gerald, she was sick at heart ; and in the
country, as she was well aware, was healing.
The breeze gently stirring in shady heights ;
the singing of brooks — such as the brook at
Thorne ; bees with their soothing hum ; the
meadows rising and falling in daisies knolls ;
the fertile hedgerows ; the creatures in field
and wood : she thought of all with longing
which none can feel, who do not know and
love them.

There was a song which she often sang
on these close evenings : the same which
had been sung by Lina, a year before, at
Mrs. Carberry's party, and to which she had
seen Hugh Vivian listen with that intensity
of remembrance. And Gerald in his turn
would listen, half closing his book, and looking
away, as if he saw the place ; and then he
would beg for it again, — Marjory cared not
how often.

O forest green and fair !
pine-trees waving high !

"Marjory, would you get me my sketching-block
?

Lulled by many a murmuring stream,
Through the long bright hours to dream —

Oil, if we could be there, at this moment,
on that ' bank of moss ! ' Fancy the forest
darkening all around, and the pine-trees
above : care would seem light — one would
come back able to bear it. lever mind ! —
drawing it is next best. Go on, Marjory."

And for a while he was happy, listening,
and embodying that to which he listened,
until it seemed to him that he was almost
there. But, afterwards, the small sitting-room,
pent about by houses, seemed the closer.

One evening, when he had extra work, and
wished to be quiet, Marjory strolled out into
the fields. She did not fancy the Heathcrofb
throngs, and turned in the opposite direction
— into those meadows where, on New
Year's Eve, she had encountered Mr. Vivian.
The scene so recalled their conversation, that
it seemed only natural when once again she
found him at her side.

'' You don't generally walk so slowly," he
said ; '' I calculated that I should overtake
you about the end of that next field. This

is the third evening I have been watching
about for you ; I am glad I have succeeded
at last."

Why did you not come to the house ?
I am in most of the day."

Yes, but I wanted to see you alone. I
have a great favour to ask of you."

You raise my curiosity," said Marjory.

'well, then, — I have been thinking of
what you told me a week or two ago ; and
I want to know if you will let me help you."

In what way ? "

In the plan you hoped to carry out,
which you said had failed. I use ambiguous
language, for fear of offence ; but you know
that I know that you know that I know
what you meant."

Mr. Vivian, how absurd you are ! " said
Marjory, smiling in spite of herself.

You see we are old friends : nine years
ago, I am sure you would not have minded
coming to me if I could help you through
any scrape. Now this is not a scrape, only
a difficulty ; and you ought not to give way
to such pride."

'you must speak more plainly," said
Marjory.

You give me leave ? Then, to put it

as plainly as possible, you cannot publish
your book. Well, you fought shy of me
before ; but I've had a good bit of experience
in these ways, and I believe I could give
you a hint. Only, to make this possible,
you must show me the story."

Marjory's colour came and went like a
flickering flame ; she had all the first shyness
of a young author ; but she thought
of Gerald — remembered the critic's power —
and hesitated.

'^ How could that hurt you in any way ? "
he went on. '' I will breathe no word of
it to any one. Do believe me. I have no
object but to help you."

*' What would you do when you had read it?"

I should see at a glance, without reading
every part of it, whether it could be made
marketable, and how ; and afterwards, if
you AYOuld let me, I would find a publisher."

'' I cannot afibrd to throw away such
help," said Marjory, after a pause. " There
is another story, much shorter than the
first, which I have been writing lately. It
is not finished, but it will do for a specimen ;
and I think it is the better of the two. If you
see either, it ought to be the best : such a
critic as you ! " she added with some malice.

You will never forgive me for being, a
critic ! Well, it is settled, then ? I will call
at your door tomorrow, or perhaps to-night,
for the manuscript."

'' You are very kind," said Marjory.

Kind, am I ? — No ! the kindness is on
your side."

She blushed hotly; and, to change the
subject, proceeded, after a somewhat awkward
pause, to talk of Thorne.

'' I should think that fellow Crawford
must be mad," said Hugh ; *' But to him, I
suppose, it is only a dull old piece of rustication."


'' To me it has seemed a Paradise on
earth ! "

'' And it might seem something not far
from that, if I had it now, to me. I did not
feel this always, though," he said, musingly ;
'you know the old song ?

When all the world is young, lad —

And all the trees are green —
And every goose a swan, lad,

And every lass a queen —
Then hey for boot and horse, lad,

And round the world away !
Young blood must have its course, lad.

And every dog his day."

That was just like me in those days when
you saw me at Thome."

'' Do you know I have often thought of you
when I sang it?" said Marjory. As she
spoke, she had a vision of the gay young soldier,
riding so carelessly on his beautiful
chestnut, down the shady lane. And Jessie !
she, too, was in that vision.

'' Every goose a swan, lad — And every lassa
queen ! " he repeated. Could he bethinking
of Jessie ? " Yes, that was the way with
me, then. I should have thought it hard
lines indeed to be confined to Thorne, or to
Copelandss either ! How strangely times
bring one down ! "

In the same dreamy manner he went on
with the other verse : —

When all the world is old, lad —

And all the trees are brown —
And all the sport is stale, lad —

And all the wheels run down :
Creep home and take thy place there,

The maimed and halt among —
God grant you find one face there

You loved when all was young !"

As he said the last words, he glanced at
Marjory.

'' It would be difficult to find any face so

unchanged as yours," lie said, as if half
unconsciously ; " But the home is gone." ■

'you may have one again, some day,"
said Marjory, with a passionate longing to
comfort him.

It will have to drop from the skies, then !
I can make enough for what are called the
necessaries of life — life in lodgings ; and that
is about all. If I set to work at once to save
and screw, it might just keep me from the
parish in my old age."

Mr. Vivian ! "

'' I mean it literally. Then this criticism,
which makes me such a bugbear ! if I were
one of the regular clique, I might get a good
bit out of that. But then I can only do that
sort of thing by fits and starts. I can't
depend on myself enough to make a paying
trade of it."

I think it is wonderful that you made
anything of it, considering "

'* Considering my empty-headdress in
years past, you mean ? Yes, it is true that I
was terribly idle. I was never made to work ;
and I learned nothing that could be of use
afterwards. I should think there was never
a more helpless young fellow than I, when I
was first thrown loose on the world, with my
mother to support."

"I know very well low you must have
felt," said Marjory; *' I myself "

"Yes ? " said Hugh, attentively.

'rit seems selfish to trouble you in this
way with my own affairs. I was only going
to say that I know what it is to be anxious.
I am often anxious now about Gerald's bank-work.
The present arrangement cannot
last ; and yet he will not be able to go back."

You fear that he will have to give up his
situation ? "

'' I do fear it — at least, for a time."

Hugh meditated.

It will be only a small amount of help,"
he said ; " but still some. If this should
happen, and he should care for a little law
copying, I could put him in the way of it.
Perhaps he'll let me know."

You are too kind," Marjory exclaimed :
"We ought not to accept so much from

you."

There comes in your pride ! " said Hugh,
smiling ; " Not the dirty pride of scorning
the work — but another quite as real. It is
simply that I know a good fellow here, a
solicitor, who has not enough work for two
clerks, and yet more than his one clerk can
manage. He would be glad to hear of a clear

hand like your brother's ; and he is too much
of a gentleman to publish it among the Alton
gossips."

*' Though, as to that, I don't think we
should care," said Marjory ; '' Gerald and I
have long numbered ourselves among the
working-classes. I wish I could get him into
these fields," she added, somewhat irrelevantly.


'' He feels the heat very much ? "
'' That and the pain are wearing him out.
Sometimes our little room seems to me like
a prison, Mr. Vivian. It is far worse to see
another suffer, without power to help, than to
suffer oneself ! I long to get him away, and
give him all he craves for, and yet I cannot."
It is strange — I have noticed that you
seem to be now almost exactly circumstanced
as I was at this very time, or a little later,
seven years ago."

Seven years! were you at Bellingham?"
Yes," he said, his countenance shadowed
by some painful memory : "At Bullingham,
in lodgings, with my mother. All through
that summer she was ill, and in pain — agony
sometimes. She pined, as your brother does,
for country air ; and I longed to get her to
the sea. A little money was left to us ; and

I hoped it might be : but there was some
hitch — and we did not get the money. I got
it afterwards : too late."

And your mother — I remembered her —
she was like a queen. And she died at those
lodgings ! "

'' In the next winter. It will be seven
years in February. Yes : she died there."

"Oh, if my Gerald should die!" cried
Marjory.

The words broke from her in a passionate
sob; she felt that she must get away, by
herself, if she would escape a burst of
weeping.

Good-bye," she said hurriedly : " I can't
talk any more. I want to be alone."

It was wonderful, she thought afterwards
at the time she noticed nothing — how instantaneously
Hugh Vivian understood ! He
stood still, quite silent, and let her pass.
Five minutes later, when she had conquered
herself, she looked back ; but he was not insight.


CHAPTER TV.

*^ Conrad: How now? Who more than she, in faith
and practice, a living member of the communion of
saints ?" Charles Kingsley. (" Saint's Tragedy")

It was as though Major's anticipations had
carried with them their fulfilment. The very
day after her talk with Mr. Vivian, the
manager of the bank called again on Gerald, to
offer now, instead of later, the month's holiday
expected in October, adding, that should
its close find him still disabled, his post must
be otherwise filled.

The present holiday was a great relief; and
Marjory felt more hopeful; for Gerald now
consented to indulge his craving for the
country. An idea had come upon him that
country air was in fact the sole remedy he
required.

It will be a bore to break into my fund,"
he said ; " but this is a case of penny wise,
pound foolish."

The fund in question was the money laid
by from the sale of his illustrations, — a

VOL. III. E

limited sum enough, though increasing ; but
on the other hand, the Thorne lodgings
were, to town ideas, surprisingly cheap.
Mr. Eobinson pronounced the experiment to
be well worth a trial, and himself undertook
to superintend the difficulties of removal.


Mrs. Myers and Miss Pilkington had returned
; the holidays were almost over ; but
Marjory's share was extended by the kind
ladies. They, like Gerald, hoped great things
from the change ; and prophesied that he
would return " quite himself." Meanwhile
Lina, from Aberystwith, had proceeded to
stay an extra week with a friend, and Marjory
wondered at the equanimity with which
this was endured by Gerald, until she found
that he had written both to Lina and Mrs.
Peele, pressing them to join him at Thorne.
Mrs. Peele, who was still at Aberystwith, had
promised her consent conditionally on Lina's.
From Lina no answer had yet arrived.

I feel hardly any doubt of her coming,"
said Gerald : ''I wrote most urgently. I
told her all that depended upon this change.
The other day Robinson warned me against
worry, and said that rest of mind was more
important to me than medicine. I told her

this too, because I thought it would induce
her. She knows what would give me rest ! ""

I did not know Mr. Robinson had said
that. Oh, I hope she will consent ! "

I can't doubt it — I won't doubt it," said
Gerald : "If you had seen my letter, you
would not. If she cares for me, she will
come."

The last words were added after a pause,
and in a different tone. Marjory knew not
how to reply.

Now sing, Marjory — don't let us dwell
on anything disagreeable. I want to be
happy for once. I want to think about
Thorne."

So Marjory sang ; and Gerald listened,
and dreamed. His own expectation seemed
to be that the free air, combined with Lina's
presence, would act like magic ; that the
pain would cease, the fever pass away ; that
he would quickly gain strength, and roam
with Lina through those fair places — hope
and health alike renewed. So ran his vision ;
and Marjory breathed no word to gainsay it :
only her heart ached strangely, as she sang
the songs that he loved.

The next day, enclosed to Gerald, came
the following note : —
E 2

university nc

The Lawn, Meddlesome,

August — , 18—.

My dear Marjory,

*' I think you have my book of Old
English Songs. Pray send it to me by post,
as I wish to choose one for the Infirmary
Concert here. I have been asked to sing,
and must therefore postpone my return once
more. You will, of course, see that this prevents
my accepting your and Gerald's kind
invitation. I never intended to be so long
from home ; and I fear that I shall find
much neglected at St. Philip's; but this
concert is in need of a good voice, and the
Infirmary must not suffer. I hope that you
will enjoy your visit to Thorne, and that
Gerald will be greatly benefited, and, in
haste,

Believe me, dear Marjory,

Your affectionate friend,

Caroline Peele.

"Pes. — Be sure that you remember the
Songs."

For full half an hour Marjory sat on in
Iter room, the note in her lap, afraid to go'
back to Gerald. Her thoughts were full of
Lina. Lina professed to aim at the highest
standards ; to live an exalted life, governed
by reason and religion ; to do always her
duty, neither more nor less, superior to impulse.
And the result was a block of ice !
marble rather, — for ice can melt. More and
more she had hardened in her rigid mould ;
Marjory could look back and trace the process.
Could it be that Lina, in her small
way, was fashioning herself after the divine
model ? Was God but an infinite expansion
of the same idea — pursuing one unswerving
track, unmoved by the cries of His creatures ?
Almost it might seem so, Marjory fancied, as
she remembered her prayers — Hugh — Gerald.
But, if God indeed were but an antitype of
saints such as Lina, she thought that she
would rather be cast out with Hugh Vivian,
than in Heaven with Him and them. It was
one of those wild and desperate thoughts
which had troubled her lately : which had
made her shrink in fear from the untried
possibilities of her nature.

In the sitting-room all was still. Gerald
had not moved since she left him. She went

silently past him to the piano, and began to
hunt for the book of songs.

"You can see my letter' said Gerald:
'* There is nothing in it that the whole world
might not see."

Marjory took it, turning her back on him
as she read. By the gentle reproofs and hints
with which it was interspersed, she guessed
the nature of that to which they replied.
Gerald was exhorted to be calm, to study
self-government, and thus to place himself
in a condition to derive all possible benefit
from the change.

'eon yourself, far more than on me, dear
Gerald, that benefit would in any case
depend," was the tender warning.

Marjory made no remark, as she returned
the letter ; but afterwards she slipped away
again, and wrote herself to Lina.

The answer reached her, by return of post,
in the lodgings at Thorne.

The Lawn, Meddlesome,

"August—, 18—.
Dear Mae joey,

I am sorry that I cannot satisfy
your — forgive me — exaggerated appeal. My

arrangements are now past alteration, even
if that were desirable. I think you are mistaken
in encouraging Gerald in what I cannot
but regard as weak-mindedness. I shall
quite hope to find him a different person
when we meet again at Alton.

*' Believe me, dear Marjory,

Your affectionate friend,

Caroline Peele."

It was much as Marjory had expected ; but
she felt it none the less. She tore the note
into a hundred pieces, saying nothing to
Gerald, and burned it in the farmhouse
kitchen.

For they were lodging in a farmhouse, old-fashioned
and substantial, every corner of it
spotlessly clean, every article in it polished
to the maximum of brightness. Wholesome
odours of hay, of new milk, of homely
flowers, pervaded the atmosphere ; sounds of
lowing cows, of sheep, of poultry, made,
from early morn to " dewy eve," a melody of
their own. The rooms engaged by Bellhouse
were in a gable older than the rest— large
and cool, with dark panels and deep window-seats,

the windows overlooking the garden,
where flowers, herbs, and vegetables grew in
comfortable unanimity. Beyond, a part of
the park and of the adjoining churchyard
were visible. The music of the brook below
the churchyard wall, that brook sought outby
Marjory nine years before, was clearly
audible in these rooms when the windows
were open, — and at present they were open
day and night.

The drive from Alton, notwithstanding
Mr. Robinson's skilful escort, had been followed
by severer pain ; and more than once
Marjory wondered whether, after all, their
coming had been wise. Still the craving for
the country was satisfied. Gerald could not
wander at will among fields and lanes,
sketching according to his fancy; but he
was in their midst; they, and not streets,
surrounded him : he could step straight
through a glass door into the garden, where,
under an ancient apple-tree, Marjory had improvised
a couch on which he spent the
greater part of each day. The farmer's wife
overflowed with genial kindliness ; dainty fare
of all rural kinds abounded ; and if cream
and butter, new-laid eggs, and delicate fowls
could have cured him, he would speedily have

been well. But, as day by day went onlie
seemed to Marjory worse instead of
better.

She could not seek sympathy from Bell-house
; for, a day or two before their arrival,
Bellhouse had been summoned to a distant
county, to the death-bed of her last surviving
sister. So, when Marjory could leave
Gerald, she roamed about the old park, as in
her childhood, alone. Constantly an elevation
in the ground, a turn among the trees,
disclosed the grand old house, lying lonely
and silent. She would sit at the foot of one
of the mighty oaks, and watch that house of
her dreams, as it rose beyond her, its many
chimneys, gray and smokeless, standing out
against the blue of the sky. Here she lived
again the times when it had been full of gay
company, and she, a stranger child, had
admired from afar those denizens of the
great world. She heard again their voices,
the words they said, the songs they sang.

Then further into the past went her
thoughts. She saw the children of whom
Bellhouse had told her, flitting along the
terraces, chasing each other through the gardens,
picking wild flowers in the park. Miss
Evie's face looked out from that window of

yore, and smiled as if it knew her. The little
old lady came again in her black mushroom
hat, and asked, "What little girl is this?"
Where were they now, all these ? Were they
thinking still, loving still — somewhere ? It
seemed to Marjory that she had come into
a world of phantoms ; that the silent house
and the park around it, the old trees, the
wood-pigeons cooing from the grove, were
themselves a part of that phantom world,
and would presently fade like the rest.

She understood now all she had read of
this fleeting world, of life's pilgrimage. A
pilgrimage ! but how long ? How many
miles of desert country ? She was nineteen,
and Gerald was twenty-three: just beginning,
as it were ! How could she bear the
desolate years ? As many a time before, the
question struck her: If prayer bring no
comfort for this world, where is its help ? In
Heaven no comfort is needed.

CHAPTER V.

'* Enough ; so let us go, mine eyes

Are blinded by their tears ;
A voice speaks to my soul to-day

Of long forgotten years.
And yet the vision in my heart,

In a few hours more,
Will fade into the silent past,

Silently as before." — Adelaide A. Procter,

One evening Gerald and Marjory were sitting
under the old apple-tree. The day had been
very hot ; now the sun was gone down, and
in the far west all manner of soft colours
glowed, changed, melted into one another.
The air was full of fragrance, and very still.
Now and then a leaf rustled, a thrush sang :
while the brook, shallow, but still musical,
trickled over its pebbly bed.

'' What rest this is, after the town noises !"
said Marjory. A book was open on her
knee ; but for the last quarter of an hour her
hands had been clasped over the page, her
eyes and ears, with unconscious soothing,
drinking in the quiet beauty around.

It might be rest — it ought to be," said
Gerald.

Marjory looked at him anxiously.

"Gerald, I cannot bear to see you like
this ; and it is very bad for your health.
How can you get well while you are so
wretched ? "

How, indeed ! " he answered with a smile.
I suppose it is impossible. It seems so."

But what is it ? I only half understand.
Are you fretting because — because
Lina "

He frowned, and turned away his face.

Gerald, I can't bear it," cried Marjory,
passionately : '' I can't bear this silence any
longer. You opened your heart to me before
; and why not now ? What is this
between you and Lina ? "

'' Nothing but what you know, — or might
know."

You mean her coolness ? Do tell me,
dear Gerald — do pray tell me what is in your
mind ! "

'' I can't talk about it — it maddens me.
If I didn't keep it under, I should be a torment
to you as well as to myself."

Not to me, dear Gerald : never to me,"
cried Marjory, her eyes filling.

You love me better thai she does ; I can
see it. I have been a fool to close my eyes
so long. But I thought — I thought "

He broke off abruptly.

Marjory, you mean it well, and I am
grateful; but please question me no more.
I am like a sick dog, turning savage if he is
disturbed. Just leave me to myself, and
forget me."

As to forgetting — that is nonsense.
But I will leave you to yourself, if you wish
it."

I do wish it. I am very sorry, — I pity
you for being tied to such a companion. I
will try to be pleasant. Only don't mention
Lina to me. Some day — when I have
had it out with her — you shall know the
result."

From that evening he exerted himself to
be more talkative, less absent, and to show
interest in the simple things around. But
Marjory was not deceived ; she saw, moreover,
that the effort was beyond his strength.
The fever-flush burned more brightly afterwards
: he was more tired, more worn, when
night came.

Gerald," she said at last, on one of these
nights, '' I am sorry I asked you any questions.

Please be as silent as you like. I
won't interfere again."

"I beg your pardon," he said, wearily;
but the fact is, I am not myself; and, what
is more, I cannot be till I have talked to
Lina."

'* She is at home now."

"Yes, I know. I suppose Would it

disappoint you very much if we went back
a little sooner than we intended ? "

No, not that. What disappoints me is
seeing you no better."

I shall never be better with such a weight
on my mind. I don't want to be selfish,
Marjory ; but the pain saps my strength — I
can't master myself as I used. This gives
me no rest, day or night."

She did not definitely understand ; but remained
true to her promise : and questioned
him no more.

"If she had been with us ; — if she had — had
all would have been different. In that
case, I should have been quite strong again
by this time."

I hardly think that," said Marjory,
gently.

I am sure of it," repeated Gerald, with
unwonted irritation ; " And now, if I can see

her, and get this settled, I shall soon improve.
I feel that Mr. Eobinson was right. This
worry is poison to me."

«« Very well ; I will send him a note tomorrow,
when Mr. Brown goes to market ;
asking him to fetch you home."

'' But not if it vexes you ? " said Gerald,
with sudden compunction.

It could not vex me half so much as to
keep you here against your will. So don't
add that to your worries," said Marjory,
forcing a bright smile.

Afterwards, alone in her room, she cried
herself to sleep.

Almost the whole of the next day she was
out of doors, making a farewell visit to her
old haunts. Strangers would soon be in
possession of those beloved places ; she might
see them never again, she thought, except in
memory. In returning, she paused long
near the familiar white gate, in the lane
bordering the plantation. A gentle breeze
stirred the tops of the larches, which had
grown into tall trees since days of old ; a
squirrel hopped from bough to bough, and
now and then a rabbit scudded through the
brushwood. No human sounds were there ;
but Marjory saw once more, Jessie, in her

young beauty, searching for burdock roots,
and beard ber clear voice sing : —

He will return — I know he will —
He will not leave me here to die."

Had those words proved strangely suitable
to Jessie's future ? Sbe turned from the
thought, oppressed by the sense of mystery.
It was pleasant to recall the other figure,
the Mr. Hugh of that old time, chatting
lightly to the fair girl in the plantation. But
Marjory hardly knew why so sharp a pang
pierced her spirit as the scene came back to
her.

The wood-pigeons were cooing in the
evening calm, when she went home. The
farmer had returned from market, bringing
word that Mr. Robinson would call for
Gerald next day. Gerald was in better
spirits than throughout their visit, as they
sat for the last time under the apple-tree.

"If an earthly Paradise were possible,"
he said, " this would be a fitting scene for it.
One might spend a very contented life here,
far from the madding crowd.' Even death
seems less gloomy than elsewhere ; that
old churchyard might have a tempting aspect
to any one who longed for rest."

You don't long for rest, Gerald ? " cried
Marjory, quickly, struck by something — sHe
hardly knew what — in his tone.

'' I ? Not in that sense ! No, what I long
for is life.

'Tis life, 'tis life, for which we pant,
More life, and fuller, that we want :'

and I fret sometimes, because I can't get
it."

You may get it yet, perhaps," said Marjory,
with a gleam of her old hopefulness ;
"Why, Gerald, nearly all the great artists —
poets, musicians, painters — have gone through
an apprenticeship of trouble ! No doubt,
when they were in the thick of it, things
seemed as dark, as often now to us. They
could foresee the end no more than we can ;
and yet what an end was in store for many of
them ! It may be the same for you."

'' I suppose it ma?/," said Gerald, dreamily.

Think of what Mr. Harding said in
answer to your note ! I remember every
word : ' Don't lose heart — the true stuff is
in you, and somehow or other it will win its
way.' Gerald, you have not forgotten ? "

No," said Gerald, in the same dreamy
tone.

VOL. III. y

He was watching the sunset light, as it
widened and deepened upon the old churchyard
wall. Why, at this moment, did it
kindle a moss-grown stone, whose inscription
Marjory had to-day deciphered amid the
stains of age.

''He asked life of thee; and thou gayest
him a long life; even for ever and ever

So ran the words ; she could not see them
now, but, while the old stone glowed, they
sounded, as if spoken, in her ear. She looked
in a kind of tremor at Gerald ; he was only
intent upon the light.

"I should like to catch that effect," he
said : " How curiously the silent radiance
widens ! There — it is going ! If we sat
here every evening for a whole summer, we
might never see a glow like that again."

CHAPTER VI.

Farewell ! thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate :
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing,

My bonds in thee are all determinate.

* * *

Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter ;
In sleep, a king ; but, waking, no such matter."

Shakspeare.

The town seemed very close and dusty after
the old farmhouse ; and Gerald was much
exhausted by the drive.

It was a pity that you could not stay
longer," said Mr. Robinson to Marjory;
Under the circumstances, I fear the move
has done him more harm than good."

Nevertheless, at breakfast the next morning,
he was in his usual place. His gray
eyes were shining, his cheeks were burning,
his face was set in stedfast resolve.

*' I wish you had not got up, Gerald," said
Marjory.

Lina is coming. We must make haste.
I expect her very soon."
F 2

"Why does she come so early ? "

"She had no other time to spare," said
Gerald, shortly. Not a word more passed
between them throughout the meal. When
it was over, Marjory quickly vanished, leaving
Gerald alone.

Was Lina struck when she entered, some
half an hour later? Did she see anything
of an omen in those eyes which met hers ?
If she loved him, did not her heart beat
faster as he clasped her hand? An old
proverb says, " None are so deaf as those
who won't hear." Another, equally truthful,
might say, " None are so calm as those who
don't feel."

I had hoped to find you looking better,"
she remarked, in her clear tones ; ''I fear
you came back too soon."

'' It would have killed me to stay longer.
I could not rest till I had seen you."

So you told me in your note ; but do
you know, I think it is a pity ? I think we
should school ourselves to bear separation.
How would it be if you went, as you planned,
to Rome ? "

If ! " repeated Gerald, with a strange
mixture of longing and despair. "It is not
the separation, Lina. I am not quite such a

poor creature ! Ko — it is something to be
decided, which has weighed on my mind,
night and day. You see I cannot boast your
self-controls*' he added, with a touch of
bitterness. '' My feelings are not so completely
under my thumb, as to be summoned
or dismissed at will."

They are rather too much the other way,
I fear," said Lina, sweetly : '' Well ! what
has troubled you so much ? I shall be glad
to know."

You have often reminded me, as a motive
for calmness, that our engagement is
not likely to be short. No more it is. But
the question in my mind is not as to the
shortness or the length of it, but whether
there had not better be an end."

Lina looked at him. His eyes were fixed
upon her, eagerly and with strange impatience.
Her own beautiful eyes were not
eager — nor perturbed. They were a little
surprised, — a little — very little — offended :
nothing more.

'' Well ? " he said quickly : "Well ? won't
you answer ? "

I did not know that you expected me to
answer. It rests with yourself. I am willing
to go on with the engagement, or not, as you
think best."

^' Is that all ? " cried Gerald, passionately:
Lina, I cannot make you out. Is it that
you are supernaturally perfect in the government
of your feelings ? or have you no feeling
o^s to govern ? I'd rather know the truth.
Speak out, and tell me."

'' Gerald, you are really unpolite," said
Lina, the shade of offence deepening : " I
must beg you to explain yourself. In
what have I shown any want of feeling
? "

'^ You won't understand : or you can't ; I
don't know which. Lina, when I asked you
to marry me, some day — far off, but real, — I
was full of hope, though all was uncertain.
Harding's praise had opened to me a future
beyond my utmost dreams ; I thought that
there might be a few years of waiting — perhaps
very few, and, if you loved me, they
would soon pass — and that then — then I
should be able to ." He paused.

'' Oh, the visions I had ! But never mind.
Only, if they had come true, your position as
my wife might be not altogether unworthy,
even of you. I thought that, for the honour
you had done me, I would give you honour
again — that I would win riches, success, glory,
and offer all to you ; and it seemed — if you

loved me — I must repeat that, — I did you no
wrong in what I asked."

'' I have told you frequently that I have
no objection to the long engagement," said
Lina. She was about once more to repeat
that her time was fully occupied at St.
Philip's ; but Gerald interposed.

'' Well, let that pass ! Things are altered
now, Lina. The fates are dead against me.
Poor Marjory's scheme has come to nothing :
I have new plans of my own ; but my health
hinders them. Here I am, a wretched log —
unfit for work of any kind. To own that fact
is terrible ! yet a fact it is. My bank appointment
is as good as gone. What we
shall do next, Marjory and I, Heaven knows
or when this knee of mine will be well.
Sometimes I think it is a mere strain ; and
sometimes "

You are too desponding," said Lina.

'* Am I ? you could soon change that !
I'll tell you what, Lina ; You said it rested
with me, — it rests with you. I am only
putting things before you. If you wish still
to stick to me" — his voice trembled, with a
sudden possibility of joy — *' you may, after
all, not regret it. The tide may turn : surely
it is nearly at its lowest — and then it may go

up. Often I think that, if my mind were at
rest about you, I should get all right. Or,
if not, and if you cared for me enough to
bear it, I would just as soon lose my leg.
There might be no other cure."

'' My dear Gerald, what portentous views
you take ! "

A peculiar smile passed over his face.

'' If you had felt for five minutes the pain
I feel all day, your views might be portentous
too ! At any rate it is enough to
convince me that this may have to be, that I
may become a cripple ; — I am only preparing
your mind. But, when once the worst was
over, I might soon be healthy and strong
again ; and, if Mr. Harding were still friendly,
my dreams might even yet come to pass. It
is possible : I dare not say more. So, Lina,
now you see ! Do you love me enough to
face all this : or not ? "

He looked at her, first red, then pale.
Lina was silent.

'' I must know," said Gerald : " I must
have a final answer. The suspense and the
bodily pain together are more than I can
stand. It's not that I care so much about
suffering ; but I do care about my hopes : I
can't let them go without a fight. I can't be

contented to die, when I might Hve. I must
know the worst, or the best. If the best, I
sometimes think that would cure me at once.
If the worst, please God I will yet face it like
a man. More than a man I can't be ; if you
are more than a woman."

His voice quivered as he spoke these last
words ; and Lina seemed slightly to melt.
I do not wish to pain you in any way," she
said graciously.

'^ Don't think of that, Lina," cried Gerald,
with sudden warmth: '^ Not for one moment !
I would not for the world go on with this,
but of your own free choice. When people
really love each other, I know, through experience,
parting is the one thing unbearable.
But without love, without great love, it
would be bondage indeed to be tied to such
as I now am. I would not for the world
expose you to it. And often lately, Lina, I
have fancied that you had no such love forme."


You are like Marjory, far too fanciful."

Am I ? Then I may have fancied more :
I may have fancied you other than you are.
I have thought, If such be the face, what
must the soul be ? what to have such a soul
devoted to me, united with me ! The idea

alone was rapture — till — till, slowly, other
thoughts dawned. Mind ! I am not complaining
; I am only telling you what has
filled my mind."

I suppose you feared that I should break
my word," said Lina proudly.

*' I did not. I knew you were honour
itself. I knew, unless I spoke, we should
drag on as we have done lately. But I can
bear even the worst better than that."

'' I do not know what you mean by dragging.
Certainly, as you say, our prospects
are far from favourable ; but, as regards your
health, I have myself no doubt but that you
will recover, without anything so portentous
as you suggest."

And what is your answer to my
question ? "

*'My answer is, that I am willing, if you
are the same, to continue without change for
the present."

'' For the present ! What does that mean?
On the chance that things may better themselves?"


'' In that hope. I fully expect that you
will some day be a celebrated artist. Of
course, if this became impossible "

'' If I had no other prospect but to be tied

for life to a bank, for instance," broke in
Gerald.

Exactly. Should this eventually seem
certain, it would be wiser, then, to part. In
such a case you could never be rich ; and,
although I shall have a moderate income,
it is never desirable that the husband should
depend upon the wife."

'' I see," said Gerald ; " At last I see your
heart. I thank you, Lina. You have spoken
plainly, now."

You asked me to speak plainly."

Yes ; and I am glad. I am glad to
know. Once more, thank you. We should
have had to part, sooner or later, no doubt ;
and now you have made me willing for it."

'' What do you mean ? " inquired Lina,
with calmness.

I mean that I release you. You need
not fear that you have broken your word,
I give it freely back."

You wish at once to break off the
engagement ? "

''I do. There is no such thing as * for
the present,' with me, in such a case. It
must be for ever, or not at all. Yes, it is
all over."

Certainly, since you desire it," said Lina,

rising ; " But you would have done better to
tell me your intention at first, and so save
this discussion."

My intention ! I had none ; except to
find out this one thing, which now I know.
I thought you were an angel, Lina ! I
blessed God for the day I first saw you.
And now — this is worse than hell."

Gerald, you quite shock me ! I see
that it is all for the best. If I had known
you more thoroughly, I should never have
consented to link my fate with so ungoverned
a nature."

Good-bye," was all that Gerald answered.
As she rose, he had risen, forgetting his
pain. Now, before Lina was aware, he had
clasped her in his arms, with one long
passionate kiss.

The last for ever and ever," he said,
letting her go : '' Good-bye, Lina."

He turned from her, with iron self-control ;
and in stately silence she quitted the room.

When, her serene head somewhat higher
than usual, she had traversed the long streets
to Albion Square, she went straight to her
own apartment, and found relief in shedding
a few tears. Their source, which she did
not analyse, was complex ; they were soon

wiped away ; and afterwards lie was quickly
herself again. She washed her hands,
smoothed her hair at the glass, and repaired
to the drawing-room.

*' Mamma," she said, " I wish to mention
that my engagement is broken off."

My dear ! " exclaimed Mrs. Peele, in
utter bewilderment. None of the ups and
downs, too well known to Marjory, had been
apparent in Albion Square. The Peeles had
grown to regard Lina's engagement in the
light of an institution ; fixed, and of indefinite
duration — a pity, but irrevocable.

Yes," said Lina, " Gerald thinks it wise ;
and of course I can only agree with him.
His health and other uncertainties considered,
the change, no doubt, is prudent. In mentioning
it to our friends, mamma, I beg you
will explain that there has been no breach of
promise on my part."

'' My dear child ! " cried tender-hearted
Mrs. Peele, temporarily moved from her
respectful awe of Lina : " I sympathise with
you so deeply ! All has been so unfortunate !
I trust you will not fret yourself ill."

'' Pray do not feel uneasy, mamma," said
Lina ; "I hope I know better how to meet a
trial than to fret myself ill."

As she spoke, she sat down at the piano,
to practise for the Philharmonic Society.
Occupation, as her father had taught her,
was the best cure for sorrow ; and a well-disciplined
mind would never permit itself
to brood over grief.

CHAPTER Ir.

*' I was not sad to die, for there was now
Nothing left in the world ; — but in a dream
I suffered j

and I thirsted more and more,
Burning and craving.

Again, again through all the long dark hours,
Always the thirst, the striving, and no drop
Once tasted. Was it hours, or days, or weeks ?
And once I came unto myself, and all
"Was agony, past thinking and past speech."

Harriet E. Hamilton King.

All through the long afternoon, Gerald had
been locked up in his room. More than once
Marjory had listened outside ; but all was
silence. Meanwhile the world went on as
usual ; the blue sky stretched above the
cathedral tower, — the bell chimed for evensong,
— the quiet little congregation, ladies
chiefly, passed through the low north door.
The rooks cawed to one another; wheels
rattled ; footsteps tramped ; the river flowed
with its wonted ripple. There was no pause
in the great hum of life, because of one
man's sorrow.

In the evening some relief came — a break
in the silence. Gerald, after tea, remained in
the sitting-room ; and presently he spoke,
unasked, and told her something of what
had happened.

*' There was no use in its going on," he
said : "It has been a delusion all along. I
can't make out, even yet, whether she has it
not in her — or only not for me : but the
result is the same."

She is not worthy of you, Gerald," said
Marjory.

I am little enough to be worthy of! "
said Gerald, bitterly : " But worthy of all I
have felt for her, she certainly is not. Marjory
! if I could but throw it off ! "

'' Throw off what, dearest ? "

My fascination for her. I can't help it,
any more than she can help the other. While
she seemed so high, so angelic, it ennobled
me ; but now it is only a clog. She is not
what I thought her, and yet — yet — still I
want her : I want her for my own."

Dear Gerald, shall I go and see her ?
Shall I try to make it up ? " asked foolish
Marjory, thinking only how to bring him
present soothing.

''No — No," he said passionately : 'what

are you dreaming of ? I did it of my own
free will. I should have done it long ago, if
I had known — if I had been certain. Many
a time I have had misgivings ; but I wanted
courage to face them. I have my art still :
that I can't be robbed of. I will reverse the
poet's decision. ' Love, my Love, thou
wert much, but Art is more.' That is my
opinion, Marjory — directly opposite to Mrs.
Browning's."

He laughed as he spoke ; and she
thought that she would sooner see him
silent.

'' If I could get her out of my head — forget
I had ever seen her ! If she were truly
what I thought her, whatever came between
us, I would remember her evermore. But
she is altogether another person. The ideal
I dreamed of is as far off as ever. To think
I should go mad about one like her ! and
yet I cannot help it."

As he talked on, Marjory doubted whether
he were indeed himself. The wildness of
manner, the fever of cheek and eye, seriously
alarmed her. With some difficulty she persuaded
him to go early to bed ; and hoped
to find him better in the morning. But,
when morning came, he was very ill.

VOL. III. G

In reply to her anxious questionings, as
she stood beside his bed, he could not tell
whether he had slept or no. He had had a
strange night, he said, full of visions. Even
now he rambled, spoke strange thoughts
aloud, or appeared to answer some person
invisible to Marjory. One fact alone seemed
certain, — he was in pain : pain so great that
the mental anguish was lost in it.

'' My knee is a burning fiery furnace," he
said, turning his head restlessly, the fair hair
tossed over the feverish brow : '' Ten thousand
flaming serpents with iron teeth !
gnawing all night, and yet not satisfied.
Who's that ? "

Dear Gerald, it is I — Marjory."

'* Just get Eobinson to cut it off. The
serpents are too much entangled — it must all
come off together. They are writhing, I tell
you ! and their fangs burn. What have I
been saying ? Marjory ? "

•'Yes, my Gerald," said poor Marjory at
his pillow.

Was I wandering ? " he asked in his
natural voice : *' I'm so thirsty ! "

Marjory ran to the sitting-room, where
breakfast was waiting, and returned with a
cup of tea ; but he was all astray once more.

Serpents — serpents," lie repeated :
Burning and blazing. The cool sea, with
tossing waves — and Venice in a flood of light.
Too hot — the streets burn ! I want water."

She gave him the tea in silence, feeling
numbed at the heart.

'thank you," he said, lying down again :
*' That was refreshing. I could sleep now,
if these brutes — My head is all confused.
What are these red-hot tongs at my knee ?
The worm that never diet 1 ' I'm not in
hell, am I ? Where are they — in my knee or
my brain ? "

He muttered on, unconscious that Marjory
had flown in search of Miss Pilkington.
Help was quickly at hand; Mr. Eobinson
summoned : and Marjory knew the worst.
Violent inflammation of the joint had set in ;
an abscess, long smouldering, had been
quickened to active mischief.

"You see he would not keep himself quiet,"
said the doctor : '' The knee has not had fair

play."

And is he very ill ? " inquired Marjory
white but tearless.

I hope he will soon be better, with careful
nursing. In a few days I shall lance his
knee ; and that will relieve him."
G 2

Mr. Eobinson, I beg of you to tell me.
Is it a white swelling ? "

It is of that nature."

And incurable ? "

'decidedly not incurable at present. I
will not deny that he is in a critical state ;
but I see no reason against eventual recovery.
In these cases so much depends upon the
strength of the constitution."

I will do all that is possible to strengthen
him. Will he be long iU ? "

'' I fear it may be a long business altogether.
This acute attack we can subdue ;
but the rest will take time. A few months
more or less."

'' A few months ! " Whence would the
money come, to say nothing of other matters,
for those months, with all involved in them ?
But she had no time to think of this now.
She must at once set to work to carry
out Mr. Robinson's directions for relieving
Gerald.

Relief was slow in coming. Through nine
long days Gerald lay racked in pain. At intervals
he was quite himself, struggling to
hide his agony, that Marjory might not be
distressed. More often, as at first, he wandered
amid delirious fancies, all coloured by

the feelings in his knee. And sometimes,
most distressing of all, he moaned, his head
turning from side to side, his arms tossing,
his hands clenched, as if the anguish were
unbearable.

Marjory would murmur, '' Oh, my Gerald !
Can I do nothing to help you?" Then he
would come at once to his right mind, and
say : "I beg your pardon — I am sorry I was
so impatient."

But a few minutes later he was moaning,
half unconscious, as before.

It was very terrible. All day, mechanically,
her heart was crying, " God, strengthen
me ! help me to bear it ! " No visible answer
came — no feeling of wonderful support — such
as she had read of. Yet she did bear it,
without breaking down, without distressing
Gerald by weeping or complaint. Therefore,
in the future, she believed that her cry had
been answered. But, in the present, her feeling
was — '' All Thy waves and billows have
gone over me ! " Hopes of the past came
back as though to mock her. As to Another
long ago, mocking spirits whispered : " You
trusted in God that He would deliver you !
let Him deliver you now, if He will have
you." In such a furnace had Hugh Vivian's

faith been destroyed : must the remnant of
hers go too, she wondered ? Thinking of
him — as much for his sake as her own — she
kept firm hold of it ; and prayed, into what
seemed empty air, that it might not utterly
perish.

Tidings of Gerald's increased illness had
rapidly spread ; and friendly inquiries poured
in from the outside world. Fruit and other
sick-room delicacies were sent in abundance ;
and Mrs. Peele came to offer help in the
nursing.

You are very good," said Marjory ; '' but
I don't know how he would bear to see you.
It would remind him too much of Lina."

'' Ah, yes, poor dear fellow ! He has acted
very sensibly ; but I feared he would suffer.
Lina told me that he could not feel it wise
to continue the engagement under present
circumstances."

*' That is her view of it ! " exclaimed Marjory,
biting her lip, the next instant, at her
unwary words. But Mrs. Peele did not observe
them.

After all, my dear, we must confess, when
we think of it, that all is for the best. Lina
does not allow herself to grieve. Such self-control
may be beyond the reach of some ;

but none the less should we admire it. And,
since she bears up so well, I cannot but
feel grateful for your brother's unselfish conduct."


Marjory felt strangely lonely as she listened
to these polite gratulations. They were glad
to be rid of Gerald, with all his wealth of
talent and of self-devotion — better worth, as
it seemed to Marjory, than mines of this
world's riches. They could not appreciate
him : only she in all the earth wanted him,
and clung to him, and felt that death, to say
nothing of poverty, would be joy in comparison
to life without him. Kind and sympathetic
though Mrs. Peele intended to be,
and was, her visit left Marjory sadder than
before.

She had taken it upon her to write to the
manager of the bank, and had received from
him a civil acknowledgment of Gerald's resignation,
and a cheque for the amount due
of his salary. From her uncle at Eockswold
she had also received what money he could
spare : a small contribution, — but welcome.
He had sent it, he said, instead of coming,
as a better means of aid : she might some
day need him more than at present, — he
would put off coming until then. Marjory

knew not why at these words a nervous chill
ran through her ! She tore up the note, and
burned it, to get them out of her mind.

One day during this period another note
reached her. Her colour deepened as she
glanced at the signature.

'' Dear Miss Stanhope, —

It has grieved me, more than you
would perhaps believe, to hear of your
brother's illness. If I can in any way be of
use to you or to him, pray remember that I
shall be thankful to know it. Meanwhile, I
am anxious to tell you that I have read your
MS., and am more glad than surprised to
find it full of promise. I think you would
be surprised if you knew what a hold it has
taken of me ! When I see you, I can give
you a hint as to re-casting certain parts ; but,
first, will you let me have the end ?

Yours very sincerely,

''H. Vivian."

Here was a gleam of comfort ! giving her
hope, even yet, for brighter times. She
clasped the letter in her hand, as the renowned
drowning man clasps his straw. Her story

was almost finished. She had been going on
with it, by snatches, as she felt inclined ; and
now, while Gerald slept or lay silent, she
wrote its final pages. She had no time to
correct her work ; it had come naturally,
in the rough, fi:'om her mind — and so was
left. She had written, as she was living, in
the dark, " out of the deep," yet clinging
tremulously, though with resolution, to the
hope that somewhere beyond the darkness
was light. Her meaning was confusedly expressed,
she afterwards feared ; but, such as
it was, the manuscript went off* to Mr. Vivian
within a few days from his note.

Meanwhile, the crisis of Gerald's suffering
was at hand. We read of great pain — we
hear of it ; but do we ever realize it until for
ourselves felt or seen ? Marjory, watching,
found a new world revealed : a fearful world,
enshrouded in mystery. Whence comes this
capacity for pain, implanted in humanity ?
There are times when bodily pain is despised ;
it seems as nothing beside mental anguish.
But see it in its intensity, and who will not
own that even bodily pain is a formidable
thing, an awful thing ? Gerald's powers of
endurance were weakened, his nerves overwrought
; he could no longer strive for self-command.

In the night he would cry out,
would start up in his bed, calling aloud on
God to deliver him. Then, seeing Marjory
beside him, he wrung her hand, and begged
her to pray that he might die.

'' And then you would be rid of me, too,"
he added, with a smile which cut her to the
heart.

The opiates were increased, and gave him
some rest ; but, when he woke again, the
struggle revived. As at first, his mind constantly
wandered.

'*Lina!" he said, one day, '' Lina —
Lina- ''

Then came a pause, a deep-drawn sigh.

'' Do you want anything, dear Gerald ? "
asked poor Marjory.

He raised his head slightly, looking round
with something of expectation. This fading,
he turned his face away and closed his
eyes.

'' I thought Lin a was here," he said ; "I
only want Lina. If she could lay her hand
upon my forehead," he went on, after long
silence : " her cool, soft hand — it would heal
me ! The serpents would quail before her,
drop away and die. I should sleep as in
old days. I slept once, and walked about,

like other men, and worked, and lived. I
was not always here among the flames."

*' It cannot go on much longer," said
Marjory.

*' Would Mrs. Peele bring Lina to seeme
? '* he asked, recalled by her voice.
"The time has dragged so heavily since I
saw her last. Would she come ? "

You would not wish it, after all that has
happened," said Marjory, gently.

Happened ! " he repeated. '* Has anything
happened?" Then, suddenly: "I
forgot," he said, in a dreary tone. '' No —
of course, she can never come again. It is
all over."

As before, he turned his face away, and
lay silent till the next paroxysm of pain.
Marjory remembered how endless, a little
while ago, even a fortnight had seemed to
him. Now, as he had said, the separation
would be, not for a fortnight, but a lifetime.


At length the worst was past. On the
tenth day Mr. Robinson performed an operation
upon the knee. Afterwards, for hours,
Gerald slept, as he had not slept through
all this time : a quiet, dreamless slumber.
Awaking, he said, with ineffable relief, that

he was free from pain ; asked for food, and
slept once more.

There is a good deal of vitality in his
constitution," said Mr. Robinson, standing
over him. '' He will do now. Only build
up his strength and keep him quiet."

And Marjory felt with thankfulness that
the last injunction might now have some
chance of fulfilment.

CHAPTER Yin.

Father ! forgive the child who fretted so, —
His proud heart yields, — the tears are on his cheek !"

Robert Buchanan.

Hugh Vivian's final departure lead been accidentally
delayed ; but, shortly after Marjory
had despatched the second part of her manuscript,
she heard that he was absent on
matters connected with some foreign adjutant
for which he had applied. September
was well on its way before he returned. The
excessive heat had long been over ; already
the early mornings and late evenings were
sharp and chilly ; and the first rich tints of
autumn glowed on the trees. Marjory was
alone, correcting divers scrawling exercises,
when unexpectedly his name was announced.

I did not know you were come back ! "
she exclaimed, with a thrill of joy.

"I came back late last night ; and now — "
He paused. '' How is your brother ?"

*' Thank you, I hope he is better. I think
so ; and yet — I am not sure. At first he
got on so well, — I was so hopeful ! but

lately he has seemed at a stand-still. The
pain is now very slight, and yet his strength
does not increase. I wish he could be
moved."

"And he cannot ?"

"No. They wrote from Rockswold to
beg that we would go home ; but Mr. Robinson
will not hear of it."

I am very sorry. All this is not fit for
you to be going through alone."

Oh, as for me, it doesn't matter," said
Marjory.

He looked as if he thought that nothing
mattered so much ! but he did not speak.

I have wanted to tell you," she went
on, abruptly and nervously, " that lately I
have understood your difficulties as never
before. I know now, as I could not then,
what is meant by the battle of life ; and how
presumptuous those who only know it by
hearsay are, to judge and lecture others in
the thick of it. If I have ever talked pragmatically
to you, I hope you will forgive me'*

You never have," said Hugh.

It was as though, for some reason, he
could not trust himself to say more. Marjory
had shrunk back with a hot blush ; and
a pause ensued.

All this time you must have thought that
I had forgotten your MS./' said Hugh, suddenly
rousing himself: '* But the truth is,
I have been reading it again and again, —
studying and thinking over it."

You mean that really ? " exclaimed
Marjory, half incredulous, half delighted.

I do, indeed. There is a great deal in
it : more perhaps than you yourself know.
I am thankful to have seen it. You will find
that I have marked certain passages needing
attention."

He unrolled the manuscript, which he had
brought in his hand, and went in a businesslike
manner into the subject ; criticizing,
with here and there a touch of satire that
made Marjory wince, but giving her valuable
help.

All this is my trade, you see," he said
at the end : "I am pretty well skilled in it
by this time."

He then told her of a publisher to whom
he proposed to recommend the story.

'* I shall prepare him to receive it in a

few weeks from now ; and, if you can alter

these few points, I think it will be accepted."

I will rewrite it altogether, and take the

greatest pains. I don't mind how I work."

Still at your old dream of helping
Gerald ! " He leaned back in his chair and
looked at her, with a smile, half amused,
half melancholy.

It has been a dream, indeed, lately! But
now you have given me hope. I don't know
how to thank you."

If I have been of any service to you,
that is beyond thanks. I am glad to carry
the thought with me : as a possibility at
least."

'when are you going?" asked Marjory,
with a sudden pang.

He paused a second, as if struggling to
command his manner: then answered very
quietly : —

''I am going to-night."

It was Marjory's turn to struggle now !
to battle, with womanly instinct, against any
betrayal of what these tidings were to her.
Her heart seemed to stop beating, but he
was looking at her, — she must speak.

To-night ? " she repeated.

It seems sudden ; but it must have come
some time. Yesterday evening, when I returned,
I found waiting for me a letter from
an old friend in Russia. He says that he can
find me work, if I will go to him at once.

The letter had been waiting several days ; so
there is no time for delay."

'^ And he does not mention any particulars
of the work ? You must have great confidence
in him."

I have — the greatest. He knows exactly
what I am, and what I want. Granted the
popular idea of Providence, his writing just
now might well be called Providential."

'^ It is a long way to go," said Marjory.

'' Yes ; but that is for the best. I was up
almost all night, thinking things over. If I
leave Alton, I may as well leave England :
otherwise I might be tempted to come back,
which would be worse than foolish."

Before Marjory could answer, Gerald's
crutch sounded in the passage. She started
up to meet and help him; and the tite-a4ete
was ended. Mr. Vivian stayed a little while
not long — talking to her brother. At last
he looked at his watch, and rose to go. He
shook hands warmly with Gerald ; she heard
Gerald wish him all good fortune ; then came
her turn. Speech failed her, shadows darkened
before her eyes : she only felt her hand
clasped fast and long, as if that hold could
not loosen.

'' Good-bye," he said.

VOL. in. H

She bowed her head slightly ; but still she
could not speak. Suddenly he raised her
hand to his lips — for one instant : and was
gone.

When, a minute later, Marjory turned round,
Gerald, with his back to her, was looking out
of the window; he did not seem to notice
her, as she slipped away, leaving the exercise
books strewn over the table. She must be
alone, she felt. Why did she care so much ?
why was the whole world suddenly dark to
her ? It had been twilight before ; now it
was dark ; she was sick of it, of everything.
For eight years she had been happy without
him : why had he crossed her path again, to
pass as he came, changing all life ? If she
could still speak to him now and then, could
know how he was, and where, could see his
face at a distance, she thought that she should
be content. But to live quite without him,
without any knowledge of him — how could
she bear it ? And yet she must !

Already, by a habit which had become
fixed, she was mechanically listening for his
knock, his step on the stairs. And this craving
must go on throughout her life : through
long years slowly rolling — each made up of
long months, weeks, days, hours. She had

plenty of work, of other interests ; but this
would haunt her through them all. And,
when earth's life was ended, would she meet
him, even then ?

"Alas for divided hearts !

For the dreams that were only dreams !
One taken, the other left — '

O saddest of human themes !

I hear a spirit wailing —

Heaven is no Heaven to me,
While I strain my eyes with gazing
O'er the parapet for thee.' "

idolatrous words ! doubtless the true
language of many a human heart, — but true
for a time only, while we measure Heaven by
earth. How must those who have reached
Heaven indeed, marvel at that earthly childhood,
which uttered cries so blind ! Yet Marjory's
heart uttered them now, with a passion
that terrified her. The cathedral bell had just
ceased tolling for the four o'clock service.
Her hat and gloves lay at hand ; mechanically
she took them up : and sought a refuge in
the calmness of God's shrine.

As she entered noiselessly, the congregation
were beginning the Confession : —

'' We have erred and strayed from Thy ways
nice lost sheep :

H 2

We have followed too much the devices
and desires of our otvn hearts :

'' We have offended against Thy holy latvs.^*

Who was that in a side aisle, kneeling with
bowed head — joining in those words — praying,
undoubtedly praying ? It seemed to
Marjory that she heard our Saviour's question,
spoken once again as of old :

thou of little faith, wherefore didst
thou doubt ? "

She had feared that her prayer was lost, —
her childish prayer, begun nine years before
that little prayer, never forgotten, night or
morning, for Mr. Hugh.

But now here he was at last, come home

to his Father's House. Now, when she had

felt most despairing, she saw him, kneeling

before God.

* * *

All through the service Marjory was constantly
looking towards that distant form in
the side aisle. The hard and bitter expression
had faded from his face ; it might return,
but for the time it was gone. He was
the Mr. Hugh of yore ; only older, graver,
"come out of great tribulation." Only a
little while ago, the unbelief in his heart had
seemed like a marble wall. He had breathed

in her hearing no suggestion of any change.
Lina had told her that he never entered a
place of worship ; and this he had confirmed,
observing that, whatever he might be, at least
he was not a hypocrite. Marjory longed to
know the cause of the transformation ; but
she would have no opportunity of asking.
It might be that she would never know, in
this world.

The service over, while the music of the
organ rolled in glory from choir to nave, still
he knelt, with hidden face. He did not know
that any human eye observed him : rising at
last, he looked neither to right nor left, but
walked quickly away, with his soldierly tread,
and through a distant door.

Then Marjory, reaching her own room unseen,
thanked God with tears which, though
her heart still ached, were sweet : a sweetness
less of earth than of Heaven.

CHAPTER IX.

The warm sun is failing, the bleak wind is wailing,
The bare boughs are sighing, the pale flowers are dying,

And the year
On the earth her death-bed, in a shroud of leaves dead,
Is lying.
Come, months, come away,
From November to May,
In your saddest array ;
Follow the bier
Of the dead cold year,
And like the dim shadows watch by her sepulchre."

/SJtellei/.

How to find money, not only for the exigencies
of illness, but for common necessaries,
had been of late a problem of painful anxiety.
Gerald would have had Marjory return to
Eockswold ; but of this she would not hear.
By extending her help in the school, which
had been recently increased, to three additional
hours, she was now able to provide for
his lodging as well as for her own. The
small but certain amount which he himself
could earn, through his illustrations, and the
law writing recommended by Hugh Vivian,

was also useful ; and from time to time some
further help was sent by Mr. Stanhope. But,
even with all these resources, they could not
have paid their way, had not Marjory, after
due consultation, been allowed to sell out a
hundred pounds of her small capital. This
necessity was equally deprecated by the uncle
and by Gerald ; but, that a necessity it was,
she succeeded in convincing Mr. Stanhope
at least. Gerald, however, announced that
he should regard it as a loan, to be repaid
when better days should come ; and Marjory,
smiling to herself, permitted the delusion.


Meanwhile, she worked hard and steadily
in remodelling her book. Her progress was
slow ; for the afternoons were no longer her
own, — and Gerald could not be neglected.
But some progress she did make daily, and
this work was an oasis in her life : both for
its own sake, and for the hope which, phoenix-like,
seemed about to rise from its ashes.

So the autumn weeks went by ; the leaves
deepened in hue, and floated away, " each to
its rest ; " and the old age of the year drew
on, surely, though in silence.

Since his attack, Gerald had suffered no
violent pain ; it was now a chronic aching.

wearing but bearable. Sometimes, if lie refrained
from moving, lie would feel little of it
for hours. Marjory was continually expecting
bis strength to increase ; ber fears took
no definite form, as the slow weeks went
on.

Slow they were, despite ber work : time
dragged upon bis course. Sbe bad to strive
against an eiinid of spirit wbicb made ber
weary of Alton, of ber walks, of the faces
around ber, of the whole world. Sometimes
a step in the street, a voice at the door, would
cause a throb at ber heart ; but in the same
moment recollection came with almost physical
faintness. He for whom sbe craved
bad passed into utter silence. He wrote to
no one in Alton ; it was as tbougb be wished
to be forgotten. Her only comfort lay in the
secret hope of a meeting, one day, beyond
the grave. Yet, when that dim and far-off
meeting came, might it not find him without
any memory of her ? Perhaps long before
then, some other might be all in all to him,
might make him a fresh home, and comfort
him for bis troubles. Sbe ought to hope it ;
and yet — oh, it was bitter, and bard to bear,
this longing for a vanished face !

One afternoon, early in November, sbe and

Lina met accidentally on Heathcroft : the
first time, since the breaking of the engagement,
that Marjory had seen this object of
her school-girl adoration. She had occasionally
heard of her, as well and busy, and to
all appearance unaltered. '' Dear Lina bears
up most beautifully," Mrs. Carberry had said,
with mysterious nods and mournful smiles, in
the course of a morning call. '' It was all for
the best, my love ; and your dear brother's
conduct was beyond praise," she added presently,
in a whisper, in the passage. Gerald
had certainly heard ; but when, the visitor
dismissed, Marjory glanced at him, his face
was cold and impenetrable. She could not
tell if he were pleased or displeased, or
neither, by the gushing remark.

She blushed hotly, feeling not a little awkward,
in encountering Lina to-day. But
Lina looked serene, lofty, gentle ; she might
have been magnanimously forgiving some
offence in Marjory, as she stopped and held
out her hand.

How is Gerald ? " she asked with unmoved
countenance; "I am sorry he recovers
so slowly."

'rare you contented," said Marjory impulsively,
as they walked on together, " to live

year after year, and never see him, except asa
stranger, any more ? "

This is rather a peculiar question to come
from you. Some might consider it insulting."

*' Insulting ! " repeated Marjory, aghast.

It was Gerald, and not I, who broke off
the engagement. I was quite willing to
continue it for the present ; his health might
have improved. The sudden end was by his
own desire."

Marjory stared at her, saying nothing.

You would never have been a wife for
Gerald," she was thinking : " Never, never,
if there were but you and he in the
universe."

To change the subject," said Lina, " Do
you know what has become of Mr. Vivian ? "

''He is gone to Russia," said Marjory;
He told us that work had been offered to
him there."

Have you any other authority for this ? "

His word is enough for me," said
Marjory, proudly.

After a pause, significantly long, Lina
continued :

A short time before he left Alton, I happened
to sit next him at a dinner-party. I
do not know which of us was most disgusted

at first ! but, on consideration, I found it a
good opportunity to sound him about that
photograph of Jessie Bellhouse."

'' How ? " asked Marjory.

You know I told you that I had seen it
before, but could not remember where. I remember
now. It was in some house at Dover."

'' By-the-by, you have a married sister at
Dover ?"

Yes, I am going to her very soon, for a
long visit. When I am there, I will hunt
out that photograph ; and more than that, if
lean."

But what did you say to Mr. Vivian ? "

I told him, casually, of my recognition
of the portrait ; and he laughed in his scornful
way, and said that Jessie was probably
not the only bride who had thus perpetuated
her splendours. I replied that it was the
face, not the dress alone, which haunted my
recollection. And, in that very instant, I
thought of Dover ! It had not occurred tome
before."

And you mentioned Dover to him ? "

*' I did, — adding, that I intended to do my
utmost to find some clue to the girl. I
remarked, that you had told me of her disappearance,
and that the story interested me :
which is true ! "

"What did he say ?"

"His whole face darkened. Even you,
partial as you are, would have been struck
by it. Some bitter thought seemed to sting
him."

I have seen that look," trembled on
Marjory's lips ; but she did not say it.

He observed, cuttingly, that I was
extremely kind thus to interest myself in a
stranger, but that he should doubt the advisability
of my scheme. I asked whether he
thought that the girl's mother would be of
his opinion ? He replied, that the question
was, whether the girl's mother would be in
any way benefited, if her present ignorance
were enlightened."

Perhaps he fears that Jessie may have
come to some painful end."

I do not pretend to know what he fears,"
said Lina, coldly : "I know only that his
manner has more than ever convinced me of
some mystery in his past life connected with
Jessie."

I cannot see what concern it is of ours."

Of yours, I should hope, none. I only
tell you to give you fair warning. It is
curious, to say the least, that he should
vanish so soon after hearing of my intentions."

'' He has not vanished at all," said
Marjory, '* He is gone to Russia. And he
sent in his resignation in May."

'' It seemed quite providential," said Lina,
ignoring this remark, " that I should happen
to meet him. His friends lately have been
observing that he had fallen back into all his
unsociable habits. I was sorry, dear Marjory,
to hear, from more than one, that this change
seemed curiously synonymous with your close
attendance on Gerald. This special dinner
was at the militia Colonel's ; so I conclude
that Mr. Yivian made an exception in his
favour," said Lina, sarcastically.

Again and again, when Marjory was alone,
this conversation recurred painfully to her
thoughts. And sometimes, at night, she
dreamed of the Thorne plantations, and of
Jessie gathering burdocks.

Meanwhile, each one of these waning days
found Gerald more silent. What was he
thinking about, Marjory wondered, as he
sat hour after hour in his old position, surrounded
by his materials for writing and
drawing — working sometimes, pausing sometimes
; as time went on, the pauses grew
longer. In the evening, when his work was
done, she would watch him, often for long

together, without his finding it out; and,
as she watched, a swelling gathered in her
throat, her eyes ached with tears suppressed
until finally she was forced to turn away.
At this hour a book was usually open on his
knee, and now and then he read ; but more
frequently sat gazing into vacancy, his arms
folded, or his elbow resting on the back of
the sofa, his head upon his hand. Those
hands had still their look of nervous power,
but they were very thin ; his eyes had their
old clearness, but with it blended a strange
transparent light. His colour, though faint,
was higher than in the days of his health ;
and sometimes it rose to a bright flush,
which Marjory had grown to recognize as a
signal of increased pain. Often, as he sat in
that impenetrable silence, his Expression was
stern and resolute, as though he were dwelling
upon some hard experience, and nerving
himself to face it like a man. At other times
it softened to a dreamy wonder, a musing
speculativeness, which, more than all the
rest, for some unanalyzed cause, filled Marjory
with a nameless apprehension. Sometimes
again, fixed melancholy, as of a baffled craving,
would be for hours the predominant
expression. Marjory passionately longed

that he would open his heart to her — that
she might know, if but a part, of that hidden
world ; but she would not worry him by
questionings.

One evening he had been glancing through
the newspaper daily lent by Mrs. Myers.
Presently, with abruptness, he laid it down,
and turned from it, leaning his head upon
his hand. Marjory, who had observed him,
stole softly to his side, and ran her eye over
the paper. The following paragraph fixed
her attention : —

'' The distinguished artist, Mr. Harding,
Ea., sailed this morning from Folkestone,
with a select number of pupils. The party
will proceed to Rome, vm Brussels, Munich,
and Venice."

More followed ; but this was enough :
Marjory also laid down the paper. As she
glanced at that face which she loved, so
young, but so careworn — so full of genius,
yet blank with the blankness of hope
crushed down, her heart swelled in unutterable
pity. The world's tide had been too
strong for him : with all his wealth of cargo,
he was swept away into the cruel waters :
and no hand was stretched out to help. She
stood at the window, her back to Gerald,

looking out behind the blind. The moon
shone with a steady light above the cathedral
tower. How many wrecked Ives had ere
now been looked down on by that cold and
smiling face !

Twenty minutes later, she turned again
to Gerald, and found him still in the same
attitude, still with the same hopelessness on
his face.

Gerald," said Marjory gently, turning
back into the room : " Are you worse tonight?"


'' Not that I know of," said Gerald.

I guess what you are thinking about, —
I have seen the paper. Oh, dearest Gerald,
do not let us give way like this ! I think weare
both too faint-hearted. Why should we
cast off all hope ? You can't go this year ;
but, at this time next year, you may be welland
strong, and on your way. You may !
Only think that it is possible."

But it is not possible," said Gerald.

"You will not try to cheer up," said
Marjory, reproachfully.

'' It is not a question of will, but of facts :
I must accept them, and so must you. I
have said to myself over and over again, of
late : I can never be a great artist — I can

never realize my ideal — I can never be strong.,
or health, any more."

'' You think that you will not get better ? "
said Marjory, very white.

'' I don't think I am going to die — if you
mean that. I feel nothing like death in me.
But the spring of my strength seems dried
up ; I shall be better than I am now, no
doubt, — in fact, I am better already. Creaking
doors last for ever, you know. I may
yet get through a quantity of bank business !
but it will be as a poor lame wretch, always
obliged to coddle and take care."

As he spoke, he met Marjory's eye, and
smiled : a smile that said more than tears.
Gerald," said she, '' if your theory be
true, — that some are fated not to succeed,
where is God ? ' '

It does not shake my faith in God in the
least," he replied : "It is His Will in the
management of this world."

But why ? why ? " she asked wildly.

That is not for you or me to ask. We
might ask for ever, and never find out :
beating our heads against a rock. His Willis
enough, — ought to be enough. It shall
be, if I can manage it," he added, half under
his breath.

VOL. III. I

He is nearer Heaven than I ! " thought
Marjory : but her heart was still rebellious.

One day, a fortnight later, he said suddenly
: " Did I hear you tell Mrs. Carberrv
that Lina was going to Dover ? "

'' She goes next week."

I should like to wish her good-bye," said
Gerald calmly.

Marjory looked at him, perplexed and
troubled.

You need not be afraid," said he, returning
the look : " It is only because we may
laye removed to Rockswold — you and I —
when she comes back ; and, after all that has
been, I should be glad of a more peaceful
parting."

Marjory could not follow his injunction
against being afraid ; she was afraid — and
anxious : but she undertook to make his
desire known to Lina — who, somewhat to
her surprise, responded readily.

'' I have specially wished," she said, " to
prove to Gerald that I have no resentful
feeling towards him. There is no reason
why henceforth we should not meet quite
comfortably, as friends."

It will not be too painful to you ? " said
Marjory, with some inward malice.

I hope I have better command of myself
than that," Lina replied.

She accompanied Marjory forthwith to the
College Yard, observing that no time was like
the present. When they approached the
house, Marjory ran on to prepare Gerald ;
but the meeting had been so much in his
thoughts, that he was not taken by surprise.
He laid down his book quietly, and looked
up : the glow upon his face alone revealing
that this was no common visit.

*' Pray stay, Marjory," said Lina, as Marjory
was moving towards the door ; ''I may
not see you again before I go."

So Marjory remained, and forced herself
to converse on ordinary topics. Lina's comportment
was exemplary ; she was affable,
gentle, and serene. She condoled with Gerald
on his long imprisonment, informed Marjory
of various devices which were to beguile to
St. Philip's the blank of her absence; she
remarked on the weather, on town affairs,
all with unruffled self-possession. Was
it acting, or reality, or both ? Was nothing
deeper underneath ? or was all too
deep to be revealed ? Had she forgotten
Gerald's passionate love, his hopes wrapped
up in her ? or could she banish their remem-
I 2

france at will? All the force that Gerald
possessed was needed, Marjory saw, to maintain
his calm of countenance, to withhold his
voice, his eyes, from saying what he would
not say in words. He could only answer
yes or no, or make now and then some trivial
remark. But Lina's easy conversation never
flagged throughout the half-hour of her stay.
She stayed an exact half-hour, measured
by her watch. At its termination she rose ;
and for the first time, save in casual glances,
her eye met Gerald's. Suddenly even her
composure appeared about to give way.
Those gray eyes were so bright, so clear, as
though a spirit from another world were
gazing through them ; the flush upon the
thin young cheek had an unearthly radiance ;
the fair hair clustered round a brow stamped
early by thought and suffering. This young
man who had loved her, was no ordinary
man. That thought struck her with renewed
power. Did it strike her also that he was
one to be clung to for life or for death ? that
death itself could not part a soul like his from
a kindred heart that loved him ? At all
events she coloured, and seemed moved ; and
therewith the old craving woke again in
Gerald's face. In another moment, had she

responded ever so little, lie would have
clasped her hand, and cried — " Come back
to me, Liu a — Lina ! " But, even while the
rose hue deepened upon her face, her calm
voice spoke and said :

Good-bye, Gerald. It is a great satisfaction
to feel that we can now meet on comfortable
terms."

He made some inarticulate answer. She
pressed his fingers, with conventional touch,
kissed Marjory, and, turning at the door to
bow and smile, passed affably away.

'marjory," said Gerald, suddenly, the
same evening, as he lay looking out at the
stars : " If I were skilled in sculpture, I could
take a block of stone and carve it into a
beautiful face, and impart to that face a look,
as they say, ' full of soul.' And yet, all the
time, beneath, would be stone — only
stone."

And the stone could not help itself," said
Marjory, vaguely.

"No — and one could not blame it. Or, if
one did blame it, where would be the use ?
But suppose it were so life-like that some
poor fool set his heart upon it, thinking ita
woman ? He would have to own his
mistake at last; and yet the power and

the charm of it, deception tbougli it were,
might have grown too strong to be castoff."


It seemed to Marjory that her brother
drooped more visibly from that day.

CHAPTEH X.

Take me away unto Thy sleep, God !
I thank Thee it is over."

Arthur H. Clough.

On one of the last days of November, Gerald
had worked harder than usual, to complete a
copy required by the solicitor before the
evening post. It was finished and sent off,
and he was resting, when a sudden faintness
seized him. Marjory, alarmed, at once despatched
Priscilla for Mr. Eobinson; Miss
Pilkington meanwhile administered remedies;
but the faintness was slow to yield. They
conquered at length, however ; colour and
life returned : and he rebuked Marjory for
troubling the doctor.

I was only a little over-tired ; I am all
right now," he said.

He would not go to bed, and, when Miss
Pilkington had retired, sat reading quietly,
his sofa drawn near the fire. Marjory, seeing
him content, forgot her anxiety in a pleasant
dream of her own. That very day her story

lead been posted to the publisher recommended
by Hugli Vivian. Her second venture
was made ; and, as she thought of it,
she felt more hopeful than for months before,
Gerald did not yet know what she had done ;
and now, as she sat opposite to him, she was
picturing his pleased surprise when, in a week
or two, he should find that at length she had
gained an entrance to the world of literature.
At last, at last, " after many days," might
come the object for which she had toiled.
Surely, when Gerald found that she had begun
to succeed, he would take heart again, and
with renewed hope his health would revive.
She was smiling to herself at the thought,
when Mr. Robinson's ring was heard. She,
too, as she looked at Gerald, thought that it
had been hardly necessary to send for him
to-night.

He entered with his usual cheerfulness, but
looking keenly at his patient, and, drawing a
chair into the glow of the firelight, sat down
to hear Marjory's report.

He has been working too hard," he said,
when it was finished : " that's the secret.
He is not up to much closeness of application."

'' But I have often done three times as
much — and since my illness' said Gerald.

"That may be. You can't do it now,
though. You see lie is very weak," he added,
turning to Marjory.

I wish you would give him some exact
rule, Mr. Robinson. He is so obstinate : I
can't manage him."

He ought to do nothing for which he is
not inclined ; and sometimes nothing at all :
he should go entirely by his feelings. Mind !
your physical feelings, I mean," said the
doctor, smilingly, to Gerald ; " Your mental
feelings are not to be depended upon."

Mr. Robinson's visits were never of long
duration. In a few minutes he rose to go,
leaving medicines to be administered, should
the faintness return, and promising to " lookin
" next day. Something indefinable in his
manner, as he looked at Gerald, had sent an
awful apprehension through Marjory. She
followed him from the room.

'* Mr. Robinson," she said breathlessly,
pausing at the head of the stairs, " I want
you to tell me the whole truth about my
brother."

"It is late now," said the surgeon, looking
at his watch. " I will see you tomorrow."


I cannot wait till tomorrow — I can't

bear the suspense. I implore you to tell meat
once — the whole truth."

Truth is sometimes painful," said Mr.
Robinson, gravely. He still looked carefully
down, as if not wishing to meet her
eye.

Marjory trembled from head to foot.

'' You mean that Gerald is very ill ? " she
said, clasping the banisters.

While there is life, there is hope," replied
Mr. Robinson.

"And that is all you can say ? "

'^ He will be spared much pain," said the
doctor, evasively. '^ He could never have
been strong again."

And — and — how long ? " gasped Mars

With care he may go on two or three
months. But very great care is required."

He paused a second. Then, as Marjory
made no answer, he looked at her at last
with true concern.

You insisted on my speaking plainly.
Miss Stanhope."

She bowed her head.

You need not be alarmed — I mean, there
will be nothing sudden."

Then, turning, he went quietly away. How

often before had a like task devolved on him !
To him this fleeting life was only one among
many. But to her !

She stood aghast, dumb and motionless,
as he had left her : until Gerald's voice called
from the sitting-room.

'' Marjory ! Are you there ? I want you."

Mechanically she went.

Gerald had thrown his book aside ; his
eyes were shining. He looked as he had
looked when Mr. Harding praised his genius,
when Lina promised one day to be his
wife.

'marjory," he said again, " the door was
a little open ; and I heard. Come here tome."


In the same mechanical manner she obeyed,
and stood before him. The colour was all
gone from her face, even from her lips.

'you are glad ? " she gasped, meeting his
eyes. For he looked glad : he looked even
transported with gladness.

Yes," he replied. " How can I help it ?
I don't want to be selfish — yet it is not altogether
selfish, — for this will be better for you
too. Yes — when it is over, when you are
used to it — far better ! Marjory, how can 1
help being glad ? "

As lie spoke, lie took her hand, and drew
her to a seat at his side.

Listen to me, dear Marjory. Only think !
I could never have been strong again : he
said it, — and I have felt it, many a time. A
weak woman is bad enough; but a weak
man ! — and a man forced to struggle with
the world, even with starvation — and in that
struggle to crush down the cravings for higher
things which all my life have been my blessing,
and yet my sorrow. My heart has sunk
within me, thinking of it, realizing the future.
What is there in this world worth livings
for, Marjory, to me? I have tried — I
have fought and struggled to resign myself
to God's Will; but now I find that
God has been better than my fears. The
cup that seemed so bitter is taken away, —
the worst is over — beyond are rest and
Paradise, — Marjory, how can I help being
glad ? "

But Marjory threw her arms around him,
and clasped him passionately, as if to hold
him back from the grave.

'' Gerald ! Gerald ! " she cried, " My
book went off only this morning ; and this
time there is every hope for it, and I had
thought — I had meant — Oh, even if you

could not be strong, you might have been,
happy yet ! Oh, it is hard — it is cruel."

'' My dear Marjory, I would pray to live,
if only for your sake. But I think it would
be asking a miracle."

'' Oh, yes ; there is no use in praying —
none ! I can never believe in it anymore."


Then she sat up suddenly, startled by her
own words. Gerald laid his hand on her
shoulder, with that touch which had soothed
her so often.

'' You are over-tired," he said, affectionately
; ''I wish you had not spoken to
Mr. Robinson. Do go to bed, dear Marjory,
and forget it for to-night. I am so sorry —
you are tired and worn-out."

*' I won't make you worse, at any rate,"
said Marjory. By resolute effort she commanded
herself, went with him to his room,
and bade him good-night as usual. But
afterwards, when she was shut up alone, the
storm had its vent. She threw herself upon
the floor, and lay there prostrate in her
agony.

"My God! my God! why hast Thou
forsaken me ? "Why hast Thou deluded
me ? " she cried. It seemed to her that she

was alone — alone in the universe. Her sobs
and tears went forth into the silence of the
night. Like a wave, she dashed herself
against the rocks without impression. There
was none to heed; and the great world
rolled on.

CHAPTER XI.

"The fame is quenched that I foresaw,
The head hath miss'd an earthly wreath."

Tennyson.

The young life, in itself so gifted, so blighted
in outer circumstances, was passing away ;
not painfully, — its chief pain, whether of body
or of spirit, was over : — passing from a world
which had dealt roughly with it. Continually
was Gerald's mind now haunted by the words,
*' The days of thy mourning shall be ended."
For him those days had been many. From
the time when, in early childhood, he had
been parted from his home, and all whom
his baby heart had loved, he had found life
an uphill way, full of disappointment, of
care, of uncongeniality. Now, as he looked
back, he remembered his boyish efforts towards
the paths of the great masters in art,
his discouragements, the strong purpose
which had gradually died into less of a purpose
than a hope — a hope unsteadily glimmering
until at length he had striven to
think of it no more. All now appeared to

him as in manhood appear the troubles and
dangers of infancy. Those " days of his
mourning " would never have seemed so
terrible had he known how closely they were
numbered. The bitter cup had been bitter
unto death ; but now it was almost drained.
He felt like one on a weary journey, expected
to prove long as weary, who turns an 
corner of the road, and, lo 1 his
home is in sight.

That feeling of fulness of life was still
powerful within him. His brain was unaffected,
and even clearer than in the days
of his health. No fear or shrinking shadowed
the newly-kindled radiance ; he had suffered
too much in this world to dread the change
to another.

One afternoon, Marjory, when she left the
school, found him absorbed in a book, and,
leaning over his shoulder, read these lines
from Keats : —

*' Bards of Passion and of Mirth,
Ye have left your souls on earth !
Have ye souls in heaven too,
Double-lived in regions new ?

Yes, and those of heaven commune
With the spheres of sun and noon ;

With the noise of fountains wondrous
And the parle of voices thunderous ;
With the whisper of heaven's trees
And one another, in soft ease
Seated on Elysian lawns,
Browsed by none but Dean's fawns ;
Underneath large bluebells tented.
Where the daisies are rose-scented,
And the rose herself has got
Perfume which on earth is not ;
Where the nightingale doth sing
Not a senseless, traced thing.
But divine, melodious truth ;
Philosophic numbers smooth ;.
Tales and golden histories
Of heaven and its mysteries.

Thus ye live on high, and then
On the earth ye live again ;
And the souls you left behind you
Teach us, here, the way to find you
Where your other souls are toying.
Never slumber'd, never cloying.
Here, your earthborn souls still speak
To mortals, of their little week ;
Of their sorrows and delights ;
Of their passions and their spites ;
Of their glory and their shame ;
What doth strengthen and what maim : —
Thus ye teach us, every day,
Wisdom, though fled far away."

"That is a fine thought," said Gerald,
repeating, as he pointed to the page, —

VOL. 111. K

' Where the daisies are rose-scented,
And the rose herself has got
Perfume which on earth is not.' "

How wonderful ! " lie said, dreamily,
leaning back in his chair.

Marjory noticed what joy was shining
through the clear gray of his eyes. A thought
struck her. She had prayed for his happiness
: was not the prayer answered ? Not
as she had hoped, but no less certainly.
She could not rejoice ; her heart was still
as a cold stone : but she acknowledged the
fact.

Here is another," said Gerald, turning
over the leaves.

* My days among the Dead are past ;
Around me I behold
Where'er these casual eyes are cast,
The mighty minds of old :
My never-failing friends are they,
With whom I converse day by day.' "

'' Southey is speaking of his books there,"
said Marjory, drearily.

Yes,— of the soul in them. ' The mighty
minds of old.' I couldn't explain to you,
Marjory; I have no words to utter my
wonder when I think of those ' mighty

minds ' — all the hosts of them : and that I
shall soon be with them. I try to realize
it; but the marvel grows like a dream.
Great artists, poets, philosophers — great
spirits of all kinds. Here is so much delusion
! — but there, none. No disappointment
no false ideals. What will it be ? It is
beyond conception !"

Again a thought struck Marjory. Would
he have known this happiness if her prayer
had been answered literally, — if he had been
in the way to gain his heart's desire, a brilliant
earthly future before him ? How would
death have seemed to him then ?

As though he read her thought, he spoke
and answered it : pausing at times, as ideas
crowded on his mind.

*' Marjory, the time of our death is fixed
of old, from the beginning. God knew that
I was to die early, so He prepared me for
it. All my life has been leading on to this.
God has been very merciful — far beyond
my thought : far beyond yours, Marjory.
He would not let me grow wedded to this
world ; He spared me that hard wrench.
Suppose I had been on the point of
going to Rome; suppose Lina — Lina had
been all I dreamed of, death would have
K 2

been the King of Terrors indeed ! Now lie
has no terrors."

Marjory was long silent, resting her head
upon her hand.

Yes' she said at last, '' I see that. But
God is Omnipotent. He could have given
you success and life both."

"But, after all, what is success in this
world ? " said Gerald, dreamily : '' Always
some flaw in it, some bitterness, some care.
No perfectness in oneself, or in others, orin
things. Oh, Marjory, far better to leave
it, and seek success in heaven !"

So he felt, to the depths of his heart. All
ambition was gone from him : or rather, it
was already transplanted to the paradise for
which he was bound. Once more Marjory
remembered her passionate entreaties that
Gerald might be blessed, honoured, glorious.
She had feared, a while ago, that they were
lost. But now, as she watched him fading,
all that was mortal of him dying as it were
by inches, yet content, with a contentment
often rising into rapture, the past forgotten
like a dream : — now, evermore and more, she
saw that they were not lost, Par beyond
their dim scope they had been answered, with an
answering which would echo through eternity.

'' I thought my love for him and my
prayers for him were all unselfish," she cried;
But no — they were selfish to the core."

And still, as she went about her daily
work, her heart felt like a stone.

Meantime Gerald wanted for nothing
which the kindness of friends could supply .<
As before, outward sympathies abounded;
while at home, the good ladies were ever
ready to help or advise. Marjory was
thankful for all ; but these things brought
her no comfort. She could never, she thought,
feel comforted again.

Letters, frequent and tender, came from
Rockswold; and Mr. Stanhope promised to
hold himself in readiness for her summons.
But Marjory as yet assured herself that any
need for such summons was far distant.
One day, soon after the declaration of Mr.
Robinson's verdict, she received a note from
Miss Peele, announcing that, if Gerald had no
objection, Mr. Throckmorton would like to
call upon him. No question of clerical interference
was involved, since the rector of
the College Yard district was non-resident ;
Gerald accepted the offer ; and thenceforth
Mr. Throckmorton visited him regularly. A
magnetic attraction, founded, as Marjory surmised,

in mutual sympathies respecting Lina,
drew them together. At one time Gerald
had mistrusted the priest ; he now discovered
that this mistrust had been wholly unfounded.
On the other hand, Mr. Throckmorton — who
had approached the young bank clerk through
a medium of patronising compassion — grew
to reverence him with reverence not unmingled
with wonder, and often, when he
left him, felt that he had gained more than
he imparted — that a spirit higher than his
own was here in training for Heaven. In
various points of ecclesiastical theology, their
opinions differed; Mr. Throckmorton thought
Gerald dangerously tolerant, — Gerald thought
Mr. Throckmorton narrow. But the great
essentials, which cannot change, formed common
ground, where they met in perfect
unity. Mr. Throckmorton's range of vision
widened in more directions than one, as he
found the growth to which a soul can attain,
independently of certain aids which he had
hitherto esteemed indispensable. Moreover,
although Lina's name was never directly
mentioned, his intercourse with Gerald revealed
certain facts regarding her, which led
him to doubt whether his criterions of holiness
had been altogether correct !

One anxiety still troubled Gerald's mind :
the payment of his debt. The will had provided
that, should he die prematurely, deficits
must be supplied from Marjory's legacy.
This necessity grieved him sorely ; the more,
since her small capital had been already reduced
in his behalf. But one December
afternoon, he was equally mystified and surprised
by a note from the solicitor, Mr. Grove,
informing him that the debt was paid. The
transaction was under seal of strictest confidence
; Mr. Grove was only at liberty to
say that the sum in full had been sent to
him by one who wished it to be regarded asa
tribute of respect to Mrs. Wilton.

Perhaps some old friend of our grandfather's,"
said Gerald, when he and Marjory,
vainly striving to elucidate the matter, had
gone over the whole list of their acquaintance.


'' I cannot at all make it out," said Marjory
; " Are you sure that we are right in
accepting it ? "

*' We have no alternative," said Gerald;
'* The thing is done. Here, you see, is the
formal receipt."

'' I suppose our grandmother had old
friends who might have done it ? "

'^ Ob, yes — she used to talk of no end ; old
sailors, too, shipmates of our grandfather's ;
some were at her funeral. Perhaps one of
those has come into a fortune, — I can think
of no one else. — But how wonderful, that
this should happen now ! "

It is too late," said Marjory.

Don't say that," said Gerald, gently ;
It has taken an unutterable load ofiP my
mind. This debt was the one anxiety I had
left, —and now it is gone."

Marjory made no reply. She only rested
her head upon the arm of his chair, that he
might not see her face.

I have no anxiety about you," he went
on, after a long pause ; " You will be happy."

Still she did not answer. Happy ! There
was no such word for her, now.

'' I feel as sure of your earthly future, as
of my own beyond earth. Things which you
don't dream of are in store for you."

Are you turning into a prophet ? " said
Marjory, trying to smile. She would let him
have his way. It was better that he should
not even guess at her desolation.

Over and over again, for days, he was
saying : '' What a relief that the debt is
paid ! " More than once he said : '' Marjory,

you used to pray that this might be ; and
here is the answer."

I prayed — but not for this," said Mar-not

for this ! " she repeated, from inmost
depths of agony. It seemed almost
a mockery that the answer should come
now !

One day she asked Gerald if she should
write to Lina, telling her of his state. He
hesitated a moment ; then a flush, like a
sunset cloud, crossed his brow.

No," he replied ; '' I'd rather not. She
would answer ; and it would only revive
He paused.

*' I shall be disenchanted in Heaven, Marjory,"
he said, with a sudden smile; "But
never, quite, till I am there."

About this time his pictures were brought
down from the attic, and, as he had strength,
he looked over them, arranging all in order.
Many he wished to burn ; but Marjory would
not hear of this ; every line of every one was
sacred to her. The " Bridge " was still unfinished
; and thus it must be left ; he would
never paint again on earth. The " Ideal,"
filled in with Lina's face, was in a cupboard
in his room. He took it out, and gazed long

on it in silence. Then, turning to Marjory,
lie showed her the figure's uplifted hand.

You see it points higher," he said,
calmly, and laid the picture aside among the
rest.

He referred in no way to Lina any more.

Towards the middle of December the publisher
wrote, accepting Marjory's story, and
offering liberal terms. She laid the note
down upon the table, and turned away sick
at heart. But Gerald took it up, and his
whole face lighted with pleasure.

Marjory ! this is famous ! Did I not
tell you that you would succeed at last ? "

'' I don't care for it now," said Marjory.
She could not say more ; she went away to
her own room, and shed tears that seemed
like blood drops wrung from her soul.

She remembered that Hugh Vivian had
told her of some help which he had hoped
for, and prayed for, in vain ; and which had
come afterwards, too late.

Too late !

*' Lord, if I lose all else, save my faith ! "
she cried, as those bitter tears flowed on.

CHAPTER XII.

My blood makes shuddering leaps, as alone in my dark

I think
Of my own white stag whom the pitiless archers wounded

sore,
My royal eagle whose plumes were all bedaubed in

gore.
My strong one whose prideful locks of glory and power

they shore —
And the iron enters deep to my soul, and I shudder and

shrink,
And the bitter and awe of death are in the cup that I

drink."

E. H. Hickey.

In a sick room, life appears as a dream. The
days of the past, the commonplace days,
with their employments, interests, joys, and
sorrows, — days of health, when sickness was
to us an empty name, pitied from afar : these
are all as a vision that is gone. The busy
world without, of which we hear the sound,
seems but a pageant — a temporary stage, on
which the players come and go. To this
they will all come, sooner or later ; to these
four walls, this helplessness, this slow decay,
with Eternity beyond. Or else they will

pass suddenly into that Eternity, find suddenly
how vain was the show. Eternity !
In a room of sickness, nigh to death, what is
anything in the whole great world beside
Eternity ?

Realities close around us like mighty shapes,
as hills emerge from twilight into dawn. The
petty ambitions and conventionalities, the
civilities and slights, melt into nothingness.
How did we care so much for them ? When
this beloved one, by whom we watch, is gone,
and we return to them, how small they will
seem ! What is it to this fading life whether
in our world it were high or low ? If such
and such a grandee of earth favoured or cut
him dead — if so and so called on him, asked
him to dinner, or the reverse, — either way,
how does it matter ? What child's play all
alike seems here ! Whether this or that
plan or speculation succeeded, — whether he
gained such or such office or high place —
what does any of it signify now ? — What the
Judge, before whom he is summoned, will
say : this is the one point now. What is
written of him in the great Book above, how
the high ones of Heaven will regard him, —
where they will place him : nothing short of
this matters now, — to him.

Slowly, and by degrees, as the days went
on, and, holding Gerald's hand, she went
beside him ever deeper into the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, the fact already suggested
impressed itself on Marjory's mind : that
God had answered her prayers for Gerald ina
way higher than she had dreamt of, than
she could even as yet comprehend : a way
that for him was " far better," if not for
herself : — and she had wished not to think
about herself.

More and more clearly, with her reason,
she saw it ; yet with her heart she could not
rejoice : that stone-like anguish did not melt.
She traced the Hand of God, but could not
acknowledge it to be a Hand of Love. The
path of pain in which so often it is His Will
to work, excited a feeling of despair, of mute
rebellion, which she controlled, but could not
conquer. All the other breaking hearts in
this wide world, all the other lifelong partings,
all the other blighted hopes, all the
other dying beds, arose as in a vision before
her. It seemed to her that the ways of God
were hard, were terrible. She could no
longer think of Him as " Our Father."

Towards the end of December, very cold
weather set in ; an icy wind blew, followed

by snows and frosts. Many said that this
was all the better, that there would be "an
old-fashioned Christmas;" and healthy people
seemed the healthier from the bracing of the
clear sharp air. Marjory saw bright girls,
wrapped in furs, and glowing with exercise,
walk briskly through the College Yard. She
saw athletic young men, and rosy boys,
brimful of life and vigour, their spirits
heightened by the combat with the cold.
But Gerald withered and drooped beneath
the severity of the change ; it seemed to her
that each day since it began, had made him
a little weaker, a little thinner. Still, Mr.
Eobinson had spoken of two or three months
two or three months, with great care.
And had he not had great care ? — the very
tenderest, the most watchful. But if possible,
that care was redoubled now : she would
hold him back as long as she could. The
thought of parting with him grew continually
more terrible. All through the last few
weeks he had been so kind, so gentle, so sympathizing
: he was so considerate of her, so
careful to save her, so anxious that she should
not be over-tired ! How she would miss
him ! She could not realize, she dared not,
half what that missing would be.

About this time she received a letter from
Bellhouse, — a letter not remarkably legible,
but full of motherly kindness. It came like
a waft from a far-off Eden, but only sent a
sharper pang through Marjory's heart, as she
remembered how little in those Eden days
she had guessed at the weary life before her.
In the course of the letter Bellhouse mentioned
that a purchaser had turned up for
Thorne. Mr. Crawford had been down, and
had said that there was little doubt of a final
arrangement ; but the gentleman was obliged
to wait some weeks before deciding. He had
not mentioned the gentleman's name.

I hope it is some one who will care for
the old place," said Gerald, dreamily : " Marjory,
I have so often thought of that old
churchyard at Thorne."

She sat motionless, staring into the
fire.

I should like, — if it did not cost very
much — I should so much like "

Marjory burst out suddenly, with an irrepressible
cry.

"I understand," she said. "You shall
have all you wish. But, oh, Gerald, don't !
I cannot bear it ! "

He laid his hand gently on her head, as

she sat on lier old stool beside him. After
that they were both long silent.

The Christmas holidays began ; and Lewis
Harding came from the other house to wish
his hero good-bye. Gerald had a parting present
for him, — a cast-off paint-box, brushes,
and drawing book ; and Marjory went to her
own chamber, leaving the two alone. Sometime
afterwards she heard the boy steal
softly out of the sitting-room : and caught a
stifled sob.

Good-bye, Lewis, "she said, going out to
him. He was leaning on the banisters, a
spotted handkerchief in his hand.

Hollo ! " said he, looking round, with an
effort at bravado : " Miss Stanhope, you
must have cats' feet ! I never heard you.
Good-bye. I say — Miss Stanhope ? ''

'eyes!"

He'll be better " — the red head jerking
towards the sitting-room door ; " He'll be
better, won't he, when we come back ? "

Marjory tried to answer ; but words failed.
The boy turned sharply, and choked in his
spotted handkerchief, and shuffled out of
sight to hide the tears he could not restrain.

The place was, as usual, very silent when
the boys were gone. Mrs. Myers and Miss

Pilkington remained, for Marjory's sake.
She saw little of them, but there they were —
ready to help when help was needed : had
they gone also, she would have been desolate
indeed.

Christmas Day came, and passed. In the
morning the sun shone brightly on the snow,
and for one instant Gerald opened the window
to hear the organ in the cathedral. Marjory
fancied that in doing so he caught cold.
Certainly, a few days later, she saw that
his breathing was oppressed — and that he
coughed : — he had never coughed before.
He seemed weaker too, but for her sake
fought against it, forcing himself to rise by
nine o'clock each morning, and to sit up, as
usual, until night. Marjory never knew how
great was the relief when she proposed that
he should lie in bed for a day, to nurse his
cold." For the last forty-eight hours he
had felt hardly able to hold up his head ; butin
bed he was quite comfortable ; a cheerful
fire blazed in his room, and Marjory made it
very pretty and bright, placing pictures and
books to the best advantage, with flowers
from Mrs. Carberry's hothouse, and the easy
chair wheeled from the sitting-room.

'' This rest will do me all the good in the

VOL. III. L

world," lie said : '' I shall be ten times better
in a day or two''

He smiled as lie spoke, and looked altogether
so bright, that the sick pain in her
breast was lightened. Who knew whether
the two or three months might not go on to
five or six — or more ? — with such care as
this!

At her solitary breakfast next morning,
she found a letter from Lina : and opening
it, felt thankful that Gerald was not in the
room. Those platitudes concerning his illness,
even the anticipated end of his illness —
those condolences, regrets, comfortable committals
of him and Marjory to higher powers,
would hardly have seemed to him so soothing
as Lina had designed. They were the
reverse of soothing to Marjory. She ran
them speedily through ; and turned the page.

You will be interested to hear that I
have found a clue to the unfortunate Jessie
Bellhouse."

What was this ? Marjory's breath seemed
almost stopped ; the blood rushed up into
her face. The letter trembled in her hand,
as she read.

One day last week, the very lady in
whose company I first saw that photograph,

called upon my sister. I recognized the face
directly, and soon found that her remembrance
of me was clearer than mine of her.
Her name is Miss Steamer ; she spends only
a few months yearly at her Dover house, and
hence it is that I have met her but once
before. She reminded me of a shopping
expedition on which she had escorted me,
one day when I was here as a young girl,
and my sister could not go out. Thus much
recalled, I remembered more, and asked if
on the same occasion she had been seeking
lodgings for a sick servant. She replied
that she had; and, to make a long story
short, I obtained the address of two houses,
which we had visited on that day. Yesterday
I contrived to call alone at the first of these
houses ; and I had no sooner entered the
little parlour, than the whole scene came
back. Before me was the sofa, the table
with the bead mats, the album itself, bound
in mauve ! I took it up ; and surely enough
there was the bridal photograph. Opposite
was the photograph of a child ; a boy of
about four years old, with handsome features,
the resemblance unmistakable. While I
was looking at this, a young person came in,
apologizing for the absence of her sister, the
L 2

mistress of the house, and asking if I wished
to see the rooms. I replied that I would
call again when Mrs. Jelly, the said mistress,
was at home, and then inquired, as if from
pure curiosity, whether the little boy were
the son of the bride on the opposite page ?
The young woman hesitated ; then finding,
I conclude, from my face, that I was not a
person to be mistrusted, she said : ' Yes,
poor little fellow — 'tis a sad case; his ma
was deserted by her husband.' I asked
what had become of the child ; she opened
the door, calling a name which I did not
distinguish : and the boy himself ran into
the room. I certainly never saw a finer
child, quite bearing out all you have told me
of his mother's beauty. He is now between
five and six years old.

Finding me interested, the young woman
told me that ' his ma,' Mrs. Russell — as she
called herself — died suddenly in these lodgings,
leaving the baby, six weeks old, utterly
friendless. She had only been here a day or
two, and had informed Mrs. Jelly — who is
evidently, if foolish, benevolent — that her
husband had left her in France, many months
before, and had never known of the childbirth
; that she had written to a friend who

might be able to find bim, — and that bethought
when be beard of the child, be
would surely come. Mrs. Jelly therefore for
some time expected bim to appear ; but no
word, either of bim or of * Mrs. Russell's '
antecedents, bad ever reached her. Tbe
young woman concluded her account by
remarking : 'It's just like a novel, miss,
isn't it ? ' I replied that I feared it was
often owing to foolish novels that young
girls made careless marriages, ending in
misery like this. Mrs. Jelly is still from
borne ; but she is expected shortly : and
when I see her, I will obtain all particulars.
Meanwhile I trust to your honour to keep
this strictly private. I will only add that
the young woman and her sister believe the
name Russell to be assumed : and that the
hoy's christian name is Copelandss.

Believe me, dear Marjory,
Yours affectionately,

'' Caroline Peele."

What would follow next ? Why should
the boy's name be Copelandss ? Marjory
pressed both bands upon her heart to still
the throbbing pain. A deadly fear bad seized

her. Old scenes, old words, old looks, came
flocking back, fitting strangely one with
another : expressions of Hugh Vivian's face,
tones of his voice, which she had thought to
be forgotten. Oh, that Lina had either not
written at all, or had put it off until the
whole truth were known !

'^ I will not believe it — I will not," she
said to herself; but that deadliness of dread
did not abate. Yet could he have been
allowed to fall — so deeply to fall — when all
the while, every morning and every night of
every year, that prayer was going up for
him ?

Almighty God, bless Mr. Hugh ! and
make him good."

Yes, all the while, as at quiet Rockswold
she grew from childhood into girlhood, knowing
only of him that he was somewhere
under the eye of God. And could he have
been left to himself — to the devils — like this?
When she saw him at the cathedral, when
she watched him praying at length for himself,
could it be that so terrible a secret lay
hidden in his heart ? As the one relief to
the anxiety Which consumed her, she fell on
her knees, and cried : " God, Thou knowest
! "— '^ Thou— Thou knowest," she repeated

again and again. Then, yet again :
God, if it be true, forgive him ! God,
if there be any reality in prayer, if Thou art
at all — forgive him ! "

Too soon she had to rise, to compose herself,
to go calmly, as if nothing had happened ,
into Gerald's room. What a contrast to the
atmosphere of crime which had been suggested,
— that room so pure and bright ! — and
Gerald, his gray eyes full of peace, lying
there, waiting for Heaven.

Marjory, are you very cold ? " he asked.
She caught a glimpse of herself in the glass,
and saw that she was paler than ever, to her
own knowledge, in all her life before.

"No, I am not cold."

'' Come here," said Gerald, stretching out
his hand. " Come to me."

She obeyed ; and he drew her down to a
seat beside his bed.

It will all come right," he said gently,
stroking her hair. '' It will all come right,
dear Marjory : — never mind."

She looked at him, astonished at what
appeared a gift of prescience : but she saw
that he knew nothing definite — he was speaking
only to the trouble in her face.

*' You are worried and overdone just now ;

and everything seems dark : but it will passover.
Marjory, remember — and take this
in : — it will all pass over."

"What shall I do when you are gone?"
said Marjory in a smothered voice, resting
her head upon his pillow. Almost she had
opened her heart to him : but no ! she would
not disturb his calm brightness.

CHAPTER Xii

And when
I saw his soul saw, — jasper first, I said,
And second, sapphire ; third, chalcedony j
The rest in order, — last, an amethyst."

Elizabeth Barrett Browning.

Lying in bed had. not, as Gerald expected,
made him stronger. At the end of the second
day he was weaker ; decidedly weaker. On
the third day he was very drowsy, dozing
continually. Any slight noise, or movement
in the room, would awake him ; he would
just smile at Marjory, or gaze dreamily
towards the window, and his eyes would
close once more. Marjory felt very lonely
as she sat beside his fire : she was glad when,
towards night, he revived, and began to
talk.

He told her of strange visions which had
come to him in slumber — of beautiful forms
and faces floating before him — of music heard
as in a trance.

*' Sleep is a wonderful thing," he said, —
and how soothing when one is weak ! "

Two or three times throughout that night
she stole into his room, and found him always
peacefully sleeping, his position unaltered.
At length she herself slept soundly: when
she awoke, the last day of this eventful year
had dawned.

Mr. Robinson called after breakfast ;
Gerald was once more asleep. For several
minutes the doctor stood beside his bed — felt
his pulse gently, without awakening him :
then laid down the passive hand.

'' Miss Stanhope," he said. " Could I speak
to you in the other room ? "

She went with him ; he hesitated, paused.

'ris he worse ? " said Marjory, grasping
the back of a chair.

'' I should advise you to send for your
uncle."

'' You said — you said two or three
months "

I thought, then, that it might be so ; butin
these cases one cannot speak with certainty.
He will not suffer. — I will send you
help," he added abruptly ; and hurried away
from the pain he could not ease.

Marjory remained long motionless in the
place where he had left her. Then, half
mechanically, half in obedience to a voice in

her heart, crying " Gerald ! Gerald ! " — she
returned to the sick chamber. This time he
did not look up and ask if she were cold.
She sat down beside the bed, and watched.
Surely Mr. Robinson was mistaken ! He
looked just as usual, as he had looked for
long past : only calmer, happier, more like a
thin and weary child that, having cried itself
to sleep, sleeps sweetly.

After a while he turned on his pillow;
his eyes, unclosing, met Marjory's, and he
saw in hers the expression unconsciously
strong.

Marjory, don't be anxious," he said,
touching her hand. " I feel better — much
better : I shall be able to get up soon."

Almost as the words were spoken, he was
lost once more in that irresistible slumber.

Marjory was ere long aware of the entrance
of Miss Pilkington, followed by the old woman
who had assisted in the nursing some months
before. She came, bundle in hand, evidently
prepared to remain. Marjory said a mechanical
" Good-morning," and resumed her
absorbed watch. It was a relief when Miss
Pilkington, behind her, breathed, in a deep
whisper : " Now you — don't you worry about
anything. I'll settle all that is necessary

with Mrs. Levett. Just see to your brother
and no more'*

Marjory looked mutely up at her : thanks
would not come in words.

*' Please don't telegraph — it will startle
Aunt Lucy," she said presently, as an afterthought,


"I will write instead," said Miss Pilkington;
and the outer world vanished as before.

Still, through the greater part of the day,
Gerald slept ; waking at intervals, and taking
food, then dozing off again. Often during
that sleep he smiled, and exclaimed as if in
joy or in wonder.

Where could I find colours ? " he said
once: "Would Mr. Harding know ? This
is brighter than the colouring of Venice."

Another time, as if in a dream, his eyes
still closed, he said : —

If I could paint it, when I got well again,
I should soon be glorious ! But I never
could. Just to remember it, will be more
than enough."

I wish you could tell me what you have
seen," said Marjory, bending over him.

I will some day," he murmured drowsily :
and sank again into slumber.

'' I will some day." Was it a prophecy ?

Were days indeed in store, when in the fields
of Paradise he would tell her the history of
these strange hours ? But oh, what might
lie between — for her — between that blessed
time and now ? "What a long waste of years !
what dreary loneliness ! The cherished dream
of her life gone like a mirage; the faces
which she had loved gone likewise — Gerald
in heaven, she here. Her whole being seemed
contracted into a pain as the silent hours
went by.

The early twilight deepened into darkness.
The stars came out, and the moon : it was
a clear and frosty night. Mr. Eobinson called
again, but said little or nothing. Marjory
was barely conscious of his presence, as he
stood beside the bed. Later came Mr. Throck-
morton, and remained a long time, hoping
that Gerald would awake; but Gerald neither
opened his eyes, nor heard when his name
was spoken. The clergyman was obliged to
leave him, promising to return very early
next day. After this, all was quiet. Marjory
persuaded the old nurse to rest in the
next room ; she herself plaited ber hair,
and lay down in her dressing-gown, on a chair-bed
at Gerald's side. The room was very
still. The fire flickered, subdued yet ruddy ;

the lamp was turned low. Marjory had drawn
up the blind ; she lay wakeful, looking at
the stars.

How calmly they shone ! how distant in
the deep ether ! Would Gerald be among
them soon ? Would he find out what they
were ? How wonderful his knowledge would
be ! how small earth and its concerns would
seem to him ! As she mused the bells rang
out in the town ; the old year was drawing
to its close. First one peal, then another ;
some far away, like echoes ; some silvery ;
some old and deep. The air was full of
melody. Marjory could almost have imagined
that some of it came from above, from those
stars shimmering in the heights. Presently
Gerald stirred, opened his eyes, and spoke.

Marjory, is anything the matter ? "

"It is only the bells ringing out the old
year, dearest. Did they wake you ? "

'' I don't know ; it does not matter. I
have slept a long time. How beautiful they
are ! "

Both lay silent, listening. In the dim
light Marjory could see his gray eyes gazing,
as hers had been, towards the stars : she
saw the expression of his face — thoughtful,
yet full of peace.

"Marjory," he said, suddenly, " Why
should we imagine that our talents end with
earth ? They are of the soul, not of the
body. T often remember Goethe's speech :
This life, gentlemen, is much too short for
our souls.' I am thinking now of my one
talent, my art. It is a part of me — I feel
sure of that ; it cannot die."

So used I to argue," said Marjory, with
a smothered sob.

'* Yes, for earth ; and why not for heaven?
This craving to devise and imitate beauty,
which was born with me, which has never
let me rest, — it has come to nothing much
here, but only God knows what work there
may be for it in the future. I can't tell
how, or where — I must leave all that. But
it is too strong to die, Marjory."

She could not answer. She only clasped
his hand, and laid her face against it ; and
the bells rang on.

Patience — it is patience we want," he
said dreamily : " ' Though it tarry, wait for
it ; in the end it shall surely come — it shall
not tarry.' You were puzzled about your
prayers, and our Saviour's promise. It seems
to me that I see it all now. That promise
is not only for this world ; sometimes it goes

on into the next. ' Only believe ' — believe
unto death ! What is death ? Just a portal,
as I have read somewhere, joining the two
lives."

Or dividing them," broke from Marjory's
sore heart.

'' So it seems now to you. It will seem
differently soon ; you will look back to these
miserable days as a dream. You have prayed
for me, and I have prayed for you, Marjory.
I know that you will be comforted very
soon."

Marjory's tears fell thick and fast upon
his hand. He felt them, and tightened the
clasp.

Don't cry, Marjory," he said gently.

I can't help it. Oh, Gerald, how can I
live in this weary world without you ? "

Think of our Saviour, dear Marjory.
Think of our Saviour," he repeated in his
calm tone.

As he spoke the bells ceased. All was
silence. Then, one after another, all the
clocks in the old city struck twelve.

''A happy New Year to you, Marjory,"
said Gerald, as the bells clashed out once
more.

*rand to you, my Gerald — to you," she

cried, rising, and clasping him in lier
arms.

Drifting away into an unknown future —
beyond the grave. Oh, might he find a
happy new year — a happy new life there !
The Hfe that knows no ending —-the tearless
life." — Happy? Oh, the impotence of words !

Lord, I see it. I see that I have been
selfish, striving to keep him from Heaven.
Forgive me 1 I will try to rejoice that he
should be so blessed."

As this cry burst from Marjory's heart,
the stony hardness softened. Her tears still
flowed ; but something of their bitterness
was past. Before her eyes a door had opened;
she had looked in and caught a glimpse of
her Gerald's bliss.

She rested her head on his pillow, her
arms still about his neck. When he spoke
again, his tone was more feeble than before.

'' This time last year," he said dreamily —
"just about this hour, I was walking from
Albion Square, and thinking about Eome.
I thought that when this day came, I should
perhaps be there. But Heaven is best."

'heaven is best ! " Yes, Marjory saw
it. She stilled her sobs, that he might not
be grieved.

VOL. III. M

He had said to her : " Think of our
Saviour." Yes — that Blessed One had
suffered, as she was suffering now. He also
had gone down into earth's depths. The
moon, yonder shining on her anguish, had
shone on His. She remembered that in that
hour He had prayed : '' Not My Will, but
Thine be done ! " Not in faith alone, but in
full knowledge, thus He prayed : and on His
knowledge our faith may rest.

From the stormy wanderings of her
wretchedness, Marjory had come at last, like
a stray child returning home, to her old
childish confidence.

'•' God knows best ! Let Him manage all
for me, for Gerald, for every one, in His
own way."

She lay more calmly now, though still
clasping Gerald, as if her hold would stay
him. The bells all clano^ed together in one
final peal ; then ceased ; and their echoes
died away. Gerald had relapsed into perfect
stillness ; she would have thought that he
was again asleep, — only, when she looked at
him, she still saw his eyes, open, and full of
life and thought, as in the days of his
health, looking fixedly out towards the
stars.

She herself was sinking into a doze, when
suddenly he spoke.

Precious stones," he said, dreamily ;
'All manner of precious stones. The first
jasper; the second , sapphire; the third, a
chalcedony ; the fourth, an emerald ; the
fifth, sardonyx ; the sixth, sardius ; the
seventh, chrysolite ; the eighth, beryl ; the
ninth, a topaz ; the tenth, a chrysoprasus ;
the eleventh, a jacinth ; the twelfth, an
amethyst. — And the twelve gates were twelve
pearls ; every several gate was of one pearl ;
and the street of the city was pure gold, as
it were transparent glass"* "

He paused, and smiled ; a calm, a heavenly
smile : of perfect peace.

Then — '' Thank God," she heard him say;
'' Thank God for my Marjory ! "

As he spoke, he turned his face upon the
pillow, and closed his eyes. Marjory half rose,
and listened ; she could not hear his breath.

A hurried call summoned the old nurse.
She entered, raised the lamp ; and, bringing
it to the bedside, turned its rays upon
the pillow.

*' Whom the gods love, die young !"

This face lying here, was plainly the face
of such an one ; and it was dead.
M 2

"He is gone," said the nurse, gently.
Marjory did not answer. Her eyes returned
from the still form beside her, to the stars,
striving to pierce the ether — to trace the
upward track on which her Gerald's spirit
was soaring.

CHAPTEH Xii.

Beating heart and burning brow, ye are very patient

now,

Toll slowly.
And the children might be bold to pluck the kingcups

from your mould
Ere a month had let them grow.

In your patience ye are strong, cold and heat ye take
not wrong,

Toll slowly.
When the trumpet of the angel blows eternity's evangel,
Time will seem to you not long."

Elizabeth Barrett Browning.

But Paradise is silent, invisible ; and though
for a moment it seems at times to open, too
soon that moment fleets, and the dividing
gulf is drearier than before. When all had
been set in order in Gerald's room, the blind
drawn down, and the still form composed
upon the bed, no longer a bed of suffering :
a time of anguish unutterable came to Marjory.
''He is with Thee; — but I am alone —
alone," she said to God. Her tears flowed
unceasingly.

'' Gerald, Gerald — I want you — I want
you," her heart was crying. The speechless
darkness was awful to her. She could not
remember the time when Gerald had not
been the chief object of her dreams, of her
hopes. She could hardly realize that he was
gone ; that he was not.

I don't want to be selfish, — I would not
call him back; but how can I bear it?"
she sobbed again and again ; "I am young
and healthy, — I cannot die like him ; I must
live on and on — perhaps for fifty, sixty
years ! "

So she wept and wailed into the silence.
He could not be near, she thought — he must
be far, far distant — or in some way he would
send her some token. She remembered his
kind touch upon her head, upon her shoulder ;
she would not be afraid, she thought, if she
could feel that touch again.

Afraid ? Oh, no — only glad, thankful ! But
there was no sign, no supernatural appearance.
When she went into his room, the
calm figure lay as if carved in marble ; as
still, as cold. The gray eyes could no more
open and gaze at her ; the kind young voice
could no more speak to her, begging her not
to cry.

There was plenty of work to be done in
these sad days. Mr. Stanhope, who had
arrived on the New Year's evening, was
anxious to return speedily, having left his
delicate wife far from well. So Marjory had
to pack, and prepare for removal, all her
own and Gerald's possessions. When those
things had been unpacked, how happy, how
full of hope, was her heart ! how bright
had all the world seemed, when she first
entered these rooms which now she was
leaving !

Arrangements were made for the funeral
in that quiet spot where Gerald had desired
to be laid. It so happened that Mr. Crawford
was spending a few hours at Thorne ;
the circumstances came to his knowledge ;
and a day or two after his return to London,
Mr. Stanhope received a kind and civil note,
placing the house at his and Marjory's disposal,
for so long as they could make it of
service. Mr. Stanhope, however, saw no
reason to accept this hospitality ; he hoped
immediately after the funeral to drive on
with Marjory to a quiet country station,
where an afternoon train stopped at a convenient
hour for the journey to Rockswold.

The pretty sitting-room was dismantled at

last ; the boxes were packed ; the coffin-lid
had been closed : all was over. The river
flowed on as Marjory had so often watched
it ; the quiet fields stretched away on its further
bank : Nature remained the same, — it
was only the human lives dwelling among
these scenes, which had undergone revolution.
The hearse was at the door ; the coffin was
carried down the stairs and away. So went
Gerald forth from the house which Marjory
had hoped to be but, as it were, the portal
of a long and prosperous life.

It was a still day, calm and cold ; as they
drove out into the country, the snow lay in
half thawed patches over the fields, and on
the cottage-roofs. The stir of the town was
soon left far behind. But Marjory could
not realize that she would not drive back in
the evening, and find Gerald waiting for herby
the familiar fire, the table spread, the
lamp lighted, as usual, the past weeks of
anguish vanished as a dream.

That dreamlike feeling prolonged itself,
and deepened. After a while they came
within sound of a bell, distantly tolling. The
slow knell came ever more clearly upon the
frosty air : she knew, yet could not realize,
that it tolled for Gerald. The carriage

slackened its pace ; she recognized the lane :
now they were passing the plantation, — the
larch firs, green where all else was leafless —
the spot where Jessie had stood with her
basket and her trowel. Some one was riding
again, as in those days long gone, through
the lane. As the carriage approached, he
reined in his horse, and drew to one side tolet
it pass. Something — she hardly knew
what — in the figure, stirred Marjory with a
sudden thrill : it died away again the next
moment, as she remembered.

Suddenly the tolling ceased; the village
bells, after an old custom in those parts,
broke into a chime : as if to welcome the
weary one who was coming to sleep beneath
their shade. Marjory was conscious that the
carriage had stopped, that her uncle was
helping her out : then that, leaning on his
arm, she was following the long coflSn, carried
reverently by rustic bearers. In the
church she knew that a voice was reading ;
she did not hear the words which it said.
Her eyes were fixed upon that silent coffin,
where her life, she thought, was buried.

Soon afterwards she stood by an open
grave : into which that coffin had been
lowered. As the earth clods fell heavily

upon the lid, words read long ago sounded
in her ears : —

Sleep in peace, thou blest one, within thy narrow room !
My heart I also lay beside thee in the tomb."

Three o'clock was barely past ; but already,
in the west, a crimson light betokened a
frosty sunset. The air was very cold ; but,
below the churchyard wall, the brook rippled
over its stones, just as it had rippled
in the summer — and in that other summer,
long ago, when Marjory went in quest of it.
How little she had thought, then, that the
same brook would ripple thus for ever past
Gerald's grave! The yew-trees stood dark
and sad in the still atmosphere ; the other
graves, closed long ago, clustered roundabout.
A few rustic figures, scattered here
and there, looked on in respectful pity : if
curiosity mingled with this, it was not obtrusive.


That, when we shall depart this life, hoe
may rest in Him* — read the clergyman —
as our hope is, this our brother doth. . . .
and receive that blessing which Thy well
beloved Son shall then pronounce to all that
love and fear Thee, saying. Come, ye blessed
children of my Father, receive the kingdom

prepared for you from the beginning of the
worlds

'' Oh, that that time were come ! " thought
Marjory : " Oh, that it could come at once !
that I were there, with my Gerald ! "

The service was ended : silence followed.
She stepped forward, to look again into the
grave. The last look: "the last forever."
All that story of Marjory's life was ended
here : here she must leave her brother sleeping.
She stood still, — her uncle waited —
the crimson light grew redder in the west —
the brook rippled on. Some one who,
throughout the service, had been standing
behind her, came gently forward, and stood
at her side, over the grave. Once more
that strange thrill ran through Marjory ; she
looked up : it seemed only a natural continuation
of her dream, that she was looking into
Hugh Vivian's face. The dark eyes of old
met hers with an indescribable expression :
which said, with more power than could be
uttered in words — " I would lay down my
life, if that could comfort you ! " She saw
it mechanically, all other things around her
growing more indistinct. Gradually the
strength seemed fading from her limbs, from
her brain ; she thought that she was sinking,

down, down, into the grave, to Gerald. In

reality she had staggered, and would have

fallen, but for her uncle's arm, stretched

quickly forward.

* * *

After long unconsciousness, Marjory opened
her eyes. Had the years rolled back, or had
they never been ? Was she still, or again, a
child ? She lay once more in Miss Evie's
little bed ; the lamp was lighted ; the chintz-covered
arm-chair stood in its old place. On
the walls shone the bright birds and flowers
which had charmed her childish fancy ; and
beside the bed stood Bellhouse : her glance,
after its first wandering survey, rested upon
that kind and homely face.

How did I come here ? " she asked, still
dreamily.

Don't you think about that, or anything
else, my dear," said Bellhouse, soothingly :
Here's some nice hot soup been waiting for
you this hour."

She turned to the fireplace, as she spoke ;
a ruddy blaze was casting gleaming lights
on the old furniture. Ah, this was no summer's
evening ! the years had been no dream.
The dreary present, with its weight of grief,
came back, and stared Marjory in the face.

She took silently the food provided for her ;
and then repeated her question.

Your uncle and the doctor brought
you here, my dear, in — the carriage. You
were in a dead faint at first ; and when that
left you, you fell into a heavy sleep. I saw
that the only thing was to get you to bed as
soon as possible ; and Mr. Robinson — he said
it would be as much as your life was worth
to take a long journey at present. Then,
when your poor uncle was perplexed what to
be at, your aunt being ill alone, and expecting
him to-night, — Mr. Hugh said that Mr.
Crawford had seen him in London, and had
sent a message to beg once more that this
house might in all ways be made use of, as
if it was your own. As for me. Miss Stanhope,
my dear, I assured your uncle that
greater care could not be taken of you, if —
begging his pardon, ma'am, and yours — you
were a child of my own : and the end was,
being indeed a case of necessity, he agreed
to leave you for a day or two at the least.
Mr. Robinson is to call the first thing in the
morning, to see how you are. So now,
ma'am, you know all about it ; and I hope
you will make your mind easy ; for you are
no more fit to travel than your poor aunt

herself: and a greater satisfaction than the
nursing of you will be to me, my dear, I
couldn't desire."

You are very kind," said Marjory gently.
It seemed, then, that all she had to do was
to be still ; — all indeed that she could do, —
for her strength was utterly gone. For
weeks she had been under a continual strain ;
the wonder was, that she had not broken
down long ago ! She felt weary, aching in
every limb, — much as she had felt when she
first lay down in this little bed, nine years
and a half before. Where the tired child
had lain, the tired girl, on the verge of
womanhood, rested. It was not a child's
heart, but a woman's, with a woman's cares,
a woman's griefs, a woman's capacity for
loving and for suffering, — which beat now
beneath Miss Evie's coverlet.

She had been silent for more than an hour,
and Bellhouse had sat down to sew, in the
chintz arm-chair, when she said faintly :
'' Bellhouse, where is Mr. Vivian ? "
Gone back, ma'am, to Alton. He will
be at the * Sun,' he told me, for the present."
'' But when did he come from Russia ? "
Only a few days ago, my dear : so I
understand. He took me altogether by surprise.

I had not heard a word of his being
expected."

Marjory relapsed into silence, closing her
eyes ; and Bellhouse hoped that she was
sleeping once more. But in the middle of
the night, when the old nurse had risen softly
from her own bed in an adjoining room to
visit her patient, she found her awake —
crying, crying, as if her heart would burst.

"My dear Miss Stanhope — Don't, don't you
fret so, my dear : you will wear yourself out."

Gerald — Gerald — I want Gerald," sobbed
Marjory.

''He is happier where he is, my dear,"
said Bellhouse softly, sitting down at her side.

'' I know — I know — But I want him so.
There are things I want to talk over — I want
to consult him, as I used. I cannot bear it."

'' It is hard, my dear. Yes, I know it is
hard," said the grave and gentle voice : ''I
know what it is — I know well."

Unconsciously, the passion of Marjory's
sobs abated; some faint sense of soothing
breathed upon the storm.

Bellhouse, my way is darker than you
know. I am perplexed ; there is no light."

'' Light will come," said Bellhouse : '' Oh,
my dear ! I do not say it ignorantly ; I am

speaking of what I have found. You trust
in the Almighty, and wait ; and light will
come. Only wait — perhaps it won't be much
longer now'*

Perhaps it won't be much longer now."
The words chimed in strangely with those
words of Gerald's.

Things which you don't dream of are in
store for you." It was a comfort to banish
thought, and cling to that vague promise.

'' Do go back to your bed, Bellhouse, — you
will be so tired," she murmured, true to the
unselfish instincts ever strong within her.
But the old nurse would have been deeply
gratified, had she known how great was the
relief when she answered —

I tired, my dear ! T must be a poor
creature indeed, if this would tire me ! " and
stayed at her post.

After a while she began softly to sing an
old lullaby, familiar in years long past to
the children of her charge. To Marjory it
seemed like a bit of babyhood returning,
with no less power to soothe than if she
were a babe indeed. She lay quite silent,
the tempest hushed ; and presently a sweeter
slumber than she had known for months stole
upon her weary young brain.

CHAPTER XV.

Mother, dear Mother ! the years have been long,
Since I last hushed to your lullaby song.
Yet with strong yearning and passionate pain,
Long I to-night for your presence again.

** Over my heart in the years that are flown,
Ko love like mother-love ever has shone ;
No other worship abides and endures
Faithful, unselfish, and patient as yours."

Florence Percy.

For many days Marjory lay passive in Miss
Evie's little bed. Nature was taking its
revenge, said Mr. Robinson ; who forbade
her to be disturbed. She would sleep for
hours — wake, and lie silently watching Bell-house's
quiet movements — then sleep again.
The only sign shown by her, throughout this
period, of interest in the outer world, was
when Bellhouse told her, — sometimes twice,
always once, on each day — that Mr. Yivian
had called to ask after her. Then a flush
would rise to her cheek, a light would shine
in her eyes : a light strangely mingled, —
partly of pleasure, but partly also of pain.

VOL. III. N

As time went on, Bellliouse understood Hugli
Vivian very well ; but she could not understand
Marjory.

The girl was sorry when she felt the
strength reviving in her limbs, the life in her
whole frame. '' I would rather have died,"
she thought ; but that reviving went steadily
forward. At last she was able to dress, and
sit in the large arm-chair.

The fire blazed cheerily, a pleasant contrast
to the wintry landscape — over which
an icy wind was blowing, the leafless branches
waved strangely by its blast. No breath of
it was suffered to touch Marjory ; windows
and doors fitted perfectly ; all in the room
was comfort. But it was hard not to remember
with shrinking, that Gerald lay in
the churchyard. Though only his mortal
body was there, the bitter weather heightened
the pain.

Marjory was very weak ; she lay back in
her chair, and gazed into the fire. Books
and work were near ; but she had forgotten
them : she did not observe how time was
passing. Bellhouse, after helping her to
dress, had left the room ; and she had since
seen only Kitty — who had made for her
aunt some excuse, heard without attention by

Marjory. But as the cuckoo clock in the old
passage struck three, she realized, suddenly
startled, that Bellhouse had been absent
five hours. — The shock which all these days
she had dreaded — was it at hand ?

She had risen, and was vaguely listening
she knew not why — when Bellhouse herself
entered. Marjory glanced at her, and
sank back into the chah% her breath failing.
Bellhouse's complexion, always pale, was
now of an almost ashen hue ; her eyes alone
were red, — swollen with crying. Crushed in
her hand was a letter.

My dear Miss Stanhope, how I have
neglected you ! But you will forgive me,
when you know all."

You have heard from — from Dover ? "

Bellhouse bowed her head, struggling for
composure. Then, without a word, she laid
the letter in Marjory's lap.

The telegraphy, calm and clear, was easily
recognized ; the writer introduced herself asa
friend of Miss Marjory Stanhope : through
whom, she said, her interest had first been
excited by the circumstances concerning
which she wrote ; and to whom, but for the
late bereavement, she would have committed
her present painful task. The substance of
N 2

her previous letter to Marjory, was then recapitulated.
Marjory passed quickly to the
following page, her hand trembling as she
turned the leaf.

Mrs. Jelly had at length returned home ;
Lina had seen her, and had learned all that
she could tell of poor Jessie. The facts were
here stated briefly ; the story in full, as
Marjory afterwards heard it from Mrs. Jelly's
own lips, was as follows. —

On a moonlight night in summer, five
years and a half before the present time,
'' Mrs. Russell," the Jessie of Thorne, had
come to Mrs. Jelly's door, a baby of six
weeks, or so, in her arms ; and had asked fora
lodging. She had offered to pay in advance
; and Mrs. Jelly, a young widow, but
lately embarked on her profession, had been
only too glad to receive her. From the first
she had been very silent, and had seemed
very ill; but Mrs. Jelly *' took to her" at
once, because she was so pretty. " As lovely
a creature as eyes could look upon," Mrs.
Jelly said, — " only so pale and thin."

She engaged two rooms for a week, saying
merely that she might require them longer,
or she might not ; it would depend on her
husband.

When lie spoke of lier husband, ma'am,"
said Mr. Jelly, " she had the air of a born
princess. I could see at times that she was
not out and out, as you may call it, a lady ;
but she might have been a queen, and her
husband a king, when he was mentioned."

Two days of the week were gone when,
one afternoon, '* something took her all of a
sudden." Mrs. Jelly, much alarmed, sent
for a doctor. He came, and afterwards in
private informed Mrs. Jelly that she was far
gone in fatal heart-disease. She ought to be
with her own friends, he said ; the end might
come at any time. Mrs. Jelly felt sorely
perplexed, not knowing whether the young
woman were aware of her condition, and
fearing to alarm her.

In the evening she seemed better, and
when the baby was asleep, — '' as good a
baby," observed Mrs. Jelly, by the way, '' as
eyes could wish to see," — its mother sat up,
writing letters. But at night Mrs. Jelly
found her lying exhausted upon her bed ;
the table strewn with papers.

I felt so faint," she said ; '' But my
letters are finished, ready to be posted tomorrow."


Mrs. Jelly helped her to undress, and

afterwards, alarmed by her pallor, remained
with her ; the fell into conversation, and
Jessie, her heart opened, no doubt, by the
good woman's kindness, presently told something
of her history. She said that she
had only just crossed over from France,
where she had lived for many months in
great trouble, — her husband having left her
seven months before the baby's birth, and
never having returned. Mrs. Jelly asked if
she had no friends in England, to whom she
might have written ? She answered, yes —
she had a good mother ; but hers was a runaway
marriage ; and she could not endure
the thought of telling her mother all that
had befallen her, or of the scorn and the
shameful reports which might be whispered
about, should she return before the baby's
birth, deserted by her husband. Many, she
said, had been jealous of her in her old home,
and had prophesied that she would come to
no good ; and what would they say if she
went back in such a plight ? So she remained
in France, supporting herself as best
she could. Her husband had left her some
money, and she had savings of her own ; and
she was clever with her fingers, and found employment
fancy shops in the neighbourhood.

She seemed uncommon quick and handy
in every way, I could tell by her talk," said
Mrs. Jelly.

For many weeks she had refused to believe
that her husband would not return. He
was " a real gentleman, thoroughbred,"
she told Mrs. Jelly. The baby was born ina
French hospital ; and she crossed to England
so soon as she was able to travel, feeling
that she could no longer support herself,
and that, should her last effort to find her
husband fail, she must go back to her mother.
This last effort she had been turning over in
her mind for some time before the baby was
born. There was a certain friend whom she
had formerly known, and who had known
her husband ; circumstances led her to suppose
that this friend might find a clue to his
whereabouts. She had to-day written to
beseech that he would exert himself in the
matter ; she had also written to her husband,
and if the friend could discover his address,
she believed that her letter would bring him
back. He had parted from her in anger,
through some misunderstanding which she
had here endeavoured to explain. Moreover,
he had not known that there was any
idea of the baby. When he heard of its

birth, she hoped, she believed, that he would
surely come.

If not," she said — '^ or if my friend
cannot find him — I shall be driven to write
to my mother."

'' If you follow my advice," said Mrs.
Jelly, '^ you'll write to your mother at once.
You just send your marriage certificate ; and
no one can scoff" at you then."

'that was the worst," said Jessie, — she
had no certificate. Her husband had taken
it away, and she did not know the name
of the church where she was married. It
was some old church in London ; she knew
nothing of the locality : she had trusted all to
him, reaching London, by his direction, only
on the morning of their marriage. He had
met her at the station, and had taken her to
friends of his own : in whose house she had
dressed — because, she said, she was resolved
to look like a bride, since she was one !
Thence they had gone straight to the church,
and had been married by licence ; afterwards
she had been photographed, to complete
her glory : and then they had started for
the Continent. Here they had travelled
from place to place, living luxuriously, and
seeing all that was to be seen. She had

written to lier mother sometimes : not often,
but still sometimes : but be bad always
promised to post the letters, and sbe thought
now that be bad not done so ; for sbe bad
received no answers. At the end of five
months they quarrelled ; and be left ber.

After telling thus much, Jessie bad seemed
to ponder ; and then bad said that — sbe felt
so strange, at times — it might be well, incase
anything should happen, to let Mrs.
Jelly know that ber husband, for certain
reasons, bad married her under an assumed
name. His real name sbe did not disclose.
Sbe also pointed out a small tin box, with a
curious lock — which ber husband, evidently
by mistake, bad left behind him. It contained,
she said, papers of importance to him
alone, with secrets which no others should
know ; and she begged Mrs. Jelly to promise
that, in case of ber sudden death, the box
should not be opened until news came of
him : but should be delivered, as it was, into
bis bands. This promise Mrs. Jelly gave
readily ; and took occasion to hint at the
doctor's verdict.

Jessie did not seem startled : only replied
that sbe had suffered so much — no wonder
ber heart was affected ! that the world bad

been a sad mistake for her, and she should
be glad to leave it. If anything of the sort
did happen before her husband came, Mrs.
Jelly must write to her mother.

You don't seem afraid at all," said Mrs.
Jelly.

'' ISTo," said Jessie : '' I am not afraid. If
you write to mother, tell her that her prayers
have saved me."

Later, Mrs. Jelly had asked for her
mother's address.

I will write it down tomorrow," she
replied ; '' Just now I am too sleepy."

In spite of their conversation, it did not
occur either to Mrs. Jelly, or to Jessie herself,
that for her no earthly morrow might
come. But in the morning, when Mrs. Jelly,
hearing the baby cry, went hurriedly to her
room, only Jessie's body lay there. She
must have died quite painlessly, in her sleep,
the doctor said.

Among her clothes was found sufficient
money to pay for decent burial ; Mrs. Jelly
followed her to the grave, and thenceforth
nothing more was heard about her. No
husband, no friend, had appeared ; and, as to
the mother, even her name was unknown.
The clergyman of the district, a busy and

hurried man, but half believing the dead
woman's story, had inserted in various papers
advertisements, such as might strike the
husband's eye, to satisfy Mrs. Jelly. But no
result had followed : and here inquiry had
ceased.

Mrs. Jelly, who then had recently lost both
her husband and her newborn child, had kept
the baby : whose beauty, like his mother's,
attracted her. She had never repented it,
she told Lina ; and a better child was never
seen. But now she was about to be married
again, and he was growing fast; much as
she loved him, it seemed hardly right, she
thought, that he should burden her new husband
: who was a widower, with boys of his
own. Thus Lina's discoveries had been
opportune ; and Mrs. Jelly thankfully accepted
her proposal to write to Bellhouse. The
photograph was enclosed in the letter. On
that last sad evening Mrs. Jelly had seen and
admired it ; and Jessie had said that she
was welcome to keep it, as she had several
more of the same. There had been little
opportunity for presentations of the portrait
taken in such exulting pride ! It remained
a tragical memorial of all that poor Jessie's
folly had brought on her.

But Lina's envelope contained another
enclosure : a letter which had. been discovered
among the papers scattered on
Jessie's table. She had written two letters,
she told Mrs. Jelly ; but only this one could
be found : and Mrs. Jelly, after a fruitless
search, concluded that she had made a
mistake, and that the other had been posted
in the morning, when Mrs. Russell had gone
out for a little while. This conclusion
appeared the more probable, since the present
envelope had no address beyond a name :
bearing out what Jessie had said of the
letter destined for her husband.

The envelope was fastened, but not sealed :
Mrs. Jelly in the doctor's presence, opened
it ; and the contents, as both believed, decided
the matter. " My dearest hushaiid,^^ the
letter began, continuing with piteous entreaties
that he would return, and acknowledge
her and his boy before the world. It was
restored to its cover, and sealed ; and thus
Mrs. Jelly had kept it. The nature of its
contents, secondhand from Mrs. Jelly, was
briefly described by Lina ; but the name —
the husband's name — was not mentioned.
When Marjory, her heart throbbing hard
and fast, had reached the well-known signature,

" Caroline Peele," lie looked again
into the envelope for that enclosure : but it
was gone. She longed to ask Bellhouse
about it at once, without a moment's delay ;
but the words would not come.

And Mrs. Jelly and the boy are now on
their way here ! "

So it says, ma'am, as you see. I can
hardly believe it : I feel like in a trance.
May the Almighty for ever bless that good
young lady. Miss Peele ! To think of her
advancing the money for the journey, and
settling it, and all ! Oh, ma'am, if she had
not had that forecast, I could not have
rested ! I should have had to start off
straight away. Only for leaving you, Miss
Stanhope, my dear ! "

Dear Bellhouse, I wonder you can have
any thought for me at such a time. Did you
find the letter waiting when you left me this
morning ? ' '

Yes, ma'am, there it was, just as if it
had been any other — on the table in the
housekeeper's room. Oh, my Jessie ! how
often have I seen her there at play, with her
toys just where that letter was lying ! "

As the recollection rose before her, she
broke down, and wept bitterly, hiding her face.

Oil, Bellhouse, if I could do anything to
comfort you ! Oh, that I could ! " cried
Marjory.

Something in her tone went to the heart
of the unselfish old nurse. She dried her
eyes, and sat down at Marjory's side.

Miss Stanhope, my dear, don't you vex
yourself," she said tenderly ; " You have
plenty of sorrow of your own. Don't you
fret about me ; I've looked the worst in the
face, these hours since the letter came : and
after all, this is no new thing, in one way,
for I knew my Jessie was dead : I felt assure,
as certain of it, as that I myself was
alive. It's all over now — all over now ; and
she's safe with the Almighty."

I am so glad Lina remembered to tell
you of her saying that your prayers had
saved her."

Yes, ma'am. Oh, how I thank the Almighty
for those words ! Miss Stanhope,
did I not say to you that no prayer is ever
lost ? i^ow — now I find the truth of it. I
have prayed in the dark for years and years ;
aud many's the time my heart has failed me.
But she said my prayers had saved her !
Oh, when I've just got over the first shock,
those words will be like summer sunshine

in my heart, ma'am, till the end of my
life."

The tears were flowing again, but gently.
After a while, Bellhouse's face being turned
aside, Marjory got courage to ask the question
which had trembled on her lips —

'' Bellhouse — have you got the letter which
was found on Jessie's table ? "

There was a long pause.

Ah I that's another trouble, ma'am — a
sore trouble. I hope though, Miss Stanhope,
my dear, it will make no difference to you,
except so far as you're sorry for other people.
That letter, ma'am, was addressed to Mr.
Hugh."

Marjory grew only a little whiter, as she
sat, her blue eyes fixed on Bellhouse.

I could not have believed it, only there
was my Jessie's writing. It gave me a turn,
as if something had risen out of a grave, to
see that writing again. It was all weak and
scrawled, but plain enough, — ' Hugh Vivian,
Esq.' "

Did you open the note ? "

"No, ma'am. I sent it straight away;
straight, as it was, by the gardener's boy, to
him that it was meant for."

"To Alton?"

'' I did, ma'am ; and I'm thinking that he
will be here directly. That is, he will be
here unless — But no ! I mustn't doubt it."

'' Bellhouse, do you think it can be true —
that he really married Jessie ? "

I don't know what to think, ma'am.
That is the long and the short. I don't
know what to think."

She had dried her tears, and sat looking
into the fire, pale and subdued, but thoughtful
; calmly considering the matter, as only
one long accustomed to school her own impulses,
and to act justly by all men, could,
under such circumstances, consider. She
went on, reasoning to herself.

There's a deal that seems against him.
The little darling called ' Copelandss,' and all.
If it was any one I did not know, I should
believe it for certain. But Mr. Hugh — as
I've known from a babe ! He was spoiled
from the first, and a bit wild ! and I fear me
he had little thought of serving the Almighty.
But he was as kind as he could be, always,
to all things. I never remember him selfish,
not where it pained other people. He might
have run ofi* with my Jessie, and he might
have married her." Marjory winced, but
uttered no sound. " There was that wildness

in him, and that passionateness, I feel
lie might have done that : but leave her in
such a way — think of her no more — and then
come and settle close to me, and tell me so
kind that he was sorry about it, as he's done
more than once. Oh, ma'am ! " cried Bell-house,
suddenly, as facts thronged upon her,
"it's more than I can bear to believe ! It
would be wickedness past fathoming."

Yes," said Marjory ; " there is no doubt
of that. If he has done this he must be
utterly wicked."

I feel almost wicked myself, ma'am, for
thinking it possible. And yet — oh, my dear,
I remember, in bygone times — I was getting
very anxious about Mr. Hugh and her. And
it was partly through my dear lady suspecting
he had a fancy for her, that she sent her
away. Then Bullingham, that he went to,
is but eight miles from Ripley; and when
my Jessie disappeared, I remember, Mr. Hugh
was gone too, — we never knew where. My
dear lady often said how grieved she felt
that he had never written. No one heard
anything about him for a long, long while :
there's no denying that. Oh, Miss Stanhope,
my dear, my mind misgives me ! Somehow
it does seem to fit in altogether."

VOL. III.

It did, indeed. Too plainly Marjory saw
it. She could have added, if she would, to
Bellhouse's sad list. She could have told of
the manner, the expression, which had fixed
Lina's suspicions, which had vaguely troubled
herself, when Jessie's name was mentioned
in his presence. And yet, in a tenfold sense,
she '' could not bear " to believe that he was
guilty.

There was long silence, meditative on Bell-house's
part, while Marjory struggled for
self-control. Her voice must not tremble,
her face must not show the agony in her
heart.

I have thought it my duty, ma'am, if
you will excuse the liberty, to say all this
to you. There's no doubt but that one who
was bad enough to act in such a way would
think nothing of denying it : and so it will
be your duty, my dear, as far as you can, to
make up your own mind. Because, excuse me,
ma'am, it is plain that, whatever may have
been in the past, his whole mind is fixed
now upon you ; and every day lately he has
asked how soon he will be able to see you.
So you must look it all well in the face,
Miss Stanhope, my dear, and pray to the
Almighty to guide you. Oh, my dear, forgive

me — you have no mother ; and my poor
Jessie and her bitter sufferings rise up before
me for a warning. Even if he don't deny,
if he confesses all — you couldn't ever be
happy, married to one who would act so.
I must forgive him, if it's he, because the
Almighty commands it ; but oh, ma'am, it
will be like hell torment to look upon his
face !"

Bellhouse, you need not say any more.
Don't be afraid. Not his face only, but his
very name, will be that to me, if what we
fear is true 1"

At this moment there was a knock at the
door. Kitty looked in.

"Aunt," she said, " Mr. Vivian wants to
see you this minute. I don't know what's
the matter ; but his horse is all of a steam."



CHAPTER XVI.

This is no my ain life,

And I peak and pine away,
Wi' the thoughts o' hame, and the young flow'rs

I' the glad green month o' May.

There's nae place like our ain hame ;
Oh, I wish that I was there ! —
There's nae hame like our ain hame

To be met wi' ony where ! —
And, eh ! that I were back again

To our farm and fields so green ;
And heard the tongues o' my ain folk,
And was what I hae been !"
From 'manse Watch's Autobiography." — Blackwood's
Magazine, 1826.

*' Oh, how could I wish to keep Gerald in
such a world ? " cried Marjory. She was
standing alone in the window, looking out
over the slopes of snow ; too restless, too
sorely racked by suspense, to sit still any
longer. She pressed her forehead against
the pane ; her heart was beating violently.

"Lord God — remember how I have prayed !
Remember Thy Promises ! " she murmured,

straining lier eyes towards the leaden
sky. The keen wind, sweeping through the
trees, seemed typical of those painful influences
by which human souls are whirled
along, to wretchedness here and hereafter.
On they go, — away, away, fleet the souls —
and with them, who can tell how vast a number
of hopes, of loves, of — of prayers ? do
the prayers perish like the rest ?

An hour had passed, it might have been
a day, for all Marjory's observance of time ;
when Kitty entered with lights, and with a
message from her aunt to beg that Miss
Stanhope would go to bed. Aunt was very
sorry that she could not come herself ; she
would come presently.

*' Where is she ? " inquired Marjory.

She has been with Mr. Vivian, miss, till
just this moment ; and now Mr. Vivian is
writing in the housekeeper's room, and aunt
is gone upstairs."

There was nothing to be learned from
this! nothing remained but to wait. Marjory
was thankful to creep under the clothes, and
hide herself from the world. If bad news
came ere long, she could bear them better so.
Thus when Kitty, somewhat later, reappeared,
carrying a tea-tray, she found Marjory

safely settled in the little chintz bed, her fair
hair flowing over the pillows.

'' I can't say as you look none the better
for being up, miss," remarked Kitty : *' The
gentleman did send up these ; but may be,
as you seem so tired, I'd best lay 'em on the
mantelpiece till tomorrow."

'' What are they ? " cried Marjory, instantly
all alive. Then she saw a small packet on
the tray ; and a note, addressed to herself.
She took quick possession of them, holding
them fast, while Kitty arranged her little
tea-table.

Did Mr. Vivian ask for an answer to this
note?"

No, thank you, miss ; he said nothing,
only would I take it to you ? I suppose it's
what he was a writing, — for he's finished
now, and gone. At least he's walking about
in the park, in all the wind and cold," said
Kitty, eyeing Marjory. Perhaps she had her
own private suspicions on the matter. Marjory
smiled and nodded cheerfully, to disarm
them.

'that will do, Kitty, thank you. Tell
your aunt not to hurry herself ; I am quite
comfortable."

She felt weak and worn no longer ; life

and excitement had revived. As the door
closed, and she found herself alone, she
hastily opened the packet. Within was a
small manuscript book, with a dark leather
cover. The note would explain it : she
opened that also, and read :

Forgive mj troubling you at such a time,
with my own affairs : I cannot help it. I see
from Miss Peele's letter, that you have heard
this horrible charge against me ; you have
long known, she says, of her suspicions. I
have been wondering what right or reason
she could have — before these last events — to
form any such suspicions at all. It strikes
me that at times, I may have shown by my
manner, that Jessie Bellhouse's name was
painful to me. It has been painful to me for
years ; but as to the cause, I ask you, before
you judge, to read this old journal of mine ;
it will explain things better than I can. I
may be a coward — but there were times in
my past life, which I cannot well bear to
speak of; — the shame, I may say the agony,
which they still raise in me, I cannot express
in words. No wonder if my face has shown
it, — or something of it !

'' I have told Bellhouse a part of what you
will read — a part only, for her daughter's

sake, no less than for my own. I confess to
you that, years ago, when I was a foolish
boy, I thought I had a fancy for Jessie. It
never came to more than a fancy — excited
solely by her beauty. In those days I
imagined that she was smitten with me : I
now believe that she was smitten with my
position, and had at times a dream that I
might marry her, and make her ' a lady.'
When I sank into a penniless bank-clerk, I was
nothing any more in her eyes : as you will see.
As to this crime laid to my charge, I am
ready to swear to you by all that is sacred
on earth or in heaven, that I am utterly
innocent. I never even knew of Jessie's disappearance,
until nearly two years after it
took place. There is some inexplicable mess
which I hope to unravel in time. Meanwhile,
I only ask you to believe in me : and
when I speak of Heaven, let me say that
Heaven is no longer an empty name to me.
"When I can see you, I shall have much to
tell you, if you will listen.

*' Hugh Vivian."

Again and yet again, Marjory read the
hurried note : of which the handwriting bore
evident trace of the agitation wherein it was

penned. Then, by an irresistible impulse,
sbe raised it to her lips.

'' He is innocent ! He is innocent ! " she
repeated to herself. '' Yes, if the whole
world doubted him, I would believe in him.
I do not understand it : but he is innocent."

The strength had come back to her countenance,
to her heart ; her blue eyes shone
with a light which they had not known since
the days when she had yet hope for Gerald.
Still holding fast the precious note, she turned

to the journal.

^ ^ ^ %

The first entry bore a date in the second
summer after that of Marjory's childish
adventures at Thorne : when Mr. Vivian, the
father, had been dead almost a year, and
Hugh and his mother were living together
at Bullingham. He must have been about
two-ands twenty when this volume was begun,
and Marjory a little girl just entered on her
teens — living a free and happy life at quiet
Rockswold, planning her plans for Gerald,
and never dreaming of the deep waters overwhelming
the bright young soldier who had
played so prominent a part in the fairy world
of Thorne.

The Journal.

*' June20tli, 18— .—My mother ill all day.
I never saw her anything like it before. A
sultry, gasping kind of day. She kept talking
about the Copeland woods ; she seemed
hardly herself at times.

June 28th. — I heard a sermon to-day on
the power of prayer, — I wonder how much
of it is true. At any rate one can but try :
I will try it for my mother.

"June 29th. — I am not a good hand at
prayers. I don't know that I ever said any
before, except the one my mother taught me
for night and morning, when I was a little
chap — and at church, out of the Prayer-book.
I make a poor business of it when I have to
find W' words out of my own head ; but according
to the parson, that don't matter. At
least I am trying my best — for my mother's
sake. Will anything come of it, I wonder ?

'' July 4th. — Night after night I kneel at
my window, praying or trying to pray, — I
am more practised in it now. I begin to
hope it may be answered ; if there is any
truth in any of it, there must be pity for my
mother. I thought she seemed better yesterday
; but to-day she is as bad as ever.

July 7tli. — That old Browning is a fool,
half quack and half old woman. Clearly
he doesn't understand my mother's case. I
shall quarrel with him some day — that's a
certainty. Broiling hot : these rooms are
stuffy past conception. If I had my old
chestnut, wouldn't I make up for all this time
I've been longing for a canter ! We would
soon be out of sight of Bullingham, — then
I'd slacken my rein, and feast my eyes on
the green fields and lanes. Prime weather
for eels ! I'd lay a wager that those Jackson
fellows are setting eel-traps this moment, now
I'm not there to catch them ! These must be
fine days for all rascals round about Copelandss.

July 12th. — My mother had a paroxysm
of downright agony this evening. Sent for
old Browning, and made him tell me the
truth. He suspects some inward formation,
but cannot speak with certainty. If I could

but take her to London, to consult H !

There is no hope for her here.

1 A.M. — Just left her room, — she has
fallen asleep at last. I sat by her bed three
hours, fanning her, and reading to her when
she could listen. Is it cruel to wish to keep
her in such a world ? Yet when she blessed
me to-night, and fell asleep with her cheek

against my hand, I felt that life would be
hell to me without my mother.

"July 16th. — Heard to-day the wonderful
news that my godmother, old Lady Waters,
has left me £100. 'Now I can save my
mother. She shall go to London, have the
best advice, — then to the sea. I wonder
when I shall get it ?

July 17th. —I begin to believe in prayer ;
this legacy was quite unexpected, — I have
tried to thank God. I am burning with impatience
to get the money. It is left free of
legacy duty ; that was thoughtful of the old
girl. My mother a little better to-day — if it
comes soon, I shall save her.

'•'July 18th.— Miss Valley called. My
mother thinks her patronising, but that is
only a diseased fancy, — I wish she would not
give way to it. It would do her so much
good to go to Ripley for a month, as Miss
Bulkley proposes, — but she fancies it an act
of charity on Miss Bulkley's part, and v/ill
not hear of it. Never mind ! there's a good
time coming ! it will be jolly at the sea, alone
with my mother, when I get the £100. Jessie
was on the box ; she looked as bewitching as
ever. I felt weak about her, as usual ; but
I doubt whether she's over-gifted with heart.

She did not look at all distressed, though she
heard me tell Miss Bulkley about my mother.

July 21st. — Peele's airs drive me downright
mad. In our county he'd have been as
proud as twenty peacocks, if — which is not
likely — he could have scraped an acquaintance
with my father. Here he lords it over us,
treats me barely as a gentleman, and as to
my mother ! — ' He is sorry my mother has
never been able to see Mrs. Peele, — Mrs. Peele
would have been happy to give her one or two
good introductions.' — Introductions, forsooth!

I had some idea of the pettiness of these
second-rate townspeople ; but nothing near
the truth. The women at least, seem to live
for tittle-tattle ; my mother and I are prime
game. Richard Peele has now and then the
impudence to repeat some of their speeches.
I gather that my mother is thought ' stuck-up,'
because she chooses not to leave her
own station ; and for our poverty — the refined
condescension on that score is grand to
behold ! ' Such is Life.' A few of the Bulk-less'
friends have called upon us; but it
goes no further. My mother has neither
health nor money for society now — even if
she had heart. But when I look back a year
or two — Well ! it gives one a lesson on ' the

world.' I shall be a first-rate philosopher intime,
if this kind of thing goes on.

*' July 31st. — Mj mother very bad again,
pining for sea air. When will this legacy come?

August 3rd. — That mean little sneak,
Lord Waters, is disputing his mother's will.
There is to be a law-suit ; and no legacies
can be paid till judgment is given. A delusion,
after all ! I have not had the heart to
tell my mother.

Aug. 4th. — Last night I went off alone,
out of the town, to work off my madness.
I did feel mad, — I should have killed that
Waters, if I had met him ! I found a quiet
little place, beyond the houses ; there was a
rick of new hay, — I lay down under it. The
stars were shining — the sky looked still and
kind. I thought of what that parson had
said about trials of one's faith ; I prayed
again. Oh, if there be a God, He will hear
me ! I prayed to Him, with all my heart, to
save my mother. If the law-suit be settled
quickly, it may yet be in time. To-day I
told her the horrible news. She tried to
cheer me, said she felt a little better. I
never knew before, what she is to me.

'' Aug. 12th. — Cooler — a fine day for the
grouse. Old Brush looks so desponding, one

would almost fancy he remembered our jolly
party on that blue moor near Aberdeen, this
day twelvemonth. That was in my last week
of happiness : four days after came the telegram.
Well ! whining will bring nothing
back. ' It's all over, old Brush,' I say, as he
sidles up to me. He seems to understand,
and shuffles away under the sofa, as if he
were in disgrace.

I found out a queer secret last night. I
don't know whether I ought to keep it secret
may be not, but then — I only half trust
my own motives. That little coquette, Jessie,
seems to be privately engaged to some one
unknown — a gentleman, she says ; and she
knows a gentleman as well as anybody. The
fellow certainly looked one, at a distance.
He looked like — confound it, what am I coming
to, breaking out in such dirty suspicions ?
I had been a good walk across the fields, and
found myself within two miles of Ripley, —
turned in a hurry, afraid my mother might
be anxious, and took French leave with a
short cut through the plantations. The path
was winding, and a gap in the trees revealed,
some way on, Jessie and this same unknown
gentleman,' who was in the act of kissing
her hand. She stood half a foot from him,

the "hand extended, after the manner of
royalty. This ceremony performed, he turned,
and disappeared in no time. I don't know
why I should have felt so mad, — I am a
precious fool ! She came on, smiling to herself,
her head held high, and that rose-bloom
I know of old, like paint upon her cheeks. I
took her by surprise, confronting her suddenly
; but she was not in the least confused :
and when I taxed her with what I had seen —
He is my fiance, ^^ replies her Royal Highness,
as cool as a — what shall I say ? cucumbers
would be torrid to it ! However, she
presently so far lowered her dignity as to
request me not to mention what I had seen ;
and, while I parried this point, other facts
came out. His name she would not reveal ;
but he was ' a captain in the army of good
family ; their acquaintance was of some
months' standing — they met at Alton, in the
spring, when she was at Thorne with Miss
Bulkley. He was passing through Alton on
business, saw her in a shop, followed up the
acquaintance, and traced her here. They
would be married so soon as he saw his way
to it without displeasing his friends ; till
then they must wait in secrecy, — she had not
even told her mother. But I would make

no promises, and came away, leaving the
Lady Jessie in high dudgeon.

'' The fact is, I want time to think. Is it
fair to keep old Bellhouse in darkness ? and,
then, who is this fellow ? To be sure, I
know no girl more cool-headed, or better able
to take care of herself, than Jessie : so why
should I meddle ? I am half afraid of being
a sneak unawares. That little minx thought
something of me, once, when I was at Cope-lands
: but what is a poor bank clerk, beside
this mighty ' Captain ? ' Well ! — I must let
the question be for the present. It shall lie
in my mind, and digest.

'' Aug. 15th. — A note from Jessie, in a fine,
pointed hand, demanding a written promise
that I will not mention her engagement until
such time as the ' Captain ' gives leave. I
have answered in three lines, that I would
promise to say nothing without warning her
but no more. The little ungrateful being-observes
that, if the facts were discovered,
her mother would get her back to stupid old
Thorne, to die of the dumps. Stupid old
Thome, indeed ! Oh, to wake, and find it alla
dream, and myself riding up to the door
of that same Thorne — the old house basking
in the sunshine, and the dear old lady coming

VOL. III. p

in her miisliroom hat across the park. . • .
But here we are in stuffy Bullingham, and
here am I a clerk in a shabby coat, — and, if
I don't take care, I shall slouch like any
desk-slave of them all — so I'll be off, and
post my note.

'august 18th.— Sultry ; and my mother
droops. I fear she is very lonely when I am
at the bank : and she is too weak to wait
upon herself, and misses her maid terribly.
To think of my mother, always used to first-rate
servants, left now in her illness quite
alone, except for mj clumsy offices ! She is
worse, — I cannot deny it : and no wonder !
Heat even at Copeland was terrible to her,
and here are no alleviations. She cannot
walk — or bear the rattle of the Bullingham
flys : she lies all day near the window, but
no fresh air seems to reach her. The streets
are baked through and through ; the opposite
houses send back a volley of stuffiness. I can
go out and escape ; but there is no escape
for her.

August 21st. — Browning has spoken
more of his mind than ever before. He says,

as I suspected, that H is my mother's

one chance — that he can save her if any one
can, and, so far, it is possible. But the disease

is making sucH rapid strides, that every day
is of importance. If that confounded legacy
would come ! she might have to stay sometime
in London, — she would need every comfort
; and we have only just enough to live
upon, as it is. Lady Thorne is ill, and cannot
attend to business, or I would ask her
to advance the £100. I have not given up
praying, — I cannot help hoping that God will
hear me yet.

"August 23rd. — Up all night with my
mother. Her agony was terrible. Oh, how
it maddens me to remember the money I
have squandered ! If I had but foreseen
this, I could have laid plenty by. Yet God
foresaw it. Why did He send no sign ?

August 24th. — My mother will die. I
cannot bear it. No relief — no help — It is
unutterable.

*' August 27th. — I have done a dreadful
thing. But I was driven to it. God knows
I was driven to it. Yet I have lost my honour
my self respect, — I am no longer what I
was. Oh, if I had some friend to talk it
over with 1 — but I have none. I must write
instead — that will be some relief. I can
burn it afterwards, if I choose : or keep it asa

warming.

p 2

It was this morning — I was alone in the
bank, — we have seldom much business on a
Thursday. Phillips, the senior clerk, was
out — the other ill at home — old Peele closeted
in the private room, with some important
person. It was twelve o'clock ; the sky was
blue and hot ; I was thinking of my mother
and the sea. Again she had been ill all night,
I had left her quite broken down — tears
rolling down her cheeks from mere weakness,
my stately, queenlike mother ! I built a
castle in the air, to soothe myself, of the

legacy, of H , his cure — and then a new

life. The swinging of the door startled me ;
old Bulkley came in, looking just as he used
to look at Thorne — so large, portly, kind.
Well, Yivian,' he said ; ' How are you ?
How's your mother ? I've not a minute — an
appointment at home in half-an-hour. Only
want to get rid of these — Just enter them,
there's a good fellow ! ' Then, waving his
glove in his old way, he was gone before I
could open the packet left in my hand. It
was a roll of notes — £200 in amount. How
can I write this ? Yet I will — the pain will
help me. For I may be tempted again, — and
if I were once such a weak, mean wretch,
who can tell what I might be a second time ?

i don't know what came over me, — a voice
in my ears said, ' It will be only for a little
while.' Yes, I felt sure, at that moment,
of the legacy — that in a month or so, I could
pay back the money. I knew Mr. Bulkley's
careless ways, and that he would never find
out. All in a moment, somehow, I had paid
half the notes into the till, and the other half
were in my own pocket, — then I entered in
the books £100 to Mr. Bulkley's account.
Just as I wrote the figures, the private door
opened, Mr. Peele showed out his visitor ;
and at the same moment Phillips came back —
I was alone no longer, and the deed was
done.

'' Well, I should fancy hell — if there be a
hell — must be something like what I felt in
the next few hours, when I remembered the
money in my pocket — and that I had stolen
it. I say when ; but in reality the thought
was never out of my head ; till I wondered
if it would drive me mad. I knew that I
was a thief. I could hardly stand it : yet I
said to myself that it was for my mother's
sake, and that I would pay back every farthing.
When I went home to luncheon, my
mother was free from pain, but exhausted —
lying as usual close to the window, the door

open, — panting for air. I said, * Mother,
If I could but get you to the sea ! ' She
answered faintly, smiling, — ' That would
soon cure me ! ' I would have given my life
at that instant, if so I could have got her
there. But honour is dearer than life. I
thought — ' Yes, I have sacrificed more than
life, for her.' But the thought gave no relief.
Then I remembered what I used to be — Yes,
I thought myself a gentleman, once — more
of one than most. How proud I felt at that
review in Hyde Park, when the Queen herself
asked who was that noble-looking young
officer ! But all that is over now. I noble ?
Oh, many a one whom I have thought below
me, would scorn to be what I was to-day !
To call it borrowing was merely a farce — I
must give it its true colours, I was a thief.
How could I look any fellow of our regiment
in the face, with that consciousness upon
me ? I who prided myself upon my honour !
Now I can understand the temptations of
the poor wretches who pick pockets in the
streets ; I have been next door to them ! I
have done all I can to retrieve it ; but that
fact can never be retrieved.

When I had been back in the bank about
an hour, I felt I could bear it no longer.

The notes were still in my pocket, — I resolved
to put them in the till with the rest,
and there would be an end of it : an end,
if I could but alter the entry in the book.
I was alone again for a minute ; I found the
place in a desperate hurry ; but, like a fool,
my hand shook, so that I made a great blot :
I mopped it up with blotting-paper, and
stupidly dried the strokes which changed
the 1 into 2. There they were, faint and
blue, quite different from the bold 1 which
I had made in the morning — which stood
out, black and uncompromising, witnessing
against me. I took the pen to blacken the
rest again, but before I could do it, the door
opened once more, old Peele came in, and
my chance was over. He saw my confusion,
looked hard at me, and came behind my
shoulder. ' Is that figure a 1 or a 2,
Mr. Vivian ? ' said he stiffly. It struck me
that he might choose to corroborate my answer
by forthwith counting the money in
the till ; and the extra notes were still in
my pocket. I answered, ' One.' He looked
again hard at me, and observed, ' You will
do well to be more careful ; if I mistake not,
you wrote 2 at first.' There he was out ;
but I said nothing. For the rest of the day

he watched me closely, and I had no chance

to act further in the matter.

^ ^ ^ 'ik

^' I had to stop here ; and now it is late.
But I will write the whole horrible story. I
wish to suffer — I wish to brand it in upon my
mind. I was almost in despair at first, when
old Peele cut off my repentance ; but presently
a new thought occurred to me. After
dinner, for which I forced myself to stay,
that my mother might not be anxious, I
started at once to Ripley. It is eight miles ;
but the walk seemed nothing. I reached
the house about nine, and was shown into
Mr. Bulkley's study. On the way I met
Jessie, going towards the staircase ; she
looked at me curiously, and seemed about to
speak, but this the servant's presence, I suppose,
prevented. As for me, I saw her without
seeing, and should not remember it only
for what happened later. In a few minutes
Mr. Bulkley came to me. I don't think,that
if I studied the matter for years, I could
find words to express his kindness ; it was
simply inexpressible. I gave him the £100,
told him the whole truth, told him also that
he could prosecute me if he liked, or expose
me in any way : only I should be thankful

if he would wait until my mother was better.
It was some time before he spoke, and I
went through tortures, till I ventured to
look at him, and saw that he was struggling
to command his voice : he was sorry, not
angry, it turned out. There's no need to
write what he said : no fear of my ever forgetting
it ! Oh, if God refuses to bless me
and my poor mother, at least He will bless
him ! He must. Not only did he freely
forgive me, refuse even to say a word in exposure
; but he actually prayed and entreated
me to keep the money. Of course I declined,
it would have choked me ; and my mother,
who must never know the facts, would not
have consented to use it. His forgiveness
alone was enough, — far more than enough —
to overwhelm me utterly. I did not tell
him all, or half, our distress, or the force of
my temptation ; I could not bear to snivel,
or beg. But he saw how terribly cut up and
ashamed I was — and perhaps he guessed at
what I could not say, — I hope so. Fine,
noble, princely, old fellow; I would lay
down my life for him, if that could do him
service.

Well, I had left him, with my heart full,
and was starting on my way home, when

some one called my old name — ' Mr.
Hugh ' — and there was Jessie, running
after me. I stopped till she caught me up,
all out of breath and heated : I never knew
that any girl, least of all she, could look so
vindictive ! — ' I got your letter, Mr. Hugh,'
she panted, as soon as she could speak :
You would make no promises, you said.
But now, I fancy, you'll change your mind ;
it shall be tit for tat.' I asked what she
meant. ' I mean that I know all about you,
all you have done ; I heard all that you
and Mr. Bulkley said : — I was listening at
the door.' ' Listening at the door, you
mean little wretch ! ' I cried. ' Who are
you to talk of meanness ? ' said she : ' I
listened because I thought you had come to
tell of me, and I wanted to defend myself;
but now you are as much in my power, as I
am in yours.' She laughed as she spoke. It
seemed a horrible dream. I should not have
known her for Jessie — the Jessie I fancied
myself smitten with, at Thorne. Talk of
the worldliness of towns ! no town can surpass
the worldliness ingrain in those country
girls, who look so smiling and so simple ! If
I were still Hugh Vivian of Copeland, she
would never speak so to me. I was thunderstruck,

answering nothing; lie went on
more quietly. ' I don't want to be hard on
you, Mr. Hugh; — I shouldn't have said a
word — only the thought of being sent back
to that dull old Thorne, and my engagement
broken off, drives me to it. This is all your
own fault, for not promising what I asked.'
Still I did not speak : it was all I could do
to keep back language which afterwards I
should have repented. ' If you knew what
it is to me,' she proceeded, ' to think that I
am to be a lady, to take my proper place in
the world,— the place a pretty woman ought
to have; — not to be obliged to work and
knock under, and feel I am a servant, anymore,
— to have plenty of money, and do
justice to my taste in dress — not to mention
all the multitude of other things : — you'd
understand better.' ' Your fine Captain
would hardly feel flattered if he could hear
you, Jessie,' said I. ' That is nothing to the
point, Mr. Hugh,' said she, with her old toss
of the head : ' The Captain is handsome
and grand enough for any lady to feel proud
of him, and I shall feel proud to become his
wife. That's enough to satisfy any man.
And now all I want is to make a bargain,
you give me the promise I asked : and in

return I'll give you one — never to mention
what I heard. But if you refuse to promise,
mark my words ! the truth shall be told.
Every one about Copelandss and Thorne — and
elsewhere, for what I care — shall know that
you robbed Mr. Bulkley ; and that only his
pity and charity saved you from jail.'
Jessie ! ' I felt myself thunder : then out
came the oaths which I had struggled to
keep in before. I could not help it, — I don't
know what I said, — nothing fit to be said
to any woman. Yet — oh, what a fiend inhuman
form Jessie seemed then to me ! Oh,
to be under her power — dependent on her
mercy ! Oh, what a maddening thought
still ! It was all I could do not to lay hands
on her, — I wonder how I managed it ! it was
from nothing in the world but the thought
that I was a man, and she a girl. If she
had but been a man like myself! The past
rushed back upon me, — my lost place in the
world, in life, in honour. And she — a
servant — a child of servants, — low in birth,
and in nature. Well, it won't bear dwelling
on ! But I can understand now, how some
men murder some women. Oh, there is
power of stinging in a woman ! I never half
knew it before. For a minute I felt inclined

to give lier leave to say her worst : anything
seemed preferable to being under an obligation
to her. But then I remembered my
mother ; the blow would kill her, — our means
of support too would be gone, for old Peele
would have no mercy on such disgrace.
Well, that's enough : the long and the short
was, that I had to stoop to promise what she
required, — never to mention one word of my
discoveries respecting her and this precious
Captain,' until she herself chose to publish
the engagement. On this condition alone
she promised equal secresy on her side ; and
so we parted.

I am degraded — lower than words can
say. I cannot but feel myself more or less
at that creature's mercy ; for she would be as
likely as not, if it suited her, to break her
promise. Or if not that, can either she or I
ever forget what passed to-night ? I suppose
I shall grow used to the burden of it in time :
just now, it seems almost unbearable. Oh,
what would my mother feel, if she had any
idea, either of what I had this day sunk todo
and be, or of the thread my good name
hangs on ! And to think that I once madly
admired that girl, and thought her worth
fifty of any in my own station ! Now I hate

her, and despise lier, — even lier face is detestable
to me ; and if ever there were a lie on
earth, that face is one. — I will go to bed,
and try to shut its mocking smile out of my
mind.

"August 28th. — There has been a new
chapter to the story— one that I never
dreamed of. When I went to the bank this
morning, I thought old Peele looked rather
queer ; but I was too sick at heart to take
much notice of him. Towards eleven o'clock
I was summoned to his private room : I
went; — there, looking kind and concerned,
stood Mr. Bulkley, and, open before old Peele,
was the book with my unfortunate blotted
entry. I wondered for a moment whether
Mr. Bulkley had betrayed me, after all ; but
no, — Mr. Peele spoke in his measured tones,
and said that he had felt it his duty to request
Mr. Bulkley' s personal attendance in
investigating a certain matter. The fact was,
the rigid old party had observed my confusion
yesterday, turned it over afterwards in his
mind, and later, examining the entry, and
comparing it with my former figures, concluded
that something was wrong. He talked
for some time, in most correct language ; but
this, so far as I made out, was the pith : followed

by a direct inquiry of Mr. Bulkley as
to the exact sum paid by him into my hands.
Mr. Bulkley, that fine old English gentleman,
who never in his life told a lie, I am very
sure, — hummed and hawed for a second :
during which I saw, by Mr. Peele's face, that
his suspicions were more than confirmed : —
and then began to say something about * all
right ' — but I stopped him by making a clean
breast of it, and telling Mr. Peele the whole
truth. I felt desperate, as if I hardly cared
whether or no I were exposed before the
whole town : till suddenly I remembered my
mother ; that thought kept me from defying
him, in words at least. Then went on a
discussion, stormy at times, between him and
Mr. Bulkley. I listened as if it concerned
any one else ; my brain seemed numbed,
somehow. Mr. Peele wanted to dismiss and
disgrace me ; he almost urged Mr. Bulkley
to prosecute. As to the dismissal, if Mr.
Bulkley were not so important a shareholder
by far the largest in the bank, fortunately
for me — I could see that Mr. Peele would not
have listened to him for one moment. As it
was, he heard against the grain, and soon the
truth came out — the truth I have long suspected.
He said that he had disliked from

the first, my admission into the bank ; that
young men of antecedents such as mine, were
invariably idle and dissipated, that, knowing
this, he had always mistrusted me, and feared
the worst ; and, though I could not be accused
of any neglect of business, he could see that
application was a struggle to me, only maintained
by a sense of its pressing necessity.
Here Mr. Bulkley broke in, and said — ' Well
now, Peele, I should have thought that a
feather in his cap ! if the boy does his best
in spite of difficulties, why reproach him ?'
I was very near making a fool of myself at
those kind words ; and to break down before
old Peele would have been too terrible ! It
was a relief when he froze me up again, with
his rigid voice : ordering me out of the room
while he and Mr. Bulkley discussed the matter.
I wonder how high a fellow's blood can boil
without anything coming of it ? I never
knew, in Copeland days, what it was possible
to go through. Only for my mother, I would
not one instant have remained dependent on
that fellow. But there would be nothing, to
buy her bread even, if I were out of work.

It was almost an hour before they sent
for me again. Then I found that old Peele
had been forced to yield : and that Mr. Bulk-ley

lead not only induced him to keep me on
in the bank, but had drawn from him a promise
not to disgrace me by publishing ray
offence. ' Indeed,' says Peele, ' I have no
need to promise that : the credit of the bank
is too precious to me.' It was a bitter pill
to him to keep me, I could see, — and no
wonder, perhaps : he cannot see into my
mind, or know how sorely I repent. He
loaded me with warnings and exhortations,
finally saying that, such faint trust as he had
in me, being now entirely gone, his vigilance
over me henceforth would be incessant and
minute : therefore, for my own sake, I should
do well to avoid any further transgression.
You mustn't be too hard upon him, Peele,'
said old Bulkley : * The poor boy has had
many trials.' I tried to thank Mr. Bulkley,
but I made a sad mess of it ; I wished I could
have knelt down, and kissed his great kind
hand. Mr. Peele, too, I had to thank ; that
was easier. I said to him — ' Mr. Peele, if it
were not for my mother, nothing should induce
me to annoy you by my presence in the
bank. But I give you my word of honour
that you shall never have cause to doubt mein
any way again.' When I spoke of my
honour, he smiled: — so low have I sunk !

VOL. III. Q

'' Aug. 29tli. — If mj mother were not here,
I would not trouble, but go comfortably onto
the dogs. It would be a jollier life than
my present one. No news of the legacy, and
my character gone — at best, kept only by
sufferance of old Peele and Jessie. — Yes, I
would soon be off! and give myself full
swing."

CHAPTER XVII

With fiercer heat than flamed above my head
My heart was hot within me ; till at last
My brain was lightened when my tongue had said —
Christ is not risen !
Christ is not risen, no —
He lies and moulder low ;
Christ is not risen."

Arthur H. C lough.

Journal continued.

'' Sept. 3rd. — I am keeping straight only
by iron efforts. Continually an impulse
comes on me to get dead drunk, and forget
my own existence ; or to throw up my post,
and enlist; or to break out in some other
way, and astonish all the solemn faces which
look at me as if I were the most inky-hued
of sheep. I feel half mad at times ; I think
it is indeed a kind of madness, — but one look
at my mother, or one thought of her, quiets
me in a moment. She is certainly thinner ;
and that flush, so unnatural to her lily-like
complexion, comes every day. I watch the
post and the papers, with anxiety which half
Q 2

sickens me : — but no news. Surely the inventors
of our law were made of iron ! the
delays are endless. I still pray constantly
to God; and the sermons tell us that God
appears to discourage us sometimes, when
He is merely waiting for the right moment.
If this be true, He may have help in store
for us, and I may yet see my mother welland
strong, and begin perhaps a new life
in a new place, the troubles here forgotten.

Sept. 11th. — Mr. Peele's bad opinion of
me seems invincible. I try to be attentive
and industrious, — a model of angelic submission
I feel myself, sometimes ! — but nothing
makes any impression upon that adamantine
prejudice. The whole town bows down before
the Peele family ; they are standards of
excellence. They are considered also great
aristocrats, and their society is courted by
all the tuft-hunters of Bullingham. Wherefore,
I know not : for the other day, from a
chance allusion, I discovered that they themselves
regard ' county families ' as stars of
superior magnitude — and feel honoured by
the possession of ' a bowing acquaintance '
with one or two. Yet they evidently look
down upon my mother and me, on account
of our small way of living. My mother, the

queen of her own county ! But what rot it
all is, after all !

'' Sept. Isti.— That fine Richard, the swell
A 1 of Bullingham, is hardly so perfect as
Mr. Peele supposes. I, who am such a black
sheep, would have scorned to deceive my
father as he deceives his. I felt sorry today,
even for rigid old Peele, when I saw how
admiringly he looked at the fellow, and heard
him say to a friend something which showed
what a son to be proud of he thought him.
That handsome girl too, who is her father in
petticoats, and chooses to eye me with an
imitation of his scandalized propriety, — she
simply adores her brother. She has been at
home for a few days, from her school, to celebrate
his birthday ; I saw her walking about
with him everywhere, holding his arm, with
the air of a devotee. I fancy, if I had an
innocent girl clinging to ray arm, and thinking
all that of me, I would try to be a little
more deserving of her ! I don't know, though
perhaps I shouldn't. It is easy enough
to be deceived in one's self.

*' Sept. 15th. — I feel like the man in the
iron cage. The weather is so glorious, but
I am shut up nearly all day, and cannot enjoy
it. Old Brush whines and cries every morning

when I leave him, and never learns that
there is no help for it ; he always expects to
be taken out, and is always disappointed. In
the evening we have a run ; but I don't like
to be long away from my mother. She is so
much alone all day, and she grows worse —
her weakness frightens me. Still I have not
given up hope. The lawsuit comes on in a
day or two ; I think we are sure to win. If
I could keep my mind from dwelling on home,
I should be less discontented : but I cannot.
It will come, — in dreams at night even more
than by day. The wide changeful sky that
stretched so gloriously over the land, — that
view which I saw with fresh joy whenever I
went back, — the woods — they must be beginning
to tint, and the shooting is in full force.
Yes, and cub-hunting has begun by this time.
How melancholy the old house must look,
though — all gutted and forsaken. How
strange it is to think of a world gone by
and dead, as if it had never been ! A world
to me and my mother : —-nothing to any one
here.

Sept. 17th. — If I were at home now, I
would be out from morning to night. Oh,
for one long day at home ! But if my mother
could have some country drives in a comfortable

carriage, I should not care about myself.
People tell her how well she looks, and say
she should go out more, &c. I can fancy
how these Bullingham ladies, who seem in
perpetual motion, always in and out of each
other's houses, or their own kitchens, or the
shops, or the market, — how their gossiping
tongues clack about my mother ! They think
her an indolent fine lady, I can see, and her
weakness half nerve and fancy. Well, fortunately
their thoughts make no difference to
her ! for the rest I only wish they were right.
But that flush and brightness, which they
take for health, — I dare not think what is
their true meaning !

'' Sept. 30th.— It is all over. The judgment
was in to-day's paper. The codicil is
pronounced null and void.

'oct. Ist.^The £100 was all a myth.
No hope, no help, for my mother. There
must be a curse upon us.

Oct. 3rd. — I shall have to stand by and
see her die, as a pauper dies, for want of
skill. I dare not look forward, lest I should
grow desperate — and then what would become
of her ? Mother — mother !

Oct. 6th. — For days I had given up
prayer ; but my mother's agony drives me toit

again. If no other help come, at least a
merciful God cannot deny some ease to her
sufferings. The pain is in His Hands — He
can still it.

'^ Oct. 9th. — It is terrible to watch intense
pain, and be powerless to relieve it. When
one of these paroxysms of anguish comes on,
it will have its way — its omnipotent, raging
way. When at last it wears itself out, she
is so exhausted that her life seems nearly
gone. I stint in every possible manner to
get her wine, brandy, beef tea, jelly, &c. —
and those preserve her strength in some
measure — at least wind her up for the next
turn on the rack. I wish I could manage
altogether without meat ; but I find I cannot
: and it would never do for me to strike
work.

'' Oct. 12th.— The Bulkleys left England
yesterday for the winter. One feels rather
forlorn, to have no friend within reach. But
I breathe more freely when I think of a
thousand miles between me and Jessie.

'' Oct. 20th. — Browning told me, as gently
as possible, that I must try to give up hope.

Even H could not save her now. It is

only a question of time. — I cannot realize
it. She is easier, too, to day.

'' Oct. 22nd.- What will it be in this world,
when my mother is in another? My one
friend gone. Gone into that impenetrable
silence which swallowed up my father. I
was spoiled, I may say idolized, for twenty-two
years. — Fate is making up for it now.

Oct. 30th. — If I saw even a worm in
torture, I would rescue it. And here is nota
worm, but a human being, a human organization
of body and mind, finely strung,
with infinite capacities for suffering — capacities
intensified by the habits of the position
in which it was born, — here is this being
racked and torn with anguish, and its Creator
Who alone can help it — seems deaf and
blind to all. God forgive me if I speak
irreverently ! — but oh, why is it ? — why,
why, why ? I pray continually. How easy
it would be to Him to send relief! Some
say that pain is sent to purify the soul. But
if God be Omnipotent, why should He choose
so fearful a method of purify mg ? If He be
merciful, as they say, how can He look unmoved
upon such torture of a tender woman ?
If I could suffer it instead, that would be
another matter. Or even if I did not pray ;
but I do. Oh, that sky — so blue, so silent,
so cold !

Nov. 4th. — Snow in the air, and my
mother feels it sadly. These rooms are now
as draughty as they were close in the summer.
A kind note from Lady Thorne, inviting
her there. But she could not travel ;
she can scarcely cross the room now, without
pain.

Nov. 7th.— To-day, as I sat by her, she
asked me to fetch her Bible. She said that
she must find out something of the world to
which she was going. I could scarcely get
into the passage before I burst out crying
like a baby. Sometimes, womanish as it is,
I catch myself wishing that I were indeed
a babe once more, and could cry it all out on
her breast.

'' Nov. 15th. — Every day the sun rises and
sets ; and the stars come out at night : otherwise
I should sometimes think that God had
forgotten the world. Yet what egotism to
think the world forgotten, because one's own
small centre-point is ruffled ! An atom more
or less, what is it ? Yet each of those atoms
can suffer ; and some of them suffer doubly,
a thousandfold, in seeing each other suffer.
Are we atoms to God ? doesn't He care, as
His great purposes sweep on their way ? —
His purposes shall ripen fast, unfolding

every hour.' I can hear our old Copeland
voices piping that out now, in the old church !
Ah, those words were nothing to me, then.
Now, as I think of them, a stern, relentless
power rises, high and calm, doing His own
Will, at all hazards to poor humanity. Yet
is not humanity the work of His Hand ? I
will pray still : though every day it is harder.

Nov. 22nd. — A sky of gray ink, — all the
ugly houses rising like glum ghosts in their
rows — sludge in the streets — a few sad-coloured
leaves forlorn on the long-armed
trees. This without : and within, my mother,
day after day, night after night, in pain.
Poor old Brush is gloomy like the rest. I
work on like a coffee-mill, to grind the family
food.

*' Christmas Day.— I went to church in
saintly fashion, to please my mother. What
mockery it all seemed ! The church dressed
up with holly and ivy — the Bullingham
families, sleeker than ever, in attendance —
boys and girls come home from school, allas
pleased as Punch. One young fellow
reminded me of myself, — old Browning's son,
on leave from his regiment. He looked as I
felt, the Christmas before last — as if care
were a popular delusion. The organ pealed,

the hymns and chants were all praise : it
was more than I could stand. I slipped out
before the sermon, in spite of old Churchwarden
Peele glancing daggers from his seat
near the door. I should have made a fool
of myself, if I had stayed ; that cursed desk-work
must unhinge my nerves. The sky
was wonderfully blue — crystal gems of frost
on the trees. I don't know where I went, —
but away from Bullingham ; and I saw
Copelandss all the time — and our old church
bright with holly-berries — and the people
curtseying and pulling their forelocks, as we
came out at the door, and wishing us a
merry Christmas, — and the pool prime for
skating, — and my father and mother looking
on, while I opened their Christmas presents.
I seemed to be walking in a dream ; when I
went back, my mother from her sofa smiled,
and beckoned me to kiss her, and gave me a
little packet — a curious seal which she had
hunted up from old treasures. She was free
from pain, then, and almost happy ; but my
brain and heart felt frozen like the earth.
Next Christmas, where will that white face
be, which smiled at me from the sofa ?

'' Jan. 25th. — What a month has gone by!
How much longer can this misery last ? I

have prayed till I could pray no more : but
never any pity.

Feb. 2nd. — A dreadful night ; and today
I cannot leave her. She is hardly herself
at times — but she always knows me ; and it
soothes her to hold my hand. If it were
not selfish, I would to God that I could keep
her even as she is now. But I am shipwrecked
— and my one plank is floating from
under me.

'' Feb. 5th. — Pain — pain — pain. Oh,
mother, would that I could bear it for you !
Or if I could ease you by fifty years of penal
servitude, I would gladly give them. But
there will be no rest for you till you are in
your grave, mother, my cherished mother !

'' Feb. 7th. — She is sinking ; and it is
almost peace, after all that she has suffered.
Peace at least for her : her pain is gone.
Her life is ebbing gently. Oh, that I could go
with her !

"Feb. 8th. — There was a star, one large
bright star, glowing and paling, in a calm
winter sky. She saw it from her bed, where
she lay propped up with pillows — and pointed
to it as she held my hand, and smiled faintly.
Still watching it, her eyes closed, and she
seemed to sleep. The last time, oh, my

mother, that I should see those eyes which
loved me so well. Who will ever love meas
she did ? I sat on by her, watching that
cold bright star, as she had watched it, a
lump like a stone in my breast. I was glad
that she should sleep after her pain : I never
dreamed that it was death. But the star
seemed to smile and mock me. Perhaps it
did : who knows ? There is no mockery like
that mocking sky. I looked at her to see
if she were waking, and found that her
breathing had ceased. I put my hand upon
her heart ; it was beating no more. My
other hand was still clasped in hers — I drew
it away, but she made no movement, as
before, to take it back. No — she was gone.
She is sleeping there still, a sheet over her
face.

Feb. 13th. — They laid her in her grave
to-day. The sleet pattered on the coffin.
Some one behind me whispered, '^ Poor
young fellow ! " I did not wonder when I
came home, and, standing over the fire,
caught sight in the dull mirror, of a dark
thin young chap, and found he was myself.
My mother's sofa was there — her work-basket
and scent-bottle lying beside it on the table.

The sleet still beat against the windows ;
but all beside was silent. As I looked
drearily round the room, old Brush sidled
from under the table-cover, and looked up at
me and whined.

'^ Feb. IGth. — Come back to me, come
back to me, my mother. Oh, where are
you, mother, my beloved ? Through all our
troubles hitherto, at least we were together.
But now blackness of darkness lies between
us — a gulf I cannot fathom. Mother —
mother — my heart aches — my life is a pain.
I am afraid to sleep, because when I wake it
comes with such startling force upon me.
And the world goes on, the dreary Bulling-ham
world, — and I have to go out into it —
and when I come back, there is the empty
sofa, and the whole silent room.

*' Feb. 21st. — An unexpected letter from
Jem Waters. He has come into the title —
his brother died last Christmas in a fit, — I
was too miserably taken up, to notice it.
Jem insists on paying the legacies cut off by
his brother's meanness : he says he knows,
whether his mother's mind were infirm or no,
that such were her intentions — and especially
as regarded ourselves. Indeed, hearing of
our misfortunes, she had begged just at last

to add another hundred, which he encloses.
So here I have it in my hand, — a cheque for
£200. It is good and honourable of old
Jem. But oh, when I think of the past !
What would this money have been to me,
five months ago ? Oh, I must go out— I must
get away — the thought maddens me.

"Feb. 22nd. — I sat up till two o'clock,
revolving my plans. My mind is made up.
I will go abroad, and live on this £200 till it
is gone, — then find some other work. At
the worst, I can enlist — though I haven't
heart for it, yet. Here I am alone among
strangers — some, downright enemies, or as
bad. How can I be anything but a black
sheep while old Peele and his cronies look
at me day after day in this way ? I will go, —
and get quit of them all.

"March 12th. — Fortunately Mr. Peele hasa
friend whose son is ready to step into my
place : so I shall be free in a fortnight. He
informs me that I need not apply to him fora
character — or whatever they are pleased to
call it. He says he cannot forget what,
against his better judgment, he consented,
for Mr. Bulkley's sake, to condone. I
managed my tongue, and that was all : at
the moment he looked old and tired, or I

believe I might have knocked him down.
Afterwards I went away out of the town,
and ran for a mile without stopping, and even
so could hardly work off my rage. Then I
lay on her grave for an hour in the dark,
thinking of her, and father, and home.

"March 26th.— The Bulkleys have come
back. I went to day to wish him good-bye ;
he is 'a fine old English gentleman, all of
the olden time.' Yes, I would die for him,
if that would do him any good. As I left
the house, I saw Jessie looking from an
upper window. I stalked on, without noticing
her. Oh, that T could forget her existence !

March 27th.— I left a wreath of lilies,
my mother's favourite flower, on her grave.
Daisies are springing up in the grass ; the
marble cross is finished, and in its place. It
seemed so strange to think that she was lying
close by me, and could not hear my voice
when I bade her good-bye, or know that I
was going ! This £200, come too late, might
have saved her. I never forget that thought,
night nor day.

"April 18th. — I have found a quiet room
in a Swiss valley, with a clean woman, who
asks no questions, and lets me live as I like.
I live roughly enough — eking out my money.

VOL. III. R

Every day, for hours and hours, I sit alone
on the mountain side, and think. My ideas
they have all been shaken up and confused
I am trying to collect them. What am I ?
What is my future life to be ? Where are
my father and my mother ? What became
of those fruitless prayers— in which all my
strength went out ?

ic April 25th. — I never knew in old days
that the soul was capable of such anguish.
I have paroxysms of it sometimes, like my
mother's physical paroxysms. I wake in the
night, and all is still, and the great mountains
rise around me : — my heart cries,
Mother — mother ' — and then suddenly, all
fresh again comes the sense that she is not.
Last night I could not bear it — I felt overwhelmed
— I could hardly help crying aloud,
like a hysterical girl. I opened my window,
and jumped out, — it is only a few feet to the
ground : then I went away alone to the
mountain. There was a sound of waters
falling down the gorges : no other. The
stars shone in full glory, but no moon. Just
below, in the shadow, lay the little burial-ground
of the hamlet, its wooden crosses
standing up like spectres of the night. What
stories of sickness, death, parting, cluster

round those crosses ! If they could speak,
and tell each its own tale ! This world, this
awful world, seems formed to be a plaything
for some malignant spirit, who creates for
the pleasure of torturing : just as I have seen
bullying fellows of old school-days. There's
such a sarcasm in it all — a grim making game
of human creatures, and all they love best.
Yesterday I heard some men talking about
an avalanche last winter — how it came down
in the night, on the other side of the mountain,
and swept a whole village away. And
yet in the same breath these unthinking peasants
speak of ' le bon Dieu ! ' But I am
fast, from all I feel and see, coming to the
conclusion that our Creator, be He whom
He may, has never verbally revealed Himself
to man : that our common beliefs are only a
new form of the old heathen mythologies —
that the God our theologians describe so
glibly, is a grand Myth : — perhaps suggested
by that very spirit who is allowed such sway,
to the minds he revels in deluding.

May 4th. — There was a storm to-day,
and I was out in it, among the mountains,
watching the lightning play, and hearing the
thunder. I should not much have cared if
one of the great flashes had struck me, — 1
E 2

feel too desperate to care, either way. It was
grand : the sudden flame lighted up all the
snowy peaks, and was gone : and then the
thunder rolled from height to height. It
spoke — to me — of something terrible in
Nature, something relentless. What are we,
against that Omnipotence ? Puny specks,
with heads and hearts infinitely too great for
us, busy about our little schemes, hoping,
planning, praying. And there above us, it
moves on its way — awful, unchangeable : like
the avalanche, which regards not the bereaved
— or the thunderstorm, which has no
mercy for frightened women. We cling to
one another ; but that Power sweeps along —
and we are torn asunder — one left, the other
vanished. We may defy Fate, but it only
mocks us, and makes it ridiculous to ourselves
and others. The only way to endure
life is to care for nothing : but then, is that
possible ? There is the question ! Oh, this
mysterious instrument of torture, the human
heart !

'' May 6th.—

Ah, Christ, that it were possible

For one short hour to see
The souls we loved, that they might tell us
What and where they be !'

Sometimes it seems to me that if there were
pity in that Power unknown, this aching desire
for my mother could not remain unsatisfied.
Oh, it is more than desire, — it is
sehnsucht ' — it is anguish. She would speak
to me if she could ; if she could escape, she
would come to me. ' Ah, Christ ! ' those
words begin. Without doubt Christ existed,
but what was He ? Only a man : otherwise
He would help. The story of Hi life is so
beautiful, — He was so kind, so pitiful, so
gracious ! Yes, if this world were in His
Hands, as some pretend, help would soon
come. He was a wonderful Man — but impotent
like the rest. He suffered. He strove, —
but He too was swept away in the storm.
Only His Nature was so exquisite — so full of
fortitude, yet of sweetness — so deeply reverential
to the Being in Whom He trusted, —
that He did not rebel, as I do. I am not
holy, like Him ; but weak and passionate : —
only a little like Him in suffering. He believed,
and converted others to His Belief :
but what came of it ? He could not really
have risen again; He cannot be indeed at
God's Right Hand : or He would contrive
help, some way or another. No, it was a
dream — a delusion, — brought about by some

means now too long past to penetrate. Oh,
that it had been true 1 that He were alive
indeed, and had seen my mother suffer ! I
should not now be what I am.

May 20th.— I see strange things in my
wanderings. In the lower forms of Nature,
endless means and diversities of suffering;
the creatures prey upon each other, as men
do, but without men's restraints : the strong
devour the weak ; the weak lead lives of
terror, and die daily a hundred deaths. A
mask of beauty covers all : to those who do
not think, how lovely the world is ! It was
lovely once to me, and seemed all that I
desired. But even the little flowers are
trampled down and overshadowed by stronger
forms of vegetation. Mio^ht makes rio;ht in
this universe ; lives rise and fall in proportion
to their inherent power of fighting. Caprice
and disorder are everywhere. I am sick of
it all : yet I believe that this gloomy mood
would melt like a dream, if only I could find
myself at Copelandss, with my mother, strong
and well, in her old place.

"October. — B in Italy. — I have made

up my mind. I will face my life like a man,
expect the worst, and harden myself. I

have learned bitter lessons ; I must take
care to profit by them. I put my faith in
prayer ; and it disappointed me. I believed
in that girl, Jessie ; and she has turned out
all but a fiend. I, for my part, should be a
fool, if I allowed myself to trust in anything
any more. If I can crush out all heart, I
shall manage pretty well. A new means to
make an honest penny has turned up. I
have got lately into the habit of scribbling ;
and a month ago, as my money began to
dwindle, I worked up one or two sketches of
queer scenes observed in my travels, and

sent them to the editor of the . To-day

comes a cheque, and a polite note requesting
more. I see plenty now which I can turn
in this way to account ; and it is jolly — if
anything could ever be jolly again — to be
roaming about by myself, as the spirit moves
me. Not one of my old cronies knows where
I am ; the Peeles are no longer scandalized
by sight or sound of me.

Dec — Saw in the distance Miss Bulkley,
fat as ever, driving with a friend. No doubt
they are wintering abroad again ; probably
that serpent is with them ; also in these
parts I may meet other friends, at this
season, if I stay. I will accept that travelling

correspondency, and be off at once to
America.

"Feb. 8th. — (Fourteen months afterwards.)
England once more. I am sick of travelling.
I must settle somewhere, if only in a
hole. To-morrow I go by the first train to
try for this berth at Alton. I thought my
heart was almost stamped out ; but here in
its native soil it torments me as of old.
Last night, the second anniversary of my
mother's death, I stood beside her grave.
It was late, but the moon had not risen ; I
pulled my hat over my eyes, and muffled my
chin in a comforter — and no one recognized

me ; I walked eight miles from W , and

went straight to that quiet cemetery. The
marble cross had lost its newness ; the grass
was green and thick. How still it was ! the
old longing rose and cried ; the old silence
struck with the same chill. Is she dust by
this time, I wonder ? is nothing left of the
mother whom I loved ? The star which I
remembered was there, looking just as two
years ago. All came back to me in a flash,
as though it had only just happened; my
travels seemed like a dream. I stood therefor
a long time — I don't know how long, —

all the rest of the world was to me unutterably
forlorn ; my one broken fragment of
home was under my feet. I had to go at
last ; as I turned away, another white stone
stared me in the face ; I caught the name of
Peele, — paused and read two names : — old
Peele's and Richard's. Both dead and gone,
like my mother ! Mr. Peele in March of last
year, eleven months ago ; Eichard, two
months before him. I feel still like a man
in a nightmare."

CHAPTER Xvii.

'Twill end, girl, end ; no cloud across the sun
But passes at the last, and gives us back
The face of God once more."

Charles Kingsley.

The record ended abruptly as it began ; and
Marjory was free to meditate. She turned
the leaves of the little book over and over,
noting once more the hurried and blotted
entries, telling their own tale of tumult in
the mind from, which they came. She longed
to be a child again, that she might run to
him and tell him — many things ; her heart
was throbbing with a strange medley of fear,
of hope, of sympathy that was almost pain.
It was long since any one had been near her ;
but she did not feel lonely ; she did not even
observe how time was going. When at
length a knock came at the door, she heard
it as in a dream.

"Miss Stanhope, my dear, are you
awake?" said Bellhouse, softly. In her
arms was a child, a beautiful boy of five
years old or upwards. As Marjory gazed at

him, the eyes that looked back appeared to
blend with her dream. They were hazel eyes
Jessie's eyes — the same which had gazed
down on her that first evening, as she lay in
this very bed ; which had sparkled so brightly
while the foolish young tongue ran on about
Lady Burleigh. Fair eyes ; of which — and
their visions — these their counterpart were
all that remained.

Here, too, was the chestnut hair, admired
by little Marjory ; rippling across the childish
forehead in waves like those which Jessie
had exultingly noted, when she numbered
her attractions in the glass. The whole face
was an infantine copy of Jessie's, differing
only in expression — which was simple, open,
innocent, as befitted its age. Withal, it had
a look of another face — a likeness which
Marjory saw vaguely, but could not decipher.

'' Here he is, ma'am," said Bellhouse,
looking from the child to Marjory, and then
at the child again, with a mixture of sorrow,
yet of pride : *' And it's wonderful, and what
I call a mercy from the Almighty, to see
how he takes to his old grandmother ! "

As she spoke, she kissed him fondly,
while he, enthroned in her arms, passed a
chubby hand around her neck, and rested

his chestnut head against her, still staring
with wide-open eyes at Marjory.

"The longest thing that ever was ! He
had his tea so comfortable ! sitting on my
lap : the jam won his heart straight off.
That good woman, Mrs. Jelly, she must have
talked to him, and incensed him, and now
he don't look on me like a stranger. Oh,
Miss Stanhope, my dear, it's past belief!
the years seem to have gone back ; and here
am I with my Jessie a child again ! Only
he's in a way more loving than Jessie ever
was, even as a little one."

She looked at him again, and hugged him
again ; and then the tears gushed forth ; but
amid her tears she smiled. Healing had
fallen at last upon this tried and widowed
heart ; even earthly healing, come in the
course of nature, in God's good time.

"I've been so grieved. Miss Stanhope, my
dear, to leave you for so long ! but I thought
it would be best to keep away for a bit after
seeing Mr. Hugh. I didn't know what to
believe, and what not ; and I felt flustered
alike ; afraid of turning your mind the wrong
way, be it the one way or the other. So I
just shut myself up alone, and prayed to the
Almighty."

Bellbouse," said Marjory, earnestly, " I
am quite certain that Mr. Vivian is utterly
innocent. I have had a note from him, and
something else which explains — I'll tell you
all I can, tomorrow."

Well, my dear, well ! I trust it may be
so ; I do trust it — and I do wish it ; — that
he knows. He'll be coming back just now,
to see Mrs. Jelly ; and it seems to me,
ma'am, that one look at this darling must
melt his heart, and make him tell the truth,
if he hasn't told it already. I can't think as
any mortal could resist him ! "

How long has Mrs. Jelly been here ? "

About an hour, ma'am. I would have
sent you word, but I was so taken up. She
is all agog to see Mr. Hugh ; and waiting for
him now by my fire ; and I've got my poor
Jessie's little crib all ready for the darling."

'' Bellhouse, you will be sure to come
afterwards, and tell me what has happened ?
And will you give Mr. Vivian this from me ?"

She had torn a scrap of paper from his
own envelope, and in pencil had hastily
scribbled on it these words : —

I believe in you utterly. M. S."

She twisted it into a tiny billet, and pressed
it upon Bellhouse.

Very well, ma'am," said the good old
nurse, after a slight hesitation ; *' I will give
it — I know you would do nothing but what
is right."

Marjory thanked her, kissed the pretty
boy, and was soon once more in solitude.

'' He shall bring forth thy righteousness
as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday."
Those words floated continually
before her, bringing, at least in some degree,
confidence and peace. Surely the deep waters
would not always overwhelm that spirit,
shown by its own confessions to be in reality
so good and true, capable of such depth of
devotion, — so noble, however faulty. Now,
when she had cause to hope that his lost
faith was reviving, he would surely not be
suffered to sink a second time ! help would
arise — proof would be found of his innocence.

Another hour, almost two hours, had gone
by, before Bellhouse's step was heard again
in the passage. As the door softly opened,
Marjory started up in her bed.

Well, Miss Stanhope, my dear ; it is all
right. Everything is explained ; and Mr.
Hugh is as innocent as you are."

Thank God ! " cried the girl, sinking
back. Until this moment she had not known

low heavy was the weight on her mind.
The relief, proportionately great, now almost
overwhelmed her. She could ask no questions ;
she could only gaze at Bellhouse, waiting to
hear her story.

I can't bear to excite you, my dear, at
this time of night," said Bellhouse, anxiously ;
but I know you would not sleep if I did
not tell you ; so I must make it as short as
I can. Well, ma'am, Mr. Hugh came in ;
and first of all, I gave him your scrap of
paper ; and whatever you wrote on it,
ma'am, I can't say, but the moment he read
it, his face changed, and he looked somehow
as if it was nothing to him any more, what
any of us thought of him. That gave me
my first hope ; and then, when he set his
eyes on the child, I felt that I could not
believe him guilty. It was the way he looked
at the darling, — not struck, or moved in his
conscience — only a bit curious, and surprised
to see such a likeness of my Jessie. Oh, my
dear ! if he had done as we feared, not the
being his child alone, but the living picture
of its mother as it is — that must have cut
him to the heart ! But after the first glance,
he took no more notice ; and then he and
Mrs. Jelly began to talk ; and when I came

back, after taking the little one to his bed,
there they were with a tin box before them,
and Mr. Hugh just about to open it.

* Bellhouse,' he says, ' Mrs. Jelly has
delivered this box to me, in my character as
your daughter's husband. If I be her husband,
I have a right to open the box, which,
as she told Mrs. Jelly, is full of his private
papers.'

I had not known of this, my dear ; for
you'll remember it's not spoken of in Miss
Peele's letter ; but Mrs. Jelly nodded to me
that all was right ; and I could see a look in
her face as if she was sorely puzzled, and
half believed in him herself, though she
could not tell how the mistake arose."

"Yes!" said Marjory, listening breathlessly.


Then, ma'am, he opened the box. It
was hard work ; for the lock is not a common
one — and the key was rusty, through
lying unused. But at last, open it came :
Mrs. Jelly and me standing by. And there,
my dear, at the very top lay a blotting-book
belonging to Mrs. Jelly, which she knew ina
minute, and had missed since the day before
my poor Jessie died, when it was lying on
Jessie's table. She had hunted high and

low, and never could think what became of
it ; but now it seemed plain that Jessie had
opened the box, while she was writing on
that last evening, and in her hurry, when she
was taken faint, locked up the book in a
mistake."

'' Then she might have locked up some of
her own letters ? "

'' So Mr. Hugh said ; and Mrs. Jelly and
me, we saw it directly. The faintness came
on all of a sudden, and no doubt she locked
the box, for fear her husband's secrets should
be spied. Well, inside the book, was half-a-dozen
sheets of writing paper ; and among
them, ma'am, a letter — looking just like the
one which came directed to Mr. Hugh. It
was the same coloured foreign paper, and
all : only the envelope was one size smaller.
Mr. Hugh — he turned it over, and we saw
the address — ' To my husband.'

Mrs. Jelly and me, we looked at one
another ; and Mrs. Jelly said — ' Please,
sir, to open it.' — He did so ; and there
came out the mystery ! The letter inside
was to Mr. Hugh in his own name. The
date was from Mrs. Jelly's lodgings, the
same as the other ; and then followed the
beginning : — ' Mr. Hugh, — I beg you to

VOL. III. s

excuse the liberty I take in writing to you
all proper, and as it should be. It seems,
ma'am, that in times past, Mr. Hugh had
known her husband ; and she thought that
he might find a way of getting his right
address : you see, Mr. Hugh and she — they
played together as children, and she had
known him all her life, and knew his kindness.
It appears that she had somehow
offended him while she was at Eipley ; for
first of all in the letter, she begs his pardon,
and humbles herself in a way which — oh, my
dear ! I was thankful to the heart's core to
find. And yet, ma'am, it cuts me too to
think how that proud spirit must have been
lowered ; but the Almighty knew best. My
prayer that she might have a humble heart —
Yes, He took His own way to form it in
her ! "

She paused, her voice carried away by
the tears which flowed afresh, as she realized
in some degree, the extent of her Jessie's
sufferings. But the momentary agitation
past, she continued with her usual calmness.

Well, ma'am, after the apologies, she
gives particulars about her marriage and her
husband, and begs of Mr. Hugh to bring or
send him to her at Dover. She says that

the boy's second name — the name by which
she intends him to be known — is Copelandss :
chosen partly as atonement for her offence
whatever that might be, — and partly to
remind Mr. Hugh of the past : thinking that
if ever he were rich again, as, some day, she
said, might happen, — and if she died, — he
would be a friend to the poor baby, called
after his old home. Then she goes on to
mention that she encloses a letter for her
husband ; which, if it cannot be delivered to
him, she begs returned. No doubt, ma'am,
that was the letter found in the box. I told
you, if you remember, that the envelope was
a smaller size — just fit to enclose in the
other."

'rand she had put each letter in the
other's envelope ! "

There can be no question, ma'am, but
that was it: especially as in her letter to
Mr. Hugh, she says her husband's name :
quite a different person altogether from Mr.
Hugh himself, — and one. Miss Stanhope, my
dear, that we had best forget ; for he is gone
to his judge : he died, ma'am, long ago."

'then Mr. Vivian's innocence is proved
beyond any possibility of doubt ? "

"Certainly, ma'am: and if more proofs
2

was wanted, which it isn't, there is the box.
The rest of the box is filled with papers, as
my poor Jessie said — all in that name as she
told Mr. Hugh : letters from all manner of
people, bills unpaid, memorandums, and the
like. I saw enough of them to find that the
most were far from to his credit, and that
there was little wonder my poor girl wished
to hide them. A pretty state, I doubt not,
he was in, when he found he had left that
box behind him ! — but may be he never
remembered where — and the Almighty took
safe care of it. The Almighty knew, Miss
Stanhope, my dear, that it would come in
useful at the last. Poor dear Mr. Hugh ! I
could willingly have begged his pardon on
my knees : and Mrs. Jelly, she downright
cried."

Oh, I am so glad ! I am so glad ! " Marjory
could not help repeating, again and
again, like a child. Her heart was brimming
over with thankfulness, relief, a thousand
nameless feelings. The vague fear which for
so long had troubled her, had melted into
nothing. He was clear, not in her eyes only,
but in the eyes of all the world. Neither
Lina, nor any other, could cast in this matter
the shadow of a stone at him, any more.

*' There was one thing beside, ma'am, which
I should Hke you to see," said Bellhouse,
after a pause. " I'll just show it to you tonight
; and then I need never trouble you
with this sad business again."

She handed to Marjory a paper partly
covered by poor Jessie's writing, — a faint
and feeble scrawl, too clearly showing the
sickness of her heart.

Oh, mj dear mother," it said '' how I
have wanted you ! — and yet I have never
written to you since my trouble, and you do
not know where I am. Mother, when I
married, I believed that I should soon come
to you in silks and jewels, with servants of
my own, and show that my old fancies were
not so foolish as you had thought them. I
often looked forward to that day, when I
should come as a lady to Thorne : — and when
I was left, as you will hear, alone in a far
country, I could not bear that you should
know how low I had fallen. Then he had
taken the marriage register, and I thought,
if I went home, there was no telling what
folks might say — some of them that were so
nasty, when I lived with you. That stuck-up
Davies, and Jane at the Parsonage, and
a many more ; I knew they would all glory

•
over me. So I have gone on, from day today

and week to week, hoping for my husband
to come back. It was mainly through
jealousy — but a fancy, after all, — that he left
me. He is a real gentleman, mother, of high
birth — and so grand and handsome ! though
he did deceive me by saying his name was
Russell. I never knew his real name till he
was gone, and I looked into a box of his
papers. But never mind, I forgive him ;
and, mother, my troubles are nearly over. I
feel it in my chest, and the doctor says it ;
so I hope you will forget my badness, and
take care of my poor baby when I am gone.
You have been a good mother to me; and
many's the time I've thought of your prayers,
and at last I thought I would pray too.
Yes, mother, I disappointed you in all else ; —
and I did not want your prayers to be disappointed.
So I have gone Where you taught
me, for mercy ; and I think I have found it.
I am easy now in my mind, mother ; and I
believe I am forgiven."

This was all. Whether written merely asa
vent for an overcharged heart, or as the
beginning of a letter to be sent some day, was
not apparent ; but be this as it might, the
words had filled a blank which Bellhouse had

never thought to see filled on earth. And
now at the close of this day of varied emotions,
peace was on her brow ; her eyes,
though swelled with crying, were calm ; her
whole countenance was that of one from
whom a load has passed away. Her erring
child was safe, waiting to welcome her, among
the others who had gone before ; her prayers
of long ago shone back on her, rich in
blessing. And she was alone in the world no
longer ; another child of her own blood had
come to brighten her old age.

Involuntarily, when Marjory gave back the
blotted paper, she clasped her arms around
Bellhouse's neck, as she had done when a
child.

I can never forget your kindness. Miss
Stanhope, my dear," said Bellhouse.

Nor I yours," responded Marjory.

Neither would she ever forget the lesson
which she had learned this night : that, albeit
after many days — days however stormy — it
shall be well at length with them that fear God.

Bellhouse had taken her candle, and was
turning to go, when Marjory called her back.

'' Bellhouse, one question — I was thinking

so much about the others, that 1 forgot

to ask the real husband's name ? "

'' My dear, I kept from mentioning it on
purpose, lest it should put you about. Ita
very sad thing ; and strange : but there'll
be no need, as he's dead and gone, to publish
it."

But pray tell me — or I shall be wondering
all night.

Well, my dear," said Bellhouse, coming
close to the bed — " I'm grieved beyond everything
for the young lady — and she so kind
too ! it will be a heavy blow for all the family.
But the name in my poor Jessie's letter to
Mr. Hugh, and likewise on all the bills and
papers, — that name," said Bellhouse, lowering
her voice — '' was the name of Richard
Peele."

CHAPTER XIX.

Now, by experience taught, . . assured
That God, who takes away, yet takes not half
Of what He seems to take ; or gives it back,
Not to our prayer, butter beyond our prayer."

Wordsworth.

The sun shone brightly after the storm ; the
bitter wind was silent : the blue sky stretched
above the leafless trees. Marjory went downstairs
this morning ; and Mr. Robinson, who
called early, gave permission for her journey
to Rockswold on the following day but one.
She could not have told, if questioned,
whether such permission made her sorry or
glad : she was conscious only of a strange
fondness for the old house, and a sad regret
in thinking that she must leave it, to enter
it perhaps never more. In each solitary room
by turns, occasional fires were lighted ; today
there was a fire in the hall, in the billiard-room,
in the old library ; Marjory wandered
to and fro among them, thinking of days
gone by, peopling the empty places with
forms long smouldered into dust.

Bellhouse and Mrs. Jelly sat together in
the old servants' hall. Mrs. Jelly was to
remain at Thorne a day or two, until the boy
was accustomed to his new surroundings ;
and in his behalf the housekeeper's room
was exchanged for this barer but more
spacious region. The wide uncarpeted floor
formed a splendid playground for the little
one, who raced to and fro, with his wooden
horse and his ball, while the two women,
now one and now the other, looked constantly
from their work to watch and admire. Here
also, as in the day, was calm after storm.
Marjory had looked in upon it, with a glow
of pleasure ; but now, as she roamed about
the silent house, the contrast made it more
lonely.

The sun was shining full through the long
windows of the billiard-room : which, like
those of the drawing-room and dining-room,
opened upon the terrace. Marjory sat in
one of the deep old window-seats, and looked
about her. There was a faintly musty odour
in the room ; the long billiard-table was
covered with holland, under which the net
pockets were turned up. She remembered,
as a child, knocking the balls about, and
watching, with strange fascination, the

polished orbs roll from end to end of the
table. From the opposite wall, old portraits
stared fixedly upon her. There was one of
a dark, belted soldier of the Roses, which
had often chilled her childish blood, as she
met his stern, deep gaze. He was gazing
still, just the same, his hand on the hilt of
his sword ; she felt again a shadow of the
same shrinking : — ghostly presences seemed
all about her, broad daylight though it were.
The step of a living man in the hall, came
with a sense of relief. That quick tread, so
light, yet so strong, — surely she knew it !
He had entered through the glass door in
the drawing-room, and was going towards
Bellhouse's domains when, in passing the
billiard-room, he saw Marjory. He stopped
short, flushing all over his brown face, his
dark eyes suddenly lightened.

Miss Stanhope ! You here ! May I come
in ? " In another moment her hand was held
fast in his familiar clasp : his, for whom she
had so craved and pined during those dreary
months at Alton. Just thus his image had
stood often in her dreams ; now he himself
was here : how kind he looked, she thought
how strong, how full of life ! But a little
while ago, youth and the world had seemed

dead to her : and now here they were reviving,
the old fire was springing up, merely
at the sight of his face, the sound of his
voice, the touch of his hand.

"I thought Ishouldneverbeabletoseeyou,"
he said. " The time has seemed unbearable."

'' Mr. Robinson kept me upstairs, but I
am free now ; and I am going home the day
after tomorrow."

If you don't catch cold meanwhile,
wandering about this old house. How
dreary it all is, isn't it ? at least, it has been
dreary, until now ; but now you bring back
life. It seems only the other day that you
were sitting just here in this same place,
staring at yonder soldier as if you expected
him to come down and devour you."

I was just thinking of it," said Marjory :
'but it doesn't seem 'the other day' tome
; it seems long, long ago. How different
everything is, since then ! The whole world
is changed."

"Don't say that," he said, drawing one
of the old leather-covered chairs near her
window. " Not in that tone. Perhaps the
change is only seeming."

As he paused, she looked up at him, and
met his eyes : fixed upon her with a strange

intensity of gaze. It was as if they had
long been craving for the sight of her, — at
least as much as hers for the sight of him.

''I have to thank you for something,"
said he : '' That little scrap of a note yesterday
evening — I shall keep it for ever and
ever."

It was nothing," said Marjory, blushing
deeply : "I could not help writing it ; I
would have said it instead, if I had seen
you."

'' And that was before the certain proofs
came out ; so I prize it more. Have you
read what I sent you ? "

Every word of it." She took the little
book out of her pocket, as she spoke, and
gave it back to him.

It has not made you despise me ? "

Despise you ! " echoed Marjory. She
was not herself aware with what emphasis
her blue eyes exclaimed against any such
possibility. But he looked as if a weight
had fallen from his mind ; evidently the question
had not been without real foundation.

I was almost afraid you would, when
you knew all. I can tell you I have often
despised myself The bare sound of poor
Jessie's name has been hateful to me ever

since, because it recalled that time — and that
scene with her."

As he spoke, Marjory, remembering all her
imaginations concerning those indications
which had so often shown in him some painful
association with Jessie's name — felt that
she had suddenly a new conception of what
it must be when two spirits parted on earth
by misunderstanding, meet in Paradise face
to face.

'' You were so strongly tempted," she
said : " I don't wonder you yielded for the
moment."

"No temptation can excuse swindling in
an English gentleman. Remember, I was a
swindler for a little while."

It is all over now," said Marjory : " You
must try to forget it."

I don't think I can ever forget it," he
said : " But I am thankful that it has not
disgusted you."

Mr. Vivian, may I ask you one question ?
You said in your note — ' Heaven is no longer
an empty name to me.' Is that true ? "

His whole countenance deepened and
brightened, with a steady brightness ; as
from some inward sunshine lately dawned,
and full of inward cheering.

It is true' lie said reverently : " THank
God it is true." He paused. Then, very
gently—

'^ I owe it all to you."

To me ! " cried Marjory, her blue eyes
widening.

Yes," he answered, looking at her with
something not far from adoration — " If rather
a long story will not tire you, I will explain."

Marjory could have listened to him forever,
without growing tired, she thought ;
although this she did not exactly say. He
stood up, a little nearer to her, leaning
against the window.

'' Miss Stanhope, when you were a little
child, and saw me here years ago, I was a
foolish young fellow, spoiled from babyhood,
with strong passions of every kind, and
thinking, if I thought at all, that I was only
created to gratify them. I had always been
accustomed to my own way ; I was rich, as
I fancied ; at any rate, I had plenty of money.
Somehow I was a favourite in the regiment
as well as at home, and altogether life was
a summer's day to me. I never dreamed
of its becoming anything more — or less."

I remember how bright and sunny you

were."

'' Because I lead my own way ; that was
all. Often since then, I have wondered how
I managed to live so entirely without thought;
but I had never been trained to thought, and
it had not yet been forced upon me — and everyday
brought some enjoyment or excitement
to drive it away. It was at that time, whenas
a matter of course, I thought pretty girls
formed to be flirted with, that I had that
foolish fancy for Jessie. As to love, I kne\^"
nothing about that ; I had never felt it, or
anything near it, then."

The unconscious emphasis of his tone
once more raised Marjory's colour. She was
not thinking of herself ; yet involuntarily the
colour came.

'* Religion I took, as I suppose nine out often
young fellows take it, for granted. I
was taught what was considered ' the thing,'
taken to church on Sundays, and the rest.
I supposed it was all very proper, and never
troubled my head further about it. Well,
then, into the midst of my self-indulgent
life, full of luxury, ease, and all that seemed
earthly good, came crashing that thundering
blow, my father's death, and the loss of all
we had. I cannot tell you what it was to
find all that I did find, when I came home at

a minute's notice — my world and everything
I cared for in it, suddenly split up to shivers.
At first I was too utterly stunned to realize
it ; that came by degrees ; every day I
seemed to go down deeper into the gulf."

It must have been terrible."

I was quite unused to judge for myself
in anything of real importance ; my poor
father had made it his business that I should
never have a care. I did not know what todo,
or how to manage. Lawyers came about
me like harpies ; I mistrusted them, and yet
had to ask their advice. Then it seemed tome
hard and cruel that my father should
have been taken so unexpectedly, and when
I was so young— before, as I regarded it, I
had got anything to speak of, out of life. I
felt utterly rebellious against fate, against
Providence — I did not call it God. I had todo
my best to be a man all at once, instead
of a petted boy, to take care of my mother,
and hide what I felt from her as much as
possible ; for she was ill, worse every day.
It was an awful time."

'' It must have been, indeed."

Then at last I was launched at Bulling-ham
; and you know what our life was there,
and how I turned to prayer as a last re-vol.

III. T

source. I see now that I prayed in the spirit
in wliicli I had grown up all my life — that of
a spoiled and wilful child, who thinks it unjust
if he cannot have all his own way. I
demanded of God what I desired ; whenas
I thought, no answer came, I stormed
and was angry. You would see from that
old journal how I drifted on, until I had no
faith left."

How sorry I should have been if I had
known ! "

Would you have cared, even then ? Ah,
if I had been with you, young as you were, I
might never have grown so bad ! But of the
religious people whom I did see, most appeared
to teach one thing and practise
another. I believe there is some book
called ' Modern Christianity, a Civilized
Heathenism.' Just so seemed their religion
to me. I had been down into the depths of
reality, and 1 was sickened of humbug evermore.
I thought : ' If those smooth lives
could be broken up like mine, where would
their religion be then ? ' Some saintly persons
were shocked at me, and showed it :
that maddened me the more. I thought how
cold and unsympathetic religion was ! and
how odious it made people. I gave up all

prater ; I tried never to think of the next
world : religious platitudes in books, sermon,
or speech, filled me with loathing. I was
wicked, wretched, lost. Then you came to
Alton."

He stopped, and looked again at Marjory, as
if a flood of recollections rushed in upon him.

'' I saw your face at the concert. It was
not changed — only intensified — more mind
in it, more ardent. It acted upon me like
the wand one reads of in the old fairy-tales ;
at the sight of it, the ice in my heart began
to thaw. All that night I dreamed of
Thorne, of the days when I had played with
you as a pleasant pastime, as a new sort of
pet ; those days when the world was young
and fair to me. Then I met you ; and when
you found me changed, you did not seem
repelled. I felt in your presence as I had
never felt in my whole life before ; there was
no unreality about you ; you were in every
way genuine, consistent. You were not full
of yourself; I discovered very quickly your
objects in existence — more quickly than you
supposed ! I was interested, as a study, in
watching them. You were so fresh and
natural, so thoroughly in earnest, an oasis
in a dried-up world."

T 2

'^ I had no idea you thought all that of me."

*'I know you had not, — that was one of

the charms. You were wrapped up in "

he hesitated.

In Gerald," said Marjory, gently. She
shaded her face with her hand, to hide the
starting tears.

I soon found out your enthusiasm in
religion. I wondered whether you would
have a rough awakening some day, or tame
down into formality like others. I watched
to see : then after a time, a change came on
your brightness. — Miss Stanhope, do you remember
wishing that you might go through
the same as I, if by that means you could
convince me of the truth of your religion ? "

I remember," said Marjory ; '' How often
I have thought of it ! I did not know what
I wished ! "

ISTot then. But you knew afterwards.
Have you noticed in that journal, the wonderful
likeness between your experiences and
mine ? Sometimes, as I watched you sinking
lower into the depths, at those Alton
lodgings, I used to imagine that some mocking
spirit had taken up your words, and was
working them into facts, to please his sardonic
fancy."

What an awful idea ! "

'' Only one among many of the same kind,
which tormented me in those days. Then, at
other times, when I saw your utter confidence
in prayer, I questioned — If there be anywhere
a God of Love, can the faith of this simple
child be disappointed ? *'

Fancy your thinking so much about me ! "
said Marjory.

«« Why, I have simply lived in you lately.
Then I had to stand by and see you suffer,
and I could not help you. It half maddened
me sometimes. But when I found your
prayers all denied, and yet you trusted, and
clung on to your faith — that gave me a new
idea. Not so much anything you said to me
but the practical faith in your life; that
gave me my first lift upward. I was used to
words, but not to seeing words lived out.
More and more the question forced itself :
Why did my faith go so soon ? Then I saw
that I never had what the Bible of the Christians
calls faith ; only just a lazy acceptance
of what was taught me by others. At last
the thought haunted me by night and by day ;
Have I ever really known anything about
true religion ? In spite of all your troubles
which seemed so hard for one so young

and pure — you never gave way ; to you faith
was no mere name, but a real support ; as
though unseen help held you up. I began
to think that there must be a God, — a Creator
I never doubted — but a living God ; and that
He was near to you."

When was this ? "

About the time I read your story. That
it recorded your own experience, was clear
enough — to me who had so watched you.
I read it again and again, and thought of it
continually. It was of value to me because
it was real — not conventional, or copied.
Then I remembered that you had once asked
if I did not think it worth while at least to
examine the evidences of the truth of the
Bible ? I had always scoffed before at the
cant phrase, as I thought it, ' faith ; ' but
now I had been forced to own that there
might be more in it than I thought. I resolved
to follow your suggestion, and study
the external proofs of the authenticity of our
Bible. I was surprised — and thunderstruck
at my own folly — when I found how abundant,
and how convincing, they are. Then
do you remember a little prayer which you
put into some one's mouth in your story ? "

^a think I do."

*' It was : —

Lord Jesus, if Thou art, reveal Thyself
to me ! '

'' I felt that the New Testament had at
least sufficient warrant to make it worth a
trial. Night after night, for hours at a time,
I prayed those words, or something like
them. — More I need not tell you now — except
that the prayer was answered.

And was it after that, you went to the
Cathedral?"

Why, how did you know I went there ? "

I was there myself," said Marjory.

How well she remembered the mingled
agony and joy of that autumn afternoon !

I had no idea you knew anything about
it ! I did not tell you, from fear of a mixed
motive. Yes, then I had begun dimly to
realize that the God of the Bible is no fable,
but a living fact : and I thought, before I
left Alton, perhaps for ever, I would ask His
blessing in His House which I had despised."

He paused ; Marjory also was silent, lost
in wonder. Now upon all that seemed so
cruel, so mysterious, light had dawned !
Some day she would have a tale of her own
to tell ; some day he should know of that
childish prayer so long persevered in — "0

Almiglity God, bless Mr. Hugli, and make
him good'* She could not speak of it now ;
she was lost in the realization that through
her means, her bitter sufferings, that prayer
had at length been answered ; and the work
she undertook for Gerald, had been for him
instead.

As she raised to him her blue eyes, all
bright and shining with that thought, he
came involuntarily nearer ; the next moment,
he was holding her close and fast. Not in
the rapture of mere earthly passion did these
two hearts which had suffered so deeply,
come together at length, but drawn also by
a higher and a firmer bond — one which
eternity itself cannot sever.

Dearest Marjory — my beloved — I can't
tell you what you are to me — there are no
words for it, — but if you will let me try to
show you, if the devotion of my whole life
can give you any idea."

For answer, Marjory only laid her hand in
his, and rested silently within those strong
arms. She could not, if she would, have
spoken ; her heart was too full ; she could
not even at this instant utter her thankfulness
to God.

Some one has said that there are moments

of which the bare remembrance might render
it worth while to have lived ! One of such
moments had arisen upon Hugh Vivian and
Marjory. Here in this deserted house, this
silent room, while the by-gone faces gazed
grimly from the walls — here the misery, the
restlessness, the craving of the past, were all
forgotten ; fleeting like dreams before the
blessed reality of the present.

Chapter, XX.

Ah ! dearest, with a word he could dispel
All questioning, and raise
Our hearts to rapture, whispering all was well,

And turning prayer to praise.
And other secrets too he could declare,

By patterns all divine.
His earthly creed retouching here and there,
And deepening every line."

John Henry Newman.

The great bell in the court-yard, which still
rang, as in the time of the little old lady, atone
o'clock, startled them back into everyday
life.

'' Bellhouse will be wondering where I
am," cried Marjory.

And I must go," said Hugh : " I must
manage to live without you till tomorrow."

Not so very long — considering the time
you have lived without me hitherto ! " said
Marjory smiling.

No, but that must be made up for now.
It has been horrible enough, without repetition.
To-day, though, I have business
which won't wait. By-the-bye, has it never

struck you as at all peculiar that I should
turn up again in this sudden way, after
wishing you good-bye for ever ? "

'' I have wondered how it was. Did you
lose your work in Russia ? "

Not exactly : but it led to work in
England. You must have seen why I had
to go away ; — if I had stayed, I might have
been mean enough, after a while, to make
love to you in spite of my poverty."

I don't think it would have been mean
at all. But are you less poor now ? "

*' My darling I You were ready to face it,
then?"

I am used to poverty, you know ; and I
thought perhaps I might help you a little by
my writing."

Steadfast to your old dreams ! " said he :
** No, dear, we shan't need that; I shall have
enough for us both, and something to spare.
I'll tell you all about it tomorrow."

You'll come as early as you can ? you
know I go home the next day."

'' I am going with you." Then, as Marjory's
eyes flashed in delightful wonder —

I have arranged it all with your uncle.
I wrote for leave to escort you, and he replied
that if you had no objection, he had none."

No fear of my objecting ! " said Marjory,
with a blush : " I shall have some one to see
to my luggage."

The next day was again fair and bright ;
and when Hugh Vivian arrived, he found
Marjory walking up and down on the terrace.
After his long years of loneliness, what joy
to meet the welcome in her eyes !

"I thought you would never come," she
said with her usual naivete.

*rand I thought the train would never get to
Alton," said he, drawing her hand within his
arm. "The train!"

I have been to London, and back, since
I saw you. I left Haddington at three a.m."

Oh, how tired you must be ! " cried
Marjory, full of compunction.

'' I never felt fresher in my life. And
now I have something to tell you."

Something about your appointment ? "

Have you any idea what the ' appointment
' is ? A commercial traveller ship, in
the tallow line, do you think ? — as I come
from Russia."

Or in metal chairs and tables, like Mr.
Anywise, perhaps," said Marjory : " I hope
it's nothing of that kind, because then you
would have to leave me so often !"

Marjory, how much could we marry
upon ? Three hundred a year ? "

Just as you think best," said Marjory.

'' Well, supposing that we are very careful,
and that you worked hard at your writing,
and that I sat up at night to review books,
and that my salary had a promise of future
increase, dare we try it upon £250 ? "

I should not be afraid," said Marjory.

"But £50,000 would be better, wouldn't
it?"

Fifty thousand ! "While we are building
castles, let us say at once, a million and a
landed estate," cried Marjory.

"Ko — it is only fifty thousand and the
estate," said Hugh quietly.

Something in his tone made her stand still
and look at him. His dark eyes seemed all
on fire, his face was full of joy ; he looked
hardly able to contain himself.

What do you mean ? " she asked gazing.

'* Marjory, I went to London to meet Mr.
Crawford. I had only waited till I could see
you, to settle with him finally. It is all done
now; and I have bought Thorne of him. —
Thorne is mine ! and £50,000 a year besides :
' and all that's mine is thine,' Marjory ! "

When Marjory had in some degree recovered
her bewilderment, she heard the history
of these wonderful tidings. It was from
Mr. Bulkley — who, with some difficulty, had
sought out Hugh's address — that the summons
to Russia came. Miss Bulkley having
died abroad, the survivor had sold his Ripley
property, and had gone to reside at St.
Petersburgh, where he was interested in
commercial undertakings, bequeathed to him
by a brother. The kind old man, now alone
in the world, was thus at liberty to carry out
a long cherished idea : that of making Hugh
Vivian his heir. He had been deeply touched
by the misfortunes of the boy whom he had
known in such different circumstances ; when
the proud young fellow came to him, full of
shame and remorse, to cast himself upon his
mercy, that large and tender heart was completely
won, and wrung with a generous
longing to make amends for all this suffering.
It was then that the notion above mentioned
had occurred as a pleasing fancy; the old
man's nature had a romantic spot, and he
had pleased himself by imaginations concerning
this unexpected joy. These he talked
over with his sister ; and Jessie had doubtless
overheard some part of their con sensation

— resulting in lier tacit recommendation
of lier boy, by the name of Copelandss. She
knew, and probably exaggerated, Hugh's
transient admiration ; she knew also the
generous nature which would make him
charitable, even beyond his wont, to any
child of hers, from the dread of any shadow
of retaliation against the offence she had
implored him to pardon.

When Mr. Bulkley, who had long suffered
from an incurable disease, was warned by his
doctor that he had but a few months to live,
his first step after finding Hugh, was to offer
him work at St. Petersburgh : designing thus
to obtain some knowledge of his present character
before committing himself by signing
his will. Had Hugh, on further acquaintance,
disappointed him, the fortune would have
been divided among charities ; but further
intimacy only served to deepen the liking
conceived long ago. Towards the end of
November, the old man, somewhat suddenly,
fulfilled his doctor's expectations : Hugh
Vivian, whom he had but a few days previously
informed of his intentions, waiting
upon him like a son, and soothing by all
possible means the lonely yet peaceful end.

Since then Hugh had been weekly hoping

to return to England ; but endless hindrances
had arisen to delay him ; and he had only at
length reached London on the eve of Gerald
Stanhope's funeral. Of this he had heard
from Mr. Crawford, with whom he had been
in correspondence concerning Thorne. Hugh
Vivian was the possible purchaser mentioned
by Mr. Crawford to Bellhouse ; but his name,
by his own special request, had been disclosed
to no one : since, little as she then knew it,
the final decision depended upon Marjory.
Had she refused him, as he afterwards
told her, he would have left England forever.


But now all uncertainty was ended ; and
Marjory would soon become the mistress of
this her ideal world. Copelandss was spoiled
beyond recovery ; but here in the familiar
spot which Hugh had loved next best, a new
and better life would begin. Here he would
found another home, to take the place of the
old ; here in these deserted walls would
again be happiness, and glad voices, and
brightness, and love.

Before we go in," said Marjory, when
they had walked long in the wintry sunshine,
while again and again she felt unable to believe
that she would not presently awake

and find herself dreaming, — '' Before we go
in, I want to see — the churchyard'

'' Aren't you tired ? — won't it be too much
for you ? " said Hugh tenderly.

No — I shan't be able to come out again
to-day, and tomorrow we start. I must see
it once before I go."

So he said no more, and they went away
through the park, to the palings where, years
ago, they had stood together. There was a
little gate in the palings now ; Hugh opened
it, and Marjory entered silently, while below
her the brook, swollen by the snow, rushed
on over its pebbles. No one was in the
churchyard, and no cottages overlooked the
quiet part where Gerald's grave had been
made. It was very near the spot where that
other grave, of that other brother, buried long
ago, had been : but that was old now, and
lost among the rest. Here was Gerald's, new
and alone. The white marble cross planned
by Marjory, was not yet in its place ; nothing
marked it from the other rustic mounds. A
little patch of snow, still unmelted, lay upon
the grass ; the sods were bound down by
osiers.

A long while Marjory stood in perfect
silence, gazing on that silent turf. Hugh,

VOL. III. u

standing near, would not speak or move to
disturb her. He knew what it is to stand
thus above a new-made grave, and yearn with
impotent craving for some word, some sign,
from the beloved who is gone ! Only at last,
in a low tone, he spoke his thoughts aloud.

'* If this had but come a year sooner, he
should have had the desire of his heart."

Then suddenly Marjory clung to him, in a
passion of weeping.

At once all had flashed upon her, —
Gerald's genius, his hopes, their slow disappointment.
Now she was to be rich and
prosperous ; the money for which they had
longed, would be plentiful around her ; she
would have all that earth could give : while
Gerald lay mouldering here.

Not Gerald. No. A moment later she
remembered. His dying words came back
to her : *' Heaven is best." Ah, he would
smile at her now, for pitying him !

'' Heaven is best — and God's Will is best,"
she said, looking up at Hugh ; "I see it
now."

Soon afterwards they turned away. Marjory
paused at the palings, with one last
lingering look.

'' It would not seem so hard to leave him,"

she said, ''if it were summer. The graves
look so dreary out there in the bitter
cold."

"Do you remember some words of your
own," said Hugh, 'years ago, when you
were a little child ? We were just in this
very place, coming up from the churchyard ;
and I have never forgotten what you said : —
It's always summer weather in Paradise.' "

So, with that thought, they left him, alone
in his calm rest. He had been cut off in his
youth, and for them life and joy had opened
afresh. But which of them had the better
part, was known to none but God.

V 2

CHAPTER XXr.

*' Serenely purest of her sex that live,
But wanting one sweet weakness — to forgive."

Byron.

And what of Lina ?

Lina was still at Dover, basking in the
consciousness of verified wisdom. That
Hugh Vivian's guilt in the matter of Jessie
was clearly proved, she conceived to be
beyond question ; her mind was now intent
upon the next step — how best to trace the
connection between this crime, and the
forgeries — falsely, she opined, attributed to
her brother — through which she believed
Mr. Vivian to have procured the needful
funds for the luxurious foreign sojourn. She
thought it was by a special interposition of
Providence, that so much mental employment
had been provided for her just at the period
of Gerald's death. The blow, she felt, was
thus softened. Yet, from time to time, recollections
of his gray eyes as they gazed at
her, of the tone of his voice, when he spoke
to her, of his visions concerning her, came
floating back with a vague sadness, a sense

of some treasure gone. Would she ever
again be thought of as Gerald had thought
of her ? — ever loved as he had loved her ?
Imprudent as, in looking back, the whole
history of their engagement appeared, and
clear of blame in any respect as she felt
herself to be — yet somehow, something of a
glory had faded with Gerald from her earth.
She had not known that the glory existed ;
until lo, it was gone.

And now Mrs. Jelly had to return to
Dover, and the Peele family to be informed
of the unfortunate facts disclosed by the
contents of the box. Bellhouse*s joy in her
grandson was somewhat damped by the fear
of their possible proceedings ; she knew not
what power they might possess to take her
darling from her. But this she was now
more than ever willing to '' leave to the
Almighty ; " and Marjory, full of deepest
sympathy and consideration for Lina, wrote,
every word guided by these sentiments, to
break the tidings ; enclosing Jessie's letter
to Hugh Vivian, found in the box, in which
her husband's name and family were clearly
mentioned. Of the box itself Mrs. Jelly
took charge, promising to deliver it safely at
the house of Lina's sister.

Not until some time later, Marjory heard
tHat the result had been a conclave of Peeles ;
who, after much discussion, and examination
of Mrs. Jelly, concluded that Richard was
undoubtedly guilty, and that the affair had
better be hushed up. They agreed to pay
an annual sum, through a lawyer, to Bell-house,
until the boy should be one-and-twenty;
in other respects, his existence, being
a family disgrace, must be by them ignored.

So, among the elder members of the
family, the matter rested ; and Bellhouse,
well content, remained sole guardian of her
treasure. But Marjory was somewhat horrified,
one day in March, to receive a letter
from Lina, stating that she felt it her solemn
duty to urge her friend to reconsider her
intended marriage with Hugh Vivian ; that,
the more she thought of the past, and of
Richard's general character, the stronger became
her conviction of — somewhere — a deep
plot ; that although of this no present proof
could be found, Richard was innocent, — the
box and papers had been stolen from him,
and the letter purporting to be written by
Jessie, was a forgery.

If a person can forge one document, he
can forge another," wrote Lina.

The supposition was wild in the extreme ;
and had the circumstances been transferred
to some other family, Lina would be the
first to counsel silent contempt as its one
answer. But Marjory could not bear that
any such suspicions, ridiculous though they
were, should lurk in any mind concerning
Hugh. A day or two later he came to
Eockswold, on one of his constant visits ;
and then she showed him the letter, and told
him of all that fabric of imaginations by
which Lina had so seriously disturbed
her peace, in that winter day's walk at
Alton.

He listened more gravely than she had
expected. Once or twice, while she spoke,
his face clouded, as though some word struck
home ; at the end he was silent for a time,
and then sighed heavily.

'' Ah ! " he said, '' there is no telling what
may come of one false step in life ! You
know now, Mr. Peele's reason for doubting
me ; and, by the way, Mr. Bulkley told meat
St. Petersburgh, that my leaving Bulling-ham
just at that particular time was unfortunate,
for the father had evidently a strong
suspicion that, in some way, I was mixed up
in Richard's forgeries'*

'' How unjust! " cried Marjory, indignantly.

It was the man's nature. ' Give a dog
a bad name, and hang him ' — that was his
maxim, — and he has handed it down to Miss
Peele. My dear old friend Bulkley told me
that he had to advise him to wait till he had
something to go upon, before dragging my
name into the matter. After that, he became
more cautious ; but Mr. Bulkley saw that he
was strong on my scent ! He found out
nothing, though."

For the very good reason that there was
nothing to find," replied Marjory, still indignant
: 'but was it only from the wandering
of his mind, I wonder, that, after reading
his son's letter, he said to Lina — ' It is just
as I thought"'

''I strongly suspect," said Hugh, "that
that letter was a confession of the whole
affair — Jessie and everything — and that this
caused Mr. Peele' s illness. As to the remark
you mention, it seems not unlikely
that Richard's knowledge of Mr. Bulkley's
leniency to me, gave him courage in his own
proceedings. His father told him everything
in the way of business. That idea is possible,
at least."

I wish the letter could have been found ! "

cried Marjory : " I do so long for Lina to see
your innocence ! "

As to that, flights so purely imaginative
are really not worth a thought," said Hugh,
with something of a smile : 'but how was
the letter lost ? tell me again about it,
darling."

Marjory repeated the story, branded only
too deeply on her memory ; and a day later
Hugh went off to Bullingham, to examine
the room which had once been Mr. Bulkley's
study.

The house was now portioned into offices :
the young surveyor who rented the room in
question, was very civil to his distinguished-looking
visitor; a new-comer, he had little
knowledge of past affairs in Bullingham. On
hearing of the missing letter, he pointed out
a crack in the mantel-piece, observing that
he could not tell how large, or how small, it
had been all those years ago ; it was scarcely
noticeable when he engaged the room — but
had widened.

Hugh examined the place : the crevice lay
between the wood of the old-fashioned ,
and the wall. Marjory had repeated
Lina's description of her father's attitude :
had the crack indeed been then wide enough

to receive the letter, it was quite possible
that thus it had dropped from his nerveless
fingers. His elbows, resting heavily upon
the shelf, must for the moment have widened
the aperture : which afterwards, as the wood
sprang back to its place, might easily escape
observation.

A mason was sent for, and the mantel-piece
removed. And there, in the debris behind
it, among dust, plaster, crumbling mortar,
and a variety of small papers, which, in the
course of years, the crack at first indiscernible,
had swallowed — lay Richard's letter.

Just as it was, unread, in the surveyor's
presence, Hugh Yivian transferred it to an
envelope addressed to Lina : which, with a
brief note of explanation, he sealed, and
posted forthwith. Then, with many thanks
to the friendly young surveyor — who was
secretly glad of the opportunity for repairing
his mantel-piece ! — he started by the next
train, back to Marjory.

'' Oh, Hugh, my dearest Hugh, if we
could only know what is in that letter ! "
cried Marjory.

She had not long to wait. In a few days
she heard from Lina.

Very touching, to Marjory at all events,

despite some pride aud rigidity, were Lina's
words. As she read them, the tears came
hot and fast to her blue eyes.

For Lina was convinced at last. She
regretted, she said, her mistake ; she would
thank Marjory to make known that regret
to Mr. Vivian. Richard, writing from his
death-bed, had owned himself guilty. His
tale corroborated Jessie's. He had named
her from a low lodging-house in London,
and had lived with her on his stolen hoard,
until it was nearly exhausted : then — weary,
moreover, of her — he had picked a pretended
quarrel, and left her to fend for herself.
She did not know, he said, his true name ;
unless indeed he had left with her certain
papers which he found to be missing, and
through which she would learn it. Other
adventures were related, ending at length in
his engaging himself as a common sailor to
work out his passage to the Cape. Thence,
if no profitable employment turned up, he
had intended to go on to the diggings : but
was stopped as we have seen.

The letter was deeply repentant ; the fear
of death had touched him. He beersfed his
father to advertise for Jessie, to inform her
of his death, to supply any needs that she

might have, and to restore her safely — if lie
were not with her already — to her mother.
He had destroyed the marriage certificate,
but gave the name of the church, and the
date, that a fresh one might be obtained.
These particulars Lina copied for Bellhouse.

Finally, as an after thought, Richard had
added that the ready exculpation of young
Vivian had first suggested to his mind the
possibility of imposing on Mr. Bulkley.
Hugh's surmise was thus correct. It was,
however, but too clear that, had Mr. Bulkley
been a less easy victim, some other would
have supplied his place ; and Lina abstained
from any further recrimination.

Richard had disgraced their father's name,
she wrote, and caused his death ; and she
disowned him as a brother. If the boy's surname
could be changed from that of Peele
to the false one borne by his parents, it
would be, she added, a relief to her feelings.
She then wished Marry happiness : and
concluded.

A month later she wrote from Albion
Square, to ask if she might come for two
days to Rocks wold. She had been very
busy, she said assisting her mother to prepare
for the removal which the vicinity of the boy

Russell rendered necessary. They had taken
a house in a distant county, and she desired
for old friendship's sake, to see Marjory once
more before her marriage.

So to Rockswold she came ; and Marjory
was struck by the change in her. Her face
looked years older than the face of Gerald's
ideal; her beauty, though unimpaired, seemed
colder and more rigid : and lines quite new
to it, crossed the high, fair forehead. But
her manner, though a trifle graver, was otherwise
as usual. When she spoke of Hugh
Vivian, her tone had yet a certain covert
dislike ; still she said that she wished him
well, and hoped with unmistakable sincerity,
that he and Marjory might live long and
happily together. Her wedding gift to
Marjory was a vignette, beautifully painted,
of Gerald, enlarged from a photograph of
ordinary size, and richly framed. Seeing
Marjory's eyes fill and her lips quiver, in
receiving it, she said :

Marjory, I do not pity you. Every year
you will feel more comfort in remembering
your brother ; every year I hope more completely
to forget mine."

So they parted.

Once again, casually, they met, after many

years. Lina was then a Sister of the English
Church, head of an orphanage. Still beautiful
and stately was the face framed in by the
white cap, but set in lines of elevated narrowness
— the face of one whose life moves
in a groove, ignoring the great world. Still,
in that groove, she did much steady work, as
the weeks and months, each so like the
others, rolled by. On some of those children
whom she was ever training, her training
doubtless answered well ; and they went
forth from her to live pure and truthful
lives, and do their duty in quiet. But others
went forth to practise bigotry, and, where
they could, to teach it — scorning alike the
rival bigotries, and that freer life where
grooves and goodness are not identical.

And some, we may fear, found in the
world, hitherto to them a blank letter, charms
too powerful to be despised in the wholesale
fashion set forth to them ; and contradictions
impossible to reconcile with that which they
had learned as truth : and in the reaction,
failing to discriminate, were caught amid
varying currents, and wrecked — if not forever,
for this earth at least, with all they
held most precious.

But nothing of all this was anticipated by

Lina, as, straight in lier course, fixed in her
principles, in her confidence in herself and
her system, she went serenely on, day by
day. What human beings ought to be, this
system ought to make them ; if it failed,
they only were to blame. Had the system
in question been that of a Methodist, or even
of a Shaker, she would have pursued it, as
she pursued her very opposite one — the one,
with firmness never varying. Not till
hereafter she wakes to find it but a thread of
the great rope, will any conception dawn
on her, that there are things (of any consequence)
in Heaven or on earth, not
dreamed of in her philosophy.

CHAPTER XXII.

Wait : my faith is large in Time,
And that which shapes it to some perfect end."

Tennyson.

It was on an ideal spring day — one of those
days in which, however grumbling folk may
talk or write, we do still every year rejoice
that Hugh and Marjory were married.
Mrs. Stanhope had not wished this event to
take place until Marjory was out of mourning
; but Marjory's health, formerly so
vigorous, had not come unimpaired through
the long ordeal of anxiety and sorrow ; in the
monotonous life at Rocks wold, when Hugh
was not with her, she drooped ; and the
doctor who had known her from childhood,
advised that the wedding should not be
postponed. Marjory secretly suspected that
Hugh, who had paid him a private visit, was
not wholly without a voice in this counsel ;
but she kept her suspicions to herself, and
made no demur. In her heart she knew
that Hugh's presence only, of all earthly
things, had power to soothe the sick craving

for Gerald, — which here, in these familiar'
places haunted, at every turn, by her lifelong
hopes, at times almost overwhelmed
her.

So they were married on a balmy morning
in the second week of May. Earth and
sky alike were bathed in sunlight, orchards
were rich in blossom, bees were humming in
the young green of the sycamores, lilacs and
syringa scented the air, — when the bride and
bridegroom came forth from the gray old
church into the new world opening before
them. Under other circumstances, Hugh
would have taken his wife abroad ; but Marjory
could not as yet have borne the sight of
those longed-for places, scenes of so many
aspirations buried in Gerald's early grave.
Instead, they went a quiet tour among some
of the English lakes. The perfect weather
glorified the loveliness at all times beyond
words to describe ; the proverbial rain was
suspended. Since those days Marjory has
seen beauty of wider fame ; but to her nothing
has ever surpassed that first vision of
Grasmere, the calm heights rising around
the still blue lake, and Rota's clear stream
watering the peaceful spot where, with his
people, Nature's great poet sleeps among

VOL. III. X

the mountains that he loved. She has never
quite lost her first impression, as they drove
in the spring sunset through the village, — of
a little foretaste of that Eden where the
ground shall no more be cursed, and perfect
blessedness shall reign on earth as in heaven.

Such scenes seem in themselves specially
fitted for the healing of minds diseased ; and
when to their influences was united the constant,
watchful devotion of such love as
Marjory now found to exist not only in day-dreams,
— no wonder that health and mind
alike speedily recovered their tone, and the
craving, hopeless as painful, left by her loss,
died gradually away.

Meanwhile Hugh, who had thought that
life, for him, was over ; that joy was a chimera
the whole world dead and dry : could only
be compared to a person who has been buried
by a winter avalanche, and, in summer delivered,
finds around him a new universe full
of endless beauty, and of delight to which
before he was blind. Constantly he felt that
had all been as he would have it, in the days
of his thoughtless youth, he could never have
known such happiness as was lavished on
him now. In those days he had had no experience
of the deep things of life ; he had

skimmed, like a brilliant dragon-fly, along'
the surface of the waters. A storm had
convulsed that surface — black clouds had
hidden the sun — he had been swept into dark
and fearful places : — now it was over — he
had come back into the light : — and all
things were changed to him !

One day during their sojourn in the Vale
of Keswick, he found in an old book some
lines which haunted him long afterwards, as
embodying the thought in his heart.

Blessed Lord, if Thou hadst led me

As I foolishly desired —
All the good I shunned forbid me,

Given all that I required, —
Hadst Thou punish'd me by granting
All that I believ'd was wanting —
Thou alone couldst count the cost
Of the treasure I had lost !"

Conclusion.

.There was great festivity when the new
squire brought his bride home to Thorne,
and such a warm welcome as Hugh had never
thought to see again. Farmers and cottagers
alike rejoiced to see a resident landlord once
more among them ; and Hugh from his childhood
had been a favourite in the place. He
X 2

made a far better landlord than would have
been possible, had he succeeded his father, in
the natural course, at Copelandss. Habits of
conventional selfishness and luxury had been
sternly broken ; and in his buffetings about
the world, he had learned to realize both
sides of many social questions : a discipline
of which those dependent on him, reaped now
more advantages than one.

Marjory's first pleasurable experience of
the benefits of wealth, consisted in placing
her kind uncle and his delicate wife beyond
the reach of pecuniary anxieties. On the
anniversary of their wedding-day, which fell
within a week of her own, she sent them, by
Hugh's contrivance, a present of certain title-deeds
of building property in London, which
had been among Mr. Bulkley's possessions, —
and which, besides the certainty of yearly
increase, more than doubled their present income.
The happiness caused by such a gift,
in the quiet parsonage where life had so often
been a struggle, was only equalled by that of
Marjory, in its anticipation.

She had early in her engagement discovered
that the anonymous friend who had discharged
Gerald's debt, was no other than
Hugh himself : disguised beneath that ambiguous

description which, although in one
sense true, had limited their suspicions to
Mrs. Wilton's personal friends. Hugh had
casually learned, during his intercourse with
Gerald, the name of the lawyer to whom the
payments were made ; and his first act, after
Mr. Bulkley's death, had been to ascertain
particulars of the sum : and so discharge it.

Marjory would have repaid him from her
own small capital ; but this he laughed to
scorn ; and she knew too well the joy of
giving to the beloved, to press the point :
she was content to owe all to him. Instead,
she carried out a suggestion of his own, and
sent the few hundreds remaining after the
expenses of her quiet wedding and her trousseau,
to Mr. Harding ; in trust for the next
poor artist of real talent, who might come in
his way. Mr. Harding's answer, accepting
the trust, contained also an expression of
true sympathy, speaking of Gerald and his
genius in terms which Marjory, with a
mingling of pride and tears, will remember
throughout her future life.

And now she filled the place of the little
old lady, as mistress of Thorne. It was her
daily prayer to fill it worthily : a prayer evermore
abundantly answered, as the years

went by. All the energy, the brightness,
the ardour of her nature, found ample scope
in her varied duties as lady of the manor.
And truly it might be said of her, that " her
price was far above rubies ; the heart of her
husband did safely trust in her ; strength and
honour were her clothing; she opened her
mouth with wisdom ; and in her tongue was
the law of kindness. Her children rose up
and called her blessed; her husband also,
and he praised her''

Thorne became one of the most popular
houses in the neighbourhood, leo unnecessary
state was maintained there — nothing-was
done for mere show ; but hospitality of
all kinds abounded — to the poor no less than
to the rich. Its owners had known the sting
of poverty ; they regarded their wealth as a
trust, to be shared with their fellows. It
was their aim to minister, not merely to the
so-called '' poor people;" but also to those
of gentle life : devising help, either anonymous,
or of such a kind as not to wound the
tenderest delicacy. The skill to which, by
patient study, they in this respect attained,
was wonderful at length ! the multitude to
whom in the course of years their helping
hands were stretched, will not be

known until the day when secrets are
revealed.

Marjory's story was published about the
time of her marriage ; and met with good
success. She continued to write at intervals,
as she had opportunity : often she was
too busy for writing, — and sometimes she
acted merely as her husband's secretary.
For Hugh still cultivated the gift which his
adversity had developed. His reviews and
essays had been known as those of an author
tinged with scepticism. Now, entering the
lists in an opposite direction, he did his
umtost to gainsay all that he had ever said
unfavourable to Revelation. Replies, bitter
as talented, from those with whom he had
formerly agreed, were hurled back at him
through the press ; but the faith which he
had won through such sore conflict was nevermore
to be shaken.

To those who, like Hugh and Marjory,
have had practical experience of the existence
of a living God, the cries for this or
that sign of it, are beneath attention. The
sometime sick who have proved within themselves
the efficacy of a special medicine,
carry within themselves the best of answers
to theories proclaiming its imposture.

And Bellliouse had no need to leave the
house to which she had clung. She stayed
on, honoured and beloved, inhabiting her
accustomed rooms, keeping up her old habits :
the backbone, Marjory often said, of the
household. Xo one could tell over how
many trifling difficulties she enabled the
young wife to steer safely. Her wisdom and
experience were invaluable ; and her fidelity
to her new master and mistress was no less
constant than to the little old lady of yore.
Bellhouse is still in every way the same ;
even in looks she is little altered. She still
talks of " The Almighty," and says often,
with a thankful countenance, that her trust
has not been disappointed. The sun of her
days is going down in peace ; her boy is all
she can desire. Copelandss is not, like his
mother, ambitious ; his highest aspiration is
to become Mr. Vivian's steward. He takes
kindly to farming and other country pursuits ;
and it is not improbable that this aspiration
will one day be realized.

And there are children once more in Miss
Evie's nursery. The eldest is a dark-haired
boy, born two years after the marriage. He
is the counterpart of his father at his age,
bright, careless, yet passionate. Marjory

trembles a little, sometimes, as she watches
him, remembering the stern discipline that
his father has had to bear. But she remembers
afterwards that, as Bellhouse says,
'' The Almighty knows best " : and puts the
future from her.

She has only two other children, twins,
three years younger, than their brother.
They are a boy and girl, reminding her of
Gerald and herself. The boy, too, strangely
resembles Gerald, both in appearance and
in nature ; and she fancies that already he
shows signs of artistic talent. She cannot
restrain some dreams concerning him, after
the fashion of former days ; but she does
not indulge them too freely. She has
learned wisdom since those dreams of her
youth.

And Gerald's face, with those gray eyes,
so clear and beautiful, hangs where she can
see it constantly, by day and by night. Not
long ago, she took her children to the house
in the College Yard : where Mrs. Myers and
Miss Pilkington still reside, amid a new
generation of little boys. Suddenly a craving
came on her to see once more the old attic
which Gerald called his workshop. She got
permission; and climbed the well-known stairs.

It looked much as in the time she remembers
; dust had gathered thickly on the
old boxes, — but they remained still as
Gerald had piled them, when he built his
easel.

'' Mother," says her elder boy, creeping
after her. '* Is this the place where uncle
Gerald used to paint? "

Marjory tries to answer ; but the words
will not come : her throat swells, — her eyes
fill with tears long strange to them. She
has turned to the window : there the familiar
river flows, with the same rushing sound, —
just as she saw and heard it in the days of
her passionate girlhood. There beyond, are
the meadows — and the Shelburn hills, with
the old lights and shades. All is the same.
Only Gerald — where is he ? Where has he
been, through all these silent years ?

The child has roamed away again ; and
the tears, unrestrained, flow faster, blinding
her eyes. But suddenly a quick step comes
behind her ; her husband's arm clasps her
waist ; his bright kind voice says —

'marjory! Why are you here alone?
You should have told me."

She rests her head upon his shoulder;
and the moment of bitterness is past.

Cometh sunshine after rain,
After mourning joy again ;
After heavy bitter grief,
Dawned surely sweet relief !

Though to-day may not fulfil
All thy hordes, have patience still ;
For perchance tomorrow's sun
Sees thy happier days begun.
As God willet, march the hours,
Bringing joy at last in showers,
And whate'er we asked is ours."

THE End.

WVJAN iN;. ;J0.V3, ri; ,XTi:aj, cheat QILEN SXHtCT, London.

(NEAR THE INNS OF COURT AND THE BRITISH MUSEUM.)

^^^^^ WYMAN & SONS,

^^^ll^fl^^^ PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,

^IP^lJj^^ iH^ ^^ Undertake Every Description of

WOOD & Copperplate ENGRAVING, LITHOGRAPHY, & BOOKBINDING.

npO AUTHORS AND OTHERS.— Messrs. WYMAN & SONS,
-^ Printers, Engravers, Stationers, Bookbinders, and Publishers,
invite the attention of Authors to the Facilities offered by their Establishments for the
COMPLETE PRODUCTION of BOOKS of every description, all Departments of
the Business being carried on tinder the immediate Personal Superintendence of the Firm.
Inclusive Estimates promptly forwarded, and liberal arrangements miide with Authors
for the publication of their MSS., whether Scientific, Artistic, or Works of Fiction.

Demy 4to., price 6s.

Tables of Roman Law.

By M. A. Panton, Docteur en Droit. Translated and edited by C. W. LAW, of the

Middle Temple, Barrister-at-law.
Here, in fifteen Tables, we have the four books of the Institutes of Justinian, as to the ancient Roman
hwv regarding persons, things, and actions. The first book gives some general notions respecting the
meaning of the words Izistitia and y2is, and treats of persons. The second, relating to things,
treats of the means of acquiring particular objects, of successions to deceased persons, legacies, and
trusts. The third deals with inheritances and obligations. The fourth treats of obligations and
actions. The tables seem to be well translated and clearly arranged. " — The Builder.

Third Edition, royal 8vo., cloth, price 5s. ; post-free, 5s. 4d.

A Manual of the Statutes of Limitation.

Showing the time within which the ownership of property must be asserted and exercised,
or actions commenced to prevent the operation of these statutes, viz. — Barring the
remedy for obtaining or extinguishing the right to such property. By JAMES
Waiter, Esq., Member of the Incorporated Law Society.

Cap. 8vo. , cloth gilt, price 2s. 6d.

King Alfred, and other Poems.

By PERCY RUSSELL.

We not only read through the volume, but thoroughly enjoyed the reading. Mr. Russell has poetic
feeling, and does not offend one's ears with false quantities." — Brief: the Week's News.

\

I 74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, W.C.

A MOST ELEGANT PRESENT FOR A LJ)J)Y.

An Entirely Novel Work on Table Decoration. In Folio, with 24 Original Designs in

Cliromo-Lithography, Price Thirty Shillings.

Floral Designs for the Table :

Plain Directions for its Ornamentation with Cut Flowers and Fruit, Classified Lists of
Suitable Plants, Leaves, Berries, iS:c. ; and Twenty-four Original Coloured Designs for
decorating Breakfast, Luncheon, Dinner, and Supper Tables at a moderate cost.

"We have no hesitation in saying that the work of Mr. Perkins now before us is one of the
most elegant and useful gift-books of the present season. The very cover of it is a model of design
and execution, and the whole get-up of the book does infinite credit to the Messrs. Wyman & Sons,
who are the printers and publishers of it. Most, if not all, the designs are quite novel, and many
of them are to be commended as much for their extreme simplicity as for their exquisite elegance."
T lie Queen.

The production of this most beautiful and instructive volume is most opportune. It consists
of a series of directions for the ornamentation of the table with leaves, flowers, and fruit, and it
contains also classified lists of suitable plants, berries, and leaves for that purpose. Some of the
designs are most beautiful ones, and the work, as a whole, is a most unconditional success. We
can recommend any of our readers who are in want of a book on this subject to obtain one and
judge for themselves. Many of the single designs are worth, to host or hostess, the money asked
for the entire volume. The binding of the work is most handsome, forming in itself a table
ornament." — Laid aid Water.

"This richly-ornamented volume comprises a series of original coloured designs, with directions
for table decoration with leaves, flowers, and fruit ; and, by the assistance of the letterpress, the
reader will have no difficulty in perceiving the effect that is intended." — Daily News.

Crown 8vo., cloth gilt, price 12s.

Russia in 1870.

By HERBERT BARRY, late Director of the Chepeleffsky Estates and Iron Works in
the Governments of Vladimir, Tambov, and Ninny Novgorod, Empire of Russia, Author
of " Russian jSIetallurgical Works."

Contexts : On Mr. Dixon's Book " Free Russia" ; Old Abuses and late Reforms
The People ; Towns and Villages ; Priests, Church, and Emperor ; Sports and Pastimes
Manufactures and Trade ; Ways and Communications ; Siberia ; The Great Fair of
Ninny Novgorod ; The Central Asian Question ; Conclusion.

Second edition, demy 8vo., price is. ; post-free, is. lid.

The England of the Pacific ; or, New

ZEALAND as an English Middle-class Emigration Field. By ARTHUR Laden,
Author of "The Revolt of the Field."

There are Eight Full-page Illustrations, a Reprint of the Letters to the Daily News
on the " English Agricultural Labourer in New Zealand," a Narrative of a Ride on
Horseback through the North Island, Sketches of Settlers' Homes, and a variety of ,
interesting particulars respecting New Zealand.

TO FREEMASONS.
Now ready, is. 6d., blue cloth ; post free, is. yd.

Masonic Points,

Being Authorized Cues in the Masonic Rituals of the Ea., Fac., and Mem. Degrees,
and of those in the Royal Holy Arch. T By Brother JaDU.

Copy 0/ Communication from I I.R.I I. the M.W.G.M.

"■ Freemasons' Hall, London, W.C.
25th October, 1876.
"Dear Sir and Brother, — I have this morning received a note from Mr. F. Knolls, Private
Secretary to the Prince of Wales, requesting me to convey to you the thanks of his Royal Highness
for the book you have been good enough to send him — a request with which I have much pleasure in
complying. — I am, dear Sir, yours fraternally, "JOHN HERVEY, Gas.

"To Bro. Jade, 74, Great Queen-street, W.C."

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, W.C.

Crown 8vo., cloth, price 6s., post free. In paper cover, price 2S.

The Felthams ; or, Contrasts in Crime.

A story of thrilling interest. By FRANZ.

A powerful story of the Charles Reade school The situations are unusually strong, and
quicken the reader's pulse as they pass before him." — Bookseller.

It is a welcome relief to have a melodramatic tale, with its vivid contrasts and its rapid changes of
scenery and persons In 'The Felthams ' there is not a little of force and literary skill, and
the whole tone of the story is excellent The tale is lively and attractive"— Z/V^rrtry /Kt^r/^.

"There is no lack of incident in this novel, and the attention of the reader is closely held throughout;
nor is he likely to anticipate, as in many works of fiction, the course and mal development of the plot,
which is skilfully constructed, and in some of its situations is most thrilling." — Capital and Labour.

There is much variety in the incidents, and we think it will be regarded as one of the best novels of
the year." — News of the IVorld.

'* The story is told with considerable ingenuity." — City Press.

"The result is a tale which exhibits considerable power." — Broad Arrow.

Is readable throughout, and neither so extravagant nor repulsive in its incidents as might be
conjectured from its title." — Queen.

The plots are well conceived and cleverly worked out ; the characters, too, are drawn with a
skilful hand The denoiionent being most dramatically told." — Pictorial IVorld.

' The Felthams,' a story by Franz, is published in novelette form-that is, in a single volume —
but its length exceeds, nevertheless, that of most three-volume novels. It is a tale of strong interest,
but too much crowded with melodramatic and painful details to suit the tastes of quiet readers." —
TrrttA.

Full of changeful incidents of a highly sensational realistic kind, * The Felthams ' carries its
readers briskly along from chapter to chapter, strengthening the interest as it goes, and is just that
kind of story in which novel-readers are likely to take most delight. The character of Tightdraw,
the unscrupulous spider-like lawyer, and his equally unscrupulous clerk, Snigge, are amongst the most
strongly-drawn in the volume, which will probably become popular." — Illustrated Sporting aid
Dramatic News.

"A novel in one portly little volume, moving briskly amongst its well-defined characters, with
incidents diverse and varied in their nature and action, is tolerably sure to be a favourite with
most novel-readers. It is exciting without being morbidly sensational, and never falls into the other
extreme of milk-and-water tameness 'The Felthams' is likely to be popular." — Walter
Plains Illustrated Joiirfial.

"This novel will enchain the reader's attention from the first to the last page." — Brief.

"The story is thoroughly wholesome in tone, at the same time displaying signs of genuine power." —
Public Opinion.

The plot is well sustained throughout, and young and old will find an excellent moral in the tale." —
Weekly Times.

A tale of the present period, full of incidents of a more or less startling character. Some — indeed,
several — of the scenes in the story are powerfully and vividly depicted. The interest in the principal
personages is so well maintained throughout that the reader never tires over the pages of a somewhat
portly volume, and that because its contents are entertaining." — Reynolds's News.

"Among stories of a sensational or melodramatic character 'The Felthams' is entitled to a respectable
place There is good stuff in the book." — Sunday Times.

This is the work of a writer belonging to the school which the productions of Miss Brandon have
made so popular, and in the present instance there is sufficient of mystery and plotting to satisfy the
most exacting, while the details arc so clearly and unobtrusively worked out that the attention of the
reader is secured to the end The novel cannot fail to please all who admire vigorous and
powerful description, accompanied by appropriate and well-written dialogue." — Clcrkcnwell Neivs.

The ' crime ' which figures in the title is far less in both quantity and quality than that which engages
the attention of the readers of lady-novelists' works. The nervous but repressed character of the chief
heroine is thoroughly well drawn A double thread of love-interest runs through the book,
brightening and enlivening it as only such interest can do The young girl, Ellen, is a most
admirable bit of work ; she and the old foster-mother of Ralph stand out with a prominence that may
serve to indicate to Franz where his truest talent lies. The story is clever, interesting, and carefully
worked out." — Sylvia's Home Journal.

"On the whole the work has considerable merit We think it gives good promise of a
future performance. At least two of the characters, those of the lawyer, Mr. Tightdraw, and Mr.
Pelham are well drawn." — Liverpool Albion.

"The interest is well maintained throughout the tale. The judicious .arrangement of so intricate
a plot marks undoubted capabilities for story-telling"— 5/rw/«<j-/rrt;// Daily Gazette.

"the Felthams' is characterized by some strong and many good points Crime is
contrasted in a very effective way." — Edifibiirgk Daily News.

Franz shows considerable dramatic power There are other characters drawn with a
skilful hand The story is skilfully told, and some smart pieces of character delineation
occur in the book." — North British Daily Mail.

It cannot be said the story is a very pleasant one, though those who delight in fiction of a strong and
exciting kind will probably read it with \n\.ftT&sX "— Newcastle Weekly Chronicle.

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, W.C.

Library Edition. Demy 8vo., doth, price los. 6d. Cheap edition, crown 8vo., price 2S.

Convict Life ; or, Revelations concerning

CONVICTS AND CONVICT PRISONS. By a TICKET-OF-LEAVE MAN.

If only half of the startling disclosures made by this intelligent convict be true, he
has made out a strong case for Government interference."

The author claims to be a good authority on the subject, because he is now a ticket-of-leave man. A
terrible domestic affliction drove him into dissipation, and the end of his madness was that he committed
the crime which made him a convict for seven years. His remarks are exceedingly valuable. He shows
himself to be a man of keen perception, and a good deal of sound common sense, and it is strictly true
that he makes out his case in the majority of the charges which he considers it necessary to bring against
the present convict system. . . . When the ' Ticket-of-leave-Man ' was serving his time, tv. o of his
associates were preparing the details of a plan which threatened ruin to foreign bankers, principally upon
the American continent." — Standard.

Is a very remarkable book. It is written by a person who has had six years' experience of prison life,
so that he writes about his subject with the knowledge that springs from painful familiarity. . It is
unquestionably an able, a suggestive, and powerful book." — Daily Telegraph.

It may, at all events, be said that the author's statements are definite, even painfully minute and
specific; and that many of his suggestions for improvement must commend themselves to the commonsense
of readers. Our prisons, according to the writer, practically corrupt rather than improve their
inmates. It would seem, at least, that the police authorities should be interested in the writer's disclosures."
— Daily News.

The author is evidently a man of good education, and he has contrived to shape his complaints into a
well-written and interesting book. Many strange stories of prison life, and many heartrending details of
progress in crime are given. Like most painful subjects this has its ludicrous side, and one cannot
repress a smile at the 'dodges' which the old hands are 'up to ' in order to avoid work and get into the
infirmary." — Morning Post.

"Wholesale accusations of favouritism and cruelty are brought against warders and governors, and the
most dogmatic opinions are expressed with respect to the whole system of prison discipline. . . . If only
a portion of the revelations are founded on facts, Portland must be a scene of great corruption." — Daily
Chronicle.

Despite the Interesting nature of some of the author's experiences in prison, and although his literary
talents by no means despicable, the affectation of superiority which pervades the narrative is infinitely
irritating. " — Globe.

A ' Ticket-of-leave Man' furnishes some remarkable statements — statements which will be found
exceedingly unpalatable in certain quarters, and not a little alarming in others, and which are given with
.1 vigour of enunciation and absence of reserve which should betoken conviction. There is a strong case
here for further investigation." — AtJienceiim.

The book is not without great value. There can be no excuse for leaving matters as they are. The
classification of criminals, the enforcement of real solitary confinement, and the dismissal of dishonest
officials, offer no difficulty whatever. . . . The suggestions contained in this book are well worth the
consideration of the whole tax-paying public, and will, we trust, obtain the attention they deserve." —
Kxaininer.

There are one or two cases in which he brings charges against certain officers who could be easily
identified, and these charges certainly should be examined into. If they are proved to be false, the
author should be prosecuted for libel, and his book suppressed. If they are proved to be true, he will
have done good service." — Saturday Review.

After the perusal of this volume, we think that the reader will come to the conclusion that, as regards
our prisons, there is much need for reform, that they cost a great deal too much money, and do a great
deal too little good. It is the merit of this book that in it the author shows how persons enter prisons
mere novices in crime, and by the fostering care of a paternal government in these high schools of
rascality, leave it thorough adepts in the arts of thieving." — Litc7-ary World.

The author is, he assures us, a ticket-of-leave man, and his chapters unquestionably indicate an
intimate acquaintance with the inner life of Portland and Dartmoor. His object is to show that our jails
and penal settlements are ' hotbeds of crime ' ; and his facts bearing on this point are startling." — Truth.

What a hell upon earth a convict prison must be ! It would be a wholesome step if the Government
would buy the copyright, print a cheap edition, and distribute the book broadcast throughout the land —
in every counting-house, in every office, in every manufactory', nay, in every school. Assuredly no manor
boy, after reading these pages — more dramatic than any drama, more tragic than any tragedy — would
allow himself even to think of crime." — Whitehall Rei.'ie^v.

It is powerfully written, and is, we emphatically sap', one of the most startling and terrible works
ever placed before the public. To our thinking, the Ticket-of-Leave Man's words bear marks of
veracity." — Vanity Fair.

"The book may find many readers, for it is as interesting as revelations of crime and prison-life can
well he"— Mayfair.

What we most admire is the writer's honesty of purpose." — Brief.

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, W.C.

Fourth edition, crown 8vo. , boards, price 2S. ; post-free, 2S. 3d.

Marston on Cholera :

Symptoms and Treatment of Malignant Diarrhoea, better known by the name of Asiatic
Cholera, as treated in the Royal Free Hospital during the years 1832-3-4, 1848 and 1854.
By WM. Garden, M.D.

Demy 8vo. ; price is.

Marston on Cancer :

The Treatment of Cancer and Tumours by Chian-Turpentine, Caustics, Excision, and
other Methods. To which is added a Short, Practical, and Systematic Description of all
the Varieties of this Disease, and Remarks on the Nature and Treatment of Ulcers. By
ALEXANDER Garden, M.D., F.R.C.S.

DemySvo., boards, price 2s. ; wrappers, is. 6d.

The Potato Disease, and how to prevent it.

By FREDERICK Lavender, author of " How to Prevent Famines in India," &c.
Demy 8vo., paper covers, price 2s. ; post-free, 2s. 2d.

Mont-Dore (Auvergne), and its Mineral

WATERS, recommended for CONSUMPTION— BRONCHITIS— ASTHMA. By
DR. EMILE Edmund, Consulting-Physician at the Springs of Mont-Dore.

Crown Svo., cloth, price 3s. 6d. ; post-free, 33. pd.

Snatches of Song.

A Collection of Humorous, Sentimental, and Descriptive Pieces. By F. B. Moreton,
Crown Svo., cloth, price is. 6d. ; post-free, is. 8d.

Searches, a Romance of Athens.

By J. W. WILLIAMS.

Crown 8vo., cloths price is. 6d. ; post-free, is. 8d.

Emilia, a Drama of the Fourth Century.

By J. W.

Demy Svo., paper, price is. ; post-free. Is. il.

Obstructions, Amendments & Elections.

A New Method of dealing therewith. A Rejected Article. Also The Conduct of the
Business of the House. A Rejected Letter.

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, M^.C.

WYMAIV's TECHNICAL SERIES.

Crown 8vo., cloth, price 5s. ; post-free, 5s. 5d.

Printing Machines and Machine Printing

Being a Guide for Masters and Workmen. Containing Valuable Hints in the Selection
of Machines— Practical Guide to Making Ready— Preparing Cuts— Cutting Overlays-rollers
— Useful Hints in Management of all kinds of Printing Machines — Details of the'
Construction of Machines, &c., &c., &c.

Crown 8vo., cloth, price 5s. ; post-free, 5s. 4d.

Stereotyping and Electrotyping:

A Guide for the Production of Plates by the Papier Mace and Plaster Processes. With
Instructions for Depositing Copper by the Battery or by the Dynamo Machine. Also
Hints on Steel and Brass Facing, &c. By FRED. J. WILSON, author of " Printing-machines
and Machine Printing."

Second edition, crown 8vo., cloth, price 5s. ; post-free, 5s. 4d.

The Grammar of Lithography.

A Complete and Practical Guide, for the Artist and Printer, in Commercial and Artistic
Lithography, Chromo-Lithography, Biography, Engraving on Stone, Photo-lithographic,
and Lithographic Machine Printing, with an Appendix containing original
Recipes for preparing Chalks, Inks, Transfer Papers, &c., &c. By W. D. RICHMOND.
The proof-sheets of this work have been revised by some of the most eminent,
men connected with the Art of Lithography, the result being a complete and reliable work.
"Up to the present time there has been no handbook of the art of lithography worthy in any way of
the attention of the practical man, except the English translation of the original treatise of Senefelder
himself. The reproach has now been wiped away, and the trade, as well as amateurs, will ever be
indebted to the enterprise and judgment which have produced this book. It was compiled under circumstances
unusually favourable to accuracy and completeness. The writer, Mr. W. D. Richmond, formerly
a country lithographer, with experience of every class of work, had studied the correlated sciences, such
aschemistrj-, with a view to understand and expound the principles upon which lithography depends.
His manuscript was set up in t>-pe, and proofs forwarded to a number of experts in different departments
men of great technical ability, like Mr. Hansard, and of artistic skill, like Mr. Louis Hague. The
corrections and additions thus gained were considered and incorporated together by the editor of the
Printing Tithes mid Lithographic. If the book be tested in any particular, the great advantage of this
process will be apparent. The Grammar is thorough in every detail ; and, in fact, may be recommended
as a model of a handbook of the kind. "We ought to mention, also, that there are not a few original
methods brought before the trade now for the first time, besides many improvements on previously
known ones. In fact, all that can be imparted relative to the lithographic arts by verbal instruction is
here lucidly and succinctly presented." — Printers' Register.

Biographers and the Printing trade in general are greatly indebted to the care and practical
supervision which have been bestowed upon this work, which may be received as the only complete
handbook of this artistical branch of the Printing business which has yet appeared. The Grammar
is very elaborate and complete, and enters into every necessary detail of the art, together with many
modem improvements as yet but little known. Part I. is confined to drawing, transferring, and Printing ;
Part II. touches machines and machine printing. The book is tastefully got up and excellently printed,
and altogether is most creditable to the firm which has issued it to the trade." — Press News.

In Preparation.

A Glossary of Technical Terms used in

CONNECTION WITH PRINTING MACHINERY, giving upwards of 500 Definitions
of Words and Phrases employed in the Machine-room, together with a Description
of the various Mechanical Motions used in Printing Machinery and its Adjuncts.
Illustrated by numerous carefully-prepared Diagrams. The first Dictionary of Technical
Terms used in the Printing Machine-room which has ever been attempted,

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, Vic.

WYMAN'S TECHNICAL SERlES-couiinued.

Crown 8vo., cloth, price 2S. 6d. ; post-free, 2S. lod.

Spelling and Punctuation.

A Manual for Authors, Students, and Printers ; together wth a List of Foreign Words
and Phrases in common use and their Explanations. By HENRY BEADNELL,
Printer, author of " A Guide to Typography : Literary and Practical," " A Key to One
of the Main Difficulties of English Orthography," &c.

Second Edition, price 6d. ; post-free, yd.

A Key to one of the Main Difficulties of

ENGLISH ORTHOGRAPHY : Being an Alphabetical Collection of nearly 3,000
Words resembling others in Sound, yet differing in Sense, Spelling, or Accentuation.
Compiled and arranged by HENRY BEADNELL.

Medium 4to., cloth gilt, bevelled boards, price los. 6d, Also Second series, price los. 6d.

The Cabinet Makers' Pattern Book.

First Series. Being Examples of Modern Furniture of the Character mostly in demand,
selected from the Portfolios of the leading Wholesale Makers. To which are added Original
Designs by First-rate Artists, comprising various Designs for Hall Furniture, Library
Furniture, Dining-room Furniture, Drawing-room Furniture, and Bedroom Furniture.
This will be found an invaluable work by the Master Cabinet-Maker and Upholsterer."

Crown 8vo,, cloth, price 4s. ; post-free, 4s. 4d.

The Practical Cabinet-Maker :

Being a Collection of Working Drawings of Furniture, with Explanatory Notes. By
A WORKING MAN.

New Edition, crown 8vo., cloth, price 2s. ; post-free, 2s. 2d.

Workshop Management.

A Manual for Masters and Men, being practical remarks upon the Economic Conduct
of Workshops, Trade Charities, &c. By FREDERIC SMITH.

Crown 8vo., cloth, price 2s. 6d. ; post-free, 2s. 8d.

How to Manage a Steam-engine.

A Handbook for all who use Steam-power. Illustrated with examples of different types
of Engines and Boilers, with Hints on their Construction, Working, Fixing, &c.,
Economy of Fuel, &c. By M. Powys BALE, M.Inst.C.E., author of " Hardworking
Machinery, its Progress and Construction, "

New Edition, crown 8vo., cloth, price is. ; post-free, is. id.

English China and China Marks :

Being a Guide to the Principal Marks found on English Pottery and Porcelain. With
Engravings of upwards of 150 Marks.

Crown 8vo., cloth, price 2s. ; post-free, 2s. 2d.

Professional Book-keeping.

A Treatise for Non-Traders, designed to meet the special requirements of Legal, Medicine,
and similar Professions. By WILLIAM JOHN GORDON.

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, W.C.

Second Edition, price 2S. 6d., cloth, flush.

The Law of Mutual Life Assurance.

By THOMAS BRETT, Esq., LL.B. (Lord. Univ), of the Middle Temple, ,
late Scholar and Student, Trinity College, Dublin. Reprinted with considerable
additions from the Review of October, 1871. To which are appended full Reports of
the Decisions of Lord Cairns in the Kent Mutual Society's Case, and of Mr. Justice
Fry in Miss Winston's Case in the Winding-up of the Albion Life Assurance Society
&c., &c.
Any one interested in Mutual Life Assurance has a clear, reliable, and comprehensive statement of
the law upon the subject open to him which is a boon at any time, and especially after the decision in
Winston's case." — sidney Market Revisit.

Mr. Justice Lindsey, in his admirable book of the Law of Partnerships, has paid Mr. Brett the
compliment of referring to the present work and correcting his own by it. It supplies a very distinct
and long-felt want in an entirely satisfactory manner. It is a work which we cordially commend to the
attention of all who are interested in assurance societies, and it will certainly become indispensable to
the managers and other officials of such societies." — Birmingham Daily Gazette.

With Illustrations of Furniture Designs and Working Drawings.

Every Saturday, price 4d. Yearly Subscription, including postage, dos. ; Half-yearly, los.

payable in advance.

The Furniture Gazette.

AN ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY JOURNAL, TREATING OF ALL BRANCHES
OF CABINET-WORK, UPHOLSTERY, AND INTERIOR DECORATION,
BOTH AT HOME AND ABROAD.

Art Editor, CHRISTOPHER DRESSER, Ph.D.

INDISPENSABLE TO THE NUMEROUS TRADES CONCERNED.
Useful alike to the Connoisseur, the Antiquary, and the Householder.

The Publishers beg to call the attention of those who are not Subscribers to the
Furniture Gazette to the strong claims of this Journal on the support of all who are interested
in the Furniture, Upholstery, and Decoration Trades.

The Furniture Gazette has completed the Eleventh Volume of the New Series, and
is the recognized organ of the important industries it represents — a fact shown not only
by its continually increasing circulation, but by the steady demand for space both in its
Literary and Advertising Departments.

Neither labour, care, nor expense is spared in the conduct of this Journal to secure
matter of special practical value and interest to its Subscribers. Information carefully
selected as to technical and artistic matters, as well as to the commercial, scientific, and
mechanical branches of the numerous Trades within the province of the Furniture
Gazette, may always be found in its pages. Amongst the subjects thus generally treated
of and watchfully recorded in its columns, the following may be indicated : —
The various Manufactures appertaining to Furniture,
Upholstery, and Decoration, in all their
numerous branches of Wood, Metal, Porcelain,

Woven Fabrics, Paper, &c., with the
Materials, Tools, and Appliances peculiar to
each.

Working Drawings from Practical Authorities.

The state of Home and Foreign Markets,
with a special view to Imports and Exports,
and the fluctuations of Supply and
Demand.

Suggestions for Useful and Attractive Novelties
in Materials and Manufactures.

Recent Patents and Improvements.

Scientific Principles, Inventions, and Discoveries
affecting Manufactures, Materials, or Machinery.


Decorative Works in progress or newly completed,
with careful and accurate Descriptions,
illustrated, where necessary, with
Wood Engravings.

Changes in Fashion, Actual and Prospective.

Ecclesiastical Furniture and Decoration.

Art Exhibitions, Art Schools, and Reports of
Lectures on Art in connection v/ith Furniture
and Upholstery Manufactures.

Current Prices, Trade Reports, Tables of Exports,
and minor Trade Fittings.

Legal and Police Intelligence affecting the represented
Trades. News, Notes, and Comments.
Useful Hints. " Short Ends Corner"
for Workmen. Practical Papers by Practical
Workmen, &c. Correspondence. Answers to
Correspondents, &c.

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, W.C.

FOURTH YEAR OF PUBLICATION.
Crown 4to., price 2S. 6d., stiff boards.

The Furniture Gazette Diary and Desk-book

FOR 1880.

A complete and useful Office Diary and Desk-book, interleaved with blotting-paper,
adapted to the requirements of the Cabinet, Upholstery, and Decorative Trades throughout
the Country. The Diary contains, in addition to the usual business information, a
carefully-compiled and authentic Directory of the Trades allied to Furnishing, reprinted
from The Furniture Gazette.

"This is a well got-up work. Plenty of space and good paper are given In the diary, the almanac
and tabular matter are carefully compiled, and a useful classified list of the furniture, upholstery, and
allied trades is given." — Building Nczus.

"Ought to be on the desk of every one engaged in any department of the furniture trade. Besides an
excellent diary, with the ordinary general information of such publications, we have a good bibliography) hy
pf furniture and decoration, and a pretty full and classified list of the furniture, upholstery, and allied
trades." — Iron.

Will be found of service to all engaged in the trade to which it specially refers." — Lloyd's Weekly
London Newspaper.

This is a portly quarto volume, containing a mass of special trade information, as well as matter of a
general character"— CzVj/ Press.

It contains a mass of useful matter of the nature likely to be required bj^ the members of the furniture
and allied trades. The diary, which is capitally arranged with regard to probable commercial requirements,
is interleaved with blotting-paper." — Eiiropcan Mail.

This is a well got-up diary, which, besides the usual leaves for writing purposes, contains a large
quantity of useful information on matters of special interest to the trades for whose use it is issued." —
English Mechanic.

"The information part of the work is so concise, liberal of facts, well arranged, and useful;
and the blank, blue blotting-paper interleaved portion, devoted to scribbling, presents so commendable
a surface for the pen, that we wish the Diary * many happy returns,' year by year"— Figaro.

"This is a new and useful addition to the stock of publications of its sort. The special information
given by it is indicated by its title." — Weekly Dispatch.

"This is a tastefully got-up business diary, interleaved with blotting paper." — Draper.

It is very tastefully got up, and should find favour with the extensive trades for which it is Intended."
Timber Trades' Journal.

"We have no hesitation in saying that It Is a very useful work." — Builders' Weekly Reporter.

So far as we can judge of the requirements of those engaged In the several trades in whose behalf It
has been issued, it is likely to become a popular annual." — Wakefield and West Riding Herald.

It is well got up, is interleaved with blotting-paper, and contains a great deal of useful information.
Warehoieseinan attd Drapers' Trade Jo7(fnal.

This is one of the completest trade diaries and almanac we have seen for some time. Besides
containing all the information common to a first-class almanac, it is a directory to the furniture trade.
To our Bethnal-green readers, now the furniture manufacturers for half the world, it will be invaluable."
Eastern A rus and Retinal Green Times.

"Irrespective of the valuable information contained in this annual, through which it is a veritable
manual for the furniture and cabinet trades, it is one of the best diaries of the day for the general public.
Excellent paper with interleaved ' blotting,' and lots of room, are its characteristics"— //^ac^«<y/ and
Kingsland Gazette.

The diary and almanac is most creditable to the enterprise and public spirit of the publishers. It
will be found exceedingly useful"— ^F/tr/r Northern Ensign.

Issued in Monthly Parts during the Session. Price 2s. 6d. to Non-Members.

Transactions of the Ethnological Society

OF GREAT BRITAIN.

Communications for the Editor of the " Transactions" to be addressed under cover to
the Publishers,

Messrs. Wyman & Sons, 74 & 75, Great Queen Street, London, W.C.

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, Msf.C.

A CONTEMPORARY HISTORY OF THE WORLD.

Brief: the Week's News.

AN EPITOME OF THE PRESS FOR THE HOME CIRCLE, TRAVEL
Less. AND RESIDENTS ABROAD.



Published in "Weekly Numbers, price Twopence ; and in Half Yearly Volumes,
Vol. I., cloth gilt, price 10s. Vols. II. to V., cloth gilt, 8s. each.

Volumes I. to V. embrace the period from November 1877, to June, 1880.

These Volumes form a popular summary of the sayings and doings of the time, a I
short record of all noteworthy events, and a compendium of the manifold wit and'
wisdom of the entire press. A careful Index being published with each volume, they are
most valuable as Works of Reference, and indispensable additions to all well-appointed
libraries. ,

EVERYBODY'S WEEKLY PAPER.

Every Friday, price 2d, Ann. Sub. (in advance), los. lod., post-free.

Brief: The Week's News.

An Epitome of the Press, for the Home Circle, Travellers, and Residents Abroad.

Brief: The Week's News is a Popular Summary of the Sayings and Doings of the
Current Week ; a short Record of Noteworthy Events ; a Compendium of the manifold
Wit and Wisdom of the entire Press ; and a useful, handy Repertory of Facts, Dates,
and Opinions, ready for future easy reference.

Brief: The Week's News aims to be a Journal alike for the busy and the idle ; for
him who has not time for much reading, and for him who has not inclination to read
much ; so that, without the labour of turning to one publication after another of the
periodical Press, the reader of but slender leisure may, almost at a glance, keep himself
abreast of all passing events, and fairly informed on all the questions of the day.

Brief: The Week's News is a necessary outcome of our very busy age. Brevity in
speech and writing has become a necessity rather than a luxury. Multum in faro is
everywhere the order of the day. Condensation and compression meet us on all sides.
And as in the material world, so in our literature. The hydraulic press is applied to the
Press. Packing, not padding, is sought. It is the age of glances and glimpses ; of terse
phrases ; of the news of the day " in a word ;" of only half-hours with even the best
authors ; of French in four lessons, and all things in manuals. Letters have dwindled
down to notes and memos, to p>ostcards and telegrams.

Brief: The Week's Nexus, presenting the Press compressed — concentrated essence of
Press, in fact — giving a bird's-eye view of the contents of many Journals ; marshalling
together the different opinions of various Leaders of National Thought ; impartially
representing all Parties and Schools of Politics, Literature, Science, and Art, must appeal
to a very large number readers, and, while indispensable to many, prove acceptable to all;
Brief: The Week's News offers to the Advertiser at once a wide range and a
long succession of the most eligible readers — not only in England, but also in the
Colonies, India, and in all Countries where the English language is spoken.
As a companion to the press, Brief: the IVcek's Nc7os deserves the highest praise." — Daily Chronicle.
"This well-conducted journal, giving as it does the opinions of the leading newspapers on the important
topics of the day, together with a good summary of the chief events occurring, forms a handy
record." — City Press.

Brief: the Week's Ne7vs is the title of a weekly newspaper which gives a capital summary of intelligence,
and the work is so well done that those wishing to have a record of current history could scarcely
do better than obtain it regularly." — Hampshire Advertiser.

"In its half-yearly as well as its weekly form, Brief: the Week's News is an excellent epitome of
everything worth recording. It is the best edited and epitomised paper of its kind ever issued. We
commend it strongly to public notice as well entitled to patronage, from its general utility and the facility
it gives for reference to matters of the past." — Brighton Examiner.

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, ^W.C.

The Printing Times and Lithographer.:

A Technical and Fine-Art Journal, devoted to Typography, Lithography, and the Reproductive
Arts.

The Printing Times and Lithographer is a medium of communication between all
who are associated with the Art of Printing in its manifold forms. Having no separate
interests to serve, it is not the organ of any one class or trade, but deals with every topic
impartially and fearlessly. It has gained a high reputation for the great value and interest
of its contents. Writers of experience and special knowledge are its contributors ;
while gentlemen well known in the Scientific and Art World co-operate with the conductors
to render the Journal a complete and authoritative exponent of the current progress
of the Graphic Arts.

All new Works of interest to the Printing Profession receive an early and impartial
criticism. Especial attention continues to be paid to the new modes of Automatic
Engraving which are constantly being introduced in Great Britain and Abroad ; and
illustrations of their capabilities, with details of their practical working, are given.

Amongst the many subjects treated of are the Press, as it is affected by the restrictions
placed upon it from time to time by Government Departments, &c. ; the Law of Copyright
as it affects Newspaper Proprietors, Authors, Publishers, Type-Founders, &c. ; the
advances made in the Art of Printing ; the production of New Publications ; an account
of all New Inventions ; a chronicle of Passing Events ; the management and progress of
the various Trade Charities ; the operations of Workmen's Unions and Combinations
among Manufacturers, &c. Its pages are open to the free discussion of all questions
upon which its readers may desire to interchange opinions by way of Correspondence.

The Printing Times and Lithographer derives its information from, and circulates in,
all parts of the World ; and no pains are spared to ensure the accuracy of its intelligence,
and to render it in every respect worthy the support of Biographers, Letterpress Printers,
Artists, Antiquaries, and Literary Men generally.

Being a thoroughly-establislied Journal — one which is both carefully read and preserved
— and possessing a large and increasing circulation at Home and Abroad, the
Printing Times and Lithographer presents an exceptionally good medium for the publication
of the Announcements and Advertisements of Type Founders, Printers' Engineers,
Inventors, Manufacturers, and of all who are associated with the Art of Printing in its
various branches.

Published on the 15th of each Month. Price 6d. Annual Subscription (payable in
advance), 7s. 6d. post-free.

THIRD YEAR OF PUBLICATION.
Crovm 4to., price 2s. 6d., stiff boards.

The Printing Trades' Diary and Desk-book

FOR 1881.

The Printing Trades' Diary and Desk-book for 1881 is compiled with a view to meeting
the everyday requirements of Principals, Overseers, and Managers, connected with the
Letterpress Printing, Lithographic, Stationery, Bookbinding, and Auxiliary Trades. In
addition to the usual General, Commercial, and Legal Information, it will contain : —
A Diary, three days on a page, interleaved with Blotting-paper ; the London Compositors'
Scales of Prices for News and Bookworm, Revised and Annotated ; Abstracts of the
Scottish and Provincial Scales of Prices ; an Epitome of the Law of Libel and Copyright,
as affecting Printers and Newspaper Proprietors ; Tables for the Printers' Warehouse,
relating to the Sizes and giving out of Paper, Cardboard, &c. ; Tables for the Storeroom,
the Economy of Types, Materials, &c. ; Various Useful Forms, Recipes, Memoranda,
«S:c. &c. Merely elementary information is avoided, as the aim of the compilers
is to present, in a convenient and accessible form, only useful matter, which, gift the course
of his ordinary occupation, the master tradesman may at any time require. All the
Reference Tables have been carefully compiled, and the Recipes actually tested.

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, Wag.

Second Edition, crown 4to., price is. ; post-free, is. id.

Wyman's Dictionary of Stationery and

COMPENDIUM OF USEFUL INFORMATION.
For the Office, Counting-house, and Library.

FOURTEENTH YEAR OF PUBLICATION.

PRICE SIXPENCE. PUBLISHED IN OCTOBER OF EACH YEAR,
In an Illuminated Wrapper, beautifully printed in Old-Style Type, on Toned Paper,

Everybody's Year-book for 1881.

A Useful and Popular Annual, containing Something for Everybody all the Year Round.

The Cheapest and Best Gift-book of the Day.

C02srT:E]IsrTS :

Fixed and Movable Festivals ; Holidays at the Public Offices ; Date of Creation of some
Festivals ; Jewish Calendar ; Mahometan Calendar ; Law Sittings ; Law Terms ; University
Terms ; Eclipses ; Transfer and Dividend Days ; An Almanac and Calendar of the Events of the
Year ; Story of the months ; Age of the Moon ; Rising and Setting of the Sun ; Time of High
Water at London Bridge ; Phases of the Moon ; Things to be borne in Mind ; Astronomical Notes
of the Month ; Table of High Water at nearly 200 of the principal Ports ; A Perpetual Almanac
for finding the Day of the Month ; Table for Calculating Interest ; Family Ready-Reckoner ;
Interest Table ; Tables of the Sovereigns of England and Scotland ; The Royal Family ; Sovereigns
of Europe ; The National Debt ; Archbishops and Bishops of the Established Church ; Supreme
Court of Judicature ; Her Majesty's Ministers and Chief Officers of State ; Her Majesty's Household
; H.R.H. The Prince of Wales's Household ; Her Majesty's Privy Council ; Lords Lieutenant
of Counties in the United Kingdom ; Officers of the Houses of Parliament ; British and Foreign
Ambassadors ; Consulate Offices in London ; Metropolitan County Courts ; Assessed Taxes ; Stamp
Duties ; Corporation of the City of London ; School Board for London ; Metropolitan Board of
Works ; Bank of England ; London Banks ; Cab Regulations ; Postal Information ; English Weights
and Measures ; How to make your Will ; Distribution of Intestate Estates ; Languages and
Alphabets ; Prevailing Winds ; Money and Coinage ; Foreign Moneys and their English Equivalents
; French Weights and measures ; The Sportsman's Calendar ; Multum-in-Parvo Guide to the
Principal Places of Amusement and Chief Points of Interest in London and its Suburbs; List of
the Principal London Restaurants ; List of Seaside Resorts ; Mode of Addressing Persons of Rank ;
The Ball Room Guide ; and a large amount of Information Useful to Everybody AH the Year Round.

Most people will invest sixpence in ' Everybody's Year-Book for 18S0 ' when they see it, for it is full
of information, admirably printed, and just the book to have by you." — Whitehall Review.

A practical work of general interest." — Daily Chronicle.

Contains a vast amount of interesting matter"— Weekly Tithes.

It should be in every household." — Brighton E.vaviiner.

Contains a large amount of matter of a varied and interesting character." — Edinburgh Courant.

Affords a very large amount of ' information for everybody'" — Reynolds s Newspaper.

The book should be in the hands of every one." — The Walsall Free Press.

Is replete with information on a great variety of subjects." — ]V at erf ord Daily Mail.

It includes a large amount of miscellaneous information, in addition to the customary and necessary
almanac matter, and will be found handy for reference on a great variety of subjects. A copious index
makes reference easy." — Halifax Courier.

"Is a useful and popular annual, with much curious and miscellaneous information"— .S"««r/a^ Times.

Its contents are more useful, more closely packed, and better arranged than ever. The amount and
variety of information embodied in the pages of the annual are well fitted to maintain and extend its
popularity." — Edinburgh Daily Review.

*j* OzoitJg to the constant demand for complete sets, the Publishers will be happy to exchange
the current issue of Everybody's Year-book for copies of Everybody's Year-book for 1874.

74, 75, Great Queen Street, London, W.C.

3 0112 041680155
