V

A DEEA^IER OF DREAMS. A Modern Romance. By

the Author of ' Thoth. ' Crown 8vo, 6s.

"Unmistakably delightful The wit and philosophy and poetry of

the book are no less striking than the grace and charm of the author's
style." — St James's Gazette.

"Original and artistic Comes very near to being a tremendous

feat of fancy." — Athencmm.

HOW I SPENT MY TWENTIETH YEAR. Being a

Short Record of a Tour Round the World, 1886-87. By
The marchioness OF STAFFORD. With Illustrations.
Crown 8vo. [Immediately.

Second Edition.

GOSSIPS WITH GIRLS AND MAIDENS. Betrothed
AND Free. By LADY Cellars. New Edition. Crown 8vo,
5s.

"An admirable manual of self-help and self-education ; an encyclopaedia
of valuable hints and suggestions. Even matters that might be
called familiar, trivial, or commonplace are brightly treated with fresh
originality. Directions are given as to diet as well as study ; stress is
laid on the due development of the physical powers and the careful
preservation of health ; dress and the adornment of the person are not
neglected ; maidens are counselled as to the choice of a husband, and
as to how they may cage as well as net an eligible admirer." — Times.

Third Edition.

BODY AND SOUL. A Romance in Transcendental
Pathology. By FREDERICK NOEL PATON. CroAvn 8vo, Is.

LOT'S CAMP ON THE AKUHWIMI. An Account of Rivers
ON THE Congo. By J. K. WERNER, Engineer, late in the
Service of the Eat Independant du Congo. With Map and numerous
Illustrations.

Fourth Edition.

SARACINESCA. By F. Marion Crawford, Author of
'Mr Isaacs,' 'Dr Claudius 'Zoroaster,' &c. Fourth Edition.
Crown 8vo, 6s.

' Saracinesca ' is a very remarkable book, and a great advance upon
any of the author's previous works." — Academy.

It is a book of which even the greatest masters of fiction might
with reason have been proud." — Pictorial World.

"Clever, striking, interesting." — Spectator.

"The book is something more than a clever novel; it is a literary
success. " — Vanity Fair.

A New and Cheaper Edition.

LIFE OF PRINCIPAL TQLLOCH, D.D. By Mrs

Oliphant, Author of ' The Life of Edward Irving,' &c., &c. With
a Mezzotint Portrait, and Wood Engraving of the Study at St
Mary's College. Third Edition, post 8vo, 7s. 6d.

"Mrs Oliphant has drawn the Principal's portrait with a loving
hand, but its fidelity will be acknowledged by all who knew him well.
It is as lifelike as the striking head on the frontispiece of the volume."
Times.

"It would not be easy for 'fellows' without a heart and mind of
unusual proportions to talk as does this great Scotchman throughout
this delightful book." — Daily News.

"This is an ideal biography In this delightful volume there is

nothing 'set down in malice,' and scarcely anything that one does
not read with interest and pleasure." — &t James's Gazette.

"Mrs Oliphant has performed a labour of love in giving to the
numerous admirers of Principal Tulloch this vivid and faithful portrait
of her old friend." — Pall Mall Gazette.

"Principal Tulloch has been fortunate in his biographer We

have nothing but praise for this pleasant memorial of a lovable and
'kmAly ms^-Q "— Athenaeum.

WILLIAM BLACKWOOD & SONS, Edinburgh and London.

DIANA Wentworth

What have those lonely mountains worth revealing ?
More glory and more grief than I can tell."

Emily Bronze.

BY

Caroline FOTHEEGILL

AUTHOR OF 'an ENTHUSIAST,' 'A VOICE IN THE WILDERNESS'

IN THREE VOLUMES
VOL. I.

WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND S0:N^S

EDINBURGH AND LONDON

MDCCCLXXXIX

All Eights reserved

CONTENTS OF THE First Volume.

t

S

X

"^

I.

II.

III.

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

IX.

X.

XI.

XII.

XIII.

Prologue.

It was an exquisite summer evening, not
moonlight, but not yet dark, so that the
young man and woman walking slowly
along the West Fields could still dimly
see one another's features. They were
very young : he looked about twenty,
she could not be more than seventeen.
He had a tall well - made figure, and a
face which expressed resolution and a

VOL. I. A

certain degree of pride, although his
clothing was that of a country workman,
and his speech betrayed him as a
dweller among the hills. The girl was
very pretty, with soft brown hair, and
eyes which were alternately appealing
and roguish. One sought in vain in
her features for some sion of the hiorh
purpose which animated his, yet, in spite
of this want, it was a very winning face.
She wore neither bonnet nor shawl, so
that it was easy to see that her figure
was slighter and more upright than is
the case with most girls of her class,
and the arrangement of her dress bespoke
an evident knowledge and appreciation
of her advantages. She had
slipped her hand through the young

man's arm, and rather nestled against
him as they walked along. The light
was fading fast ; the river rushing at the
foot of the cliffs, on the top of which
they were walking, made its presence
known to the ear rather than the eye ;
the outlines of the hills, which rose around
them on all sides, were becoming dim ; the
woods on the other side of the valley were
an indistinct mass. They had walked fora
long time before they began to speak.
Then the man said —

*sit's a bonny spot, Mary lass; I shall
often think of it when I am far away."

Eh, John," she answered, with a little
toss of her head, " you are a queer fellow.
Any one else would have told me they
would think of me."

*'I shall think of you. This place and
you are so bound up in my mind, I
can't think of one without the other. We
have walked here so often together."

An' now I nun walk alone. It'll be
dree work. Are you born' to go tomorrow,
John ? "

Yes ; I'm off in the morning as soon as
it's light. I shall walk to Bellingham, and
take the train from there."

And you can't tell when you'll be
back?"

Nay, how can I tell ? I've my fortune
to make ; but as soon as I can come back,
I will."

I doubt it will be a long time to
wait," she said, with a sigh.

"And what if it is?" he answered

rather quickly. "You won't be waiting
alone ; I shall be keeping you company,
though I am a long way off. You don't
think you'll get tired of waiting, Mary?"
he concluded, rather anxiously.

No," she answered, " no ; I won't get
tired, though it is a dull place, and there
is very little to see. But I shall be glad
when you've made your fortune ; then
you'll be a rich man, and I shall be a
lady."

It's not only riches as makes ladies
and gentlemen," he said ; " it's many a
lot of other things besides ; and I doubt
if ladies and gentlemen is any happier
than us poor folk. They've just as hard
a time in many ways, and I can't tell
why you hanker after it so. A good.

honest, working woman's better than an
idle fine lady; and if you were a lady,
Mary, you would be an idle one, I fear :
you're not fond of work," he concluded,
half playfully.

*'No," said Mary, 'Tm not. It's a
life as would suit me finely, to ride i'
my carriage and do nothing all day,
because there was servants to do the
work. Eh, I should like to have servants,
and to keep my hands white and
clean."

He laughed at her tone of enthusiasm,
and then said more gravely —

I can promise you servants, if you will
only have a bit of patience. And now,
Mary, we must say good-bye. Here weare
at your father's farm, and they will

be angry with me if I keep you out any
longer. Promise me once more to be true."

"Eh," she cried, "how you do go on!
Do you doubt me ? "

"No, I don't doubt you; but I don't
like leaving you so long. You are very
pretty, and there will be lots of men
asking you to wife. And maybe they
will try to persuade you at home ; they
have not much faith in me, you know."

"John," she cried, with a sudden tone
of fear in her voice, " you never can
tell. If father began wishing me for to
marry some one else, and you not here to
help me, I'd happen say Yes for peace
and quietness. Let me swear, and then
I shall be quite safe ; I coidd not break
an oath."

I don't like oaths," said John ; " I
would rather have an honest promise
from some one I trusted."

"Ay, but John, to please me," she
pleaded. " We will swear to one another,
and then we shall both be safe. Do now,
John; it's the last thing I shall ask you
for a long while."

"Well," he said, slowly; "but it's to
please you, mind."

Yes, yes ; and you swear first."

So he swore. "I, John Garth waite,
swear to be true to you, Mary Metcalf,
as you are true to me."

And Mary said the oath after him.

I, Mary Metcalfe, swear to be true
to you, John Garth waite, as you are true
to me."

Then there came the last parting, kisses,
blessings, and a few last words, and then
Mary went into her father's house, and
John set off home across the hills.

CHAPTER I.

PROFESSOR WENTWORTH's WILL.

Professor Wentworth was dead and
buried, and his will had created a certain
sensation among those who heard it, and
those who heard of it. It was an un-english
will, and those who talked about
it said that if he had not all his life been
an eccentric man, there would have been
grounds for thinking him of unsound mind
when he died. To his sons, aged respectively
twenty-three and eighteen, he left
five hundred pounds apiece — all his savings.

He had money invested, which was
bringing in a hundred and fifty pounds
a-year, and this he bequeathed to his
widow and only daughter, to be shared
equally between them until his widow's
death, when it should all go to his
daughter. There was a letter directed to
his sons, which he had desired they might
read after hearing his will, and in which the
following passage, relating to the way in
which he had left his money, occurred : —
I have done my best for you, and
now you are both started in life, and
must look to yourselves alone. With five
hundred pounds to fall back upon, you
cannot come to harm. It is in accordance
with what I have taught you all
your lives, that the women must have the

settled income. Your sister may never
marry, in which case lie must be provided
for; or, if she does, she cannot go
penniless to her husband."

The lads were fond and proud of their
sister, and had acquiesced in their father's
judgment. Wilfrid, the elder, was well
placed in New Zealand — Harold, the
younger, was in a large AVhitfield warehouse
; clearly it was Diana, beautiful
fastidious Diana, who must be provided
for, and shielded from the wintry winds
of care and privation. As for their
mother, they were both good sons, and
would always care for her. They thought
their father had acted quite rightly, and
went back to their work perfectly contented
with what had fallen to their share.

CHAPTER II.

MOTHER AND DAUGHTER.

"It is from your uncle Philip, Diana; you
may read it," said Mrs Wentworth, handing
her daughter an open letter.

Diana put down her mother's breakfast-tray,
and sat down on the edge of the bed
to read the following letter : —

"My dear Alice, — I have your letter
telling me of your changed arrangements.
I think it is a pity Harold cannot makeup
his mind to stay in England near his

mother ; but since Wilfrid is doing so well
in New Zealand, I suppose it is only
natural that he should wish to share his
good fortune. Young blood will be young
blood, and life in a Whitfield warehouse
cannot be as attractive as sheep-farming
in New Zealand. I wish the lad every
success. Under the circumstances, I think
it quite natural you should wish to leave
Whitfield, and I feel gratified that you
should ask my advice as to a suitable
place for your future home. I need not
assure you that, were it necessary, any help

could give you in the expense of removing
I would willingly offer. I have,
however, another proposal to make, which

trust will prove agreeable to you. You
cannot live in comfort anywhere upon

the income to which you have been reduced,
and I write now to suggest that
you and Diana should henceforth make
your home with us. I have consulted
Guy and the girls, and I need scarcely
say that they join with me in offering
you a hearty welcome. Your income will
be sufficient for your personal wants ; and
as your presence in my house can only bea
help and an advantage to my girls, I
think the arrangement will be a mutual
gain. Of Diana I cannot speak, since I
have not the pleasure of knowing her ;
but I trust she will be happy with her
cousins. Perhaps I am biassed, but I
think intercourse with Gertrude and
Dora cannot fail to influence her for
good."

There was much more — plans, arrangements,
and sympathy ; but all breathed a
confident spirit, as though the writer felt
sure of his invitation being accepted, and
the letter concluded very affectionately
with a hope of a speedy meeting.

Diana having finished reading, let her
hands sink into her lap, and sat looking at
her mother.

'how like your uncle ! " said Mrs Wentworth,
enthusiastically. " What a noble,
generous offer ! and what a simple way
out of all my difficulties ! "

What does it mean ? " asked Diana ;
'' I don't understand it. Have you been
writing to uncle Meredith about money
matters ? "

I wrote to tell him that as Harold is

going to join Wilfrid in New Zealand,
there is no further need for us to remain
in AVhitfield. I asked his advice about
a cheaper place to live in, and just hinted
that I should be very thankful for any
help in the expense of removing, or even
for permanent help if he could afford it.
This constant anxiety about money matters
will drive me into my grave before
long. I would not say a word against
your poor father ; but I really think he
miorht have contrived to leave me a
little better off. However, now it is
all at an end, thanks to your uncle. I
thought he would send me a cheque ;
but I never anticipated such generosity
as this."

Diana said nothing, and her mother went

VOL. I. B

on, having only paused for an instant to
wipe her eyes.

*' Dear Philip ! it is just like him ; and
the thought of passing the rest of my life
in the old Abbey, the happy, happy home
of my girlhood, is almost too much forme.
What an unspeakable relief it will
be to have everything one wants again,
and not to be constantly counting the
cost of every little thing ! I shall feel
quite young again. I shall write at once
and tell him how grateful I am for his
kindness. You, of course, will do the same."

"Nay, mamma," said Diana; *' I have
nothing to write about. I did not ask
for charity. I do not need it, and I am
not going to accept it. I have no gratitude
to express."

*'I beg you will not talk in that foolish
way," said Mrs Went worth, with some
show of irritation. "When I accept, my
acceptance will be for us both ; your home
must be with me."

I shall not go to Garshill," said Diana,
in a voice which was neither loud nor excited,
but which expressed unshakable determination.


"It is quite useless to talk in that way.
I shall not allow such behaviour to my
brother."

*' I don't know him : I have never seen
him, or any of my cousins. I know
nothing about him, and he knows nothing
about me, or I don't think he would
ask me to go and live at his house," with
a sudden gleam of something very like

wickedness lighting up her face. "Just
listen how he speaks of me ! he seems to
think I am a child yet," and she picked
up the letter again, and read aloud the
few words relating to herself. Then she
threw the letter aside and laughed, standing
in the middle of the room with a
satirical smile curling her lip.

Mrs Wentworth looked at her without
speaking, and with a peculiar look in her
eyes. What she saw ought to have filled
her heart with a glow of joy and pride,
and instead she looked gloomy and dissatisfied.


She saw before her a tall slim girl of two-and-twenty,
with a face and figure of marvellous
beauty. Hair and eyes were dark,
the eyes very large and clear, the complexion

very fair and delicate. Her
features had been moulded in an expression
of command, and the general
habit of the face was rather proud than
sweet. Her whole face and bearing were
full of spirit and resoluteness, yet her
figure was delicate to fragility. There
was something about her which would
have made even a stranger feel instinctively
that she had her whole life before
her, and that it would be very difficult,
in spite of her two-and-twenty years, to
forecast the use she would make of it.

It has been said that it was a sight to
fill a mother's heart with pride, and that
Mrs Wentworth looked only gloomy ;
perhaps the slight air of defiance in the
rounded upturned chin irritated her, for

her voice was not altogether sweet as she
said —

It is a long time since I saw your
cousins ; but Gertrude was then very handsome,
and Dora an exquisite fairylike
creature. Their father is quite right in
thinking them charming, and I quite agree
with him that intercourse with them would
do you a world of good."

Diana laughed again ; laughter was very
often on her lips.

I have no doubt they have every imaginable
beauty and attraction," she said ;
'but I have not the slightest desire to
make their acquaintance, nor have I any
intention of doing so."

You make me very angry," said her
mother.

I will go now," said the girl, taking
up the breakfast-tray. "I suppose you
will get up. We can talk about this
later."

She went clown-stairs into the sitting-room,
and stood looking out of the window.
It was a dismal winter morning, fog, melting
snow, and rain filled the street. She
stood for some time lost in thought, and
then with a quick graceful movement
turned to the inside of the room, saying
half aloud —

"I'll write now, while I am alone. I
would rather starve than go to live there."

She got writing materials and began her
letter. Judg-king; from the smile which so
often lit up her face as she wrote, she had
reason to be satisfied with her work ; but

there was that in her smile which made
one feel doubtful whether her uncle would
be equally pleased. When she had finished,
she folded and addressed her letter,
saying —

"Now, my sweet cousins, I wonder if,
after this, you will be so anxious to have
me, and yet it is polished and perfectly respectful,
in fact 'deadly polite;" opening
her letter again to once more run her eye
over its contents. " That is one of the
greatest benefits of civilisation ; it enables
you to sting people beyond endurance,
without casting a shadow on decency and
politeness."

She leaned her elbows on the table, and
catching sight of her own reflection in an
old-fashioned round mirror which hung

against the opposite wall, she smiled
frankly at herself.

"One is handsome' she murmured,
and the other is an exquisite fairy-like
creature. I am not afraid of them."
There was a pause, during which she continued
to gaze into her own eyes, reflected
in the old mirror. Then she spoke again,
She did not say they were clever," and
she smiled once more.

CHAPTEE III.

A FRIEND.

At that moment the maid-of- all-work
knocked at the door and said, " Dr Sherlock."


Diana rose from her seat in surprise.

'* Tom ! " she cried ; " what are you doing
at large at this time of day ? "

I am not busy this morning, and it is
so long since I saw you, I thought I would
just look in in passing. How is your
mother ? "

Very well, and I am very glad to see

you. There is something to relate, and I
want you to hear it from me first."

She told him about her uncle's letter,
and the proposal it contained, her expressive
face all alight with varying emotions
as she sat looking up at the tall young
man standing on the hearth-rug, his eyes
fixed upon her face, as if he did not want
to look at anything else.

He listened in silence : it was a way he
had, and sometimes Diana liked it, and
sometimes it roused her impatience. This
time she liked it. Her mother might comedown
at any moment, and she wanted to
tell her story first.

Tom was still silent when she had finished.
He was slow in everything, slowest
of all in speech. He was a tall plain

young man, with nothing remarkable about
him except a very beautiful complexion
and an odd drifting way of walking, which
made every one smile. He was a young
doctor, working his way steadily upwards,
with no relatives or connections to help
him on, accustomed to look to himself
alone, and quite satisfied with his solitary
position in the world. He had known the
Wentworth for some years before he had
come to settle in Whitfield. Diana and
he had been fast friends ever since she
was a child, and now the hope of some
day winning her for his wife was the
only feeling which equalled in strength
his wish to get on in his profession.

He remained silent for so long that at
last she looked up at him again, and said —

'* Well, are you too surprised to speak?"

*' I don't know. What are you going todo?"


Each word dropped slowly and separately
from his lips, and when he spoke,
one heard that his voice was very flexible.


"Mamma is in raptures; she is going to
accept."

Oh ! Do you think you will like it ? "

"I am not going."

You won't go ? "

I think I would rather starve. Ever
since I read the letter, one of my favourite
mottoes has been running in my head :
It is better to dwell in a forest, haunted
by lions and tigers, the trees our habitation,
flowers, fruits, and water for food.

the grass for a bed, and the bark of the
trees for garments, than to live among
relations after the loss of wealth.' That
is a pagan proverb, and I like it."

Good for the pagans," said Tom, slowly.
That is very vigorous ; but it wouldn't do
in our climate, you know."

No," said Diana ; " as a medical man,
of course, you could not countenance it.
But I can do what comes to the same
thing, — put up with anything rather
than go."

"But what shall you do?"

I have not quite made up my mind
yet ; but I think I shall get a situation of
some kind."

*' Oh ! " Dr Sherlock pulled his moustache
thoughtfully, and then ventured on

the mild remonstrance, "Do you think
your father would have liked it ? "

I don't think he would have objected,"
said Diana, with a little hesitation.

Well, but I do," replied Tom.

You see," said Diana, and the fact that
she condescended to an explanation impressed
Tom very much, — " you see, I
shall not be really working for my living.
I have plenty to fall back upon, and I
shan't trouble about a large salary. But
if I do definite work in exchange for my
maintenance, I shall be independent. I
will not receive benefits, I should be so
hampered afterwards. I should never be
able to do anything to which uncle objected,
because of past favours. I could
never endure it, — I must be free. I might

as well go to prison at once, as live in that
way. I should be chained hand and foot
with invisible chains."

What kind of man is your uncle ? "

'' I have never seen him."

Then he may be a monster for anything
we know."

He thinks I am a monster, and I will
tell you why. Years ago, six or seven,
before he had the accident which made
him the invalid he has been ever since,
he came over here to see mamma. We
were sent for, of course, and the boys
went, bribed by promises of gold watches
and chains, which, to be quite fair, were
honourably given to them. I remember
I had been in disgrace all day, and was
very angry with mamma, so I refused to

go. Repeated messages were sent ; but I
paid no heed to them, and when I heard
that uncle was coming to the schoolroom
to see me, since I would not go to see him,
I ran out of the house and stayed away
until I was sure he was gone. He was
deeply offended, of course. Can't you imagine
the rage of the rich man, accustomed
to have every one bow down before him,
when he was spurned by a poor relation ? "
She leaned back in her chair, and laughed
delightedly at this recollection of the past.
And I never feel sorry I did it : I have
no doubt it was a wholesome check to his
pride. He never forgave me, and I was
never invited to the Abbey. The boys
have been often, and always came home

laden with gifts, amongst which there was
VOL. I. c

never anything for me, to my great joy.
But you see he has borne malice all these
years, and would have gone on all his life,
if this had not happened. I would not
live in his house for the world. I should
feel suffocated in it."

Dr Sherlock's face had grown very tender
as he sat and listened to her. He
realised, not for the first time, how tempestuous
and impulsive this girl's nature
was ; how passionately she felt about even
little things ; and with how dogged a determination
she would do battle for what
she believed to be right, — and her right
was seldom that of the world at large. He
understood that she looked upon her isolation
and estrangement from her mother's
people as in some way conferring distinction

upon her, even though it had originated
in a mere fit of girlish naughtiness.
She was very full of faults, and she did
not make the most of such virtues as she
had ; yet Tom loved her dearly, and the
thought of such a girl going out to work
seemed pitiful to him. An older man
might have said it would bring her just
the discipline she needed ; but Tom did
not think of that. Nevertheless he felt
instinctively that this was not the right
moment for making the only alternative
proposal which seemed to him good. Instead
he said —

"No, you must not go: it is not the
right place for you ; you would not be
happy there. We must see what else can
be done. I will come in again some

evening, and we will talk things over
at our leisure. Perhaps your friend Mrs
Burland might be able to suggest something."


^'I will see. Must you go? Come in
again as soon as you have time."

One thing first, Diana," he said,
hesitatingly. "Don't speak so bitterly
of your mother : it is not fair, you
know."

"It is true," said Diana, knitting her
brows. "You know, Tom, that mamma
and I do not get on ; and that is another
reason why I will not go to Marshall
Mamma and I have lived together long
enough. It is her own doing; she herself
got me out of the way of living with
her."

I wish you would try to forget that,
or to look at it in a different light. Your
mother thought she was acting for the
best."

The girl's face hardened as she said —

She did it because she wanted to be rid
of me. She condemned me to four years
of misery, when there was no need for it,
and I shall never forgive her."

Well, good-bye, Di. Kemember me to
your mother, and tell her I will look in
again soon."

When he was gone, Diana stood by the
fireplace, with all the light gone out of her
face. He should not have called up those
recollections just then, because when her
father died she had made a resolution that
she would try to live on better terms with

her mother. A year had gone by since
then, and she had kept her resolution fairly
well, but she was not happy at home ; and
now that both her brothers had left England,
and a change was inevitable, she was
determined that the change should be to
her own advantage.

Mrs Wentworth was, in the opinion of
most people, a very charming woman. A
few, Tom Sherlock amongst them, thought
differently, but that was the general verdict.
Unfortunately she had never known
how to live in harmony with her daughter.
Diana had always been difficult — from her
earliest childhood a strange mixture of
apparently diametrically opposed qualities
and characteristics — a very ill-balanced
mind, many people said, and Mrs Wentworth

fully agreed with them. When
Diana was fourteen, her mother decided
that she had utterly outgrown home influences,
and that she must go to school
at once — to a school, moreover, where the
strictest discipline should be rigorously
enforced. Such a school was difficult to
meet with ; but the right place had eventually
been found, and for four years Diana
had led a life of pure misery in it. She
came home for her holidays, each time feeling
more embittered against her mother,
and the last two years had been spent
entirely at school. She knew that her
mother had sent her from home because
she had no sympathy with her, and she
judged her with the pitiless intolerance of
youth. This four years' banishment from

home-life had in some degree moulded her
character, and was partly answerable for
the cynical view she took of domestic
happiness, family affection, and other accepted
facts of life.

CHAPTEE lY.

A LOVER.

Diana got her way : Mrs Wentworth
yielded, after a not very strong show of
resistance. Secretly she was of her daughter's
opinion, that they had lived together
quite long enough ; and she was well aware
that life in the old home, with her brother
and two affectionate attentive nieces, would
be much more comfortable without this
daughter, between whom and herself there
seemed always a tacit coldness and misunderstanding.
She knew her brother would

not approve of Diana going out as a governess,
so she said very little about it.

Diana had no great difficulty in meeting
with a situation, for her father's will rendered
her independent of salary, although
she said that on principle she should take
what was offered to her. She had been
anxious to go on to the Continent, and
the situation she finally decided to take
was in Polish Prussia. Her employers
were called Camphausen, and they lived
at a place called Jacewo, a place of which
no one had ever heard, which considerably
increased Diana's wish to go there. There
was a large family — three sons and three
daughters, the eldest girls aged respectively
seventeen and sixteen. Diana was
to be companion-governess to them, and

to share the family life. She at once made
up her mind to go there, and her mother
only ventured the remonstrance that it
seemed a very long way off — three days'
journey, without stopping even a night on
the way. Diana bore down all opposition,
and without consulting any one, wrote to
Frau Camphausen to settle the matter,
and arrange the time and manner of her
journey.

She and her future employer had exchanged
letters by return of post, so that
the whole business had been settled in
about a fortnight. During; that time Dr
Sherlock had been very busy, and had had
no time to see the Wentworth, so that
he had heard nothing of Diana's plans.
He came in on the evening of the day

on which she had written to accept the
post, and she lost no time in telling him
all about it. They were alone, for Mrs
Wentworth was busy packing and arranging
for her removal to Garshill.

I am so glad it is settled," she said,
when she had finished. " I was afraid some
obstacle might arise at the last moment."

The animation in her face found no reflection
in her companion's features.

It is a long way," he said, slowly.

That is why I like it. I want to get
as far from here as I can — thousands of
miles away."

What for ? " asked the doctor, bluntly.

I am weary of this place. I never
want to see it again."

Oh ! " was all his reply ; but she heard

him murmuring: in his deliberate

'O

way:

"Bad for me that."

She said nothing, and presently he went
on —

I don't like the whole thing ; there is
something unnatural in it. You were
never made to work for your living ;
and I am very much opposed to your
going."

I am not going to work for my living :
it would be rather a dismal prospect if I
were, for they offer only a very small
salary."

"Suppose you fall ill."

Suppose the world comes to an end."

I don't know how your mother can
consent to your going."

Diana smiled as she answered —

She is glad."

I wish you would not speak in that
way," said Tom, looking distressed. "I
do not like to hear it."

What is the use of trying to disguise
the truth ? you might as well try to clothe
a deformed man so that he should look
straight. Mamma and I feel crookedly
towards one another, and always shall.
We cannot live together any longer."

*' What has happened ? Have you
quarrelled ? "

"What need is there to quarrel? It is
the constant dropping that wears away a
stone, not pouring a bucketful of water
over it."

He made no answer; he had scarcely
heard her. He was thinking that the

time to speak had come, and he felt
horribly shy, and very anxious and
doubtful as to the result. She said no
more, and he began to feel his way
cautiously by saying —

I do wish you would give this up,
Diana."

I can't, Tom. I wrote to Frau 
to say I will go as soon as she
wants me."

That doesn't matter. Write again, and
say that on consideration you don't want
to go so far from home, and she must find
somebody else."

"I am counting the days till I go," washer
only answer.

What do you know about these people?
They may be very disagreeable."

I have no doubt they are ogres at the
very least."

"You are running a great risk."

I run a risk every time I skate or
dance or drive. In fact," fixing her
beautiful eyes upon his face, "I must
go; if I gave it up I should have to go
and live at Garshill, and I will not do
that."

"No," he said; "that is not the only
other thing to do."

His heart beat very fast, and he felt
that now he must go on. But he got
little encouragement from the rather
puzzled look which came over her face.

I can't see any other," she said, at
last.

I'll show it to you, then. I don't want

you to go and live at Garsliill ; there is
no need. I want you to come and live
with me."

He was looking hard at her as he spoke ;
indeed there was an almost stony expression
in his eyes, so nervous and uncertain
did he feel. For a moment she returned his
gaze — wide open and uncomprehending ;
then a light seemed to break in upon her,
and she began —

*' Do you mean ? "

I mean that I want you to be my wife ;
yes, that is what I mean."

He heaved a great sigh of relief as he
realised that he had at last said what had
been on his heart, and he waited anxiously
for her answer.

Tom ! " she said, in a tone of utter

VOL. I. D

incredulity, which brought the colour into
his face.

What do you mean ? " he asked.
Why do you speak like that ? "

"0 Tom, how could you ever think of
such a thing ! "

"Do you mean to say that you have
never thought of it ? " he asked, completely
losing his head.

Thought of you as a husband ? never —
not once. As my comrade and my best
friend, who has often taken my side when
every one was against me, — I have always
thought of you like that, but never as
anything else."

I have never thought of anything but
that ; and won't you begin to think of it
too ? Do, Diana."

Oh no ; it is quite impossible."

Why ? " he asked, desperately. " I
don't see it."

I can't," she answered. " I simply
can't."

I have loved you so long and
so truly. I can't believe there is no
hope."

You would not like me to say ' Yes '
when I do not love you."

"No, I wouldn't — yes, I would. I
would rather have you in that way than
not at all."

"0 Tom, don't talk so foolishly! I
can't imagine what put such an idea into
your head ; you must have seen I never
thought of such a thing."

Oh, I know you are not to blame," he

said bitterly ; " but still I thought you
liked me."

I do — that is, I did ; but if you go on
talking like this, I shan't like you anymore."


Her eyes flashed, her foot tapped the
floor. Her temper was quick, and her
patience soon exhausted ; neither did Dr
Sherlock show to advantage as a disappointed
lover. He had nothing to say to
this outburst ; and after a pause she went
on —

If I married you, I should be chained
here for the rest of my life. I should live
and die here. I know nothing but Whitfield,
and I should never know anything
else."

"It is your home," he said, rather stolidly.

" I don't know what you mean by
talking in that way."

Of course it is my home : that is the
very reason. Do you never get tired of
home ? "

Never. I love it ; I become more and
more of a home-man every day. If you
would only marry me, it would be perfect."


She laughed a little unsteadily before
she answered —

You see how utterly unsuited we are
to one another. We should always be acting
in opposition to one another."

'' I don't think it follows at all. People
who marry should not be too much alike."

Still less, too much unlike," she answered
quickly, and then they were both

silent. Diana was sitting in a low chair
in front of the fire, and after her own last
words, she leaned back and clasped her
hands at the back of her head, so that
her arm hid her face from Tom. She
wished that he would go. Her nerves
were naturally highly strung, and just
lately she had been going through a good
deal. Tom's attitude and manner jarred
upon her, and made the temptation to
speak sharply almost irresistible. As the
minutes went on and he said nothing, she
began to find the silence almost more than
she could bear, and she bit her lip, in her
endeavour not to show her nervous irritation.
She was absolutely heart-whole ; no
man had as yet touched her feelings below
the surface, and she was powerless to enter

into Tom's state of mind. She only felt
angry with him for having spoken at all.
When she did at last speak, her words
were not calculated to comfort him.

*' I am so tired of Whitfield : that is
why I want to go to this particular place,
Jacewo. However disagreeable it and the
people may be, they will at least be fresh
and different from what I know here. If
only for that reason, they are to be preferred."


"That sounds as if you where fickle."

' I daresay I am fickle. I get tired of
things and people. I don't think I could
keep to the same affection for ever and
ever."

She was saying the first thing that came
into her head, out of pure contrariness, and

her mood was not improved by Tom saying
with great solemnity —

You are talking like a child : it is very
wrong to talk like that."

"It would be the height of folly to
marry now," she went on, ignoring his
interruption. " I have seen nothing of
life, and know very few people. I want
to see life, and it would be ridiculous to
tie my hands at the very beginning ; afterwards
I might easily meet some one I
liked better than you, which would be
very awkward."

It was natural to her to express herself
with a little exaggeration ; but her words
were not devoid of wisdom, except to
Tom, who did not like them at all, and
said —

I should think you have seen as many-men
as other girls, with your father and
brothers, and the open house you have
always kept."

"Do you think I call those people I
meet at dances and picnics and tennis
men ? You are the nearest to a man I
know here, but I can conceive that even
you might be surpassed."

You are very unkind ; and just let me
tell you what I have been thinking. You
say you are tired of your home, and this
place, and everything about you. I believe
that is only because you have never
been without them. I don't like this idea
of your going away in the least ; but we
might do this. I won't ask you to marry
me now. After all, though I could offer

you a home, it is not such as I should
like you to have, and I should not have
spoken so soon, if it had not been for this
scheme of yours. Go to this outlandish
place, since you have set your mind upon
it : it may teach you to appreciate what
you despise now. In the meantime, I will
work hard for us both. I am making two
hundred a-year clear now ; will you promise
to come home and marry me when I am
making four hundred ? "

"Am I to be banished out there till
then? Condemn me to transportation for
life at once, and have done with it."

Her scoff brought the hot colour into
his cheeks, and he answered warmly —

"You are unfair and insulting, Diana.
Do you suppose I have not got it in me

to make a decent livelihood by my profession
? "

I hope you may make a hundred thousand
a-year, as long as you don't ask me
to share it with you. I don't avant to
marry you, Tom. I wish you would take
my answer, and leave me."

I won't. You ought to marry, Diana.
You have got a lot of queer crotchets,
which only make you unhappy. If you
got married, you would soon forget them
in other things."

There was truth in what he said, but
there was also truth in Diana's answer.

You are not the man to make me forget
crotchets, Tom."

There was a note of sadness in her voice.
Beautiful and brilliant though she was, she

had too marked an individuality ever to
be popular. She had many acquaintances ;
but the portion of love which had fallen
to her share was small. She and her
mother were hopelessly at odds, and perhaps
each was equally to blame. Tom
was the first man who had asked her to
share his life, and although she rejected
his offer, she felt that he would probably
be the last. She was touched by his
faithfulness, and she inwardly marvelled
when he repeated —

Will you promise what I ask ? "
She did not speak. Some time before
she had risen from her chair, and now she
stood with one foot on the fender, her
elbows on the mantelpiece, her face shaded
by her hands. Some inspiration held Tom

from disturbing her meditations. He had
no idea what was passing in her heart, nor
how empty it felt, nor how the emptiness
ached in a dull gnawing way, as the
empty socket aches after the tooth has
been taken from it. At last she turned
round. Her face was pale, her eyes
burned beneath the contracted brows. She
looked at him for a moment. Her lips
were so firmly closed, it seemed as if she
had difficulty in opening them to speak.
At last she said —

I cannot engage myself to you ; but
if you like, I will promise "

"Yes — what?" he interrupted, eagerly.

Not to engage myself to any one else
until we meet again."

He had expected more, and his face fell.

Why do you offer this ? " he asked at
last.

He did not understand her in the least ;
he felt puzzled and uneasy at her manner.

*' To give you satisfaction. You have
been very kind to me, and we are old
friends ; you deserve something."

But I don't see that I am getting anything,"
he said, speaking more from embarrassment
than boldness.

Oh yes," with equal gravity, " you
are. As long as we do not meet — for this
promise dates from my leaving Whitfield
you will have the satisfaction of thinking,
when you do think of me, that I
am free, and if not engaged to you, at
least not engaged to any other man. And
so," with a smile beginning to hover round

her lips, '' if you are wise, we shall never
meet again."

Bitter disappointment kept him silent
for a minute. She had succeeded in rousing
his slow but lasting anger.

Is that your way of dismissing me ? "
he asked at length. "It is ingenious and
womanlike, truly."

"Softly, softly; will you have my
promise ? "

He looked at her, and his anger blazed
up anew. He had learnt his lesson at
last, and he saw there was no hope for
him. He felt just then as if he never
did wish to see her again, and if she
would not be his, he could at least prevent
her marrying any one else. That
was something : his blood boiled up, and

speaking quickly, almost savagely, as if he
feared she might change her mind, he said —

"Yes ; I will have it. Promise me that
after you leave Whitfield you will engage
yourself to no man till we have met
again. Get a Bible, and swear it to me."

"Nay, I will not swear. You often
call me a pagan, and with a pagan her
word is her bond. I promise on my
honour that, after leaving AVhitfield, I
will engage myself to no man until you
and I have met again."

I am satisfied," he said, solemnly ;
and she, having recovered her spirits,
laughed at his gravity. There was no
weak place in her heart, and she gave
the promise with the greatest assurance.

Directly after this he went away, and

as he went out at the house - door, he
met a young lady coming in, with whom
he exchanged salutations. She said —

I suppose Diana is at home ; " and on
his saying she was, the girl went forward
unannounced, and knocked at the drawing-room
door.

Diana greeted her visitor with some
surprise.

"You, Amy!" she said; "what has
brought you out at this time of night ? "

I have not seen you for a week, and
I wanted so much to hear if you have
come to any arrangement with those
German people."

She sat down as she spoke. She was a
fair girl of middle height, with undecided
manner and speech, and yet with some-vol.

I. E

thing in her face which seemed to denote
obstinacy. She formed a strange contrast
to Diana, yet she was the only girl in all
Whitfield who stood on terms of anything
like intimacy with her. The
deeper feeling was on the side of Amy
Fairbairn, who often served as a vent to
Diana's overwrought feelings. It was unfortunate
that she had come just now ;
Diana had not yet recovered from her
interview with Dr Sherlock, and she was
not in the gentlest mood. She told Amy
that she was going to Jacewo, and Amy
said —

How dull it will be when you are gone !
But perhaps you will not like the place,
and will be back again soon."

If my esteemed friend Tom Sherlock

could have had his way, I should stay
here for ever. He has just asked me to
marry him."

Diana, I am so glad ! I hope you
accepted. Did you accept? It would be
so delightful if we lived in the same town :
we might be married on the same day.
If you had to wait, I should not mind
waiting too."

Take care how you make rash promises.
Tom explained his position to me very
clearly, and had I accepted him we might
have looked forward to a possibility of
marriage in the next world, it would certainly
never have taken place in this.
If you and your Cartwright decided to
wait for me, you would have every prospect
of dying an old maid."

Mr Cartwright was the curate, to whom
Amy was engaged ; waiting for preferment
as a necessary preliminary to marriage.

You say such strange things, Diana.
Is Dr Sherlock so poor ? "

*' Very poor ; but he had the generosity
to offer me a share of his poverty."

Then you refused him ? " said Amy,
blankly.

"Yes; although he made another generous
proposal. He wanted me to wait
for him out at Jacewo ; no doubt he
thinks it is a safe place, where I shall
not meet with the temptation of a more
brilliant offer."

I am sorry," said Amy. " His practice
is here, and so is Eeggie's curacy. We might
have lived here together all our lives."

"How is your Reggio?" asked Diana.
"Is he any better?"

Yes, he is better ; but there is still
infection, and I may not go near him.
It is very hard I can do nothing for him.
When mamma is poorly, I brush and comb
her hair gently, it soothes her so ; but I
cannot even do that for him."

Of course not. He might think you
wished to assume the mastery, if you began
to comb his hair. It would be most unwise,
and might cause your engagement
to be broken off."

She spoke with a gravity which made
Amy feel uncertain as to her meaning.
Strong as was her affection for Diana,
she was often at a loss to know whether
she was in jest or earnest.

I heard of such a sad thing yesterday,"
she said presently. "Mr White of the
Carlton Road Bank has died suddenly, in
the prime of life, leaving a widow and
a large family."

I wonder why it is," said Diana, " that
men with wives and large families so often
die in the prime of life. Poor men, I
mean, only poor men have those large
families. I suspect they do it in self-defence.
They see they have got into
a hopeless muddle, with only one way
out of it comfortably to themselves, and
they naturally take that way, and leave
the others to get on as they can."

I don't think such a way would be
natural at all ; it would be very selfish."

It would be natural because it is selfish."

She spoke almost gloomily. She was
leaning forward with her chin in her hand,
her dark eyes looking into the glowing
coals, her mouth set in a cynical curve.

I am very sorry for Mrs White,"
said Amy, '' she is such a weak, delicate
woman. If you think like that, it will
be useless for me to ask you what I was
going to."

"Do you mean to join in a subscription
? "

*eyes; I am trying to get a little sum
together."

"I can't help you. It would only
encourage others to do the same. If I
ever found a charity, it shall not be for
destitute clergymen or poor widows' children,
but for old maids who have fought

their way through life against great odds,
and have at last come to the end of their
resources."

Amy said nothing. She was one of
those people who remain comparatively
indifferent to the privations and sorrows
of older people, but who " cannot bear to
see the little children suffer." Besides,
she took no interest in old maids. Who
does ? She thought Diana hard and cold,
and rose from her seat, saying —

I shall go home. I can't talk to you
any more. You are not nice to-night."

I will not keep you if you would
rather go. Good night. I will let you
know when I leave home."

When she was alone again she resumed
her seat by the fire, looking gloomily

into it ; but lier thoughts, whatever they
might be, were not uttered aloud.

Amy walked home in a glow of indignation
against Diana and of satisfaction
with herself. Yet every now and
then the thought of her friend's deep sad
eyes and gloomy speech penetrated to
her heart and made her feel uncomfortable,
and as she walked along she murmured
—

"Poor Diana ! I wish she were happier,
and I believe she would have been if she
had accepted Dr Sherlock."

CHAPTER y.

THE END OF A JOURNEY.

New Year's Eve was the date fixed for
Diana to arrive at Jacewo, and a fortnight
before that day she left "Whitfield
and went to her friend Mrs Burland, in
London : a day or two later, Mrs Wentworth
went to Garshill. Diana could not
have sent her last days in England with
any more congenial companion than Antoinette
Burland ; she entered fully into
the difficulty of the girl's position, and
sympathised entirely with her refusal to

go to Garshill. She could sway Diana
when no one else had the slightest influence
over her, and Diana trusted her
implicitly. Antoinette had opposed to
the utmost Mrs Wentworth's decision to
send her daughter to school, and although
her counsel had been disregarded, Diana
had never forgotten that the effort had
been made. The oases in that four years'
desert of existence had been Antoinette's
visits, letters, and hampers. Now she
discussed her plans with a sympathy and
insight which soothed Diana's wounded
spirit, and which not even Amy had
shown. They had parted friends, and
Amy's last words had been to urge
Diana to bear in mind her promise, that
when she returned to England, her first

visit must be paid to the future Mrs
Cartwright. Mrs Burland's only misgiving
was regarding the long journey, more
than half - way across Europe, and she
was anxious that Diana should let Mr
Burland see her safely to her destination.
She scouted the idea, and would so evidently
have been angry if the plan had
been persisted in, that Antoinette let it

drop.

• • • • • •

She had made her last change in trains ;
in less than an hour she would be at
Jacewo. She was alone in the railway
carriage, and she let down the window
and leaned out. She had passed through
many patches of wood at an earlier stage
of her journey ; now she seemed to be

travelling through an endless forest. The
tall pine-trees rose straight and motionless,
almost within reach of her hand. She
crossed the carriage and leaned from the
opposite window, the same sight met her
eyes. The train was running on a single
line, which went straight on into the forest.
She looked back, the trees had closed in
upon the narrow road, the line traced
by the finger of civilisation. She looked
forward, and at no great distance the
railroad appeared to melt into the trees ;
the train seemed imprisoned in the heart
of the forest. A chill feelings of loneliness
crept over her, and for the first
time she began to ask herself where she
was going, and what would be the end
of this long journey. Jacewo I Where

was Jacewo ? She did not know. How
was she to know when she had reached
Jacewo, and what kind of a- place would
it be ? She could not tell ; she knew
nothing of it all. She was going she
knew not whither. A feeling came over
her that she was going where strange
things would befall her ; as though she
had turned a corner in the road of life,
and unproved sights and experiences lay-before
her ; as though she had entered a
new world, and a voice which she did
not know, yet could not disobey, was
calling her to advance in the darkness.

The moon rose higher, and she could
see more plainly. From time to time
there came a clearing amongst the trees,
and, stretching away in the distance, she

saw glittering white expanses, frozen tracts
of water which occur here and there in
the forest, now silvered by the light of
the rising moon. She looked at them in
fascination, with this strange feeling of
awe growing stronger and stronger in
her heart, until at last the trees grew
thinner, the train slackened speed, and
at last stopped. She saw a kind of
shanty, and a platform of rough earth
frozen hard as iron, and then she hastily
looked at her watch : it was already some
minutes past the time when the train
was due at Jacewo, and she again put
her head out of the window and asked
of a man who was running past if this
station was Jacewo. He answered " Yes,"
without pausing or turning his head, and

she collected her things and got out of
the train.

Her luggage placed safely on the ground,
and the train having steamed slowly out
of sight round an immense curve, which
made it look like an enormous serpent,
she turned to a group of men who stood
near, looking at her with a good deal of
curiosity, and, according to her instructions,
asked if the Camphausens' carriage
was at the station. One of the men
shook his head, and when, at his request,
she repeated the name, he said he knew
it not, he had never heard it before.
The other men drew near, and took part
in the conversation. A few questions,
asked in Diana s quick, rather imperious
way, and in German which, though per-feet

in grammar and structure, betrayed
her nationality in accent and tone, brought
out the fact that this station was not
Jacewo, but only a kind of small goods
station, little more than a signal-box ; that
the train she had left was the last ; and
that there was no village anywhere near,
where she could get either shelter or a
conveyance to take her to the end of her
journey.

She did not hesitate to reproach the
men with their perfidy in letting her
leave the train and giving her her luggage.
The culprit shrugged his shoulders,
and turning to his companions, a sort of
council was held, in which the deliberations
were carried on in Polish. Diana,
being left to herself, also set her wits to

VOL. I. F

work, although she had told the men
that as they had got her into this difficulty,
she left it to them to find hera
way out. It had just occurred to her
that she might be able to telegraph to
the Camphausens and ask them to send
the carriage on to her, and she was just
going to make the suggestion when one
of the men turned to her and said he
thought it possible that she might be
able to finish her journey at once. It
appeared that a gentleman had driven
over from Jacewo in the afternoon, it was
not known if he had gone back. If he
had not, they knew where to find him,
and they were sure he would be glad to
share his carriage with her; should one
of them go and see after him ?

Certainly," she said ; and when the
messenger had departed, the other men
invited her to go into the signal-box until
he returned. She was accommodated with
a chair by the stove, and sat looking out
of the window into the forest. The moon
had now risen fully, and the night was
almost as light as day, with a cold clear
light in which the pine-trees looked like
ghosts, and the perfect stillness of the
place was almost oppressive. She began
to believe in the actual existence of bears
and wolves, not as likely visitants on this
particular night, but as living creatures
with an existence outside books. Her
companions talked together in Polish, and
from time to time addressed her in German.
The messenger had already been

absent some time, and they spoke openly
of the small chance of the gentleman from
Jacewo being still in the neighbourhood.
Fearless by nature, Diana felt no terror at
her position : it never occurred to her that
these men could have sinister intentions
towards her, and she was perfectly ready
to intrust herself to the care of the unknown
man, whoever he might be, il he
were still at hand and willing to be burdened
with her. She only felt annoyance
at being stopped so near the end of
her long journey, for she was tired ; and
also, after having insisted on travelling
alone, it was a little humiliating to find
herself in this difficulty, and she quickly
made up her mind never to mention it to
her friends in England.

She was warm and comfortable, and as
she sat looking out on the mysterious
forest, wondering how the Garlands were
spending this New Year's Eve, and how
they imagined her to be spending it, the
door opened, and the messenger came in,
and communicated with his fellows in his
own tongue. Then he turned to her and
told her he had had a long search for " den
Herr Ingenious," as he called him, but he
had at length found him, and he was perfectly
willing to accommodate her in his
carriage, which was even now at the door.
If she would take her seat in it, he would
join her in a moment ; he was still in the
forest.

She lost no time ; she was out of doors
almost before he had finished speaking,

and the men followed her and began to pack
in her luggage. The carriage was a truly
aboriginal vehicle, like an immense basket
on wheels, filled with straw, and with a
plank placed across it for a seat. In front,
on a plank to himself, sat the driver, an
aged Pole, in sheepskin coat and cap and
green woollen gloves. He appeared to have
the utmost confidence in his own power of
guiding the four small restive horses which
were harnessed to this primitive chariot.

Diana stood looking on at the group of
men, who, with many exclamations, and
what seemed the exercise of superhuman
strength, were getting her boxes into the
cart. She was smiling at them in some
derision, when, out of the shadow of the
trees, a man emerged into the moonlight.

He saw her before she saw him, and he
stood still for a minute to look at the
English girl standing there alone, the
spirited bearing of her slight figure noticeable
even in the muffling of the long
garment, trimmed and lined with fur,
which she wore. (It was a parting gift
from Mrs Burland, and Diana had caught
it closely round her, to protect her against
the stinging cold.) This man was accustomed
to see and judge at a moment's
notice, or even less ; and his keen eyes
ran rapidly over the girl's face and figure,
as she stood there unconscious of his presence.
He noted everything, the beautiful
proud features, the slight touch of haughtiness
in the face, caused by the cutting of
her nostrils and lips, the exquisite setting

of the head, the resolution and courage
expressed in her attitude. Her face was
half turned towards him, and he could
see both her smile and the brilliance and
depth of her eyes. It was a beautiful
sight, and as he looked at her, he muttered
—

"Is it possible? There must be some
mistake."

What he saw stirred him ; there remained
yet to hear her voice, and he was
on the point of stepping forward to accost
her, when the men, having accomplished
their task, fell back, and he saw her take
out her purse.

"That, too, is an indication of character,"
he thought, and waited a moment.


She took out a piece of twenty marks,
he saw the gleam of gold in her hand, and
gave it to one of the men, saying in German,
which surprised him by its purity —

"Divide it amongst you, and drink tome
: it is New Year's Eve ; wish that I may
have everything I want in the new year."

"We will wish you a handsome husband,
Fraulein," said the man, touching
his cap.

A husband ? Ah no," with a little
laugh, — " that I could have ; wish me
everything I want''

The listener raised his eyebrows and
smiled as he heard her. She must be very
young. In spite of the dignity of her
bearing and her chiselled features, youth
was in every line of her face and figure.

She had just been delivered from a very
awkward position, and the chances were a
thousand to one that she would never set
eyes on any of these men again. The
little scene showed that heart and hand
were equally open.

But he had seen enough. He came upto
her and raised his hat, saying —

'you are the lady who got out hereby
mistake ? "

*you are English!" she said, turning
to him in her quick way.

'why, yes; did they not tell you?
I was told at once that you were a compatriot."


They did not say what you were ; they
spoke of you exclusively as the ' engineer.' "

I am an engineer, and an English one."

"I am SO glad. I took it for granted
you would be German, and I feared you
would smoke, — I do so dislike tobacco."

He bit his lip to hide a smile. He liked
to hear her speak ; her voice was clear and
delicate, suggestive of lifelong intercourse
with people of culture.

It is so kind of you to give me a seat
in your carriage," she went on. "I am
exceedingly grateful to you."

I beg you will not mention it ; I am
only glad it is in my power to do you any
little service. And now, my men," he
went on, for they were again occupied with
her boxes, " make haste, or the lady will be
frozen."

He turned to help Diana into the carriage,
saying —

You had better take your seat at once :
it is fearfully cold, and you must be tired.
Are you properly wrapped up ? What is
this made of ? " touching her long mantle.

It is lined with fur," she answered,
just turning up a corner of it that he
might see.

Sit at this side," he said, as she was
moving to the other end of the plank,
having got into the vehicle with perfect
ease and disregard of his offer of help.
We shall drive fast, and the wind comes
like a knife across the plain. If you keep
at this side, I shall somewhat shelter you
from it."

They were off, flying along the highroad
at the reckless rate at which Polish
horses generally go, and Diana, feeling

very wide awake and intensely alive to
everything around her, sat upright on her
hard jolting seat, and let her eyes wander
over the wide monotonous plain over
which they were driving. Everything
was distinctly visible in that clear moonlight,
and distant objects looked strangely
near. She shivered as she looked. It
was so silent, so lonely, so unlike anything
she had ever seen before. She
glanced at her companion ; she had not
yet seen his face clearly, and she could
not see it now. His fur cap was pulled
down on to his head, and the fur collar
of his overcoat was turned up to his ears.
He was tall, and she liked his voice and
manner, with a touch of authority in it
which seemed natural to him. He sat in

silence, his chin sunk in the fur on his
coat, his hands buried deep in his pockets.
He appeared quite unconscious of her
presence, which was a new experience to
her, and caused her to smile.

While she was looking at him, he
suddenly raised his head, and his keen
grey eyes met hers. He looked straight
at her for a moment, and then said —

"Well, and where am I to set you
down when we get to Jacewo ? I did
not hear where you are going to."

I am going to some people called
Camphausen ; " and as he said nothing,
she went on, " do you know them ? "

Yes, I know them. They told me they
were expecting an English lady to live
with them; but I had forgotten, and it

would never have entered my head that
you were the lady."

Ashy not ? Do I not look like one ? "

Heaven forbid ! But there are ladies
and ladies : they have different manners,
and one associates a certain manner with
a certain calling. If I may say so, you
do not look in the least like a governess."

I am not one yet ; I do not begin till
tomorrow."

And you have never been one before ? "

I will not try to conceal that this is
my first attempt."

Do you know anything of these
people ? " he asked, after a pause.

Nothing at all. Since you do, will
you tell me something about them?"

I know nothing to tell. They are not

interesting ; they are very respectable, and
think very highly of themselves."

Respectable people always do ; they
mould their opinions on their reputation."

"Are you really going to be the
children's governess ? "

"I am really. Perhaps you do not
think I look competent, and I must
frankly confess that I have no certificates."


"I do not think you are accustomed
to failure," was his somewhat ambiguous
reply, and then his chin sank back into
his coat-collar, and he said no more.
Neither did Diana speak again ; the only
human sound came from the old driver,
who urged on his horses ever faster and
faster, till they seemed to fly over the

ground. Presently " the engineer " roused
himself, and pointed to where at some
distance before them a group of lights
was visible near the ground.

Those are the lights of the Jacewo
railway station," he said ; " we shall soon
be at your destination now."

Ere long they reached the railway, and
drove across the line ; the barriers — tall,
tapering white poles — were lifted, and
showed sharply against the clear sky.
Immediately afterwards they crossed another
line, then the ground rose a little,
and in another moment they stopped.

The house-door was opened almost before
they had left the carriage, and a
bewildering scene of arrival and explanation
followed. Diana was aware that she

VOL. 1. G

was shaking hands with her countryman,
and thanking him for what he had done
for her, then the door closed after him
with a bang, and he was gone.

CHAPTER VI.

JACEWO.

By the time Diana had been a month at
Jacewo, only pride prevented her from
shaking the dust of the God-forgotten
spot from her feet, and turning her steps
elsewhere. Every one who knew her had
opposed her coming out here, and she had
persisted in it ; she was resolved, therefore,
to bear a great deal before confessing that
they had been right, and that she could
hold out no looser.

She did not get on with the Camp-houses.

Frau Camphausen had never
been pleasant, and lie could not resist
telling Diana that she had all along been
opposed to her coming, from the moment
she had seen her photograph. She had
only reluctantly yielded to her husband's
representations that Miss Wentworth's
name would be such excellent practice
for the children. The children themselves
found no more favour in her eyes : she
was not naturally fond of children, and
this particular family possessed characteristics
and qualities which roused her
deepest dislike and repulsion. The four
younger children attended the local day-schools,
the two eldest, Minna and Hedwig,
studied with her, and she spoke English
to, and superintended the preparation of

the lessons of all. All the children inherited
their mother s handsome features ;
but they were ill brought up, ill-mannered,
and selfish. They had been governed
from babyhood by force, and understood
no other authority. The two elder girls,
being of an age to appreciate personal
advantages, were jealous of her. Her life
was very monotonous, and the social
pleasures hinted at in Frau Camphausen s
letters consisted almost entirely of sitting
in the drawing-room in the evening and
plying her needle. Frau Camphausen was
a magnificent animal, attached to her
children solely by her physical relationship
to them, ambitious that they should
do well at school, and make a good show
in the world, because if they failed, the

discredit of their failure would be reflected
upon herself. In their home
training, morals and mind had been left
to take care of themselves, and all the
energy had been concentrated in bringing
their physical points to perfection — as,
for instance, they always wore strong
walking-boots in the house, lest their feet
should deteriorate in shape ; and Diana's
slender and daintily slippered feet were
regarded by the girls with envy, and by
their mother with disapproval. Their
dresses were ugly and unsuited to their
age; but they were pretty enough to
triumph over that, and had not thought
much about it, until Diana came with her
well-made gowns and indescribable air of
wearing them. All her ways and works

were opposed to theirs, and it was no
wonder she did not fall into her place in
the family. But Frau Camphausen bore
with her. Her music and singing were
good, and her English and French irreproachable
; and she had accepted without
a murmur a salary which was small even
for a private governess in Germany.

Jacewo was an ugly little town, with
narrow squalid streets, and no public
buildings of any size except the prison,
from which prisoners now and then escaped,
and fled over the frontier into
Russia. There was a shabby town-hall,
a shabbier synagogue (half the population
were Polish Jews), and a Lutheran church,
which surpassed even the other buildings
in shabbiness. There was also a ruined

Polish church, standing a little way out
of the town, with the remains of a square
tower, upon which storks built their nests ;
and a burial-ground, which was strewn
with bones and skulls which had been
thrown up when, a grave being full, the
latest occupant was evicted, to make room
for a new-comer. There was a cemetery,
but that, too, was overcrowded, and a new
one had been made ; but, as Diana observed
in the sarcastic letter which she
wrote to Mrs Burland, descriptive of her
new surroundings, it seemed as yet designed
more for the use of the living than
the dead, for while no one had been buried
in it, it contained live garden-seats, and
was used as a kind of public promenade.
The town stood in the vast plain of Eastern

Europe, in surroundings dreary beyond
description. In that wonderfully
clear atmosphere one could see for many
miles. Diana, standing at the schoolroom
window, could see the train coming in
from Pawlowsk half an hour before it
reached Jacewo. The only variety, and
that was repeated until it became monotonous,
was the vast stretches of dark
pine - wood. Lines of pine - trees fringed
the horizon, and patches of the same
formed the only shadows in all that
shadeless land. There was something
impressive in the very flatness and monotony
of the landscape — on so large a
scale it was rescued from the commonplace.
Diana, although by nature a lover
of the hills, did not escape the influence

and fascination of this " fringe of Siberia " ;
the character of the country got into her
mind and coloured her thoughts.

In spite of being uncomfortable, and
aware that she was not regarded with
favour by her employers, she was not
unhappy. She was eager and speculative
by nature, and the difference in family
life, with the relics of Polish manners and
customs which came under her notice, interested
her; and she was too indifferent
to the people among whom for the present
her lot was cast, to be disturbed by
their want of affection for herself. She
lived curiously apart from them, and was
affected merely objectively by what she
saw. She felt no disgust or concern of
any kind when she saw Herr Nowakow-

sky, seated opposite to her, take a boiled
egg from its cup, divide it lengthwise
by a cunning stroke of his broad-bladed
table-knife, scoop out half the egg, and
tip it down his throat from the end of
the same knife. She only looked at him
with curiosity and interest, and wondered
how he did it, and whether he had had
to practise very long before he succeeded
in accomplishing the feat without any
personal risk. She did not lose her self-control
or equanimity When she saw Frau
Camphausen kick her eldest son, a lad of
thirteen, in a rage, or thump her eldest
daughters shoulders with her fist, when
in the same frame of mind. She only
raised her eyebrows, lifted her lip in a
half smile, and generally left the room

with lier head a little higher than usual.
She listened with absorbed interest when
she heard the youngest boy (a child of
eight, and the most inveterate little liar
that ever breathed) invent a long and
complicated string of falsehoods in answering
his mother's questions as to why
he had been late in coming home from
school. She never complained of the
children to their mother, she never offered
any remark on their manners and customs
; but her face was very expressive,
and take it all in all, she was amply
revenged for Frau Camphausen's often
studied rudeness and neglect, by the
embarrassment which appeared in that
portly lady's face when, in the midst of
some lecture, chastisement, or catechism,

she encountered Miss Wentworth's calmly
critical eyes and composed countenance,
with its half-amused, half-cynical expression.
Diana herself never punished the
children ; she taught them what she had
undertaken to teach, but declined to interfere
in any other department.

Her compatriot she had not seen again,
but she had heard of him from time to
time, and the information she got may be
condensed into the following : —

He was an engineer employed by the
German Government to construct a new
line of railway between Jacewo and Berg,
a town on the Russian frontier. His name
was John Garthwaite, and he came from
England, but from which part of England
no one seemed to know. He divided his

time between Jacewo and Berg, and when
at Jacewo lived at the Adler, the principal
hotel in the place. He could visit at any
of the houses in the town ; but availed himself
of his privileges to only a very limited
extent, being by nature (so Diana was
told) reserved and self-contained, to a degree
unusual even among Englishmen. He
was shut out from a good deal of social
pleasure because he did not play cards,
and cards were the chief amusement of
the people of Jacewo. Women played as
vigorously as men, and Frau Camphau-
sen's bosom friend, Frau Olawska, would
sit down to the whist-table in the evening,
and remain there all night until eleven
o'clock the next morning ; but then she
had no family, as Frau Camphausen always

said in defence of her friend. As
Diana merely received the information
which was volunteered to her without
asking any questions, she got no idea of
Mr Garthwaite's character. It appeared
that, the very day after her arrival at
Jacewo, he had gone to Berg, and had
been there ever since, nor was he expected
to return for some time yet.

As the weeks went by, she began to
wish Mr Garth wait e would come back.
She was tired of the Camphausens, and
he would be some one fresh, and then she
had never really seen him ; she would not
know him again were she to see him, except
from the fact that he would probably
look like an Englishman. She thought
that the situation was rather amusing,

and she also enjoyed the reflection that
nobody else knew there was any situation,
for in her letters to England she had mentioned
neither the mistake she had made,
nor the existence of such a person as John
Garthwaite. Now, she felt herself in the
position of the King of Bavaria, sole spectator
of a most interesting drama, arranged
for her enjoyment alone, and upon which
the curtain might go up at any moment.

CHAPTEE Iii.

THE Curtain RISES.

It had been with o;reat unwillingness that
John Garthwaite had gone to Berg, the
morning; after his meetings with Diana.
He very much disliked the whole 
family. He had heard all about
their project of having an English governess
; they had taken him into their confidence,
and had discussed the subject in
his presence frequently, with constant appeals
to his judgment and opinion. In
the midst of it he had gone to Berg for

VOL. I. H

some time, and when lie came back the
matter had been settled, and he heard
with complete indifference that a suitable
English lady had been met with and engaged.
Later, he was told with some excitement
that she was to arrive on New
Year's Eve ; but he had straightway forgotten
all about it. As far as 'miss
Yentvort" occupied his mind at all, she
figured as a middle-aged woman, worn with
toil, and hardened by a long struggle to
keep her place in the world; with few
ideas, and those narrowed by limited experience
and monotony of existence — in
fact, the typical "governess," as she existed
years ago. The governess had come ;
by an accident he had made her acquaintance
before she had met her employers

and their family. He had seen her, and
talked to her, and he would never forget
her; he felt that at once. After leaving
the Camphausens' house, he had gone to
his hotel, and had sat for hours smoking
and lost in thought. He wondered how
Diana would find herself in the new life
and surroundings. He had had no experience
of governesses, and while admitting
his ignorance, he could not persuade
himself that the young lady whose
acquaintance he had just made was a fair
representative of the class. She had none
of the attributes of a woman accustomed
to earn her own living. The very douceur
she had given the men at the station
showed either culpable recklessness or
the comfortable knowledge that there was

plenty more money where that came from.
He knew very little about women's dress ;
but he had an idea that the garment in
which Diana had been wrapped was a
costly affair, and that the fur with which
it was lined, as she had so obligingly
turned up a corner of the mantle that
he might see, was very superior to anything
he had so far seen worn by the
ladies of Jacewo. He wondered who and
what she was ; he thought of her all evening
; he could not get her out of his head.
He wondered what she was doing at that
moment. Had she had supper? Was
she answering the questions which would
be poured upon her? Had she gone to
bed early, tired with her long journey?
Was she sad, disappointed, home-sick?

Or was she curious, alive, and interested ?
Most probably the latter, he thought ; and
he hoped it was so.

He could not help thinking of her : he
had known very few women, and none
like Miss Wentworth. She was a new
type and a revelation to him. He was
the second son of a Yorkshire dalesman ;
his parents had been middle-aged when
he was born, and by the time he was of
an age to take notice of people's appearance,
his mother was merely a hard-featured
woman, old beyond her years,
and without beauty of any kind to arrest
the eye. There was his cousin Susan,
who was like his sister, but she had lived
at his home since she was a child, and
was fast becoming what his mother was.

It is true he had once loved, and his love
had been a bonny lass ; but that was over
now, and she had been in no way like
this girl he had just seen. He had led
too busy a life to think about women.
His father had been an unsuccessful man,
poor, and as proud as unsuccessful people
are apt to be. He had shunned intercourse
with his neighbours, and had
bidden his boys do the like. The elder
son was at home, — he had inherited the
bit of land at his father's death. John
had been early apprenticed to the engineer
from whom he had learnt his profession.
He had worked hard, for it had
been made clear to him betimes that he
would have no one to look to but himself;
and as his calling had been his own

choice, persisted in against the will of his
parents, he had been expected to justify
that choice by rising high in his profession.
There was every external inducement,
added to natural love, to work hard,
and for years he had given little thought
to anything outside his work. Now he
had his reward. Though still young —
thirty-three — he had risen high. His
name was known beyond the limits of his
own country ; his opinion had an influence
out of all proportion to his years ; and he
was consulted and deferred to on matters
of great public weight in his profession.
He had made a good deal of money already,
and there was every prospect of
his becoming a rich man among rich men.
At present he chiefly valued his .money

for a reason which was known to no one
but himself. It was thirteen years since
he had been home; but he knew the immense
disadvantages under which his
brother laboured, and he foresaw that,
sooner or later, he would come to the
end of things, and would be obliged to
sell the old farmstead. Few people ever
heard John Garthwaite speak of his birthplace
; but none the less had he a deep
and abiding love for it, and it was his intention
to become the purchaser whenever
his brother should want to sell it. Up to
the present time, he had had no other
thought in* amassing money. He knew
the time to which he looked forward would
come, and it was his intention to be
ready for it. Thus, almost his whole life

had been spent in work, with rare and
short intervals of leisure, leaving little time
for intercourse with women ; and to tell
truth, he had not hitherto regarded this
deprivation in the light of a hardship.
That bygone experience had left a bad
taste in his mouth, and he rather shunned
than sought them, nor had the ladies of
Jacewo been destined to correct his taste.
Hence the fact that, in speaking to women,
he forgot to lay aside the manner he wore
in talking to men. The air of authority,
and abruptness of speech, which had
pleased the one, Diana, offended the 
of Jacewo and elsewhere, and
had earned for him the reputation of being
rough and disagreeable. He forgot to
make allowances for their weakness, orin

deference to custom, to outwardly yield
the point which he inwardly maintained.
He contradicted them, judged them on
their merits, and exposed their shortcomings
in a way which was rendered even
more exasperating by the way in which
it was done, which showed a perfect unconsciousness
of having offended. A fine
lady, with languid airs, and indifference
to everything which was worth knowing
and doing, was an abomination to him ;
and there had been a crispness and energy
in Diana's speech and action which
had impressed him favourably.

He did not forget her when he went
to Berg. He did not believe she would
be happy or even comfortable with
the Camphausens, and he often found

himself wondering what she was doing
and how she was getting on. He felt
that he had had a hand in bringing her
to Jacewo, that he was in a measure responsible
for her safety and wellbeing
while she was there, partly because he
was her countryman, the only one of her
nation in the place. The feeling that he
had some one dependent upon him was
new to him, and filled him with an odd
pleasure. He enjoyed the feeling for sometime,
and at the end of a month, made
up his mind to go back to Jacewo, and
see for himself how she was faring. He
had not intended to go so soon ; but he
told himself that was not at present to
the point, and he went as soon as he
could.

He reached Jacewo in the evening, and
having decided to take the earliest opportunity
of paying his respects to Miss
Wentworth, he contrived to make a spare
half-hour on the following afternoon. He
was just pushing open the garden-gate,
when the house-door opened, and Frau
Camphausen appeared.

She expressed surprise and pleasure at
seeing him; and as it never entered into
her head that any one not coming to see
her husband on business could be calling
upon any one but herself, she said at
once —

You see I am going out. I am going
to take coffee with Frau Olawska. Will
you walk with me so far, and then perhaps
you will come in too ? "

Heaven forbid I " thought Garth. waite ;
but he only said —

I am going to call on Miss Wentworth,
and ask how she is. This is the first opportunity
I have had."

The German lady's face and tone
changed at once.

Oh, Miss Wentworth ! " she said. '' It
is unfortunate ; but she is out walking with
the children."

He felt some surprise, for he knew the
ways of the family, and that this was not
an hour when it was usual for the children
to be out walking.

*' Perhaps she may have come in again,"
he said.

*' She has not come in again," frowning,
and with a sharp tone in her voice.

*' Besides," lie went on, "I do not
wish Miss Wentworth to have visitors.
It will take her mind off her
work."

I see. Has Miss Wentworth many
friends here?"

She knows no one, nor do I think it
necessary she should. You are the first
person who has asked for her."

"Then you don't think it would be
pleasant for her to feel that she has one
acquaintance here ? "

His tone was calm and mild. Frau
Camphausen walked straight into the trap
set for her.

She came to teach, not to enjoy herself;
and when I have made a rule, I adhere
to it under all circumstances. If you

see Miss Went worth, it will be only in
my presence."

"You are really very kind," he said,
serenely. "I should be sorry to put you
to any inconvenience."

"I am sure you would," with a happy
smile ; " and as I am very much engaged,
it will be better for you not to call on
her again. At the same time, I will
give her any message you intrust tome."


Thank you ; but I have no message."

"Ah, then I will not mention your
coming this afternoon ; it might Unsettle
her."

She had walked on, and Garthwaite
was almost obliged to accompany her.
He strolled along by her side, continuing

the conversation with his eyes fixed upon
the ground. He was thinking about
Diana ; had he looked up at the house,
he would have seen her at an upper
window, looking down upon them. He
did not look up, however, but walked by
Frau Camphausen's side, until she halted,
saying—

"Here we are at Frau Olawska's. Are
you sure you will not come in ? she would
be so glad to see you."

He excused himself on the ground that
his half-hour was already at an end, and
went away disappointed that he had not
seen Diana, and glad that he had come
back to look after her. He very much
distrusted the tone in which Frau 
had spoken of her.

When Diana had seen him from the
window, she had just left Frau ,
and had come into this room to
get a French book from which to read
aloud to the girls as they sat at their
needlework. She very seldom looked out
of the windows, but on this occasion she
did draw aside the curtain and look down
into the road. The first objects upon
which her eyes fell were Frau Camphausen
walking slowly along with a man by her
side. She saw at once that it must be
Mr Garthwaite. His clothing, carriage,
and whole appearance proclaimed him an
Englishman, and there was only one
Englishman at Jacewo. He had come
back, then. She bent forward and looked
curiously at him. She still could not

VOL. I. I

see his face, which was turned from her ;
but she recognised the general aspect of
his figure, and she saw that he wore the
same heavy fur-lined coat he had had on
the evening of their drive together. She
could see now that he looked well in it.
His tall spare figure carried it with ease,
and a certain distinction which pleased
Diana's fastidious young eyes. She
watched them for a few moments, and
then turned away with an almost imperceptible
contraction of her forehead. She
would not confess, even to herself, that
she felt a shade of disappointment at his
having returned to Jacewo, and come
close to the house without having made
any effort to see herself.

A day or two later Minna Camphausen,

the eldest of Diana's pupils, burst into
the schoolroom and threw herself into a
chair.

"You remember that Englishman who
brought you here the night you came ? "
she said, addressing herself to Diana.
He has come back to Jacewo, and will
have supper with us to-night."

Indeed ! " was Diana's reply.

Yes, he came back a few days ago ;
and last night papa saw him and asked
him to come. He does not often take
supper with us; he likes better to drop
in in the evening, and sit smoking with
papa."

Diana said nothing, and Minna went
on —

Are you not anxious to see him ? He

is the only English person who has ever
been here except yourself; and his bringing
you here was quite romantic — moonlight,
too."

English people see no romance in
such a common thing as a gentleman
helping a lady out of a difficulty."

Oh," said Minna, with a toss of her
pretty head, " I know you think German
girls are always thinking about love-affairs
and husbands, and you despise us
for it ; but we must think of these things.
You are only a governess, so it does not
matter for you ; but mamma is always
telling Hedwig and me how careful we
must be in the presence of gentlemen,
and be sure not to do anything which
might make them think us very clever,

or fond of books, or used to doing things
for ourselves."

She has not set you a very uncongenial
task," was the reply, given with
some dryness ; but Minna sailed serenely
on —

"You know when grandpa dies we
shall have fortunes, and then we shall
always have to remember that all these
gentlemen who make themselves agreeable
to US may be only fortune-hunters, and
we must be very careful to whom we
speak."

You are very humble, Minna : it does
not seem to occur to you that people may
like you for your own sake."

Oh," said Minna, '' that is what you
always do — laugh at people and make

them look ridiculous. There is no talking
to you with any comfort ; I shall go
away."

When Diana was alone again, she put
down her work and thought of the expected
guest. She was glad he was
coming ; among other reasons, because
she would like to hear English spoken
without this excruciating German accent
which took all the music out of her native
tongue. She felt interested and expectant
— the curtain was on the point of
rising, the play was going to begin.

They met in the dining-room ; but the
few words of greeting they exchanged
were the only words which passed between
them during supper. Frau Camphausen
took care the conversation should never

fall into their hands, and neither made
any effort to frustrate her design. Diana
contented herself with studying her compatriot's
face. Like him, she could take
in a great deal at little more than a glance,
and in a short time she was perfectly
familiar with Garth waite's face. She liked
it, and the longer she looked at it, the
more she liked it. It was not a handsome
face, but it was a very characteristic one.
The nose and chin were good, clearly cut
and well formed, the mouth — scarcely
visible under the heavy moustache — closed
vdih great determination ; there was a
hawk-like keenness and penetration in the
iron-grey eyes. It was the face of a man
accustomed and naturally fitted to command,
yet capable of softening into great

tenderness. The head was well set on
broad square shoulders, and covered with
a mass of dark hair.

After supper they all went into one of
the sitting-rooms. The Olawskis came in,
and there was promise of a social evening.
Both Frau Camphausen and Frau Olawska
flirted with Garthwaite ; Frau Olawska
shamelessly, her friend with moderation,
remembering the presence of her daughters
and their governess. The Englishman
bore it with fortitude ; but at the first
opportunity he made his way to Diana's
side.

It is a long time since I saw you," he
said. " I was obliged to leave Jacewo
the day after sour arrival, and I have
only just come back. I came to call on

you one day, but was told you were
out."

Which day was that, and what time ? "
holding her needle suspended over her
work as she awaited his answer.

He told her, adding, " Frau 
told me you were out. I met her
just as I reached the house."

I was in : she knew I was in ; I had
but that moment left her ! " she answered,
rather emphatically.

She looked at him as she spoke ; he
also looked at her. Their eyes met, and
remained fixed on each other for a moment.

"I suggested that she had made a
mistake," he said.

I knew you were here," said Diana.
I saw you with Frau Camphausen."

Did you think I ought to have
called?"

"Yes, I did think so."

You have a great respect for social
observances ? "

*' I believe they are good."

And social distinctions, do j^-qu believe
in them too ? "

I don't think it is wise to penetrate
too far into the enemy's country, even
if you carry the flag of truce in your
hand."

You would go no further than truce ?
Perhaps you don't believe in the stability
of contracts drawn up under the
soothing influence of the pipe of peace.
You know tobacco is a very democratic
weed."

You know I dislike it," was her reply,
given with a half smile.

And you believe in the natural enmity
of people in different classes?"

''I don't see what they can have in
common."

'' Ah ! " he said ; " you are young yet."

Frau Olawska had been watching them,
devoured with curiosity. She took advantage
of the pause which followed
Garthwaite's last words, to interrupt with
a question of her own.

Why have you came back to Jacewo
so soon?" she asked. "We did not expect
you yet."

''I have duties here," he answered, as
laconically as Diana herself could have
spoken; and although she had no conception

of what the duties were to which
he referred, she could not repress a smile
at the very effectual way in which he
silenced the vivacious little Polish lady.

CHAPTEE Viii.

NEAR THE FOREST.

Several days had passed since John had
supped at the Camphausens, and he had
not seen Diana again. She had excited a
strong interest in him, and he was growing
impatient for a meeting. Something happened,
too, to increase his impatience.

He had come out to post a letter, and
having reached the post-office, he pushed
his letter into the box. It would not go
in; something already filled the slit, and
he put his fingers in to discover the

cause. He drew out another letter, which
had been carelessly posted, and had not
dropped into the box; as it came outwith
the address side upwards, it was
almost unavoidable that he should read
it. The envelope was of English paper,
and was addressed in an Englishwoman's
clear and compact hand, to —

Mrs Wentworth,

'^jo Philip Meredith, Esq.,
The Alley,
Garshill,
YorJcs,

England.

He held it in his hand for a minute, and
then, with a very curious look on his face,
looked from it to the letter which he had

himself brought to the post, and which
was directed to —

Susan Morrison,

Becktop Farm,
GarsMll,
YorJcs,

England.

He looked from one to the other several
times, then, smiling to himself, he dropped
them both into the letter-box, and went
on his way.

The next day he met Diana out of doors,
and alone, for she generally took exercise
in addition to the morning constitutional
with her pupils. She was walking swiftly
along the frost - bound road, wrapped in
her fur mantle, and with a fur cap seton

her dark hair. Exercise had brought
the warm colour into her cheeks, and her
eyes were brilliantly clear. She was walking
along the road to Berg, and had left
the last straggling cottage on the outskirts
of Jacewo some distance behind, being
already within the shadow of the pine-forest
through which the road ran almost
the whole way. The light was on the
point of growing dim, and the flat country
stretched out on either side — visible for
miles without the slightest elevation.
John was going home from the railway,
so met her face to face, and after exchanging
greetings, continued his own way
instead of turning back with her.

Why don't you turn round with me ? "
asked Diana at once.

"I have business at Jacewo which is
rather pressing. I must get on ; and, at
the same time, I have something to say
to you."

"Then why not say it, and let us each
go on our way again ? I was enjoying
my walk."

"It is too late for you to be out on this
road alone. It is never very safe ; thieves
and cut-throats find it conveniently near
the frontier. Berg is under Russian government.
You would be exposed to risk
at any time, and especially now, with the
navvies about."

Thieves and cut-throats ! " she echoed,

with a derisive laugh. " Do you seriously

expect me to believe in those bogies

in the nineteenth century in a civilised
VOL. I. K

country? If thieves and cutthroats are
the only dangers to be feared, I will undertake
to walk from Jacewo to Berg and
back again, without a single qualm of fear."

He heard her out, without being in the
least disturbed by her scepticism.

'•'You talk like a child," he said, when
she had done. " They are not only possible
but existent. Those woods, which you
were on the margin of, extend for miles,
and are the shelter of numbers of half-starving
men, who will run great risks on
the chance of a successful robbery. As
for the nineteenth century, and a civilised
country, this country is a long way off
the nineteenth century, and leaves much
to be desired in point of civilisation. You
may have noticed as you came along a

little mound by the side of the road, with
a rough wooden cross at one end. That
is the grave of a child who has died since
I have been here. Its parents were too
poor to provide a funeral and pay the
expenses, so they buried the child in that
field opposite their cottage."

I thought it was a dog's grave. But I
think they were very wise. Why should
they have to pay fees ? burying and marrying
come in the natural scope of a clergyman's
work. Weddings, at least, ought to
be performed for love."

He repressed the smile which came on
his lips and said —

"Possibly; but you will agree that a
country in which such things are done
and tolerated, cannot be called a civilised

country in our sense of the word, and
may permit other things to go on, which
would not be suffered in England."

''Oh, well," said Diana, 'england is
not everywhere, and what's the harm ? I
should think the child is safer and wholesome
in that field than in the churchyard,
where in a year or two his bones would
be tossed out of his grave again, to make
room for some one else."

John had not enjoyed the privilege of
knowing Diana during her childhood, or
he would have appreciated this sudden reversion
to the tone and phraseology of that
happy time. He only smiled and said —

"That last custom stamps the country
at once with the seal of the highest civilisation."


You are undoubtedly my superior in
argument," returned the girl, with a movement
of her long throat, which was both
graceful and charming in its half-laughing
petulance. " Instead of subjecting me to
any further defeat, suppose you tell me
this wonderful 'thing' which you have in
reserve. I can't imagine what you have
to say to me, and I am devoured with
curiosity to know."

John did not answer at once. A walk
with a girl like Diana was a totally new
experience to him, and he was surprised to
find how much he enjoyed it. So little
was he used to walking with women, that
it never entered his head to alter his
habitual long swinging step when walking
by Diana's side ; and he was progressing

with his usual speed, lost in reflection,
instead of attending to what his companion
said, when he heard a breathless voice
at his side saying —

*' How you fly ! You remind me of that
mythical creature in the nursery rhyme."

"What was that?" stopping short in
his walk.

It was ^ a winged beast with teeth and
claws.' You first reduce me to mental
mince-meat with your superior logic, and
then you fly along like an eagle, leaving
me to toil after you as I can."

She was half laughing as she finished
speaking, and after looking at her for a
moment, he too burst out laughing, and
they both laughed until they nearly cried.

Why did you not tell me sooner that

I was going too fast ? " lie asked, as
they went on again at a more moderate
pace.

I kept up with you as long as I could.
English people never like to confess themselves
beaten, and in this hostile land
one feels inclined to force one's national
characteristics into undue prominence."

But none of the enemy were by to
see if you had given in."

'' Oho ! " she answered ; " is that the principle
on which you are making your railway
? But now, tell me what you wanted
to say; you keep putting it off in the
most cunning way. Is it something very
disagreeable, which you don't like to bring
out ? "

That your own conscience must decide

for you. You post your letters very carelessly,
Miss Wentworth."

The lightly stepping figure at his side
halted ; the dark frank eyes looked
straight into his as she asked —

What do you mean ? "

He told her what had occurred at the
post-office, and she laughed carelessly, and
asked with some curiosity —

Which one was it ? I posted three."

He repeated the address to her, and she
said —

"Oh! that — mamma's. It was of no
importance."

Suppose it had fallen into the hands
of some unscrupulous person," he said,
with some severity.

Yes ; into Frau Camphausen s hands,

for example. She would have opened
and read it. She would have been quite
pleased at what was in it."

"Why?"

Oh, because I have never given anyone
a true description of this place. No
one wanted me to come, and I would
come ; so I have always practised a little
deception on my friends, and told them
how comfortable I am here."

"Are you not comfortable?" he asked,
bluntly.

Does it strike you as a place in which
one would be comfortable ? " she asked,
with a little edge in her voice.

"Well, no. To tell the truth, I was
rather surprised to find you still here
when I came back from Berg."

Were you ? " she answered. " I am
not going away yet. I don't like the
place, but it interests me a little."

*' But to go back to your letter. I
fancied that before you came the Camp-houses
told me you lived at "Whitfield."

*' I did ; but when I came here, our
house was broken up and my mother
went to live at Garshill with her brother.
My father had died the year before," she
added, in explanation, for she was in an
expansive mood, which had come upon
her as a sort of reaction from the reserve
she practised towards the Camphausens.

Is Mr Meredith your mother's brother?"

Yes ; the only uncle I have."

Have you ever seen him ? "

I have never been to his house. I

have never seen him, or any of my
cousins. I have four cousins," she concluded,
with a laugh which was catching
in its melody.

"You seem rather proud of it," he said,
with an answering smile.

I am ; as a domestic situation, I believe
it is unique," she answered.

There was a pause before John said, ina
tone of some constraint —

"Perhaps some day we may be sufficiently
intimate for you to tell me about it."

Would you like to know ? " she asked,
in a tone of some surprise.

It would interest me very much
indeed," he said, with some emphasis.

"Do you know my uncle ? "

I know him well by repute : I have

seen him. I have relatives who live near
Garshill."

How curious ! Well, if I tell you my
tale, you must tell me yours ; only to
make a fair exchange, you know. I am
not at all interested in them."

They had entered Jacewo by this time,
and had only a few minutes' walk before
them. John wondered that she did not
ask questions about Garshill. To him it
was his native place, the best-loved spot
on earth, to which he felt his heart would
draw him from the other side of the world.
He did not know — forgetting that she had
just said she had never seen the place —
that the word " Garshill," which always
set his heart-strings vibrating, had no
special meaning for her. As these thoughts

passed through his mind, they reached the
Camphausens' house, and were shaking
hands. He kept her long slender hand
in his as he said —

Promise me not to walk alone on that
road again, Miss Went worth ; I assure you
it is not safe."

*' Nay ; " with the graceful motion of
her long throat. " If I promise I shall
never rest until I have thoroughly explored
it. I shall be safer if you leave
me with a warning."

CHAPTEE IX.

BY THE LAKE.

For several times after this, Jolin and
Diana met only in the presence of the
Camphausens, and on these occasions said
very little to one another. Frau 's
eagle eye was upon them ; for by
slow degrees her intelligence had worked
round so far as to grasp the fact that, considering
the isolated position of these two
English people, they must seek each other's
society, unless something should happen to
render them reciprocally obnoxious. They

cared very little for the sanction of lier
presence, and still less for the supervision
of her eagle eye ; but without ever having
spoken on the subject, there seemed a tacit
agreement that, except when alone, they
should not converse together for any length
of time. So, for some three or four weeks,
John had no chance of hearing the explanation
of the unique domestic situation which
prevailed in Miss Went worth's family, and
Diana on her side had no temptation to
lay aside the reserve which characterised
her manner with her employers.

After this long time of meeting and yet
not meeting, John felt quite a thrill of
pleasure when, walking along the street
one golden spring afternoon, he saw Diana
just before him. He quickened his pace.

and soon overtook her and asked whither
she was going.

Nowhere in particular," she answered ;
*rand you ?"

I am going to the railway."

That is along the road to Berg. Shall
we walk together ? "

*' What are you doing out at this time of
day ? " asked John, as they strolled along.
'' I should think every other lady in Jacewo
is lying on her sofa fast asleep."

Yes ; I honour and respect that custom
of sleeping through the hot part of the day,
because I love the heat, and it sets me free
to have a walk by myself. They think I
am mad, of course, but that does not distress
me, and my dress is thin."

He glanced at her dress, and, although he

could not have said why, it produced a feeling
of coolness and refreshment in him, and
pleased his eye at the same time. It was
grey, trimmed with lace and long floating
ends of ribbon. Her hat was white, with
grey ostrich-feathers curling over its upturned
brim ; and over her head she held a
large parasol of lace, which harmonised with
her hat and gown. She stepped lightly
under the blazing sun, and her dainty
shoes left slight traces of her passing in
the dust.

They walked through the town, and
passed the cemetery gates and the ruined
Polish church ; storks flapped lazily through
the air, and the windmills creaked and
groaned as their sails moved slowly and
heavily round ; they left behind them the

VOL. I. L

last miserable-looking cottage, with mud
floor and thatched roof. The primitive
and clumsy combination of pump and well
before its door excited the contempt and
amusement of the engineer. All this they
passed, and then John stood still and said —

*' I am not in a hurry, let us go this way :
it is a favourite walk of mine, and you may
not have seen it."

He turned off the road as he spoke, and
went along a rough grass-grown track leading
through some fields. The ground
dipped a little, so that Diana could not
see what was coming, and she uttered a
little cry of surprise and delight when she
found herself standing on the edge of a
vast sheet of water, which stretched before
them further than the eye could reach, and

lay motionless beneath the blue sky. On
the side of the lake on which they stood
there ran for a little way a bit of earthen
wall, which rose breast-high, and was overgrown
with grass and daisies and flowering
weeds. Here they came to a standstill,
and, leaning their elbows upon it, looked
away beyond —

Where the long green reed-beds swain
the rippled waters grey
Of that solitary lake " —

to where, in the distance, a patch of sombre
pine-trees stood brooding over the still water
at their feet.

I had no idea such a place existed," she
said ; " I should never have suspected it."

"That is only because you don't know
the country. You passed numbers of such

lakes, some smaller, some as large or larger,
as you came here in the train. This used
to be in the midst of the forest, before they
cleared the ground."

They stood in silence for a while, then
Diana said —

By the way, since I saw you last, a
great event has taken place."

What is that ? "

They have found a husband for Minna."

Is that all ? "

"All ! For heaven's sake don't let them
hear you speak like that. It is the event
of the day. You know that on the death
of their grandfather they will have fortunes,
and the choice of a husband in such a case
is a very delicate affair."

He caught the infection of her tone

and sparkling eyes, and laughed aloud,
asking —

Well, what is he like ? Have you seen
him?"

I have seen him."

*' What do you think of him ? "

She made a little grimace as she said —

Oh, as to that, I have not studied him.
He is not a gentleman."

He looked at her fixedly for an almost
imperceptible time before he asked —

Ah, that, what do you mean by it ?
What kind of gentleman is he not ? "

"Not by birth, not by education, not by
mind, not by manners."

That's tolerably sweeping at all events.
You think a great deal of those qualifications
? "

Why, of course," lie answered ; " don't
you? Life would be impossible without
them."

He had noticed before this trick on
her part, of throwing a question back
upon her interlocutor, and he answered
now —

Oh, my opinion does not matter, at
least not at present. I want to have
yours. Let's take them in order, as if
they were points to be discussed at a conference.
Birth, now, what's the good of
birth ? "

A preliminary to life," was her reply.

"Ah, now," he said, smiling, "don't let
us play with words. You know what I
mean, and what is the good of birth ? "

*' Oh," she said, turning her head, for

she saw that he was going to demolish
her, " it is useful to know what any one's
ancestors have been, — those, for instance,
of a baby from whom one is going to be
vaccinated."

He laughed outright, but persisted in his
catechism —

But tell me seriously ; I have a reason
for asking, and want very much to have
your opinion. What advantage do you
think a man gets from being born of a
stock which has always stood well in the
world?"

Show me first your penny," she answered.
" That is, tell me first why you
want to know what I think."

''No," he said, immovably. "I won't tell
you now ; but I promise I will tell you sometime.

Will you trust me till I think a fit
time has come ? "

*'0h yes," was her carelessly given answer.
" Why talk so long about nothing ?
let us get to our points. I do think a man,
and a woman too, is better for being born
of good stock as you call it. I think it
tells. It must help people at difficult
points in their lives to remember that if
they do wrong they will disgrace not only
themselves, but those who went before, and
those who will come after."

"That's all theory. When you come to
plain fact you find that people think only
of themselves and the present ; not of what
in my part of the country we call their
fore-elders, or their descendants at all. Is
crime confined to people without ancestry ?

I suppose you never heard of kings or
dukes, or any suck transcendent beings,
breaking laws, did you ? "

*' Yes ; plenty of them," reddening under
his tone ; " but there will always be exceptions
to every rule, and I don't see that
they destroy the principle."

"Not now, perhaps," he said, more
gently ; " but I think you will see it
when you are older, and have seen more
of life — I think you will then."

Why do you think so ? " she asked,
with some curiosity.

Because people who don't see it are
narrow and selfish, and incapable of all
true greatness, and I don't believe you
are like that."

She was annoyed to feel that she was

colouring under his fixed gaze, and that
she could find no reply to make to him.
So much for birth," he went on ; "as
for education — some of the most dastardly
men I have known had been educated atour
great public schools, and had been at
the universities. The most cowardly thing
I ever knew done was done by a man belonging
to one of the oldest families in
England. Manners, too, are only skin-deep,
and are often more the result of
habitual intercourse with women than the
outcome of genuine tenderness and reverence
for them. So you see only mind
remains ; and the longer you live, the
more clearly you will see that the only
aristocracy is of the mind, the intellect,
and the heart, no matter what the birth

and education have been. And every man
who is a gentleman by nature will have
gentle manners, too."

He was rather amazed at himself when
he had finished speaking. He had not
intended to hold forth like this ; but
something in Diana's face and attitude,
as she listened, had seemed to draw the
words from him. The arguments he used,
too, were in his estimation so self-evident,
he had used them merely because she was
clearly such a novice — such a child in her
views on these matters. He had spoken
simply, that she might easily understand
him.

She was silent for a moment, and before
she spoke, he went on —

I suppose you have heard such expressions

as ' a born gentleman ' a natural
gentleman used of working men ? You
see you have to agree with me at last'
he said, when she had answered in the
affirmative.

But' she persisted, although she spoke
with a little shyness, which became her
very well, " we were not considering
merely the question of gentlefolk. Minna
is going to marry this man, and however
much a working man might be a gentleman,
one could not marry him."

'why not?"

Oh ! " looking at him with her face full
of laughter, as though the idea he had
suggested was too ludicrous, " one could
not — it would be impossible."

Not at all. See, the prophet's mantle

has fallen upon me, and I am going to
foretell what might happen. You yourself,
Miss Wentworth, would marry a workingman
if you thought it desirable."

Oh no. In what way am I fitted for
life in a cottage ? "

He looked at her from head to foot
before he answered —

The workman who aspired to marry
you would not be content to live in a
cottage."

In what way would he aspire, if I am
no higher than he ? "

Because in whatever position you had
been born, you would have been a lady,
and a lady must always be aspired to."

His face looked very pleasant as he said
this. He was smiling at the quick way in

which she had taken him up ; he was
smiling at herself, and yet he spoke
earnestly, from his reverence for her.

She met his eyes, and then turned
away her head, that she might think of
what had been said. All the time she
stood thus, with her face turned aside,
John's eyes were fixed upon her, and she
was keenly conscious that he was looking
at her. At length he broke the silence
by saying—

"You told me once, Miss Wentworth,
that there are peculiarities in your relations
with your family, and you said you
would explain them to me : will you tell
me now ? "

'how? Why?" she asked, rather
puzzled. "What do you want to know?"

"What induced you to come out
to such a remote corner of the world as
this ? "

How can the world have corners, if
it is round ? " she asked ; and then went
on, "Was it a very extraordinary thing
to do?"

"It seems so to me, knowing the place
as I do."

But I did not know the place at all.
I came because it was quite strange, and
I was tired of everything I knew."

A few more questions from John, and he
was in possession of the whole story, with
the exception of that part relating to Tom
Sherlock. Either she was in a very communicative
mood, or John was a very
sympathetic listener ; at any rate he had

the power of drawing her story from her.
He listened without speaking, and then
said —

I am glad you did not go ; you were
right not to go. I sympathise with you
entirely."

I thought you would," she said, showing
a confidence in his sympathy and
understanding, which he had noticed before.


"And yet these people are perfect
strangers to you ; possibly if you knew
them you might like them."

"Oh no ; that is quite impossible.
There are four of them — two men and
two girls — but I have never seen them."

"Perhaps you will make their acquaintance
some time."

"I intend to. I know I am quite different
from what they think, and I should
like them to know how mistaken they
are."

It was the sentiment of a very youthful
mind, and John smiled as she spoke.

Your mother will probably set all that
right," he said.

Oh no ; her being there will make very
little difference."

He was silent. He knew there were
cases of complete want of sympathy between
parents and their children. Here
was one before his eyes, and he found
it very interesting. There was still one
test to which he wished to put her ;
and suddenly changing his tone, he

said —

VOL. L M

Now I understand your reluctance to
link your lot with a workman, let him be
never so chivalrous. It would be against
all your family traditions, and you say
such things have weight with you. Your
people are evidently the great people of
the place."

She coloured, and straightened her figure
a little. She had been leaning against
the earthen wall, plucking daisies and
grass and heaping them up, or throwing
them down into the water.

I believe they are," she said with
dignity ; " but I don't know why you draw
attention to it : I have never said such a
thing even to myself."

The sun seemed to have left his humour,
for he answered —

There is nothing surprising in that. I
should imagine you are very tender with
yourself."

She was too angry to speak, and he
went on —

I am interested in these things, and
particularly in the fact that I have a
member of the English aristocracy before
me, because my people are not at all the
great people of the place in which they
live. They live in a very small way,
and have never done anything else. You
ought to know it, for you seem to attach
great importance to the accident
of birth, and I am entirely a self-made
man."

His eyes were cold and keen as they
met hers, his whole face had changed,

and its genial expression had turned into
one the very reverse of agreeable. He
seemed to be awaiting lier reply or count
with almost a sneer upon his
lips.

She drew a deep breath as he spoke,
and her head was very high as she said —

"You are atrociously rude. Good afternoon."


She walked home without casting one
backward glance. She regained the dusty
highroad, and walked for some distance
along it without encountering any one.
The great elm-trees, which met in a lofty
arch above her head, whispered and rustled
in the breeze ; she thought of no one but
Garthwaite. She told herself that he was
a savage and a boor, and that she could

never forgive him. Doubtless his own
ancestry, if he had any, had never lifted
themselves from the soil, and all his ideas
were of the earth, earthy.

CHAPTEE X.

CARISSIMA/

The conversation wliicli had been brought
to so abrupt a close by Miss Wentworth's
action remained long in the thoughts of
both John and Diana. Now that John
knew her story, who she was, and how
it had come to pass that she was at
Jacewo, his thoughts about her were
strongly tinged with a sort of fierce sarcastic
pleasure which was comprehensible
to himself alone. He had heard of parents
and children being antipathetic ; he was

CARISSIMA." 183

himself a case in point, although he never
thought about it or allowed it to influence
him. Here was another and more singular
instance, for the want of sympathy was
between a mother and her only daughter.
From what he had seen of Diana he felt
sure that, charming and sympathetic
though she was to him, many people
might find it difficult or even impossible
to get on with her, and there was really
nothing surprising in the fact that one
such person should be her own mother.
He soon ceased to dwell on that part
of the question ; what did arrest his
thoughts, and over and over again bring
into his keen face that look of grim
sarcastic delight, was the story which
Diana had told him, the knowledge of

the family to whom she belonged, the
extraordinary fate which had, at any rate
for a time, linked her lot with his.

Swinging along the road to Berg, his
thoughts ran somewhat in this way —

So those are her people, and her
mother was that Miss Meredith who married
that Professor Wentworth. How well
I remember the wedding and the village
festivities ! We were of course forbidden
to go near them ; but Susan heard of the
cakes and goodies, and cried for them,
and I said I would get her some. I did,
too, and the father found it out and
flogged me soundly. I believe Reuben
told him," he went on, smiling as he
recalled those distant memories. "And
that was her mother's wedding ! I had

forgotten all about it, but how it comes
back to me now ! I wonder how she
would look if I were to tell her. She
would be amused and curious, as if her
attention had been drawn to the habits
of some strange creature from another
planet ; a little indignant, too, that her
kindness and credulity had been imposed
upon. Shall I tell her ? No ; it is no use
bringing that ugly light into her eyes, or
that spirit into her, when I know she is
capable of being brought to see the folly
of all that, and I intend to be the man
to bring her to it. I intended it before,
and these revelations don't in the least
alter my mind."

He paused for a moment, and then
went on again —

*'Tlie very idea of letting a girl such as
lie is come out here ; alone, too ! What
were they thinking of? It is true they
had never seen her, but her mother knew
and seems even to have encouraged it. I
thought those people always took such
care of their women. But to let a girl
like Diana Wentworth come out here !
The Camphausens dislike her, and if I
were not here to look after her, there
is no telling what might not happen.
I to look after her ! There is the cream
of the whole affair. Here is a member
of the house of Meredith stranded in a
remote corner — although the world is
round — of semi-civilised Europe, and she
owes her comparative comfort and wellbeing
to the fact that she is watched

over by a Garth waite ! " He laughed aloud
at the thought, and in all that great
desert there was no one to hear him ; he
could laugh aloud, speak, sing, or cry
aloud, and no one would be the wiser.
There was not a house, or the sign of
a house, within all the range of vision
of his keen long-sighted eyes. " What
would they say if they knew," he continued,
"if they knew that one of the
despised race is the guardian angel of the
fairest of their whole fair flock ? She is
quite right ; as a domestic situation it
is indeed unique, more unique than she
knows. She is not like them. She is
too much unlike them to be thought of
as belonging to them. Suppose I had
been different from what I am, would

she still have talked as frankly to me
and told me her secrets? Suppose I had
been unscrupulous, and had misused my
influence over her — I have some, I believe
— would she then have been as frank
and unsuspicious ? Suppose I had not
been here at all, but some one else, would
she have been to him what she is tome
? Nay," shaking himself impatiently,
for the thought stung him sharply, " that
is going too far. Besides, if some one
else had been here, she would not have
come. She would have come to wherever
I was. ' Things will be what they will be.' "
Diana was equally thoughtful. Garth
alternate compliments and jeers
stung and thrilled her. The look on
his face when he had said he believed

she was capable of great things, thrilled
her with a feeling she had never known
before, which she only half understood
now. Then the remembrance of the rude
rough words he had said at the last sent
the hot passionate blood in a torrent to
her cheeks. What had made him take
that manner ? She alternately wished not
to see him again, and longed impatiently
for a meeting.

She was thinking of these things as she
stood one afternoon alone in the schoolroom.
The younger children were still at
school ; their parents, with the two elder
girls, were spending the day on the estate
of Herr Platen, the future son - in - law.
After a few days of spring, summer had
come with a burst. It was intensely hot ;

the cloudless blue sky was almost fatiguing
to look upon, and the sun beat relentlessly
down upon the thirsty earth ; the
air seemed to quiver with the heat. Diana
stood at the window looking out. Before
her the plain stretched out, fringed on the
horizon by a dark line of pine-trees, ten
miles away a tall chimney rose sharply
against the sky, and in all that wide
stretch of country, there was only one
house to be seen. To the left were all the
surroundings of the railway station, and
the railroad to Pawlowsk cut in a straight
line through the plain. A train was coming
along, and Diana watched it idly.
She knew by looking at her watch that
it was seven or eight miles distant, yet
she saw the white steam rising clearly

CARISSIMA. 191

against the blue sky ; then the train itself
came in sight, and she wondered who was
in it. She turned her eyes to the trees
growing near the station, and then, taking
some music in her arms, she went downstairs
to practise.

She felt more inclined to sing than to
play, and she began some old English
airs, which came with peculiar charm and
freshness from her lips.

In the middle of her singing, the front-door
bell rang, and she heard some talking
at the door ; but she did not cease
singing, and so did not hear that the
visitor, whoever it was, came into the
house, and towards the room where she
sat. She knew nothing until she heard
a voice behind her saying —

"Good afternoon, Miss Wentworth. I
was very rude to you the last time we
met ; will you forgive me ? "

She ceased playing, and turned round
quickly.

How you startled me, Mr Garth waite !
Is that the tone in which you address your
navvies ? "

The meeting, half wished for half avoided,
had come, and she was a little startled
and bewildered.

** I have never had to beg the pardon of
any of my navvies yet," he answered. " If
I do, I may possibly speak in that tone."

I am glad you acknowledge that you
were rude."

She had twisted round on the music-stool,
and now sat facing him.

Of course I acknowledge it," lie said.
"I was very rude, and I would have followed
you at the time to say so ; but you
walked so fast, I could not overtake you.
I thought you would rather not see me
again that day."

** You were quite right," she said, somewhat
drily.

You are very angry," he said quickly.

I tuas very angry," she corrected him ;
** but to say I am so now, would be to
imply that I attach much weight to your
opinion, and I do not."

The dignity which always underlay
Diana's careless manner was predominant
now, and John, who was not overwhelmed
by it, looked at her critically as she spoke,
and decided that this display became her

VOL. I. N

perfectly. She had risen as she spoke,
and the slender white-clad figure looked
unusually tall, the beautiful head was
held unusually high. John thought her
most beautiful as she stood there.

There is no reason why you should
attach much weight to it, if you do not
agree with it," he answered, with perfect
composure. '' Our views on some points
differ so widely, that if we were to attach
much weight to the opinion of the other,
we should be very uncomfortable."

The words were apologetic, the manner
was perfectly courteous, and the tone was
ironical enough to send the colour into
Diana's cheeks. She raised her head even
a little higher as she said —

If I remember rightly, you urged me

for my opinion ; it was only your own
which was given unasked."

He had some difficulty in repressing the
smile which trembled on his lips as she
spoke, and he answered hastily —

Exactly ; and it is the fact of mine
having been given unasked which constitutes
the rudeness. As an opinion, T had
as much right to it as you had to yours ;
there can be no rudeness in the mere
holding of an opinion. But, as you say,
I forced it upon you unasked, which I had
no right to do, and for which I here ask
your pardon."

Diana did not speak at once. His words,
when he had said them, had stung her
very sharply. With time the sting had
grown duller ; now that she was reminded

of them, lie felt the barb quivering in
her mind once more.

"You were rude," she said at last. ''I
don't know if I can forgive you."

"See," he answered, "you are angry
still."

It was true ; and the weight she had
herself laid upon her anger lasting so long,
returned to her, and made her more angry
still — with this difference, that she was
now as angry with herself as with him.
She knew her colour was rising again, ashe
stood with his keen clear eyes fixed
full upon her. She had got herself into
an awkward predicament, and she did not
quite know how to get out of it. It was
difficult after her last words and his to
say anything which should not sound foolish.

Perhaps lie saw her difficulty, and
in his strength was merciful, for he spoke
first.

I promise you," he said, " that it shall
not occur again. I see you are not used
to contradiction."

He could have taken no surer way to
gain his end. Diana almost started as he
spoke, and though she did not blush again,
she felt her face tingling. He wished her
to see that he thought of her as a child.
He had begun by treating her as a woman,
but he found it would not do ; she was too
childish and unreasonable. No doubt he
would take this as a lesson never to speak
seriously to her again, or to take the
trouble to dispute her opinions, however
foolish they might be. She felt keenly

the degradation of stepping from her position
as his friend, to that of the girl with
whom he exchanged a few words from time
to time, because in civility he could not
do less. There was nothing either impulsive
or childish in her manner, as she once
more turned to him and said —

You make too much of it. Pray, say
no more, and let us forget such a trifle."

"With all my heart," he said, a smile
lighting up the depth of his eyes. " Will
you give me your hand, to show we are
friends again ? "

She put her hand in his, and he held it
for a moment, looking down at its slender
whiteness : he could have crushed it out of
shape with one squeeze of his own fingers.
Then he loosened his clasp, and said —

I said I would wait for Herr .
Will you, in proof of complete
reconciliation, let me wait here, and sing
me something ? I heard you singing as
I came in."

AVhat shall I sing ? " she asked, turning
again to the piano; and he replied, "I
leave it to you."

She began without more ado. Her voice
was a contralto of some range, and she
sang with considerable sympathy ; it was
always a pleasure to hear her, and John
felt soothed as he listened. He sat by
the side of the piano, turning over her
music, and now and then putting aside
something which he intended to ask her
to sing for him. Presently he came upon
a piece of manuscript music which attracted

him more than the .others. He held it
in his hand, waiting for her to finish.

She had scarcely taken her fingers from
the keys, before he asked —

Where did you get this thing ? "

"That?" taking it from his hand, and
looking at it. " The words I found in a
novel of Turgeniefi''s, and the air is an old
German thing, to which they adapted themselves
in the most obliging way."

"Sing it for me, will you?" he asked.
"The English, I suppose, is yours."

"Yes," she answered, striking the first
notes.

John did not return to the piano ; he
went to the window, and stood in the
shadow of the curtain, looking out. It
was a doleful song she sang, and his heart

grew heavy as lie heard it ; yet as in a
dream, he saw what was passing around
him. The work-people were coming from
their work in the fields, the women, old
and young alike, wearing neither shoes nor
stockings, and with gaily coloured handkerchiefs
wound round their heads. They
were all chatting together in their soft
Polish tongue, and snatches of their conversation
came to him through the open
window. In a few minutes they had all
passed, the road was empty again, and the
words of Diana's song came clearly to him,
and filled his soul with their haunting
melancholy : —

A heart devoid of joy.
• •»•••
Love and Grief go hand in hand
In every land, in every land.

Is anywhere a love to see

Alike from pain and sorrow free ?

Not anywhere, not anywhere."

His heart "ached as lie heard her. Was
that to be their portion ? Would they have
to bear and suffer much before all was
clear between them ? Knowing something
of her feelings, could he hope that all ever
would be clear between them ? He shook
off the thought, and when she had finished,
went to her side and addressed her
in his ordinary manner.

That song is like your situation —
unique," he said.

Yes ; I flattered myself when I found
it, that I had come upoji something very
uncommon."

CARISSIMA. 203

Yet, if the song is to be believed, that
which it describes is common enough. Is
that your opinion ? "

"Oh," turning her head aside, "as to
that, I cannot judge ; I am absolutely
without experience.

He had leaned his elbow on the piano,
and was looking straight at her as she
spoke. His face was serious, and yet he
had the air of being amused.

I do not know whether I am wishing
for your happiness if I say, I hope you
may never have the experience."

''Oh, surely. Pain and sorrow, and a
heart devoid of joy, cannot be desirable."

They were speaking more lightly than
they felt, and he went on —

"It depends. There is such a thing

as compensation, and you know there is
always a partner in this particular bargain."


In that case the partner may take
the grief and pain and other disagreeable,
and I will have the compensation."

He was quite grave again as he said —

In this bargain the partner is the
compensation : they cannot be separated."

She would not take her tone from him.
She shrugged her shoulders, saying —

You are getting into too deep water
for me, and I will not venture beyond my
depth. I can only wade, not swim."

He was going to say more, but she
interrupted him with —

I have never heard you sing, Mr
Garth waite ; can you ? "

'' Oh yes, I can sing," lie answered,
rising to his feet, as if he wished to shake
off some unpleasant thought. " Give me
your seat for five minutes, and I will
show you the best I have to give."

She went to the window, and stood in
the shadow of the window-curtain, as he
had done, and without any preamble he
began to sing *' Caressing."

She had never heard it before, and
before he had sung many lines, she found
herself trembling with excess of feeling,
a strange new feeling which had never
come to her before. He had a beautiful
voice, and the last two lines, with the
constant repetition of those two words,
Caressing, caressing," rang in her ears
for days afterwards. She suddenly felt

that if John were ever, in a voice like
that, to ask her to do anything for him,
she would find it very difficult to resist
him, let the request be what it might.
When he had finished, she was silent fora
moment, she dared not speak at once,
lest her emotion should betray itself in
her voice. At last she went forward to
the piano, speaking even more lightly than
usual, in her desire not to betray how his
song had moved her.

"Thank you," she said. "That is new
to me; what kind of a song do you call
it ? a love-song ? "

"Oh no, not a love-song particularly.
It is a song from any man to any

woman. "

''I see," she said; "just so," and the

corner of her lids lifted in a half smile.
"We won't sing any more, I think," she
went on, as he began to screw the music-stool
back to her level. 'let lis talk
instead. I am afraid you will have to
wait a long time for Herr Camphausen :
they will not be back until evening ; they
have gone to Herr Platen's estate."

I will wait a little longer — and that
reminds me of something I have wanted
to ask you before. Will this approaching
marriage make any difference in your
arrangements here ? "

No. I had a talk with Frau 
about it, and I agreed to stay
on."

"To stay on ! " he echoed; "I am surprised.
Why stay on?"

I like the place ; I do not want to
go."

"You do indeed surprise me," was all
he said.

*why?" she asked, with heightened
colour, and a frown on her brow.

"I thought you disliked the place."

You were mistaken."

It appears so."

They sat in silence for some time after
this. Diana, in her white dress, was the
only light object in the sombrely furnished
room. John's heart burned within
him; she was so very beautiful, so
very desirable, he was so sure of his own
feelings, so very uncertain, or rather so
completely in the dark as to hers. Before
he spoke again, a door banged, sounds

were heard in the house, feet tramping
up-stairs, and loud voices raised in dispute.

"There," said Diana rising, 'your talk
is at an end. The children have come in
from school ; I must go to them."

I am glad we have talked," he said ;
because I think we understand each
other better now."

"Yes, perhaps," she answered somewhat
vaguely, as she gave him her hand.

VOL. I

Chapter XL

GLAMOUR.

It was dating from this day that Diana
began to live in the glamour which surrounded
her during the rest of her stay
at Jacewo. She and John met nearly
every day out of doors, where they were
practically, often really, alone. Their
meetings were not brought about by
appointment — nothing of the kind had
ever been even hinted at. They met by
attraction : when both were out it seemed
inevitable that they should meet, they

themselves were passive in the matter.
When they were together they talked of
everything and anything. Diana told
John that she had reason to believe
that her letters, if put into the household
post-bag, were tampered with before
leaving the house. Upon this he took
from his watch-chain a little gold seal,
and told her to keep it and seal all her
letters with it. She refused at first, and
seemed to be rather shocked at the idea ;
but he insisted, and in the end gained
his point. The seal now hung from her
own watch-chain, its solitary ornament.
It had rather a curious device : a globe
surmounted by a cross, over which hovered
a bat ; underneath were the two
words "For ever." This seal had an odd

fascination for her ; she could not discover
the connection between the device and the
words : it was a shabby little thing, but
she grew fond of it, and later used to
look at it with a queer smile.

Their conversations included some odd
subjects. That is, they might have seemed
odd elsewhere ; here, where everything was
strange, they seemed in keeping with the
surroundings. Sometimes, but very rarely,
John spoke of himself, and it was only after
they had separated that Diana, finding she
could recall every word of those conversations,
knew how deeply they had sunk
into her mind.

"It is curious to me to hear you talk
in that way," he said one day, when she
had been ridiculing some want of savoir

faire on the part of one of the Jacewo
worthies. "You seem to think so much
of those things, and in the sense in which
you understand the word I am not a gentleman
either. I am entirely ' a self-made
man.' It does not seem to me that I
have any less right to be in the world
for that reason, and I should not think it
necessary to mention it to any one but
yourself; but if I did not tell you, it
might possibly make mischief some time.
One of these days, if it is ever necessary,
I will tell you all about my people ; but
it is not necessary yet, and unless it were,
there is nothing to tell. Mine is not an
interesting story like yours. I have no
domestic situation."

"Ah," she said, smiling, "you cannot

forget that. I believe you will laugh at
me in your own mind as long as you live."

"Well, why shouldn't I?" he replied;
it does you no harm."

There the subject dropped ; she never
inquired what he meant by saying he
was a self-made man. Either it had no
interest for her, or else, he thought, with
a smile which his business friends never
saw upon his face, " She thinks it would
be ill-bred on her part to ask, and might
embarrass me to explain."

It was a relief to him that she never
asked any questions about her relatives
at Garshill. Her indifference was evidently
genuine. She never mentioned
them, but seemed to have entirely forgotten
them. On that one occasion when

they had talked about them, he had forgotten
himself and spoken to her in an
unpardonable way. It should never happen
again, even were the provocation to
be greater than then. He had not thought
of them for long ; when he did, the old
fire blazed up in his heart as 'fiercely as
ever.

"That song you sang that day," he
began once ; " you said you were absolutely
without experience. Now I am
not, I have been in love. Once I was
very deeply in love."

Diana turned towards him with her face
full of interest. They were on the edge
of the lake again, leaning against the
earthen wall as they had done on that
other day. Diana happened to wear the

very same clothes : it might have been an
exact reproduction of that former scene,
but that the sky was a deeper, warmer
blue, and the sun sent out a fiercer, more
ardent glow. They had been talking and
had relapsed into silence; suddenly, after
a long pause, John broke out in this
way.

"Were you?" she asked. "When was
that? Why do you speak as if it were
past ? "

It is past ; it is all gone, and as though
it had never been. I told you once I left
home thirteen years ago. I have not been
there since. Before I left I asked a girl,
with whom I had been in love ever since
I was a lad, to marry me. She promised.
We plighted our troth with an oath. I

did not believe in those things, but she
did. She promised to be true to me — to
wait till I came back to marry her. I
was just beginning. I had my way to
make, and the future was uncertain. But
she promised, and I left her."

He broke off there, and seemed disinclined
to say any more. He had spoken
as if under protest, in response to something
Diana had said at an earlier stage
of their conversation. He would have said
no more ; but Diana's interest and curiosity
had been aroused, and she was bent upon
hearing the whole of the story. It was
a revelation to her; she had never asked
herself any questions about his past life.
The past was disregarded as much as the
future. She waited some time for him to

go on ; but he said nothing, and at last
she asked, with some hesitation —

"And is she waiting yet?"

"No," he answered, "no. Did I not
say it was all at an end?"

But how? " she persisted. " You should
not have begun, if you did not intend to
tell me the whole of the story."

Do you care to know ? There is really
nothing to tell."

' I care very much, " she answered. " Ah !
do tell me."

It was only like lots of other love-stories.
She found some one whom she
preferred to me."

"Was it a great trouble to you?" she
asked, after a short silence.

"At the time it tried me sorely; now

I have come to see that it was all for the
best."

*' I wonder if she thinks so too ? "

There I cannot help you," he said,
with rather an odd tone in his voice. " I
have not seen her again."

And that is the end of it ? "

"That is the end of it."

Little by little she became completely
absorbed in her own life. It was far more
interesting to her than anything she had
ever read, anything she had ever seen on
the stage. She did her work faithfully,
if mechanically ; but she let everything
else drift. She gave up writing letters;
at intervals of weeks she sent her mother
a post-card, or a mere line, and to her

other correspondents she did not send even
that. She scarcely read the letters she got.
These from her mother were empty of all
interest, dealing with persons and things
totally unknown to her, and not to be
weighed against what was going on in
this remote spot of semi-eastern Europe in
which just now she found herself. She did
glance over her mother's letters, scarcely
longer than her own, and no more frequent
; but the long epistles she received
from Amy Fairbairn and Tom Sherlock
were tossed into a drawer, generally unopened,
always unread. Whitfield seemed
like a dim cloud on the horizon of her
memory. What had she to do with it,
or those who lived there ? Her past life
there was now like a distant dream, once

vivid, but now faded to a mere misty
outline. She kept up a show of correspondence
with Mrs Burland, and was from
time to time reminded of the existence of
her brothers, by seeing their names in some
letter which she was skimming with less
abstracted eyes than usual. But she had
kept her own counsel, she had mentioned
John's name to no one. She enjoyed the
thought that, except to themselves, their
intimacy was unknown ; that no one could
annoy her with foolish or uncomprehending
remarks. She put from her the thought
that John and she were not equal. From
time to time she was reminded of the fact
that he was, as he uncompromisingly called
himself, " entirely a self-made man." She
turned from it, she refused to heed. She

felt that, lead she once given serious thought
to it, once realised that he was not a gentleman
by birth nor made any pretensions to
be so, her regard for him must crumble
away, their friendship must come to an end.
This very feeling, that there was something
in their intimacy which she dared not face,
gave a zest to the whole affair. She was
on the edge of a precipice, the verge of a
volcano. She dared not look before her,
each step as she took it absorbed all her
attention. So she never questioned him,
never encouraged him to speak of himself
and his past. She shut her eyes resolutely
to everything except the present, which
held all she wanted. She lived in an ecstasy
— rising each day with a feeling that
she had awakened in Paradise ; and what

all this meant, and when or how it was
to end, she never asked herself or paused
to consider. She took it as it came, feeling
only that she had never been so happy in
her life, that she had had no conception
of what real happiness was.

Perhaps John was equally under a spell.
His calm strong manhood had been convulsed.
Not even the knowledge of who
Diana was, or of the link which existed
between them, could destroy the power of
her fascination. Had he been asked once,
he would have said there could be nothing
between them. Before the reality, all that
was swept away — to him she was everything
in the world. He loved to see her,
to hear her talk. He loved to quarrel with
her, and become reconciled. He loved her

delicate fastidious tastes and ways, and
lier utter childish unreasonableness and
wrong-headedness on many points. He
loved her as lie had never thought to love ;
he had made up his mind with his natural
determination that he would win her for
his wife, to love and to cherish till death
should them part.

There were obstacles to be overcome,
and he knew it ; but he would not have
been the man he was if the thought of
those obstacles had not been an additional
spur to him, — if the thought that in order
to win her he would have to fight a hard
battle, had not both made her still more
desirable to him, and strengthened his resolution
that the victory should be his.

To battle with her people would be

nothing — the thought of it gave him pleasure
; but he might have to battle with
herself — and if she was not for him, if
she would not join him, how could he
prevail ? There was her love of gentle
birth, her almost unconscious assumption
that nothing less could be tolerated ; and
although he had told her more than once
that his own parentage was not up to her
standard, she had always treated him asa
gentleman, as on a level with herself.
What would she say when he told her
that, in the opinion of her world, there
was a huge social gulf between them?
Would her liking survive the shock of
finding that, were they to meet at Gars-hill,
they would stand on totally distinct
social platforms? Had she strength and

VOL. I. P

faith to put her hand in his, and bridge
over that gulf? That was what he
wanted to know, that was what he would
know. Was a certain dainty flimsiness,
which she sometimes took a pleasure in
flaunting before him, her real character,
all there was of her? Was "her beauty
her sole duty," and did it go no deeper
than the surface ; or was there a true and
noble woman underneath? He had his
theory, which sooner or later he intended
to put to the test.

CHAPTER XII.

IN THE FOREST.

Diana was walking along the road to
Berg. She was alone at home. The
whole family, children included, had gone
to sjDcnd the day on the Platen estate.
She herself had been included in the invitation,
but Frau Camphausen had not
judged fit to transmit the message. She
had spent the morning in practising, the
afternoon in those vague half - formed
thoughts which so often came to her now ;
and having sipped her cup of coffee and

eaten her supper in all the unusual luxury
of solitude, she put on her things
and came out to walk. Almost involuntarily
her steps turned in the direction
of the road to Berg, and she walked
along without noticing how far she was
going. She passed the track leading from
the highroad to the Jacewo lake, she
passed the solitary grave by the roadside,
she passed many shrines and crosses,
and still she walked on. She walked
with downcast eyes, for she was thinking
deeply, and she did not notice that she
had got far beyond the point at which
John had once stopped her. Only when
a sudden darkness seemed to fall upon her
path, did she look up and discover that
she was not only in the shadow of the

forest, but had actually walked some little
distance in it. She stood still and looked
around her. Intense, deepest silence near
at hand — and far away, further in the
depths of the forest, a swaying sighing
sound, which sent a thrill all through
her; for what purely natural sound appeals
more to the imagination than the
wind in pine-trees ? She lifted her head
and looked on every side — everywhere
the same giant trees standing straight
and tall, so that she felt a pigmy in their
midst. She walked on a few steps, and
the sound of her own footsteps startled
her. But those few steps had taken her
round a bend in the road, and now, looking
about her, she saw at some little
distance amongst the trees what she took

to be water, one of those lakes of which
John had told her. A strong desire to
get to it came over her ; she wanted to
see it close at hand. It did not seem
far away ; and even had it been a much
greater distance, her old childish love of
adventure had come over her, and beat
down all objections to her wish. She
vaguely remembered John's warning about
the danger of this forest; but the whole
place exercised a fascination over her
which she could not resist. Besides, she
argued, even if there were robbers in the
forest, they were not likely to be so near
the highroad while it was still broad daylight.
She overlooked the facts that
here in the forest it was nothing like
broad daylight any longer, and that the

further she went in the less light it
would be ; also, that for a long distance before
reaching the forest she had passed no
house anywhere near the roadside. She
silenced all warning, and struck straight
amongst the trees in the direction of
the water. There was no path, it was
difficult to get along, and she soon found
that the lake was further off than she
had expected; but in proportion as her
goal seemed to recede, her determination
to reach it strengthened ; and at last,
after so long a struggle that she was
unwilling to think how long a time must
have been occupied in it, she did at last
stand on the shore of the little lake.

No one with an imagination less vivid
than Diana's would have thought it worth

all the trouble it had cost to see. It was
very small, and the water was very clear.
The pine-trees kept a solemn guard over
it, and out of a mass of earth which lay
in its midst, grew a tall silver birch-tree.
That was all ; but Diana stood for a few
moments on its brink, and then took out
her watch to see how late it might be.

It was later than she had thought, and
she thrust it hastily back into her dress.
She could not at once find the right place
for it, and she still held it in her hand
when she turned round to get back to the
road. She stopped short, and her hand
was arrested in its motion, when she
saw a man standing a few paces from
her.

It was by no means broad daylight,

but she had no difficulty in seeing the
man and distinguishing his features. He
was tall, with a thin gaunt figure, and
a face with a sullen, rather desperate, expression
; his clothing was almost in rags,
he looked as though he would hesitate at
very little. Still, in spite of his hungry
appearance, he looked like an educated
man ; but Diana only thought he was a
robber, and for anything she knew, might
have a whole band within call. Even
were he alone, she was, as she suddenly
recollected, a very long way from help of
any kind.

Her heart beat fast, for the encounter
was not agreeable, and she stood for a
minute looking at him in silence. He
spoke first, addressing her in French —

"Will you have the goodness to give
me your watch, mademoiselle ? You seem
to have some difficulty in finding a place
for it."

'* Thank you," she answered, in a voice
which it cost her some effort to keep
steady ; " I can accommodate my watch
perfectly well."

As she spoke she finally deposited it in
her dress, and then moved a few steps in
the direction of the road.

She had no belief that she would be
allowed to escape so easily ; and in fact
no sooner did she move from the spot on
which she had been standing, than two
swift steps brought the man in front of
ner.

Pardon, mademoiselle," he said again.

I cannot allow you to pass until you
have given me your watch and chain."

He spoke and looked as if he meant
what he said ; but Diana was naturally
fearless, and her anger and spirit where
roused by this unceremonious request.

This is nonsense," she said, with the
imperious tone which so often came into
her voice when she was thwarted or annoyed;
*you must let me pass at once!"

*with pleasure, as soon as ever your
watch has passed into my hands."

*' I took you for a gentleman at first,"
she said ; " but I see you are nothing buta
robber."

The hot temper which had been her
bane from childhood was rising, and she
scarcely knew what she was saying.

The man shrugged his shoulders as he
answered —

"Necessity knows no law; often the
mighty are brought low. I should advise
you to do what I ask quickly ; I should
be unwilling to keep you out late."

*' You shall not have it' she said, her
natural determination coming to her aid.
Let me pass at once. It is cowardly of
you to stop a lady who is alone, and to
try to frighten her in this way."

"Ah, mademoiselle," he said, "nothing
could give me greater pain than to appear
at a disadvantage in your eyes. If I
seem rough, you must lay it at the door
of my unfortunate condition. In short,"
his tone suddenly changing, "I am starving,
and a starving man is desperate.

Give me the watch without more delay,
or I must take it by force."

He spoke much more roughly than he
had done yet, and Diana bit her lips, and
tried to believe that her heart was not
beating in a way which almost took away
her breath. She began to feel seriously
alarmed ; but, in spite of her fear, she was
cool enough to reason that the loss of
her watch and chain, even had she felt
no natural disinclination to part with
them, could not possibly remain undiscovered
and unremarked. Any explanation
would be at once awkward and humiliating.
Pride urged her to stand out as
long as possible. She resolved to try
persuasion.

"The watch is of great value to me,"

she said. " It was a gift from my father,
who is dead. I cannot believe you would
use force against a woman who is alone,
and without defence. I beg of you to let
me go."

You shall go as soon as you have
done what I ask. I am a gentleman, and
without great provocation would not harm
a hair of your head. God knows I do
not live like this from choice. But the
watch I must and will have. If we stay
here till midnight, I will not go without
it. But the moments are precious, and
you must remember you are wholly in
my power."

Perhaps with the intention of giving
her a gentle reminder of the reality of
her position, he came forward a step and

laid his hand on her arm. It was a very-light
touch, but Diana recoiled as if a
serpent had darted out its sting at her ;
everything swam before her eyes, and she
trembled from head to foot.

Oh I " she cried, her voice unsteady
with mingled anger and horror, " how
dare you touch me ! stand back at once ! "

She looked desperately round as she
spoke, her lips half opened to call for
help ; and then she closed them again, as
the thought came over her, chilling her
with sickly fear, that nothing like help
was anywhere within reach. She leaned
against a tree, scarcely able to stand.

The man, watching her closely, probably
saw the effect of his action, and being
really desperate, hoped that a repetition

of it would bring the scene to a speedy
close. He stepped up to her again, and
firmly grasping her arm with one hand,
with the other seized the wrist of the
hand with which she had clutched that
part of her dress where she had put her
watch.

Now, mademoiselle ! " he said, bringing
his face very close to hers.

Her head swam, as she bent it back as
far as possible, so as to withdraw her face
from his ; and she shut her eyes, that she
might not see the fierce haggard countenance
so near her own. A frantic unreasoning
terror took possession of her,
-and, pushing him from her, she took out
the watch, saying with a half sob —

"There! take it and let me go."

His hold relaxed at once, and he seized
her watch. The honos o-old chain was entangled
with one of the buttons of her
dress, and as she hastily strove to free
it, she caught sight of Garthwaite's little
shabby seal, which she had forgotten, and
which she now suddenly realised was more
precious to her than a hundred watches
and chains. Her fingers tightened upon
it at once, and she said quickly —

"Wait a moment."

What is it ? " he asked, impatiently.

This little seal ; you cannot have it.
It is of no value except to me. Let me
take it off the chain."

No, it belongs to me ; quick, let me
have it."

But she was desperate, with the feeling

VOL. I. Q

that that which she prized most on earth
was at stake, that she would endure almost
anything rather than let this go;
and she returned doggedly —

No ; the watch and chain you may
have, but this I will keep."

He might have snatched it from her
hand, but he did not, he only said —

I must have it too. How is it that
you attach such price to it, if, as you say,
it has no value ? Either you are deceiving
me, or it is something you prize for its
own sake, perhaps a love-token."

Diana's face burned, but she only tightened
her hold on the seal without speaking.
But her head drooped somewhat, so
that she did not see the expression which
came into her companion's face. He looked

at her fixedly and in silence for several
moments, and then he said more gently —

"I must request you to give me the
seal."

No," she said, almost beneath her
breath.

"Then I must take it," beginning to
unclasp her fingers one by one.

He noticed that, in defence of so trumpery
a thing as this seal, she submitted
to his touch, which had won from her so
valuable an object as her watch. As fast
as he raised her fingers, she closed them
again, with a strength which he had not
believed she possessed. Looking at her
again, he saw that she was very pale, her
lips were compressed, her brows contracted,
her whole face had taken that look of

sternness which did come upon it sometimes.
In spite of the sternness she looked
very beautiful, and he said —

Your faithfulness to this little object
touches me, and I am willing you should
keep it, but on one condition."

Yes ? " she answered, without raising
her eyes.

The condition is, that you let me kiss
your lips."

''I would rather die."

Nay," he returned ; " not so. And it
is possible that you may have to choose,
because I am determined to have these
things, and I cannot stay here all night."

She was silent, lost in thought. What
was she to do ? She was wholly in this
mans power. Help there was none.

Only a robber very sure of his position
would have taken this affair as deliberately
as this man had done. She could
not give up the seal, she would keep it
at any price. But such a price ! Through
her mind flitted the recollection of a
duchess, who had bought votes with the
price she was asked to pay for this ; and
what were votes compared with this one
gift of her countryman. She made one
more effort.

Name another condition," she said,
hurriedly.

"That, and no other," he replied; "and
choose at once, or I will take both the
things I want."

She drew a long breath, and said —

I consent ; give it to me."

He came nearer to her, bending his
head to hers. She lifted her face ; unshed
tears sparkled on her eyelashes, she drew
a long shivering sigh and shut her eyes,
shuddering from head to foot, while she
clenched her fingers upon the seal. She
felt for a second the breath of her persecutor
upon her cheek, and then, instead of
coming nearer to her, he suddenly started
away with a loud exclamation, a well-known
voice sounded in her ear, and she
was free.

There was a short parley between Garth-waite
and the other man, of which she, in
her surprise and relief and joy, did not
catch one word, and then the man disappeared
among the trees, and they were
left standing together.

CHAPTER XIII.

IN DOUBT.

They stood for a few minutes, Diana trying
to realise that her peril was at an
end ; John looking at her with a wrathful
clouded face — such as she had never seen
him wear before. Then he roused himself,
and said abruptly, " Come home,"
moving as he spoke in the direction of
the road.

Diana followed him in silence, and it
was not until they were clear of the trees
that she asked —

How did you find me ? "

"You had left this on a thorn, and I
went on till I heard voices and saw you."

This " was a cobwebby handkerchief
with "D. W." interlaced in embroidery in
one corner. He held it towards her as he
spoke ; but she merely glanced at it, without
offering to take it, so he withdrew
it rather hastily, and pushed it into his
pocket without saying anything more.

They walked on again in silence, till
John, turning again to speak to Diana,
saw that she was crying. She was completely
unstrung, and utterly unable to
keep back her tears. When she saw that
John had discovered them, she turned
aside her face ; but her whole figure shook.
Pride, self-control, and all were gone ; and

lie was weeping as John had not thought
she could weep.

"Lean on me," he said, gravely. "You
are too much upset to walk alone."

She accepted his proffered arm, for indeed
she was scarcely able to stand. The
strain removed, she began to feel the
reaction. Her limbs shook beneath her,
and she felt that she could not have
walked home alone.

John was silent while her violent fit of
sobbing lasted; but by degrees she grew
quieter, and before very long, though while
they still had a long walk before them, she
had withdrawn her hand from his arm, and
was speaking in a low tired voice.

How good of you to come to my rescue
! " she said. " This is the second time."

*^ You are so heedless," he answered, still
speaking with unusual gravity. " You need
some one to be constantly looking after
you ; you are not to be trusted alone."

'' You have me completely at your
mercy," she said, with a tremulous smile.
'^ I cannot defend myself; only remember
what Shakespeare says about a giant's
strength."

His features relaxed a little. She had
a way of taking him which practically
disarmed him, and obtained for her very
tender treatment indeed.

Why did you go so far ? " he began.
'' I had warned you ; I had told you how
dangerous these roads were."

''I had not noticed how far I had got,
or I might have turned back sooner."

''If you had kept to the road itself it
would not have been so bad ; but to
positively go right in amongst the trees !
It was most foolhardy; and if I had not
seen it, I would not have believed that
even you could have been so reckless."

"You see you do not know me very
well yet," was all her reply.

"I begin to think I do not know you
at all."

He spoke with a little bitterness, and as
Diana said nothing, there was silence between
them until he said —

Here is your watch."

He spoke abruptly, holding it out, but
not looking at her. " In future," he went
on, " if you will take these lonely walks, at
least leave your valuables at home."

She blushed crimson as she took it from
him. She had forgotten all about her
watch ; and the sight of it, and the little
seal dangling from the chain, brought all
the past scene vividly before her mind —
and for the first time she began to ask
herself how much John had seen.

"Thank you," she said, putting it on.
I did not know you had rescued it too.
How did you get it ? What did you say
to that man?" she asked, hesitatingly.

I told him to make off as fast as he
could, or he should be relieved of the
responsibility of his maintenance by being
placed in prison. If you had not been
there, he would have got something a little
nearer his deserts."

You mean you would have knocked

him down, or thrashed him. I am so
glad you did not ; I could not bear to see
men fight. How surprised he must have
been to see you 1 "

Probably ; though, I think, scarcely as
surprised as I was at what I saw, and what
he told me."

Diana was kept silent by a feeling of
guilty confusion which made speech impossible.


Do you know what I did see ? " he
asked.

I suppose you saw that man and me —
he trying to get possession of my things,
and I doing my best to keep them."

Yes, I saw that ; at least I suppose so.
At first I saw nothing of what you were
holding. I only saw that he was going to

kiss you, and that you were allowing him
to do so."

She said nothing : his anger was just ;
shame and misery kept her silent.

"Was it so? Am I right?" he asked,
in a voice which was stern with the effort
which he made to keep it calm.

*' He would let me keep it on no other
terms," she said, forgetting in her wretchedness
of what she was speaking, until
after the words had left her lips.

And was it worth such a price ? " he
asked, with strong scorn ; ** to barter your
maidenly dignity for a paltry watch and
chain ! Are you so fond of finery ? "

His words roused her anger, and at the
same time caused her keen humiliation; and
her reply was prompted by both feelings.

I set a very high price on them. My
father gave them to me years ago, and he
is dead."

She spoke with some constraint — tears
were not near her eyes now. She had got
long past them ; she saw one question
inevitably coming.

Even that is not reason enough. But
if what that man told me is true, it was
not your watch you were going to redeem,
but that little seal I gave you. He said
you had already yielded the other things.
I cannot believe it. Is it true ? "

She made no reply; she felt cold allover.
What should she say ? What could
she say?

He waited for a moment, and then, as
she said nothing, he repeated —

*was it SO, Diana? Tell me."
His passion would be restrained no
longer. It leapt out, and her name came
from his lips with an intonation which there
could be no mistaking. It thrilled Diana
like a chord of music, and in a single
second revealed a new world to her startled
eyes. She did not speak ; she was fighting
with herself — torn between two impulses.
To tell him he was right would be
to confess to him what she had not yet
confessed to herself, and to tell him more
than he had asked for. To tell him, or let
him think the other, would be to not only
permit an untruth, but to hopelessly lower
herself in his esteem, and kill his regard
upon the spot. She did not know what
to do. She walked by his side in, silence,

unheeding that they had by this time
reached Jacewo, and totally oblivious of
the suspense in which he must be until
she spoke. How long she would have
halted between two opinions cannot be
known, for before she had made up her
mind to speak, or with what words she
should break the silence, they were accosted
by Herr Olawski, who came out
of a side - street, and, taking his place
by Garthwaite's side, walked on with
them.

By this time it was too dark to see
Diana's face, and her silence passed unnoticed,
as the conversation was chiefly
on business. She was both relieved and
impatient at the interruption, for she
saw there was no chance of any further

VOL. I. R

conversation with Join. Herr Olawski
lived just beyond the Camphausens, and
so would go all the way with them. He
did. Garthwaite turned off to his hotel
when he reached the main street ; only
saying, as he shook hands with Diana,
I will see you again, soon," and she
concluded her evening walk under the
escort of Herr Olawski.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.

OP

MESSRS BLACKWOOD & SONS'

PUBLICATIONS.

Edited by WILLIAM KNIGHT, LL.D.,

Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of St Andrews.
In crown 8vo Volumes, with Portraits, price 3s. 6d.

Nov ready
Professor Mahaffy, Dublin.
By Rev. W. Lucas Collins, M. A.
By Professor Campbell Fraser, Edinburgh.
By Professor Adamson, Owens College, Manchester.
By Professor Wallace, Oxford.
By Professor Yeitch, Glasgow.
By Professor Edward Caird, Glasgow.
By J. Theodore Mers.
By Professor Flint, Edinburgh.
By Professor Room Robertson, London.
By the Editor.

By the Very Rev. Principal Caird, Glasgow.
Part L— The Life. By Professor Nichols, Glasgow.
Part II. — Philosophy. By the Same.
Other Vols, in preparation.

FOREIGN CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS.

Edited by Mrs OLIPHANT.

In crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

Contents.

Dante. By the Editor.

Voltaire. By Lieut-general Sir E. B.

Hamley, K.C.B.
Pascal. By Principal Tulloch.
Petrarch. By Henry Reeve, C. B.
Goethe. By A. Hay ward, Q.G.
MoLiERE. By the Editor and F. Carver,

Mea.
Montaigne. By Rev. W. L. Collins, Mea.
Rabelais. By Walter Besaiit, Mea.
Caldron. By E. J. Haseil.

Saint Simon. By Clifton Collins, Mea.

Cervantes. By the Editor.

Corneille and Racine. By Henry M.
Trollope.

Madame de S]£vign£. By Miss Thackeray.

La Fontaine, and other French Fabulists.
By Rev. W. Lucas Collins, Mea.

Schiller. By James Sine, M.A., Author
of ' Lessing : his Life and Writings. '

Tasso. By E. J. Haseil.

Rousseau. By Henry Grey Graham.

Now Complete.

ANCIENT CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS.

Edited by the Rev. W. LUCAS COLLINS, M.A.

Complete in 28 Vols, crown 8vo, cloth, price 2s. 6d. each. And may also be had in
14 Volumes, strongly and neatly bound, with calf or vellum back, £2, los.

Saturday Review. — "It is difficult to estimate too highly the value of such a series
as this in giving ' English readers ' an insight, exact as far as it goes, into those
olden times which are so remote and yet to many of us so close."

OF

MESSRS BLACKWOOD & SONS'
P U B Lie A T I N S.

ALISON. History of Europe. By Sir Archibald Alison, Bart

D.C.L.

1. From the Commencement of the French Revolution to the

Battle of Waterloo.

Library Edition, 14 vols., with Portraits. Demy 8vo, ;^io, los.
Another Edition, in 20 vols, crown 8vo, £6.
People's Edition, 13 vols, crown 8vo, £^2, his.

2. Continuation to the Accession of Louis Napoleon.

Library Edition, 8 vols. 8vo, £6, 7s. cl.
People's Edition, 8 vols, crown 8vo, 34s,

3. Epitome of Alison's History of Europe. Twenty-ninth

Thousand, 7s. 6d.

4. Atlas to Alison's History of Europe. By A. Keith Johnston,

Library Edition, demy 4to, £-i, 3s.
People's Edition, 31s. 6d.

Life of John Duke of Marlborough. With some Account

of his Contemporaries, and of the War of the Succession. Third Edition,
2 vols. 8vo. Portraits and Maps, sos.

Essays : Historical, Political, and Miscellaneous. 3 vols.

demy 8vo, 45s.

Air. Poetical Works of Thomas Air. Fifth Edition, with
Memoir of the Author by the Rev. Jardine Wallace, and Portrait,
Cro^vn 8vo, 7s. 6d.

ALLARDYCE. The City of Sunshine. By Alexander Altars

Three vols, post 8vo, £x, 5s. 6d.

Memoir of the Honourable George Keith Elphinstone,

K.B., Viscount Keith of Stonehaven, Marischal, Admiral of the Red. Bvo,
with Portrait, Illustrations, and Maps, 21s.

Letters from and to Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe. Edited

by Alex. Allardyce, with a Memoir by the Rev. W. K. R. Bedford. 2 vols.
8vo. Illustrated with Etchings and other Engravings. £2, 12s. 6d.

Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century. Edited

from the MSS. of John Ramsay, Esq. of Ochtertyre, by Alex. Allardyce.
2 vols. 8vo, 31S. 6d.

ALMOND. Sermons by a Lay Head-master. By Held Hutchinson
Almond, M.A. Oxon. , Head-master of Lorenzo School. Crown 8vo, 5s.

ANCIENT CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS. Edited by

Rev. W. Lucas Collins, M.A. Complete in 28 vols., cloth, 2s. 6d. each; or in
14 vols., tastefully bound, with calf or vellum back, £2> los.
Contents of the Series.
Homer: The Iliad, by the Editor. —Homer : The Odyssey, by the Editor.— Herodotus,
by George C. Wayne, M.A.— Xenophon, by Sir Alexander Grant, Bart. , LL.D.
Euripides, by W. B. Donne —Aristophanes, by the Editor.— Plato, by Clifton W.
Collins, M.A.— LuciAN, by the Editor.— aeschylus, by the Right Rev. the Bishop of
Colombo.— Sophocles, by Clifton W. Collins, M.A.— Hesiod and Theognis, by the
Rev. J. Davies, M.A.— Greek Anthology, by Lord Leaves.— Virgil, by the Editor.
—Horace, by Sir Theodore Martin, K.C.B.— Juvenal, by Edward Walford, M.A.—
Plautus and Terence, by the Editor.— The Commentaries of C^sar, by Anthony
Trollope,— Tacitus, by W. B. Donne.— Cicero, by the Editor.— Pliny's Letters, by
the Rev. Alfred Church, M.A., and the Rev. W. J. Brodribb, M.A,— Livy, by the
Editor.— Ovid, by the Rev. A. Church, M. A.— Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius,
by the Rev. Jas. Davies, M. A.— Demosthenes, by the Rev. W. J. Brodribb, M.A.—
Aristotle, by Sir Alexander Grant, Bart., LL.D.— Thucydides, by the Editor.—
Lucretius, by W. H. Matlock, M. A.— Pindar, by the Rev. F. D. Morice, M.A.

AYTOUN. Lays of the Scottish Cavaliers, and other Poems. By

W. Edmonstone Aytoun, D.C.L., Professor of Rhetoric and Belles-lettres
in the University of Edinburgh. New Edition, printed from a new type,
and tastefully bound. Cap. 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Another Edition, being the Thirtieth. Cap. 8vo, cloth extra, 7s. 6d.

Cheap Edition. Cap. 8vo. Illustrated Cover. Price is.

An Illustrated Edition of the Lays of the Scottish Cavaliers.

From designs by Sir Noel Paton. Small 4to, 21S. , in gilt cloth.

Bothwell : a Poem. Third Edition. Cap., 7s. 6d.

Poems and Ballads of Goethe. Translated by Professor

Aytoun and Sir Theodore Martin. K.C.B. Third Edition. Cap., 6s.

Bon Gautier's Book of Ballads. By the Same. Fourteenth

and Cheaper Edition. "With Illustrations by "^ Doyle, Leech, and Crowquill.
Cap. 8vo, 5s.

The Ballads of Scotland. Edited by Professor Aytoun.

Fourth Edition. 2 vols. cap. 8vo, 12s.

Memoir of William E. Aytoun, D.C.L. By Sir Theodore

Martin, KC.B. With Portrait. Post 8vo, 12s.

BACH. On Musical Education and Vocal Culture. By Albert

B. Bach. Fourth Edition. 8vo, 7s. 6d.

The Principles of Singing. A Practical Guide for Vocalists

and Teachers. With Course of Vocal Exercises. Crown 8vo, 6s.

The Art of Singing. With Musical Exercises for Young

People. Crown 8vo, 3s.

BALLADS AND POEMS. By Members op the Glasgow

Ballad Club. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d

BANNATYNE. Handbook of Republican Institutions in the

United States of America. Based upon Federal and State Laws, and other
reliable sources of information. By Dugald J. Bannatyne, Scotch Solicitor,
New York ; Member of the Faculty of Procurators, Glasgow. Or. 8vo, 7s. 6d.

Cellars. The Transvaal War, 1880-81. Edited by Lady Bel-hairs.

With a Frontispiece and Map. 8vo, 153.

Gossips with Girls and Maidens, Betrothed and Free.

New Edition. Crown 8vo, 5s.

BESANT. The Revolt of Man. By Walter Besant, M.A.

Eighth Edition. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Readings in Rabelais. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

BEVERIDGE. Culross and Tulliallan; or Perthshire on Forth. Its

History and Antiquities. With Elucidations of Scottish Life and Character
from the Burgh and Kirk-session Records of that District. By David
Beveridge. 2 vols. Svo, with Illustrations, 42s.

Beveridge. Between the Ochils and the Forth ; or, From

Stirling Bridge to Aberdour. By David Beveridge. Crown 8vo, 6s.

BLACK. Heligoland and the Islands of the North Sea. By

WiLLiAJi George Black. Crown 8vo, 4s.

Black. Lays and Legends of Ancient Greece. By John

Stuart Black, Emeritus Professor of Greek in the University of Edinburgh.
Second Edition. Cap. 8vo. 5s.

The Wisdom of Goethe. Cap. 8vo. Cloth, extra gilt, 6s.

Scottish Song : Its Wealth, Wisdom, and Social Significance.
Crown Svo. With Music, ys. 6d.

A Song of Heroes. Crown Svo. [in the mess.

BLACKWOOD'S MAGAZINE, from Commencement in 1817 to

March 1889. Nos. i to 881, forming 144 Volumes.

Index to Blackwood's Magazine. Vols, i to 50. Svo, 158.

Tales from Blackwood. Forming Twelve Volumes of

Interesting and Amusing Railway Reading. Price One Shilling each, in Paper
Cover. Sold separately at all Railway Bookstalls.
They may also be had bound in cloth, i8s., and in half calf, richly gilt, sos.
Or 12 volumes in 6, roxburgh, 21s., and half red morocco, stales

from Blackwood. New Series. Complete in Twenty-four
Shilling Parts. Handsomely bound in 12 vols., cloth, sos. Tn leather
back, roxburgh style, 37s, 6d, In half calf, gilt, 52s. 6d. In half morocco, cs.

In course of Publication.

Tales from Blackwood. Third Series. In Parts. Each

price IS.

In course of Publication.

Travel, Adventure, and Sport. From 'Blackwood's Magazine.'
In Parts. Uniform with ' Tales from Blackwood.' Each price is.
Standard Novels. Uniform in size and legibly Printed.

Each Novel complete in one volmne
FLORIN SERIES, Illustrated Boards. Or in New Cloth Binding, 2S. 6d
Tom Cringe's Loo. By Michael Scott. Pen Owen. By Dean Hook.
The Cruise OF THE Midge. By the Same. Adam Blair. By J. G. Lockhart
Cyril Thornton. By Captain Hamilton.
Annals of the Parish. By John Gait.
The Provost, &c. By John Gait.
Sir Andrew Wylie. By John Gait.
The Entail. By John Gait.
Miss Molly. By Beatrice May Butt.
Reginald Dalton. By J. G. Lockhart

Lady Lee's Widowhood. By General
Sir E. B. Hamley.

Salem Chapel. By Mrs Oliphant.

The Perpetual Curate. By Mrs Oliphant.


Miss Marjoribanks. By Mrs Oliphant.

John : A Love Story. By Mrs Oliphant.

SHILLING SERIES, Illustrated Cover. Or in New Cloth Binding, is. 6d.

The Rector, and The Doctor's Family. Sir Frizzle Pumpkin, Nights at Mess,

By Mrs Oliphant. &c.

The Life of Manse Watch, By D. M. The Subaltern.

Mohr. Life in the Far West. By G. F. Buxton.

Peninsular Scenes and Sketches. By t Alterius : A Roman Story. By J. G.

F. Harden. 1 Lockhart.

BLACKMORE. The Maid of Seer. By R. D. Blackmore, Author

of ' Lorna Done,' &c. New Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

BLAIR. History of the Catholic Church of Scotland. From the

Introduction of Christianity to the Present Day. By Alphonse Blenheim,
D.D., Canon of Aix-la-chapelle. Translated, with Notes and Additions, by
D. Oswald Hunter Blair, O.S.B., Monk of Fort Augustus. To be completed
in 4 vols. Svo. Vols. I and II. 25s.

BOSCOBEL TRACTS. Relating to the Escape of Charles the

Second after the Battle of Worcester, and his subsequent Adventures. Edited
by J. Hughes, Esq., A.M. A New Edition, with additional Notes and Illustrations,
including Communications from the Rev. R. H. Bashan, Author of
the ' Ingoldsby Legends.' Svo, with Engravings, i6s.

BROOKE, Life of Sir James, Rajah of Sarawak. From his Personal

Papers and Correspondence. By Spenser St John, H.M.'s Minister-Resident
and Consul-general Peruvian Republic ; formerly Secretary to the Rajah.
With Portrait and a Map. Post 8vo, 12s. 6d.

BROUGHAM. Memoirs of the Life and Times of Henry Lord

Brougham. Written by Himself. 3 vols. 8vo, £-2, 8s. The Volumes are sold
separately, price i6s. each.

BROWN. The Forester : A Practical Treatise on the Planting,

Rearing, and General Management of Forest-trees. By James Brown, LL.D.,
Inspector of and Reporter on Woods and Forests. Fifth Edition, revised and
enlarged. Royal Bvo, with Engravings, 36s.

BROWN. The Ethics of George Eliot's Works. By John Crosbie

Brown. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

BROWN. A Manual of Botany, Anatomical and Physiological.

For the Use of Students. By Robert Brown, M.A., Ph.D. Crown Svo, with
numerous Illustrations, 12s. 6d.

BUCHAN. Introductory Text-book of Meteorology. By Alexander
Buchan, M.A., F.R.S.E., Secretary of the Scottish Meteorological
Society, &c. Crown Svo, with 8 Coloured Charts and other Engravings,
pp. 218. 4s. 6d.

BUCHANAN. The Shire Highlands (East Central Africa). By

John Buchanan, Planter at Zomba. Crown Svo, 5s.

Bridge. Domestic Floriculture, Window Gardening, and

Floral Decorations. Being practical directions for the Propagation, Culture,
and Arrangement of Plants and Flowers as Domestic Ornaments. By F. W.
BuRBiDGE. Second Edition. Crown Svo, with numerous Illustrations,
7S. 6d.

Cultivated Plants : Their Propagation and Improvement.

Including Natural and Artificial Hybridisation, Raising from Seed, Cuttings,
and Layers, Grafting and Budding, as applied to the Families and Genera in
Cultivation. Crown Svo, with numerous Illustrations, 12s, 6d.

BURTON. The History of Scotland : From Agricola's Invasion to

the Extinction of the last Jacobite Insurrection. By John Hill Burton.
D.C.L., Historiographer-Royal for Scotland. New and Enlarged Edition,
8 vols., and Index. Crown Svo, £,-i, 3s.

History of the British Empire during the Reign of Queen

Anne. In 3 vols. Svo. 36s.

The Scot Abroad. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, los. 6d.

The Book-Hunter. New Edition. With Portrait. Crown

Svo, 7S. 6d.

BUTE. The Roman Breviary : Reformed by Order of the Holy

CEcumenical Council of Trent ; Published by Order of Pope St Pius V. ; and
Revised by Clement VIII. and Urban VIII.; together with the Offices since
granted. Translated out of Latin into English by John, Marquess of Bute,
K.T. In 2 vols, crown Svo, cloth boards, edges uncut. £2, 2s.

The Alius of St Columba. With a Prose Paraphrase and

Notes. In paper cover, 2s. 6d.

BUTLER. Pompeii : Descriptive and Picturesque. By W.

Butler. Post Svo, 5s.

BUTT. Miss Molly. By Beatrice Mat Butt. Cheap Edition, 2s.

Eugene. Crown Svo, 6s. 6d.

Elizabeth, and Other Sketches. Crown Svo, 6s.

CAIRO. Sermons. By John Caird, D.D., Principal of the University
of Glasgow. Sixteenth Thousand. Cap. Svo, 5s.

Religion in Common Life. A Sermon preached in Craigie

Church, October 14, 1855, before Her Majesty the Queen and Prince Albert.
Published by Her Majesty's Command. Cheap Edition, 3d.

CAMPBELL. Sermons Preached before the Queen at Balmoral.
Bj' the Rev. A. A. Campbell, Minister of Craigie. Published by Command
of Her Majesty. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.

CAMPBELL. Records of ArgylL Legends, Traditions, and Recollections

of Argyllshire Highlanders, collected chiefly from the Gaelic.
With Notes on the Antiquity of the Dress, Clan Colours or Tartans of the
Highlanders. By Lord Archibald Campbell. Illustrated with Nineteen
full-page Etchings. 4to, printed on hand-made paper, £3, 3s.

CANTON. A Lost Epic, and other Poems. By William Canton.

Crown 8vo, 5s.

Capon. Victor Hugo. A Memoir and a Study. By James

Capon, M.A. Post 8vo. los. 6d.

CARRICK. Koumiss ; or, Fermented Mare's Milk : and its Uses
in the Treatment and Cure of Pulmonary Consumption, and other Wasting
Diseases. With an Appendix on the best Methods of Fermenting Cow's Milk.
By George L. Carrick, M.D., L.R.C.S.E. and L.R.C.P.E., Physician to the
British Embassy, St Petersburg, &c. Crown Svo, los. 6d.

Calvin. A Treasury of the English and German Languages.

Compiled from the best Authors and Lexicographers in both Languages.
Adapted to the Use of Schools, Students, Travellers, and Men of Business ;
and forming a Companion to all German-English Dictionaries. By Joseph
Calvin, LL.D. & Ph.D., of the University of Gottingen,&c. Crown 8vo,7S.6d.

Came-BROWN. Lambeth Palace and its Associations. By J.

Cave-Brown, M. a., Vicar of Dealing, Kent, and for many years Curate of Lambeth
Parish Church. With an Introduction by the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Second Edition, containing an additional Chapter on Medieval Life in the
Old Palaces. Svo, with Illustrations, 21s.

Charters. Canonicity ; or. Early Testimonies to the Existence
and Use of the Books of' the New Testament. Based on Kirchhoffer's '.
' Edited by A. H. Charters, D.D., Professor of Biblical
Criticism in the University of Edinburgh. Svo, iSs.

Christian. Life of Sir Robert Christian, Bart., M.D., D.C.L.

Oxon., Professor of Medical Jurisprudence in the University of Edinburgh.
Edited by his Sons. In two vols. Svo. Vol. I.— Autobiography. i6s. Volet.
Memoirs. i6s.

CHURCH SERVICE SOCIETY. A Book of Common Order :

Being Forms of Worship issued by the Church Service Society. Fifth Edition.
6s.

Houston. Popular Tales and Fictions : their Migrations and

Transformations. By W. A. Houston, Editor of ' Arabian Poetry for English
Readers,' ' The Book of Sindibad,' &c. 2 vols, post Svo, roxburgh bind-cochran.'

A Handy Text-book of Military Law. Compiled

chiefly to assist Officers preparing for Examination ; also for all Officers of
the Regular and Auxiliary Forces. Specially arranged according to the Syllabus
of Subjects of Examination for Promotion, Queen's Regulations, 1883.
Comprising also a Synopsis of part of the Army Act. By Major F. Cochran,
Hampshire Regiment, Garrison Instructor, North British District. Crown
Svo, 7S. 6d.

COLQUHOUN. The Moor and the Loch. Containing Minute

Instructions in all Highland Sports, with Wanderings over Crag and Corrie,
Flood and Fell. By John Colquhoun. Seventh Edition. With Illustrations.
Complete in i vol. Svo, 21s.

COTTERILL. Suggested Reforms in Public Schools. By C. C.
Cotterill, M.A., AssistantMasteratFettes College, Eden. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d.

Cranston. The Elegies of Albinus Tibullus. Translated into

English Verse, with Life of the Poet, and Illustrative Notes. By James Cran-stout,
LL.D., Author of a Translation of ' Catullus. ' Crown Svo, 6s. 6d.

The Elegies of Sixtus Propertius. Translated into

English Verse, with Life of the Poet, and Illustrative Notes. Crown Svo,
7s. 6d.

CRAWFORD. Saracinesca. By F. Marion Crawford, Author of

Mr Isaacs,' ' Dr Claudius ' Zoroaster,' &c. &c. Fourth Ed. Crown 8vo, 6s.

CRAWFORD. The Doctrine of Holy Scripture respecting the

Atonement. By the late Thomas J. Crawford, D.D. , Professor of Dimity in
the University of Edinburgh. Fourth Edition. 8vo, 12s.

The Fatherhood of God, Considered in its General and

Special Aspects, and particularly in relation to the Atonement, with a
Review of Recent Speculations on the Subject. Third Edition, Revised and
Enlarged. 8vo, 9s. , , o, o

The Preaching of the Cross, and other Sermons. 8vo,

7$. 6d. . ^

The Mysteries of Christianity. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

GUSHING. The Blacksmith of Woe. A Novel. By Paul Gushing,

Author of ' Misogyny and the Maiden,' ' A Woman with a Secret,' &c. 3 vols,
crown 8vo, 258. 6d.

DAVIES. Norfolk Broads and Rivers ; or, The Waterways, Lagoons,

and Decoys of East Anglia. By G. Christopher Davies, Author of ' The
Swan and her Crew.' Illustrated with Seven full-page Plates. New and
Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Dane. In the Name of the Tzar. A Novel. By J. Belford

Daynr. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Tribute to Satan. A Novel. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

DE LA War. An Eastern Cruise in the 'Adeline.' By the
Countess De la War. In Illustrated Cover. 2s.

DESCARTES. The Method, Meditations, and Principles of Philosophy
of Descartes. Translated from the Original French and Latin. With a
New Introductory Essay, Historical and Critical, on the Cartesian Philosophy.
By John Veitch, LL.D., Professor of Logic and Rhetoric in the University of
Glasgow. A New Edition, being the Ninth. Price 6s. 6d.

DICKSON. Gleanings from Japan. By W. G. Dickson, Author
of ' Japan : Being a Sketch of its History, Government, and Officers of the
Empire ' In One Volume, with Illustrations. [In the press.

DOBSON. History of the Bassandyne Bible — the First Printed

In Scotland. With Notices of the Early Printers of Edinburgh. By William T.
DoBSON, Author of 'Literary Frivolities,' ' Poetical Ingenuities, ' Royal Characters
of Scott,' &c. Post 8vo, with Facsimiles and other Illustrations. 7s. 6d.

DOGS OUR DOMESTICATED : Their Treatment in reference
to Food, Diseases, Habits, Punishment, Accomplishments. By * Magenta.'
Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. ext m

DU CANE. The Odyssey of Homer, Books I-xii. Translated into

English Verse. By Sir Charles Du Cane, K.C.M.G. 8vo, los. 6d.

DUDGEON. History of the Edinburgh or Queen's Regiment

Light Infantry Militia, now 3rd Battalion The Royal Scots ; with an
Account of the Origin and Progress of the Militia, and a Brief Sketch of the
old Royal Scots. By Major R. C. Dudgeon, Adjutant 3rd Battalion The Royal
Scots. Post 8vo, with Illustrations, los. 6d.

DUNCAN. Manual of the General Acts of Parliament relating to

the Salmon Fisheries of Scotland from 1828 to 1882. By J. Barker Duncan.
Crown 8vo, 5s.

DUNSMORE. Manual of the Law of Scotland as to the Relations

between Agricultural Tenants and their Landlords, Servants, Merchants, and
Bowers. By W. Dunsmore. 8vo, 7s. 6d.

DUPRE. Thoughts on Art, and Autobiographical Memoirs of

Giovanni Dupre. Translated from the Italian by E. M. Peruzzi, with the
permission of the Author. New Edition. With an Introduction by W. W.
Story. Crown 8vo, los. 6d.

ELIOT. George Eliot's Life, Related in her Letters and Journals.

Arranged and Edited by her husband, J. W. Cross. With Portrait and other
Illustrations. Third Edition. 3 vols, post Svo, 42s.

ELIOT. Works of George Eliot (Cabinet Edition). Handsomely

printed in a new type, 21 volumes, crown 8vo, price £5, 5s. The Volumes

are also sold separately, price 5s, each, viz. : —

Romola. 2 vols.— Silas Maner, The Lifted Veil, Brother Jacob). i vol. —
Adam Bede, 2 vols. — Scenes of Clerical Life. 2 vols.— The Mill on
the Floss. 2 vols.— Felix Holt. 2 vols.— Middlemarch. 3 vols. —
Daniel Deronda. 3 vols.— The Spanish Gypsy. 1 vol.— Jubal, and
other Poems, Old and New. i vol.— Theophrastus Such, i vol. —
Essays, i vol.

George Eliot's Life. (Cabinet Edition.) With Portrait and

other Illustrations. 3 vols, crown 8vo, 15s.

George Eliot's Life. With Portrait and other Illustrations.

New Edition, in one volume. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

- Novels by George Eliot. Cheap Edition. Adam Bede. Illustrated.

3s. 6d., cloth. — The Mill on the Floss. Illustrated.
3s. 6d., cloth. — Scenes of Clerical Life. Illustrated.
3s., cloth. — Silas Marner : The Weaver of Kaveloe. Illustrated.
2s. 6d., cloth. — Felix Holt, the Radical. Illustrated.
3s. 6d., cloth. — Romola. With Vignette. 3s. 6d. , cloth.

- Middlemarch. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

- Daniel Deronda. Crown 8vo 7s. 6d.

- Essays. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 5s.

- Impressions of Theophrastus Such. New Edition. Crown

8vo, 5s.

- The Spanish Gypsy. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 5s.

- The Legend of Jubal, and other Poems, Old and New.

New Edition. Crown 8vo, 5s., cloth.

- Wise, Witty, and Tender Sayings, in Prose and Verse.

Selected from the Works of George Eliot. Eighth Edition. Cap. Svo, 6s.
The George Eliot Birthday Book. Printed on fine paper,

with red border, and handsomely bound in cloth, gilt. Cap. Svo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
And in French morocco or Russia, 5s.

ESSAYS ON SOCIAL SUBJECTS. Originally published in

the ' Saturday Review.' A New Edition. First and Second Series. 2 vols,
crown Svo, 6s. each.

EWALD. The Crown and its Advisers ; or. Queen, Ministers,

Lords, and Commons. By Alexander Charles Ewald, F.S.A. Crown Svo, 5s.

FAITHS OF THE WORLD, The. A Concise History of the

Great Religious Systems of the World. By various Authors. Being the St
Giles' Lectures — Second Series. Crown Svo, 5s.

Farmer. A Tour in Greece in 1880. By Richard Ridley

Parker. With Twenty-seven full-page Illustrations by Lord Windsor.
Royal Svo, with a Map, 21s.

Farrier. Philosophical Works of the late James F. Farrier,

B. A. Oxon. , Professor of Moral Philosophy and Political Economy, St Andrews,
New Edition. Edited by Sir Alex. Grant, Bart., D.C.L., and Professor
LusHiNGTON. 3 vols, crown Svo, 34s. 6d.

Institutes of Metaphysic. Third Edition. los. 6d.

Lectures on the Early Greek Philosophy. Third Edition ,

los. 6d.

Philosophical Remains, including the Lectures on Early

Greek Philosophy. 2 vols., 24s.

FLETCHER. Lectures on the Opening Clauses of the Litany,

delivered in St Paul's Church, Edinburgh. By John B. Fletcher, M.A.
Crown Svo, 4s.

FLINT. The Philosophy of History in Europe. By Robert

Flint, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Divinity, University of Edinburgh. Vol. I.
Svo. [New Edition in preparation.

FLINT. Theism. Being the Baird Lecture for 1876. By Egbert

Flint, D.D., LL.D., Professor of Divinity, University of Edinburgh. Sixth
Edition, Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

Anti-Theistic Theories. Being the Baird Lecture for 1877.

Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, los. 6d.

Agnosticism. Being the Croall Lectures for 1887-88.

[In the press.

FORBES. Insolence : Experiences of a Naturalist's Wife in the

Eastern Archipelago. By Mrs H. O. Forbes. Post Svo, with a Map. 8s. 6d.

FOREIGN CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS. Edited

by Mrs Oliphant. Price 2s. 6d. For List of Volumes published, see page 2.

GALT. Annals of the Parish. By John Galt. Cap. Svo, 28.

The Provost. Cap. 8vo, 2s.

Sir Andrew Wylie. Cap. 8vo, 2S.

The Entail ; or, The Laird of Grippy. Cap. Svo, 2S.

GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.

Family Prayers. Authorised by the General Assembly of

the Church of Scotland. A New Edition, crown Svo, in large type, 4s. 6d.
Another Edition, crown Svo, 2s.

Prayers for Social and Family Worship. For the Use of

Soldiers, Sailors, Colonists, and Sojourners in India, and other Persons, at
home and abroad, who are deprived of the ordinary services of a Christian
Ministry. Cheap Edition, is. 6d.

The Scottish Hymnal Appendix, i. Longprimer type, is.

2. Nonpareil type, cloth limp, 4d. ; paper cover, 2d.

Scottish Hymnal with Appendix Incorporated. Published
for Use in Churches by Authority of the General Assembly, t. Large
type, cloth, red edges, 2s. 6d. ; French morocco, 4s. 2. Bourgeois type, limp
cloth, IS.; French morocco, 2s. 3. Nonpareil type, cloth, red edges, 6d. ;
French morocco, is. 4d. 4. Paper covers, 3d. 5. Sunday - School Edition,
paper covers, id. 6. Children's Hymnal, paper covers, id. No. i, bound
with the Psalms and Paraphrases, French morocco, 7s. 6d. No. 2, bound
with the Psalms and Paraphrases, cloth, 2s. ; French morocco, 38.

GERARD. Rata: What's in a Name. By E. D. Gerard.

New Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Beggar my Neighbour. New Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

The Waters of Hercules. New Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

The Land beyond the Forest. Facts, Figures, and

Fancies from Transylvania. By E. Gerard. In Two Volumes. With Maps

and Illustrations. 25s.

GERARD. Stonyhurst Latin Grammar. By Rev. John Gerard.

Cap. Svo, 3s.

GILL. Free Trade : an Inquiry into the Nature of its Operation.

By Richard Gill. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

Free Trade under Protection. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

GOETHE'S FAUST. Translated into English Verse by Sir Theodore
Martin, K.C.B. Part I. Second Edition, post Svo, 6s. Ninth Edition,
cap., 3S. 6d. Part II. Second Edition, revised. Cap. Svo, 6s.

GOETHE. Poems and Ballads of Goethe. Translated by Professor

Aytoun and Sir Theodore Martin, K.C.B. Third Edition, cap. Svo, 6s.

GORDON GUMMING. At Home in Fiji. By C. F. Gordon

Gumming, Author of ' From the Hebrides to the Himalayas.' Fourth Edition,
post Svo. With Illustrations and Map. 7s. 6d.

A Lady's Cruise in a French Man-of-war. New and

Cheaper Edition. Svo. With Illustrations and Map. J2S. 6d.

Gordon GUMMING. Fire-Fountains. The Kingdom of Hawaii :
Its Volcanoes, and the History of its Missions. By C. F. Gordon Gumming.
"With Map and numerous Illustrations. 2 vols. 8vo, 25s.

Granite Crags : The Yo-semite Region of California. Illustrated
with 8 Engravings. New and Cheaper Edition. 8vo, 8s. 6d.

Wanderings in China. New and Cheaper Edition. 8vo,

with Illustrations, los.

GRAHAM. The Life and Work of Seed Aimed Khan, C.S.I.

By Lieut-colonel G. F. I. Graham, B.S.C. 8vo, 14s.

GRANT. Bush-Life in Queensland. By A. C. Grant. New

Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

GRIFFITHS. Locked Up. By Major Arthur Griffiths.

Author of • The Wrong Road,' ' Chronicles of Newgate,' (kc. With Illustrations
by C. J. Staxiland, Rei. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

HALDANE. Subtropical Cultivations and Climates. A Handy

Book for Planters, Colonists, and Settlers. By R. C. Haldane. Posts, 9s.
Hamilton. Wenderholme : A Story of Lancashire and Yorkshire
Life. By Philip Gilbert Hamilton, Author of 'A Painter's Camp.' A
New Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

HAMILTON. Lectures on Metaphysics. By Sir William Hamilton,
Bart., Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh.
Edited by the Rev. H. L. Manse, Bed., LL.D., Dean of St Paul's ; and John
Veitch, M.A., Professor of Logic and Rhetoric, Glasgow. Seventh Edition.
2 vols. 8vo, 24S.

Lectures on Logic. Edited by the Same. Third Edition.

2 vols., 24s.

Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education and

University Reform. Third Edition, 8vo, 21s.

Memoir of Sir William Hamilton, Bart., Professor of Logic

and Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh. By Professor Veitch of the
University of Glasgow. 8vo, with Portrait, i8s.

Sir William Hamilton : The Man and his Philosophy.

Two Lectures Delivered before the Edinburgh Philosophical Institution,
January and February 1SS3. By the Same. Crown 8vo, 2s.

Hamlet. The Operations of War Explained and Illustrated. By
Lieut-General Sir Edward Bruce Hamley, K.C.B., M.P. Fourth Edition,
revised throughout. 4to, with numerous Illustrations, sos.

Thomas Carlyle : An Essay. Second Edition. Crown

8vo. 2S. 6d.

The Story of the Campaign of Sebastopol. Written in the

Camp. With Illustrations drawn in Camp by the Author. Svo, 21s.

On Outposts. Second Edition. Svo, 2s.

Wellington's Career ; A Military and Political Summary.

Crown 8vo, 2s.

Lady Lee's Widowhood. Crown Svo, 28. 6d.

Our Poor Relations. A Philozoic Essay. With Illustrations,

chiefly by Ernest Grist. Crown Svo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.
Hamlet. Guilty,' or Not Guilty 1 A Tale. By Major-general

W. G. Hamley, late of the Royal Engineers. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Traseaden Hall. "When George the Third was King.'

New and Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, 6s.

Harbor. Definitions and Diagrams in Astronomy and Navigation.
By the Rev. J. B. Harbor. M.A., Assistant Director of Education,
Admiralty, is.

HARRISON. The Scot in Ulster. The Story of the Scottish

Settlement in Ulster. By John Harrison, Author of ' Cure Tunis Colledge.'
Crown Svo, 2S. 6d.

HASELL. Bible Partings. By E. J. Hasell. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Short Family Prayers. By Miss Hasell. Cloth, is.

HAY. The Works of the Eight Rev. Dr George Hay, Bishop of

Edinburgh. Edited under the Supervision of the Right Rev. Bishop Strain.

With Memoir and Portrait of the Author. 5 vols, crown 8vo, bound in extra

cloth, ;^i, IS. Or, sold separately — viz. :
The Sincere Christian Instructed in the Faith of Christ from the Written Word.
2 vols., 8s.— The Devout Christian Instructed in the Law of Christ from the Written
Word. 2 vols, 8s.— The Pious Christian Instructed in the Nature and Practice of the
Principal Exercises of Piety, i vol., 4s.

Heathen. The Horse-Owner's Safeguard. A Handy Medical

Guide for every Man who owns a Horse. By G. S. Heathen, M.R.C.V.S.
Crown Svo, 5s.

The Stock-Owner's Guide. A Handy Medical Treatise for

every Man who owns an Ox or a Cow. Crown Svo, 4s. 6d.

HEMANS. The Poetical Works of Mrs Hemans. Copyright Editions.—
One Volume, royal Svo, 5s.— The Same, with Illustrations engraved on
Steel, bound in cloth, gilt edges, 7s. 6d. — Six Volumes in Three, cap., 12s. 6d.
Select Poems of Mrs Hemans. Cap., cloth, gilt edges, 3s.

HOME PRAYERS. By Ministers of the Church of Scotland and

Members of the Church Service Society. Second Edition. Cap. Svo, 3s.

HOMER. The Odyssey. Translated into English Verse in the

Spenserian Stanza. By Philip Stanhope Worsley. Third Edition, 2 vols,
cap., 1 23.

The Iliad. Translated by P. S. Worsley and Professor

Dodington. 2 vols, crown Svo, 21s.

Horace. Mary Queen of Scots and Her Accusers. Containing a

Variety of Documents never before published. By John Hosack, .
A New and Enlarged Edition, with a Photograph from the Bust on
the Tomb in Westminster Abbey. 2 vols. Svo, ;^i, his. 6d.

Mary Stewart. A Brief Statement of the Principal Charges

which have been made against her, together with Answers to the same.
Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

HUTCHINSON. Hints on the Game of Golf. By Horace G.

Hutchinson. Fourth Edition. Cap. Svo, cloth, is. 6d.

IDDESLEIGH. Lectures and Essays. By the late Earl of

Iddesleigh, G.C.B., D.C.L., &c. Svo 16s.

INDEX Geographical : Being a List, alphabetically arranged,

of the Principal Places on the Globe, with the Countries and Subdivisions of
the Countries in which they are situated, and their Latitudes and Longitudes.
Applicable to all Modern Atlases and Maps. Imperial Svo, pp. 676, 21s.

Jameson. Discussions on the Atonement : Is it Vicarious ?

By the Rev. George Jameson, A.M., Bed., D.D., Author of ' Profound Problems
in Philosophy and Theology.' Svo, 16s.

JEAN J AMBON. Our Trip to Sunderland ; or, Grand Excursion

to Bluudertown and Back. By Jean Jambon. With Sixty Illustrations
designed by Charles Doyle, engraved by Daniel. Fourth Thousand.
Handsomely bound in cloth, gilt edges, 6s. 6d. Cheap Edition, cloth, 3s. 6d.
In boards, 2s. 6d.

JENNINGS. Mr Gladstone : A Study. By Louis J. Jennings,

M.P., Author of ' Republican Government in the United States,' ' The Croaker
Memoirs,' &c. Popular Edition. Crown Svo, is.

Birmingham. Reminiscences of an Attache. By Hubert

E. H. Birmingham. Second Edition. Crown Svo, 5s.

Diane de Breteuille. A Love Story. Crown Svo, 2S. 6d.

JOHNSTON. The Chemistry of Common Life. By Professor

J. F. W, Johnston. New Edition, Revised, and brought down to date. By
Arthur Herbert Church, M.A. Oxon. ; Author of 'Food: its Sources,
Constituents, and Uses; ' 'The Laboratory Guide for Agricultural Students ; '
'Plain "Words about Water,' &c. Illustrated with Maps and 102 Engravings
on Wood. Complete in one volume, crown 8vo, pp. 618, 7s. 6d.

Elements of Agricultural Chemistry and Geology. Fourteenth
Edition, Revised, and brought down to date. By Sir Charles A.
Cameron, M.D., F.R.C.S.I., &c. Cap. 8vo, 6s. 6d.

Catechism of Agricultural Chemistry and Geology. An

entirely New Edition, revised and enlarged, by Sir Charles A. Cameron,
M.D., P.R.C.S.I. ,&c. Eighty-sixth Thousand, with numerous Illustrations, is.

JOHNSTON. Patrick Hamilton : a Tragedy of the Reformation

in Scotland, 1528. By T. P. Johnston. Crown 8vo, with Two Etchings by
the Author, 5s.

KENNEDY. Sport, Travel, and Adventures in Newfoundland

and the West Indies. By Captain W. R. Kennedy, Ren. With Illustrations
by the Author. Post 8vo, 14s.

KING. The Metamorphoses of O-vnd. Translated in English Blank
Verse. By Henry King, M. A. , Fellow of Wadharn College, Oxford, and of
the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-law. Crown 8vo, los. 6d.

KINGLAKE. History of the Invasion of the Crimea. By A. W.

KiNGLAKE. Cabinet Edition, revised. Illustrated with Maps and Plans. Complete
in 9 Vols., crown 8vo. at 6s. each. The Volumes respectively contain : —
I. The Origin of the War between the Czar and the Sultan. II. Russia
Met and Invaded. III. The Battle of the Alma. IV. Sebastopol at
Bay. V. The Battle of Balaclava. VI. The Battle of Inkerman.
VII. Winter Troubles. VIII. and IX. From the Morrow of Inkerman
TO the Death of Lord Raglan. With an Index to the Complete Work.

History of the Invasion of the Crimea. Demy 8vo. Vol.

VI. Winter Troubles. With a Map, i6s. Vols. VII. and VIII. From the
Morrow of Inkerman to the Death of Lord Raglan. With an Index to the
Whole Work. With Maps and Plans. 28a.

Eothen. A New Edition, uniform with the Cabinet Edition

of the ' History of the Invasion of the Crimea,' price 6s.
Knolls. The Elements of Field-Artillery. Designed for the

Use of Infantry and Cavalry Officers. By Henry Knolls, Captain Royal
Artillery; Author of 'From Sedan to Saarbriick,' Editor of ' Incidents in the
Sepoy War, ' fee. With Engravings. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

LADY BLUEBEARD. A Novel. By the Author of 'Zit and

Noe.' 2 vols, crown 8vo, 17s.

LAING. Select Remains of the Ancient Popular and Romance

Poetry of Scotland. Originally Collected and Edited by David Laing, LL.D.
Re-edited, with Memorial-Introduction, by John Small, M.A. With a Portrait
of Dr Laing. 4to, 25s.

Auvergne. The Rural Economy of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
By Leone de Auvergne. Translated from the French. With Notes
bv a Scottish Farmer. 8vo, 12s.

LAWLESS. Hurried : a Study. By the Hon. Emily Lawless,

Author of 'A Chelsea Householder,' 'A Millionaire's Cousin.' Fourth
and cheaper Edition, crown 8vo. 6s.

LEE. A Phantom Lover : a Fantastic Story. By Vernon Lee.

Crown 8vo, is.

LEE. Glimpses in the Twilight. Being various Notes, Records,

and Examples of the Supernatural. By the Rev. George F. Lee, D.C.L.
Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d.

LEES. A Handbook of Sheriff Court Styles. By J. M. Lees,

M.A., LL.B., Advocate, Sheriff-substitute of Lancashire. New Ed., 8vo, 21s.

A Handbook of the Sheriff and Justice of Peace Small

Debt Courts. 8vo, 78. 6d.

LETTERS FROM THE HIGHLANDS. Reprinted from 'The

Times.' Cap. 8vo, 4s. 6d.

LIGHTFOOT. Studies in Philosophy. By the Rev. J. Lightfoot,

M.A ,D.Sc., Vicar of Cross Stone, Todmordeu. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.

LITTLE. Madagascar: Its History and People. By the Rev.

H. W. Little, some years Missionary in East Madagascar. Post 8vo, los. 6d.

LOCKHART. Doubles and Quits. By Laurence W. M. Lockhart.
With Twelve Illustrations. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Fair to See : a Novel. Eighth Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

Mine is Thine : a Novel. Eighth Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

LORIMER. The Institutes of Law : A Treatise of the Principles

of Jurisprudence as determined by Nature. By James Lorimer, Regius
Professor of Public Law and of the Law of Nature and Nations in the University
of Edinburgh. New Edition, revised throughout, and much enlarged.
8vo, i8s.

The Institutes of the Law of Nations. A Treatise of the

Jural Relation of Separate Political Communities. In 2 vols. 8vo. Volume I.,
price i6s. Volume II., price dos.

M'COMBIE. Cattle and Cattle-Breeders. By William M'Combie,

Tillyfour. New Edition, enlarged, with Memoir of the Author. By James
Macdonald, of the ' Farming World.' Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

MACRAE. A Handbook of Deer - Stalking. By Alexander

Macrae, late Forester to Lord Henry Bentinck. With Introduction by
Horatio Ross, Esq. Cap. 8vo, with two Photographs from Life. 3s. 6d.

M'CRIE. Works of the Rev. Thomas M'Crie, D.D. Uniform Edition.
Four vols, crown 8vo, 24s.

Life of John Knox. Containing Illustrations of the History
of the Reformation in Scotland. Crown 8vo, 6s. Another Edition, 3s. 6d.

Life of Andrew Melville. Containing Illustrations of the

Ecclesiastical and Literary History of Scotland in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries. Crown 8vo, 6s.

History of the Progress and Suppression of the Reformation
in Italy in the Sixteenth Century. Crown 8vo, 4s.

History of the Progress and Suppression of the Reformation

in Spain in the Sixteenth Century. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Lectures on the Book of Esther. Cap. 8vo, 5s.

MACDONALD. A Manual of the Criminal Law (Scotland) Procedure
Act, 1887. By Norman Dora Macdonald. Revised by the Lord
Justice Clerk. 8vo, cloth. los. 6d.

MACGREGOR. Life and Opinions of Major-general Sir Charles

MacGregor, K.C.B., C.S.I., CLE , Quartermaster-General of India. From
his Letters and Diaries. Edited by Lady MacGregor. With Portraits and
Maps to illustrate Campaigns in which he was engaged. 2 vols. 8vo, 35s.

Macintosh. The Book of the Garden. By Charles Macintosh,

formerly Curator of the Royal Gardens of his Majesty the King of the Belgians,
and lately of those of his Grace the Duke of Buccleuch, Keg., at Dalkeith Palace.
Two large vols, royal 8vo, embellished with 1350 Engravings. ^4, 7s. 6d.

VoL I. On the Formation of Gardens and Construction of Garden Edifices. 776
pages, and 1073 Engravings, £7., los.

Vol. II. Practical Gardening. 868 pages, and 279 Engravings, ;^i, 17s. 6d.

MACINTYRE. Hindu Koh : Wanderings and Wild Sports on and

beyond the Himalayas. By Major-general Donald Macintyre, V.C, late
Prince of Wales' Own Goorkhas, F.R.G.S. In One Volume, with numerous
Illustrations. [In the press.

MACKAY. A Manual of Modern Geography ; Mathematical, Physical,
and Political. By the Rev. Alexander Mackay, LL.D., F.R.G.S. with
Thousand, revised to the present time. Crown 8vo, pp. 688. 7s. 6d.

MACKAY. Elements of Modern Geography. By the Eev. Alexander
Mackay, LL.D., F.R.G.S. 53d Thousand, revised to thei^resent time.
Crown 8vo, pp. 300, 3s.

The Intermediate Geography. Intended as an Intermediate
Book between the Author's ' Outlines of Geography' and ' Elements of
Geography.' Fourteenth Edition, revised. Crown 8vo, pp. 238, 2s.

Outlines of Modern Geography. insist Thousand, revised
to the present time. imo, pip. 118, is.

First Steps in Geography. 105th Thousand. imo, pp.

56. Sewed, 4d. ; cloth, 6d.

Elements of Physiography and Physical Geography.

With Express Reference to the Instructions recently issued by the Science and
Art Department. 30th Thousand, revised. Crown Bvo, is. 6d.

Facts and Dates : or, the Leading Events in Sacred and

Profane History, and the Principal Facts in the various Physical Sciences
The Memory being aided throughout by a Simple and Natural Method. For
Schools and Private Reference. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

MACKAY. An Old Scots Brigade. Being the History of Mackay's

Regiment, now incorporated with the Royal Scots. With an Appendix containing
many Original Documents connected with the History of the Regiment.
By John Mackay (late) of Herriesdale. Crown 8vo, 5s.

MACKAY. The Founders of the American Republic. A History

of Washington, Adams, Jefferson, Franklin, and Madison. With a Supplementary
Chapter on the Inherent Causes of the Ultimate Failure of American
Democracy. By Charles Mackay, LL.D. Post 8vo, los. 6d.

MACKELLAR. More Leaves from the Journal of a Life in the

Highlands, from 1862 to 1882. Translated into Gaelic by Mrs Mary Mackel-
LAR. By command of Her Majesty the Queen. Crown 8vo, with Illustrations,
los. 6d.

Mckenzie. Studies in Roman Law. With Comparative Views

of the Laws of France, England, and Scotland. By Lord Mckenzie, one of
the Judges of the Court of Session in Scotland. Sixth Edition, Edited by
John Kirkpatrick, Esq., M.A. Cantab.; Dr Fur. Heidelb. ; LL.B. Eden. ;
Advocate. Bvo, 12s.

MAIN. Three Hundred English Sonnets. Chosen and Edited by

David M. Main. Cap. 8vo, 6s.

MAIR. A Digest of Laws and Decisions, Ecclesiastical and Civil,
relating to the Constitution, Practice, and Affairs of the Church of Scotland.
With Notes and Forms of Procedure. By the Rev. William Mair, D.D.,
Minister of the Parish of Carleton. Crown 8vo. With a Supplement, 7s. 9d.

MARMORNE. The Story is told by Adolphus Serve, the

youngest of three Brothers. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

MARSHALL. French Home Life. By Frederic Marshall.

Second Edition. 5s.

Marshal. History of India. From the Earliest Period to the

Close of the India Company's Government ; with an Epitome of Subsequent
Events. By .John Clark Marshal, C.S.I. Abridged from the Author's
larger work. Second Edition, revised. Crown 8vo, with Map, 6s. 6d.

MARTIN. Goethe's Faust. Part I. Translated by Sir Theodore

Martin, K.C.B. Second Ed., crown 8vo, 6s. Ninth Ed., cap. 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Goethe's Faust. Part II. Translated into English Verse.

Second Edition, revised. Cap. Bvo, 6s.

The Works of Horace. Translated into English Verse,

with Life and Notes. 2 vols. New Edition, crown 8vo

- Poems and Ballads of Heinrich Heine. Done into English

Verse. Second Edition. Printed on papier verge, crown 8vo, 8s.

- Catullus. With Life and Notes. Second Ed., post 8vo, 7s. 6d.
Aladdin : A Dramatic Poem. By Adam Oehlenschlae-

GER. Cap. Bvo, 5s.

MARTIN. Correggio : A Tragedy. By Oehlenschlaeger. With

Notes. Cap. 8vo, 3s

King Rene's Daughter : A Danish Lyrical Drama. By

Henrik Hertz. Second Edition, cap., 2s. 6d.

MARTIN. On some of Shakespeare's Female Characters. In a

Series of Letters. By Helena Faucit, Lady Martin. Dedicated by permission
to Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen. Third Edition, 8vo, with
Portrait, 7s. 6d.

Matson. Can the Old Faith Live with the New? or the

Problem of Evolution and Revelation. By the Rev. George Matson, D.D.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

The Psalmist and the Scientist ; or, Modern Value of the

Religious Sentiment. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

MAURICE. The Balance of Military Power in Europe. An

Examination of the War Resources of Great Britain and the Continental States.
By Colonel Maitre, R. A., Professor of Military Art and History at the Royal
Staff College. Crown Svo, with a Map. 6s.

MICHEL. A Critical Inquiry into the Scottish Language. With

the view of Illustrating the Rise and Progress of Civilisation in Scotland. By
Francisque-Michel, F.S.A. Lord. and Scot., Correspondant de Institut de
France, &c. In One handsome Quarto Volume, printed on hand-made paper,
and appropriately bound in Roxburgh style. Price cs.

MICHIE. The Larch : Being a Practical Treatise on its Culture

and General Management. By Christopher Y. Michel, Forester, CuUen House.
Crown Svo, with Illustrations. New and Cheaper Edition, enlarged, 5s.

Practical Forestry. Crown Svo, with Illustrations. 6s.

MILNE. The Problem of the Churchless and Poor in our Large

Towns. With special reference to the Home Mission Work of the Church of
Scotland. By the Rev. Root. Milne,M.A.,D.D., Archer. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d.

Into. A Manual of English Prose Literature, Biographical

and Critical : designed mainly to show Characteristics of Style. By W. Into,
M.A., Professor of Logic in the University of Aberdeen. Third Edition,
revised. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

Characteristics of English Poets, from Chaucer to Shirley.

New Edition, revised. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

■ The Crack of Doom. 3 vols, post Svo, 25s. 6d.

MITCHELL. Biographies of Eminent Soldiers of the last Four

Centuries. By Major-general John Mitchell, Author of ' Life of Wallenstein. '
With a Memoir of the Author. Svo, gs.

Mair. Life of Manse Watch, Tailor in Dalkeith. With 8

Illustrations on Steel, by the late George Cruikshank. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d.
Another Edition, cap. Svo, is. 6d.

Homeric. Defects of Modern Christianity, and other Sermons.

By the Rev. A. W. Mom«rie, M.A., D.Sc, LL.T)., Professor of Logic and
Metaphysics in King's College, London. Third Edition. Crown Svo. 5s.

The Basis of Religion. Being an Examination of Natural

Religion, Second Edition. Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

• The Origin of Evil, and other Sermons. Fifth Edition,

enlarged. Crown Svo, gs.

Personality. The Beginning and End of Metaphysics, and

a Necessary Assumption in all Positive Philosophy. Third Ed, Cr, Svo, 3s.

Agnosticism. Second Edition, Revised. Crown Svo, 5s.

Preaching and Hearing ; and other Sermons. Second

Edition. Crown Svo, 4s. 6d.

- Belief in God. Second Edition. Crown Svo, 3s.
Inspiration ; and other Sermons. Crown Svo, 5s

MONTAGUE. Campaigning in South Africa. Reminiscences of

an Officer in 1S79. Bv Captain W. E. Montague, 94th Regiment, Author of
Claude Meadowleigh,' &c. Svo, los. 6d.

MONT ALE Bert. Memoir of Count de Montalembert. A

Chapter of Recent French History. By Mrs Oliphant, Author of the ' Life
of Edward Irving,' &c. 2 vols, crown 8vo, £t, 4s.

MURDOCH. Manual of the Law of Insolvency and Bankruptcy :

Comprehending a Summary of the Law of Insolvency, Notour Bankruptcy,
Composition-contracts, Trust-deeds, Cession, and Sequestrations; and the
"Winding-up of Joint-stock Companies in Scotland ; with Annotations on the
various Insolvency and Bankruptcy Statutes ; and with Forms of Procedure
applicable to these Subjects. By James Murdoch, Member of the Faculty of
Procurators in Glasgow. Fifth Edition, Revised and Enlarged, 8vo, £i, los.

MY TRIVIAL LIFE AND MISFORTUNE: A Gossip with

no Plot in Particular. By A Plain Woman. New Edition, crown 8vo, 6s.
By the Same Author.
POOR NELLIE. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s,
NAPIER. The Construction of the Wonderful Canon of Logarithms
(Mirifici Logarithmoruni Canons Construction). By John Napier of
Merchiston. Translated for the first time, with Notes, and a Catalogue of
Napier's Works, by William Rae Macdonald. Small 4to, 15s. A felo large,
'paper copies may he had, printed on Whitman 'paper, price sos.

Leaves. Songs and Verses, Social and Scientific. By an Old

Contributor to 'Mama.' By the Hon. Lord Leaves. Fifth Ed., cap. 8vo, 4s.

The Greek Anthology. Being Vol. XX. of * Ancient Classics
for English Readers.' Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

NICHOLSON. A Manual of Zoology, for the Use of Students.

With a General Introduction on the Principles of Zoology. By Henry Al-leone
Nicholson, M.D., D.Sc, F.L.S., F.G.S., Regius Professor of Natus-al
History in the University of Aberdeen, Seventh Edition, rewritten and
enlarged. Post 8vo, pp. 956, with 555 Engravings on Wood, i8s,

Text-book of Zoology, for the Use of Schools. Fourth Edition,
enlarged. Cro\vTi 8vo, with 188 Engravings on Wood, 7s. 6d.

Introductory Text-book of Zoology, for the Use of Junior

Classes. Sixth Edition, revised and enlarged, with 166 Engravings, 3s.

Outlines of Natural History, for Beginners ; being Descriptions

of a Progressive Series of Zoological Types. Third Edition, with
Engravings, is. 6d.

- A Manual of Palseontology, for the Use of Students.

With a General Introduction on the Principles of Palseontology. Second Edition.
Revised and greatly enlarged. 2 vols. Svo, with 722 Engravings, ;^2, 2s.

- The Ancient Life-History of the Earth. An Outline of

the Principles and Leading Facts of Palseontological Science. Crown Svo,
with 276 Engravings, los. 6d.

- On the " Tabulate Corals " of the Palaeozoic Period,

with Critical Descriptions of Illustrative Species. Illustrated with 15
Lithograph Plates and numerous Engravings. Super-royal 8vo, 21s.

- Synopsis of the Classification of the Animal Kingdom.
8vo, with 106 Illustrations, 6s.

- On the Structure and Affinities of the Genus Monticello

and its Sub-Genera, with Critical Descriptions of Illustrative Species.
Illustrated with numerous Engravings on wood and lithographed Plates.
Super-royal 8vo, i8s.

NICHOLSON. Communion with Heaven, and other Sermons.

By the late Maxwell Nicholson, D.D., Minister of St Stephen's, Edinburgh.
Crown 8vo, 5s. 6d.

Rest in Jesus. Sixth Edition. Cap. Svo, 4s. 6d.

NICHOLSON. A Treatise on Money, and Essays on Present

Monetary Problems. By Joseph Shield Nicholson, M.A. , D.Sc, Professor
of Commercial and Political Economy and Mercantile Law in the University
of Edinburgh. Svo, los. 6d.

OLIPHANT. Masollam : a Problem of the Period. A Novel.

By Laurence Oliphant. 3 vols, post Svo, 25s. 6d,

Scientific Religion ; or, Higher Possibilities of Life and

Practice through the Operation of Natural Forces. Second Edition. Svo, i6s.

OLIPHANT. Altera Peto. By Laurence Oliphant. New and

Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, boards, 2S. 6d. Illustrated Edition. Crown
8vo, cloth, 6s.

Piccadilly : A Fragment of Contemporary Biography. With

Eight illustrations by Richard Doyle. Eighth Edition, 4s. 6d. Cheap Edition,
in paper cover, 2s. 6d.

Traits and Travesties ; Social and Political. Post 8vo, los. 6d.

The Land of Gilead. With Excursions in the Lebanon.

With Illustrations and Maps. Demy 8vo, 21s,

The Land of Khemi. Post 8vo, with Illustrations, los. 6d.

Haifa : Life in Modern Palestine. 2d Edition. 8vo, 7s. 6d.

■ Episodes in a Life of Adventure ; or, Moss from a Rolling

stone. Fourth Edition. Post 8vo, 6s.

Fashionable Philosophy, and other Sketches. In paper

cover, IS.

Sympneumata : or, Evolutionary Functions now Active in

Man. Edited by Laurence Oliphant. Post 8vo, los. 6d.

OLIPHANT. The Story of Valentine ; and his Brother. By Mrs

Oliphant. 5s., cloth.

Katie Stewart. 2S. 6d.

OSBORN. Narratives of Voyage and Adventure. By Admiral

Shepard Osborn, C.B. 3 vols, crown 8vo, 12s.

OSSIAN. The Poems of Ossian in the Original Gaelic. With a

Literal Translation into English, and a Dissertation on the Authenticity of the
Poems. By the Rev. Archibald Clerk. 2 vols, imperial 8vo, £1, his. 6d.

OSWALD. By Fell and Fjord ; or, Scenes and Studies in Iceland.

By E. J. Oswald. Post Bvo, with Illustrations. 7s. 6d.

OUTCASTS, The ; or, Certain Passages in the Life of a Clergyman.

2 vols. Post 8vo, 17s.

Outran. Lyrics : Legal and Miscellaneous. By the late George

Outran, Esq., Advocate. New Edition, with Explanatory Notes. Edited
by J. H. Stoddart, LL.D. ; and Illustrated by William Ralston and A. S.
Boyd. Cap. 8vo, 5s.

PAGE. Introductory Text-book of Geology. By David Page,

LL.D., Professor of Geology in the Durham University of Physical Science,
Newcastle, and Professor Lapworth of Mason Science College, Birmingham.
With Engravings and Glossarial Index. Twelfth Edition. Revised and Enlarged.
3s. 6d.

Advanced Text-book of Geology, Descriptive and Industrial.
With Engravings, and Glossary of Scientific Terms. Sixth Edition, revised
and enlarged, 7s. 6d.

Introductory Text-book of Physical Geography. With

Sketch-Maps and Illustrations. Edited Charles Lapworth, LL.D., F.G.S.,
&c., Professor of Geology and Mineralogy in the Mason Science College, Birmingham.
12th Edition. 2s. 6d.

Advanced Text-book of Physical Geography. Third

Edition,' Revised and Enlarged by Prof. Lapworth. With Engravings. 5s.

PATON. Spindrift. By Sir J. Noel Paton. Cap., cloth, 5s.

Poems by a Painter. Cap., cloth, 5s.

PATON. Body and Soul. A Romance in Transcendental Pathology.
By Frederick Noel Paton. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, is.

PATTERSON. Essays in History and Art. By R. Hogarth

Patterson. 8vo, 12s.
The New Golden Age, and Influence of the Precious

Metals upon the World. 2 vols. Bvo, 31s, 6d.

PAUL. History of the Royal Company of Archers, the Queen's
Body-Guard for Scotland. By James Balfour Paul, Advocate of the Scottish
Bar. Crown 4to, with Portraits and other Illustrations, £2, 2s.

Pile. Lawn Tennis as a Game of Skill. With latest revised

Laws as played by the Best Clubs. By Captain S. C. F. Pile, B.S.C. Fourth
Edition, cap. cloth, is. 6d.

PETTIGREW. The Handy Book of Bees, and their Profitable

Management. By A. Pettigrew, Fourth Edition, Enlarged, with Engravings.
Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.

PHILOSOPHICAL CLASSICS FOR ENGLISH READERS.

Companion Series to Ancient and Foreign Classics for English Readers.
Edited by "William Knight, LL.D., Professor of Moral Philosophy, University
of St Andrews. In crown 8vo volumes, with portraits, price 3s. 6d.

[For list of Volumes pxtUishecl, seepage 2.

Pollock. The Course of Time : A Poem. By Robert Pollock,

A.M. Small cap. 8vo, cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. The Cottage Edition, 32mo, sewed,
8d. The Same, cloth, gilt edges, is. 6d. Another Edition, with Illustrations
by Birket Foster and others, cap., gilt cloth, 3s. 6d., or with edges gilt, 4s.

PORT ROYAL LOGIC. Translated from the French ; with Introduction,
Notes, and Appendix. By Thomas Spencer Barnes, LL.D., Professor
in the University of St Andrews. Tenth Edition, imo, 4s.

POTTS AND Darnel. Aditus Facilities : An easy Latin Construing
Book, with Complete Vocabulary. By A. W. Potts, M.A., LL.D.,
Head-Master of the Fetters College, Edinburgh, and sometime Fellow of St
John's College, Cambridge; and the Rev. C. Darrell, M.A., Head-Master of
Cargilfield Preparatory School, Edinburgh, and late Scholar of Pembroke and
Downing Colleges, Cambridge. Tenth Edition, cap. 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Aditus Facilities Graeca. An easy Greek Construing Book,

with Complete Vocabulary. Fourth Edition, cap. 8vo, 3s.

Prince. The Live-Stock of the Farm. By Robert 0. Prince.

Third Edition. Revised and Edited by James Macdonald, of the ' Farming
World,' &c. Crown 8vo, ys. 6d.

PUBLIC GENERAL STATUTES AFFECTING SCOTLAND

from 1707 to 1847, with Chronological Table and Index. 3 vols, large 8vo, £2, 3s.

PUBLIC GENERAL STATUTES AFFECTING SCOTLAND,

COLLECTION OF. Published Annually with General Index.

RAMSAY. Rough Recollections of Military Service and Society.

By Lieut-Col. Balcarres D. Wardle Ramsay. Two vols, post 8vo, 21s.

RAMSAY. Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century.

Edited from the MSS. of John Ramsay, Esq. of Ochtertyre, by Alexander
Allardyce, Author of 'Memoir of Admiral Lord Keith, K.B.,' &c. 2 vols.
8vo, 3Ls. 6d.

RANKIN. A Handbook of the Church of Scotland. By James

Rankin, D.D., Minister of Uphill ; Author of 'Character Studies in the
Old Testament,' &c. An entirely New and much Enlarged Edition. Crown
8vo, with 2 Maps, 7s. 6d.

RANKINE. A Treatise on the Rights and Burdens incident to

the Ownership of Lands and other Heritages in Scotland. By John Rankine
M.A., Advocate, Professor of Scots Law in the University of Edinburgh.
Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 8vo, 45s.

RECORDS OF THE TERCENTENARY FESTIVAL OF THE

UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH. Celebrated in April 1884. Published
under the Sanction of the Senatus Academics. Large 4to, £2, 12s. 6d.
RICE. Reminiscences of Abraham Lincoln. By Distinguished
Men of his Time. Collected and Edited by Allen Thorndike Rice, Editor
of the ' North American Review.' Large 8vo, with Portraits, 21s.

Simmer. The Early Homes of Prince Albert. By Alfred

Rummer, Author of ' Our Old Country Towns,' &c. Beautifully Illustrated
with Tinted Plates and numerous Engravings on Wood. 8vo, los. 6d.

ROBERTSON. Orellana, and other Poems. By J. LoGiE Robertson,
M. a. Cap. 8vo. Printed on hand-made paper. 6s.

The White Angel of the Polly Ann, and other Stories.

A Book of Fables and Fancies. Cap. 8vo, 3s. 6d.

Our Holiday Among the Hills. By James and Janet

LoGiE Robertson. Cap. 8vo, 3s. 6d.

ROSCOE. Rambles with a Fishing-rod. By E. S. Roscoe. Crown

8vo, 4S. 6d.

ROSS. Old Scottish Regimental Colours. By Andrew Ross,

S.S.C., Hon. Secretary Old Scottish Regimental Colours Committee. Dedicated
by Special Permission to Her Majesty the Queen. Folio, handsomely
bound in cloth, £0., 12s. 6d.

RUSSELL. The Hangs of Bemersyde. A Family History. By

John Russell. Large 8vo, with Illustrations. 21s.

RUSSELL. Fragments from Many Tables. Being the Recollections of

some Wise and Witty Men and Women. By Geo. Russell. Cr. 8vo, 4s. 6d.

RUSSELL. Essays on Sacred Subjects for General Readers. By

the Rev. William Russell, M.A. 8vo, 7s. 6d.

RUSTOW. The War for the Rhine Frontier, 1870 : Its Political

and Military History. By Col. W. Rustow. Translated from the German,
by John Lapland Needham, Lieutenant Rem. Artillery. 3 vols. 8vo, with
Maps and Plans, £\, us. 6d.

RUTLAND. Notes of an Irish Tour in 1846. By the Duke of

Rutland, G.C.B. (Lord John Manners). New Edition. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

RUTLAND. Gems of German Poetry. Translated by the Duchess

OF Rutland (Lady John Manners). Small quarto, 3s. 6d.

Impressions of Bad-Homburg. Comprising a Short Account
of the Women's Associations of Germany under the Red Cross. Crown
8vo, IS. 6d.

■ Some Personal Recollections of the Later Years of the Earl

of Beaconsfield, Keg. Sixth Edition, 6d.

■ Employment of Women in the Public Service. 6d.

• Some of the Advantages of Easily Accessible Reading and

Recreation Rooms, and Free Libraries. With Remarks on Starting and
Maintaining Them. Second Edition, crown Svo, is.

A Sequel to Rich Men's Dwellings, and other Occasional

Papers. Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

Encouraging Experiences of Reading and Recreation Rooms.

Aims of Guilds, Nottingham Social Guild, Existing Institutions, &c., &c.
Crown Svo, IS.

SCHILLER. Wallenstein. A Dramatic Poem. By Frederick

VON Schiller. Translated by C. G. A. Lockhart. Cap. Svo, 7s. 6d.

SCOTCH LOCH FISHING. By 'black Palmer." Crown Svo,

interleaved with blank pages, 4s.

SELLAR. Manual of the Education Acts for Scotland. By

Alexander Craig Sellar, M.P. Eighth Edition, Revised and in great
part rewritten by J. Edward Graham, Bea. Oxon., Advocate. Containing
the Technical Schools Act, 1887, and all Acts bearing on Education in Scotland.
With Rules for the conduct of Elections, with Notes and Cases. Svo, los. 6d.

SELLER AND STEPHENS. Physiology at the Farm ; in Aid of

Rearing and Feeding the Live Stock. By William Seller, M.D., F.R.S.E.,
and Henry Stephens, F.R.S.E., Author of ' The Book of the Farm,' &c. Post
Svo, with Engravings, i6s.

SETH. Scottish Philosophy. A Comparison of the Scottish and

German Answers to Hume. Balfour Philosophical Lectures, University of
Edinburgh. By Andrew Seth, M.A., Professor of Logic, Rhetoric, and
Metaphysics in the University of St Andrews. Crown Svo, os.

Hegelianism and Personality. Balfour Philosophical Lectures.
Second Series. Crown Svo, 5s.
SETON. A Budget of Anecdotes. Chiefly relating to the Current

Century. Compiled and Arranged by George' Seton, Advocate, M.A. Oxon.
New and Cheaper Edition, cap. Svo. Boards, is. 6d.

SHADWELL. The Life of Colin Campbell, Lord Clyde. illustrated

by Extracts from his Diary and Correspondence. By Lieutenant-general
Shadwell, C.B. 2 vols. Svo. With Portrait, Maps, and Plans. 36s.

Hand. Half a Century; or, Clian.c^'es in Men and Manners. By

Alex. Innes Shad, Author of 'Against Time,' &c. Second Ed., Svo, 12s. 6d.

Letters from the West of Ireland. Reprinted from the

'Times,' Crown Svo, 5s.

Shape. Letters from and to Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe.

Edited by Alexander Allardyce, Author of 'Memoir of Admiral Lord
Keith, K.B.,' &e. With a Memoir by the Rev. W. K. R. Bedford. In two
vols. Svo. Illustrated with Etchings and other Engravings. £1, 12s. 6d.

SIM. Margaret Sin's Cookery. With an Introduction by L. B.

Walford, Author of 'Mr Smith : A Part of His Life,' &c. Crown Svo, 5s,

SKELTON. Maitland of Lexington ; and the Scotland of Mary

Stuart. A History. By John Skelton, C.B., LL.D. Author of ' The Essays
of Shirley.' Demy Svo. 2 vols., 28s.

SMITH. Italian Irrigation : A Report on the Agricultural Canals

of Piedmont and Lombardy, addressed to the Hon. the Directors of the East
India Company ; with an Appendix, containing a Sketch of the Irrigation System
of Northern and Central India. By Lieut-col. R. Baird Smith, F.G.S.,
Bengal Engineers. Second Edition. 2 vols. Svo, with Atlas, sos.

SMITH. Thorndale ; or, The Conflict of Opinions. By William

Smith, Author of 'A Discourse on Ethics, '&c. New Edition. Cr. Svo, ios.6d.

Gravenhurst ; or, Thoughts on Good and Evil. Second

Edition, with Memoir of the Author. Crown Svo, Ss.

SMITH. Greek Testament Lessons for Colleges, Schools, and

Private Students, consisting chiefly of the Sermon on the Mount and the
Parables of our Lord. With Notes and Essays. By the Rev. J. Hunter
Smith, M. A King Edward's School, Birmingham. Crown Svo, 6s.

SMITH. Writings by the Way. By John Campbell Smith,

M. A., Sheriff-substitute. Crown Svo, 9s.

SMITH. The Secretary for Scotland. Being a Statement of the

Powers and Duties of the new Scottish Office. With a Short Historical
Introduction and numerous references to important Administrative Documents.
By W. C. Smith, LL.B., Advocate. Svo, 6s.

Softer. A Lady's Ride Across Spanish Honduras. By Maria

Softer. With Illustrations. Post Svo, 12S. 6d.

The Fat of the Land. A Novel 3 vols, post Svo, 25s. 6d.

Morley. The Ethics of Naturalism. Being the Shaw Fellowship

Lectures, 1884. By W. R. Morley, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge,
and Examiner in Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh. Crown Svo, 6s.

SPEEDY. Sport in the Highlands and Lowlands of Scotland with

Rod and Gun. ByToMSpEEOv. Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged. With
illustrations Lieut-gen. HopeCrealocke,C.B.,C.M.G., and others. Svo, 15s.

Sprout. The Worship and Offices of the Church of Scotland.

By George W. Sprout, D.D., Minister of North Berwick. Crown Svo, 6s.

STARFORTH. Villa Residences and Farm Architecture : A Series

of Designs. By John Starforth, Architect. 102 Engravings. Second Edition,
medium 4to, £1, 17s. 6d. , . ■,

STATISTICAL ACCOUNT OF SCOTLAND. Complete, with

Index, 15 vols. Svo, ;sic, impeach
County sold separately, with Title, Index, and Map, neatly bound m cloth ,
forming a very valuable Manual to the Landowner, the Tenant, the Manufacturer,
the Naturalist, the Tourist, &c.

In cnvrse of pvhiicntion.

STEPHENS' BOOK OF THE FARM ; detailing the Labours of

the Farmer, Farm-Steward, Ploughman, Shepherd, Hedger. Farm-Labourer,
Field Worker, and Cattleman. Illustrated with numerous Portraits of Animals
and Engravings of Implements. Fourth Edition. Revised, and in great
part rewritten bv James Macdonald, of the ' Farming World,' &c., &c. Assisted
by many of the leading agricultural authorities of the day. To be completed
in Six Divisional Volumes.

[Divisions I. and II., price its. 6d. each, now ready.

STEPHENS. The Book of Farm Buildings ; their Arrangement and

Construction. By Henry Stephens, F.R.S.B., Author of 'The Book of the
Farm ; ' and Robert Scott Burn. Illustrated with 1045 Plates and Engravings.
Large 8vo, uniform with ' The Book of the Farm,' &c. £1, his. 6d.

The Book of Farm Implements and Machines. By J.

Slight and R. Scott-Burn, Engineers. Edited hy Henry Stephens. Large
8vo. uniform with * The Book of the Farm,' £2, as.

STEVENSON. British Fungi. (Hymenomycetes.) By Rev. John

Stevenson, Author of 'Mycologia Scotia,' Hon. Sec. Cryptogamic Society of
Scotland. 2 vols, post 8vo, with Illustrations, price 12s. 6d. each.
Vol. I. Agaricus— Bolbitius. Vol. II. Ordinaries— Dacrymyces.

STEWART. Advice to Purchasers of Horses. By John Stewart,

vs., Author of ' Stable Economy.' New Edition. 2s. 6d.

Stable Economy. A Treatise on the Management of

Horses in relation to Stabling, Grooming, Feeding, "Watering, and Working.
By John Stewart, Vas. Seventh Edition, cap. 8vo, 6s. 6d.

STORMONTH. Etymological and Pronouncing Dictionary of the

English Language. Including a very Copious Selection of Scientific Terms.
For Use in Schools and Colleges, and as a Book of General Reference. By the
Rev. James Stormonth. The Pronunciation carefully Revised by the Rev.
P. H. Help, M.A. Cantab. Ninth Edition, Revised throughout. Crown
8vo, pp. 800. 7s. 6d.

Dictionary of the English Language, Pronouncing,

Etymological, and Explanatory. Revised by the Rev. P. H. Help. Library
Edition. Imperial 8vo, handsomely bound in half morocco, 31s. 6d.

The School Etymological Dictionary and Word-Book.

Combining the advantages of an ordinary pronouncing School Dictionary
and an Ethnological Spelling-book. Fourth Edition. Cap. 8vo, pp. 254. ss.

STORY. Nero ; A Historical Play. By W. W. Story, Author of

'Robe di Roma.' Cap. 8vo, 6s.

Vallombrosa. Post 8vo, 5s.

He and She ; or, A Poet's Portfolio. Cap. 3s. 6d.

Poems. 2 vols, cap., 7s. 6d.

Damietta. A Summer Idol. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

STRICKLAND. Life of Agnes Strickland. By her Sister.

Post Bvo, with Portrait engraved on Steel, 12s. 6d.

Surges. John - a - Dreams. A Tale. By Julian Surges.

New Edition, crown Bvo-3,5. 6d.

Little Comedies, Old and New. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

SUTHERLAND. Handbook of Hardy Herbaceous and Alpine

Flowers, for general Garden Decoration. Containing Descriptions, in Plain
Language, of upwards of 1000 Species of Ornamental Hardy Perennial and
Alpine Plants, adapted to all classes of Flower-gardens, Clockwork, and
Waters ; along with Concise and Plain Instructions for their Propagation and
Culture. By William Sutherland, Landscape Gardener; formerly Manager
of the Herbaceous Department at Kew. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

TAYLOR. The Story of My Life. By the late Colonel Meadows

Taylor, Author of 'The Confessions of a Thug,' &c. &c. Edited by his
Daughter. New and cheaper Edition, being the Fourth. Crown 8vo, 6s.

THOLUCK. Hours of Christian Devotion. Translated from the

German of A. Tholuck, D. D. , Professor of Theology in the University of Halle,
By the Rev. Robert Menzies, D. D. With a Preface written for this Translation
bv the Author. Second Edition, crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

THOMSON. Handy Book of the Flower-garden : being Practical

Directions for the Propagation, Culture, and Arrangement of Plants in Flower-gardens
all the year round. Embracing all classes of Gardens, from the largest
to the smallest. With Engraved Plans, illustrative of the various systems of
Grouping in Beds and Borders. By David Thomson, Gardener to his Grace
the Duke of Buccleuch, K.T., at Drumlanrig. Fourth and Cheaper Edition,
crown 8vo, 5s.

THOMSON. The Handy Book of Fruit Culture under Glass : being

a series of Elaborate Practical Treatises on the Cultivation and Forcing of
Pines, Vines, Peaches, Figs, Melons, Strawberries, and Cucumbers. With Engravings
of Hothouses, &c., most suitable for the Cultivation and Forcing of
these Fruits. By David Thomson, Gardener to his Grace the Duke of Buck
K.T., at Drumlanrig. Second Ed. Cr. 8vo, with Engravings, ys. 6d.

THOMSON. A Practical Treatise on the Cultivation of the Grapevine.
By William Thomson, Tweed Vineyards. Ninth Edition, 8vo, 5s.

THOMSON. Cookery for the Sick and Convalescent. With
Directions for the Preparation of Poultices, Fomentations, &c. By Barbara
Thomson. Cap. 8vo, is. 6d.

THOTH. A Romance. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.

By the Same Author.
A Dreamer OF DREAMS. A Modern Romance. Crown

TOM Cringe's LOG. A New Edition, with Illustrations.

Crown Svo, cloth gilt, 5s. Cheap Edition, 2s.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE HIGHLAND AND Agricultural
SOCIETY OF SCOTLAND. Published annually, price 5s.

Bullock. Rational Theology and Christian Philosophy in England
in the Seventeenth Century. By John Tulloch, D.D., Principal of St
Mary's College in the University of St Andrews ; and one of her Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordinary in Scotland. Second Edition. 2 vols. Svo, i6s.

Modern Theories in Philosophy and Religion. Svo, 15s.

Luther, and other Leaders of the Reformation. Third

Edition, enlarged. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d.

Memoir of Principal Tulloch, D.D., LL.D. By Mrs

Oliphant, Author of 'Life of Edward Irving.' Third and Cheaper Edition.
Svo, with Portrait. 7s. 6d.

TWO STORIES OF THE SEEN AND THE UNSEEN. * The

Open Door,' ' Old Lady Mary.' Crown Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

Veitch. Institutes of Logic. By John Veitch, LL.D., Professor
of Logic and Rhetoric in the University of Glasgow. Post Svo, 12s. 6d.

The Feeling for Nature in Scottish Poetry. From the Earliest
Times to the Present Day. 2 vols. cap. Svo, in roxburgh binding. 15s.

Merlin and Other Poems. Cap. Svo.

VIRGIL. The ^neid of Virgil. Translated in English Blank

Verse by G. K. Richards, M. A., and Lord Ravenswood. 2 vols. cap. 8vo,ios.

WALFORD. The Novels of L. B. Walford. New and Uniform

Edition. Crown Svo, each 53. Sold separately.
Mr Smith: A Part of his Life. — Cousins. — Pauline. — Troublesome
Daughters.— Dick Nether.— The Baby's Grandmother. — History
OF A Week.

A Stiff-Necked Generation. 3 vols, post Svo, 25s. 6d.

Four Biographies from ' Blackwood ' : Jane Taylor, Hannah
More, Elizabeth Fry, Mary Somerville. Crown Svo, 5s,

WARREN'S (SAMUEL) WORKS:—

Diary of a Late Physician. Cloth, 2s. 6d. ; boards, 2s.

Ten Thousand A- Year. Cloth, 3s. 6d. ; boards, 2s. 6d.

Now and Then. The Lily and the Bee. Intellectual and Moral

Development of the Present Age. 4s, 6d.

Essays : Critical, Imaginative, and Juridical. 5s.
WARREN. The Five Books of the Psalms. With Marginal

Notes. By Rev. Samuel L. Warren, Rector of Esher, Surrey ; late Fellow,
Dean, and Divinity Lecturer, Waltham College, Oxford. Crown Svo, 5s.

WATSON. Christ's Authority ; and other Sermons. By the late

Archibald Watson, D.D., Minister of the Parish of Dundee, and one of
Her Majesty's Chaplains for Scotland. With Introduction by the Very
Rev. Principal Laird, Glasgow. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

WEBSTER. The Angler and the Loop-Rod. By David Webster.

Crown 8vo, with Illustrations, 7s. 6d.

WELLINGTON. Wellington Prize Essays on "the System of Field

Manoeuvres best adapted for enabling our Troops to meet a Continental Army."
Edited by Lieut-General Sir Edward Bruce Hamley, K.C.B. 8vo, 12s, 6d.

WESTMINSTER ASSEMBLY. Minutes of the Westminster Assembly,
while engaged in preparing their Directory for Church Government,
Confession of Faith, and Catechisms (November 1644 to March 1649). Edited
by the Rev. Professor Alex. T. Mitchell, of St Andrews, and the Rev. John
Struthers, LL.D. With a Historical and Critical Introduction by Professor
Mitchell. 8vo, 15s.

WHITE. The Eighteen Christian Centuries. By the Rev. James

White. Seventh Edition, post Bvo, with Index, 6s.

History of France, from the Earliest Times. Sixth Thousand,
post 8vo, with Index, 6s.

WHITE. Archaeological Sketches in Scotland — Kintyre and Knap-dale.
By Colonel T. P. White, Ree., of the Ordnance Survey. With numerous
Illustrations. 2 vols, folio, £4, 4s. Vol. I., Kintyre, sold separately,

£2, 2S.

The Ordnance Survey of the United Kingdom. A Popular

Account. Crown 8vo, 5s.

WILLIAMSON. Poems of Nature and Life. By David R.

Williamson, Minister of Kirkmaiden. Cap. 8vo, 3s.

WILLS and GREENE. Drawing-room Dramas for Children. By

W. G. Wills and the Hon. Mrs Greene. Crown 8vo, 6s.

WILSON. Works of Professor Wilson. Edited by his Son-in-law,

Professor Perrier. 12 vols, crown 8vo, £2, 8s.

Christopher in his Sporting-Jacket. 2 vols., 8s.

Isle of Palms, City of the Plague, and other Poems. 4s.

Lights and Shadows of Scottish Life, and other Tales. 48.

Essays, Critical and Imaginative. 4 vols., i6s.

The Notes Ambrosial. 4 vols., i6s.

Homer and his Translators, and the Greek Drama. Crown

8vo, 4s.

WING ATE. Annie Weir, and other Poems. By David Innate.

Cap. Bvo, 5s.

Lily Neil. A Poem. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.

WORDSWORTH. The Historical Plays of Shakspeare. With

Introductions and Notes. By Charles Wordsworth, D.C.L., Bishop of S
Andrews. 3 vols, post 8vo, each price ys. 6d.

WORSLEY. Poems and Translations. By Philip Stanhope

Worsley, M.A. Edited by Edward Worsley. Second Edition, enlarged.
Cap. 8vo, 6s.

YATE. England and Russia Face to Face in Asia. A Record of

Travel with the Afghan Boundary Commission. By Captain A. C. Yate,
Bombay Staff Corps, Special Correspondent of the 'Pioneer,' 'Daily Telegraph,'
&c., &c., with the Afghan Boundary Commission. 8vo, with Maps
and Illustrations, 21s.

YATE. Northern Afghanistan ; or, Letters from the Afghan

Boundary Commission. By Major C. E. Yate, C.S.I., C.M.G. Bombay Staff
Corps, F.R.G.S. 8vo, with Maps. i8s.

YOUNG. A Story of Active Service in Foreign Lands, Compiled

from letters sent home from South Africa, India, and China, 1856-1882. By
Surgeon-general A. Graham Young, Author of ' Crimean Cracks.' Crown 8vo,

Illustrated, ys. 6d.

YULE. Fortification : for the Use of Officers in the Army, and
Readers of Military History. By Col. Yule, Bengal Engineers. 8vo, with
numerous Illustrations, los. 6d.

3 0112 045843965

M^^^imi

■giiPi

SCOTTISH SONG: Its Wealth, Wisdom, and Social
Significance. By JOHN STUART Black, Emeritus Professor
of Greek in the University of Edinburgh, Author of ' Lays
and Legends of Ancient Greece,' &c. Crown 8vo. With Music.
7s. 6d.
"A charming iDOok, as useful as it is charming, and one which every
lover of letters will sincerely welcome." — Echo.

"A most original and suggestive work The very best book on

the subject yet published." — North British Daily Mail.

"The work is thoroughly and altogether admirably diOnQ."'— Manchester
Examiner.

"A pleasant wholesome book full of shrewd and just observations."
— World.

In Course of Publication.

TALES FROM 'BLACKWOOD.' Third Series. In
Parts. Price One Shilling each.

JSfO. I. — CONTAINS : — Bourgogne — THOMAS — ThE BRIGAND'S

Bride : A Tale of Southern Italy— The Misogynist— A Fetish
City— The Gascon O'Driscol.

Uniform with 'TALES FROM BLACKWOOD,'

TRAVEL, ADVENTURE, AND SPORT, from 'Blackwood's
Magazine.' In Parts. Price One Shilling each.

jV'o, /.—cowTTlJiVS.— Discovery of THE Victoria N'yanza. By
Capt. Speke.— My Home in Palestine. By Laurence Oliphant.— A
Sketch in the Tropics.— How I Caught my First Salmon. By
the Hon. Sir H. Stafford Northcote, Bart.

%* 'Travel, Adventure, and Sport' is issued on alternate
months with the 'Tales from Blackwood.'

LAYS OF THE SCOTTISH Cavaliers, and Other
Poems. By W. Edmonstone AYTOUN, D.C.L., Professor
of Rhetoric and Belles Lettres in the University of Edinburgh.
In Paper Cover, Is.

ELIZABETH, AND OTHER SKETCHES. By the

Author of *Miss Molly,' 'Felicia,' 'Eugene.' Crown
8vo, 6s.

GEORGE ELIOT'S LIFE AND WORKS. Cabinet

Edition. Complete in 24 Volumes, crown 8vo, printed from a
New and Legible Type. Price £6.

"A delightful edition of George Eliot's Works In size, type, and

paper, everything that could be wished." — Athenaeum.

NOVELS BY GEORGE ELIOT. Cheap Editions in
Uniform Binding.

Adam Bede. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, . . . 3s. 6d.
The Mill on the Floss. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Felix Holt, the Radical. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
Scenes of Clerical Life. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 3s.
Silas Marner. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, . . 2s. 6d.
Romola. With Vignette Title. Crown 8vo, . . .3s. 6d.
Daniel Deronda. With Vignette Title. Crown 8vo, . 7s. 6d.
Middlemarch. With Vignette Title. Crown 8vo, . . 7s. 6d.

Recta : WHAT'S IN A NAME. A Novel. By E. D.
GERARD. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

BEGGAR MY NEIGHBOUR. A Novel. By the Same.
New Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

THE WATERS OF HERCULES. A Novel. By the
Same. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s,

THE MAID OF Seer. By R. D. Blackmore, Author of

'Lorna Done,' &c. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s.

WILLIAM BLACKWOOD & SONS, Edinburgh and London.

DIANA WENTWORTH

Where the grey flocks in ferny glens are feeding ;
Where the wild wind blows on the mountain-side.

What have those lonely mountains worth revealing ?
More glory and more grief than I can tell."

Emily Bronze.

BY

Caroline FOTHEEGILL

AUTHOR OF *AN ENTHUSIAST,' 'A VOICE IN THE WILDERNESS

IN THREE VOLUMES
VOL. II.

WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AIs^D SONS

EDINBURGH AND LONDON

MDCCCLXXXIX

All Rights reserved

CONTENTS OF THE SECOND Volume.























CHAPTEE XIV.

INTERRUPTED.

A WEEK had passed since Diana's adventure
in the forest, and she had not seen John
again. She thought of very little else than
their next meeting, and alternately wished
for and dreaded it. He must be busy :
after the way in which their last talk had
ended, she felt sure nothing but necessity

VOL. II. A

kept him from seeking her out. All this
time she was in a state of suppressed excitement
and agitation ; she could think of
nothing and attend to nothing. The effort
to carry out the daily routine was almost
more than she could make, and two letters
one from her mother and one from Tom
Sherlock — which she received during this
week, shared the fate of many others, and
were never opened. She had never failed
to open her mother's letters before, but this
time she threw it aside with Tom's.

At last they met. She was out alone
one afternoon ; she had been doing some
errands for Frau Camphausen, and was returning
home, her mind rather exercised
by the strange customs of this far country.
It was Saturday afternoon, and the shops

being nearly all kept by Jews, were ostensibly
closed ; but after four o'clock, admittance
could be had by the back entrance, and business
carried on behind the closed shutters.
In the half light the Jew had decidedly the
advantage. Diana felt almost certain that,
instead of matching some silk of which Frau
Camphausen had given her a pattern, she
had only bought some rubbish which Herr
Ehrlich was glad to be rid of, and which
possibly only made its appearance on Saturday
afternoons. Meditating on these
things, she suddenly found herself face to
face with John.

I am glad to meet you," he said. " I
have been wanting to see you alone ; but I
did not care to call, or to write and ask you
to meet me somewhere."

The latter course would have been very
unsafe," she answered, hardly knowing what
she said.

You will come with me now ? "

A sudden fit of cowardice seized her, and
she said, dubiously —

"I don't know. I have been buying
things for Frau Camphausen, and I
ought to go home and take them to
her."

Oh, never mind Frau Camphausen ! "
he said, impatiently. " Let her wait. I
have waited a week, which has seemed like
a year. I have something to tell you, and
we may not have such an opportunity
again. "

He spoke in a tone of authority, unmixed
with persuasion, and Diana, usually

SO quick to resent such a mode of address,
only said —

Very well, I will come with you."

She had noticed how grave he was. He
had not once smiled ; he looked anxious
and worried, as though his mind were filled
with an unpleasant thought, of which he
could not rid himself. His face brightened
for an instant when she agreed to his request,
but by the time he spoke again the
cloud had once more come down upon it.

Now, where shall we go ? " he said, half
to himself. " We must be quite safe from
interruption. Ah ! I know. Come this
way."

He moved on at once, and she walked at
his side. They were quite silent, perhaps
gathering their forces together for the coming

contest. They went within a little distance
of the cemetery — when they turned
off the main road and went along a rough
track leading to the place John had thought
of as suitable for their explanation.

Some years previously the cholera had
visited Jacewo and almost decimated the
little town. The ordinary cemetery had
been closed, and a special burial-ground
provided by the appropriation of a piece of
waste land lying at the back of, and separated
from it by, a wide road. The " cholera
ground," as it was called, was part of a
field, and overgrown with long thick grass
and a few bushes, which had perhaps been
planted by the surviving friends of those
who were buried there. They must have
been put under the ground hurriedly and

without care or attention, for there was
only one memorial stone ; neither was it
certain that such was its meaning, for it
bore neither name nor date, and it stood at
the foot of an immense cross which towered
up from the middle of the burial-field.
The cemetery occupied comparatively high
ground, which on one side was continually
breaking away and leaving fragments of
bone and skulls protruding from the soil.
Though so near the other cemetery, it was
invisible from it, because of a wide belt of
thickly growing trees which came between ;
the track which led to it went no farther ;
no house stood near it. It was a desolate
place, completely isolated, and no one ever
approached it ; the peasants had a superstitious
fear of it, and John was quite right in

choosing it as a place where under any
ordinary circumstances they would be safe
from interruption.

During their walk to this dismal spot,
Diana had in some measure recovered her
courage, and when she stood in the shadow
of the great cross, she looked round and
said —

"What a ghastly place! It is evident
that you stand no more in awe of death
than of birth."

There is a certain fitness in it. Since I
saw you last, my belief in you has almost
died ; it is for you to raise it into life again,
here, now, while we are together."

She said nothing, and he went on —

We were interrupted at a critical point
in our talk. I said once, that if I ever

thought it necessary, I would tell you all
about my people : that evening I thought
the time had come, and I was going to tell
you. Perhaps I ought to have spoken
sooner — I can't tell; to-day must decide.
Before I ask you what has been in my
mind for a long time, I want you to
thoroughly understand the position we
occupy one towards the other."

She had seated herself on the stone, and
he stood leaning against the cross, his arms
folded, and a grim look on his face as he
looked down upon the girl almost at his
feet. His belief in her had been rudely
shaken. He was going to test his theory.
That which he-was going to propose could
be undertaken in no half-hearted spirit ; it
must be done with full mind and heart and

soul, or not at all. If, after what he should
tell her, she consented to be his wife, never
would doubt or fear of her enter his heart
ao-ain. If she refused, if she chose to remain
with her own people, if she would not or
could not see that " the old order change,"
it would mean the death of all his hope and
faith and love.

She had said nothing when he ceased
speaking, and after looking at her for a
moment he went on —

"I shall have to go rather a long way
back, to the night of your arrival here.
The Camphausens had told me they were
expecting an English governess, but I did
not give more than a passing thought to
the matter before I saw you. During our
drive together I was thinking of nothing

but you, wondering what had induced you
to come out here, and how you would stand
the life. The next day I left Jacewo, and
then I very often thought of you and felt
anxious about you, and wondered how you
were getting on — if you were still here. I
did not like the thought that you might
be gone without my ever seeing you again,
and at last I came back to see how things
were going for myself. I felt that I had
had some hand in bringing you here, and
that the responsibility of your wellbeing,
as long as you remained, rested upon me
partly at any rate.

He was silent again for a minute ; but she
was still silent, and he could not see her
face. He went on —

"I have not known many women; you

are the only one of your class whom I know
intimately. The women with whom I have
been familiar have been women of the
people, poor and often rough — not playing
at working, as you are doing now, but
working in grim earnest to keep the wolf
from the door. Knowing you, was like entering
a new world, or being born again, and
a man can't go through such experiences
and remain the same man he was before."

Diana still sat perfectly silent, looking
straight before her, across the flat fields
to the railway station, and the white line
which was the road along which John and
she had driven on New Year's Eve. She
was pale, her mouth was set, her brows
drawn together; what she was thinking,
no one could tell.

'ewe have met here," continued John,
"on an equality as English man and English
woman, the only members of our nation
in a foreign town ; but I want you to understand
that if we met in England, in a
place where your family and mine were
known, we should not be on an equality
at all. Your family — I told you I knew
something of it, and I will tell you how
and all about it before I have done — is the
great family of the place, one of the oldest
and probably one of the proudest in the
country. My people, on the contrary, in
the little place in which they live, are distinguished
only by being a little poorer even
than their poor neighbours ; they have always
been sons of the soil — I am probably
the first of them who has stood upright on

the soil from which we spring. My father
was a very small farmer, poor and in debt
all his life ; my brother is the same ; my
mother is a hard-working woman, with
rough hands and a weather - beaten face ;
my cousin Susan will present the same
appearance when she is my mother's age.
Those are my people — the people whom, if
I ever marry, my wife will have to take
with me, for better for worse. My lot is
different — I have a different calling, and
shall lead a different life ; but that is the
background to my life and fortunes."

She rose from her seat, unable to remain
longer in that passive attitude. She walked
a few steps away from him, plucked some
grasses from the ground, and twisting them
round her fingers, came and stood opposite

to him, forcing herself to look him in the
face, and pale with repressed feeling.

*swell?" she asked — "well? What
more ? "

"This more. They are not respected
among their neighbours, although to my
knowledge they have committed no crimes.
They are poor and despised even among
the poor and despised. They live in an
old and small cottage. They are rough
and ignorant and uncultured. If you addressed
them in your daintily tripping
speech, the chances are they would not
understand you ; for their speech is like
themselves — heavy and rough and slow,
of the earth earthy. There is neither
beauty nor grace among them ; their interests
are not your interests, nor their

ways your ways. They belong to a class
between which and the class to which you
belong there has always been a wide and
unnatural gulf ; and not only a class gulf,
but an individual one. I have come to
that now. My people and your people

are not strangers; they live "

A loud shout close at hand made him
break off, and the last word had barely
left his lips before a man, shouting and
gesticulating almost madly, had rushed upto
him, and grasping his arm, began to
talk loud and fast, half in German and
half in Polish, into which language he kept
running over in his excitement. There had
been an accident on the line ; two men
were badly hurt — one, they feared, was
killed. Garthwaite's presence was necessary

; much precious time had already
been lost in looking for him.

As Garthwaite heard, an extraordinary
change came over his face. Had Diana
been in a state of mind to analyse her impressions,
she would have said that he
ceased to be a man and became an engineer.
He seemed to forget her; but in
turning to leave the place, he caught sight
of her standing there, and without even
holding out his hand to her, he just said,
We will meet again," and then began to
run as fast as he could across the fields in
the direction of the railway.

VOL. II.

CHAPTER XV.

FINIS Colonia.

In a dream Diana walked home, and ina
dream lie confronted Minna, who met
her on the doorstep in a state of great
excitement.

Come in ! " she cried. " I have been
dying for you to come back. Where
have you been ? Mamma said she only
sent you — I mean asked you to go to
Ehrlich's, and you have been away hours.
He is so handsome, and he is expiring with
impatience to see you."

What are you talking about ? " said
Diana, roused to herself, and impatient
with Minna. " If that card is for me, give
it to me at once."

Oh, how angry you are ! " laughed
Minna. " He says he is your cousin ;
I can only say I wish I had such a
cousin. Such manners and such an
air ! Mon Dieu, I wish he was Heinrich!"


She put the card into Miss Wentworth's
hand, and Diana felt a strange chill of
foreboding as she read upon it, "]\Ir Guy
Meredith."

She held it in her hand for a moment,
with her eyes fixed upon it, and something
within telling her that her life at
Jacewo was at an end, the play was played

out. Then, obeying a momentary impulse,
she tore the card into little bits, scattered
them out of the open door, and turned to
Minna, asking —

'' Where is he ? "

In the drawing - room. Supper is
ready; bring him into the dining-room
when you have done with him."

Without replying, Diana went slowly
to the drawing - room, opened the door,
and went in. She saw a young man
standing at the window and looking out.
He heard her step, and turned round.
It must be remembered that Diana had
just come from her conversation with
John : her face was paler than usual ; her
eyes looked larger, darker, clearer — there
was an expectant, half-defiant look in

them ; her whole manner had something;
intense and highly strung about it. In
the conversation which followed, she
scarcely knew what she was saying. It
is perhaps not surprising, therefore, that
when the man at the window turned
round and saw her, he should for an instant
have been too much startled to
speak. Diana said nothing, only stood and
looked straight at him.

"You are my cousin Diana?" he asked,
recovering himself quickly.

"Yes," she answered. "Why have you
come ^

She looked him over from head to foot
as she spoke, and saw a tall, well-made
man, with fair hair and complexion, handsome
features of the " high - bred " type,

and something about him which made her
think of her mother.

I am your cousin Guy," he began.

Through Diana's mind ran some words
of Emerson : '' Gertrude is enamoured of
Guy; how high, how aristocratic, how
Woman his mien and manners ! to live
with him were life indeed," and she half
smiled.

I have come to take you home," he went
on ; " my aunt, your mother, is very ill."

The first part of his sentence was all
Diana heard, and her thoughts instantly
flew to John and his parting words, "We
will meet again."

Home ? " she repeated. '' Do you mean
to Garshill ? Oh no, I can't leave this
place."

"I said your mother was very ill," he
repeated, with some severity.

"Mamma ill?" repeated Diana, as if
she did not at all take in the significance
of the connection between her mother's
illness and his appearance at Jacewo. " I
am very sorry, but — is she very ill ? "

"Exceedingly ill," he said, frowning.
I have come to take you home ; we must
go as soon as possible."

Even yet she scarcely seemed to comprehend.
She had been under a spell so
long, she could not shake it ofi" at once.
Garshill and her mother were very faraway
; John had just left her, and her
thoughts were with him.

I cannot go — it is impossible," was all
she said.

To Guy this hesitation and apparent
indifference were revolting, and lie spoke
more roughly than he had ever done in his
life to a woman.

Can't you understand ? " he said.
Your mother is dying — we may not find
her alive. Every moment is precious."

Then at last a new light came into her
eyes.

"Mamma dying?" she cried. "Why
did you not tell me before? Why
have you wasted all this time ? We
must go at once. I will go and get
ready."

"You have an hour before the train
goes," taking out his watch. " If you are
quick, you will have time to get something
to eat."

She had left the room before he had
finished speaking. As yet she scarcely
realised all that had happened, which
enabled her to join the Camphausens at
supper. She explained matters hastily
as she ate, and in ten minutes had risen
from the table, calling Minna to help her
in her packing.

She ran up-stairs and pulled open all
the drawers in her dressing-table. One
was full of unopened letters, and she stood
for an instant looking at them, with an
odd feeling that somewhere among them
was one of importance — that some one of
these many envelopes contained that which
it behoved her above all things to know,
the not knowing of which would ruin her
whole life. It was a strange feeling, and

lasted only a few seconds; Minna's voice
came to her, saying —

"What loads of things you have, Miss
Wentworth ! I can never get them all in,
and those letters are out of the question."

Diana shrugged her shoulders.

They must go ; I will tear them up, and
you must burn them for me."

She set about the work of demolition at
once, and in five minutes their fragments
lay in a large heap upon the ground.
Then she exchanged her muslin gown,
with its lace and ruffles and floating
ribbons, for a dark travelling-dress and a
linen collar; put a soft cap on her head,
and wrapped herself in an elegant .
Thus equipped for her journey,
she completed her packing, locked her

trunks, and went clown-stairs again to her
cousin.

The carriage was at the door ; there were
some hurried farewells ; at the station they
found themselves only just in time for
their train, and almost before Diana had
realised that her unknown cousin was
waiting for her in the drawing-room, she
was seated in the train with him, and had
left Jacewo for ever.

They were alone in the carriage, and,
more from accident than design, had seated
themselves as far apart as it was possible
to get. Guy did not speak, and Diana
also was in no mood for talking. She
nestled in her corner, turned her shoulder
towards her cousin, and gave herself up to
her thoughts.

She thought of Jolin, and of all lie had
told her. A^Tien he had left her standing
by the cross, she had sunk on her
knees on the coarse grey grass, beating
her clenched hand on the ground, her
body swaying to and fro with emotion,
which was lightened by no tears. Then
the power to hold herself upright had
failed her, and she had cast her arms
round the old cross and leaned her head
against it. Yet she told herself she did
not love John. The feeling she had for
him was not what she knew she was
capable of, not that which made everything
appear of no account in comparison
with life at the side of her chosen husband.
She doubted if she ever could
have such a feeling for him. His frank

revelations concerning the people to whom
he belonged almost appalled her. Had he
been alone, it would have been different ;
but he had people — womenkind — ordinary,
rough working women. She pictured
them — loud-voiced and red-faced, scarcely
belonging to the human race, copying her
clothes according to their lights, making
grotesque caricatures of them. What could
she do among such people ? She shut her
eyes, and a shudder ran over her whole
figure at the thought. She drew her elegant
cloak around her, thinking, "How
could he even think of such a thing, much
less propose it ! It would have been absurd
and unnatural, and could have ended only
in disaster." When she thought of John
himself, she was filled with intense longing;

when she thought of those people
who were part of him, her heart turned
to stone within her, and she kept saying
to herself, *' No, no ; it was quite impossible,
it is all at an end." Yes, it was at
an end. He was gone ; she would probably
never see him again.

She could not bear to think of this, and
to banish the thought she turned to her
cousin, saying —

*what is mammas illness? You did
not tell me."

Rheumatic fever," he answered. *' But
how is it you do not know ? You seemed
quite unprepared for what I told you ; and
if I remember rightly, aunt wrote to you
after her illness began. It is true that
then we did not think it was anything

serious, but still it would have prepared
you for this."

*' I got no letter," said Diana, unthinkingly.


"It is very strange," said Guy; "you
should have had it three or four days ago."

A light broke in upon Diana.

I did get it," she said — "at least I got
a letter from mamma three days ago, but
but I did not read it."

"You did not read it!" echoed Guy.
You did not read a letter from your
own mother ! "

I did not even open it," frowning at
his tone. " I was thinking of something
else, and I put it aside and forgot all
about it."

I never heard anything so extraordinary.

Whatever you had been thinking
of, I should have imagined that a letter
from your mother, so far from home as
this, would have put it out of your
head."

"You see, I was not far from home at
all ; I was at home. My home is wherever
I am — I have no other."

Guy said nothing. He had more than
once heard his aunt speak of the demon
which sometimes seemed to possess Diana,
and he had no desire for an encounter with
it. So he kept silence, and presently she
asked —

Why did you come for me ? Why did
you not telegraph? I should have been
at Garshill by now, instead of having only
just left Jacewo."

*' I could not possibly have allowed you
to travel alone."

I came alone."

I know you did," was the reply, given
in a tone which discouraged all further
discussion of the subject ; and it suddenly
flashed across Diana that the sensation she
had sometimes enjoyed the thought of making
had been made. Like most other things
once eagerly wished for, now it came it was
of no importance at all, it was completely
swallowed up in things of far greater moment.
She did not bestow an instant's
thought upon it.

Later in their journey she asked —

"Did mamma ask for me? Was she

anxious that I should be sent for ? "

She knows nothing of it," said Guy.
VOL. II. C

*'Slie was delirious; we acted without consulting
her."

Diana did not speak at once, then she
said —

I took it for granted she had sent forme,
or else "

Or else what ? "

Or else I do not think I should have
come."

"How can you speak in such a way?
Of course you would have come."

"I do not know if she will be glad to
see me."

Guy said nothing, and Diana went on —

"I wish I had asked. I suppose I
should have come with you just the same,
but I wish she had known what you were
doing."

From the time they reached England,
she was silent. Not once did she open
her lips, except in brief reply to her cousin,
during all the long journey from London
to Garshill. It is true she was very tired,
almost exhausted ; but that was not alone
the cause. She was thinking deeply. She
had taken it for granted that her mother
had sent for her, and had begun her
journey in an almost exalted frame of
mind. Her mother did really, in her
heart, love her. When she was dangerously
ill, her first wish had been to have
her daughter with her. Diana responded
to the call generously and fully, as it washer
nature to do, putting aside all thoughts
of John in the revived tenderness of her
mother. She had resolutely beaten down

her first thought, " Why is she so ill just
now ? " and had fixed her mind on the
fact that her mother wanted her; she
would strain every nerve to be with her
as soon as possible. Suddenly she learned
that her mother had expressed no wish to
see her, that she was in ignorance of her
coming. The whole affair changed its
aspect, and she boded no good from this
hurried action. She would not be wanted
at Garshill. Guy had faithfully performed
his duty, but he had never pretended to
think it a pleasure. He had said no word
of welcome, he had not said his father
and sisters would be glad to see her. If
their worst anticipations were realised,
all smaller things would be swallowed
up in the tragedy of her coming ; but

if they found her mother better, how
then?

It was abbacy dark when they reached
Garshill. There was a carriage waiting
for them, and a man in livery came upto
Guy and made some communication
to him which Diana did not hear. Then
her cousin came back to her side, and
said —

They bring me word that your mother
is better. She is out of danger, and there
is every reason to hope for her recovery."

Without a word Diana turned from him
and got into the carriage without his assistance.


CHAPTER XVI.

FORECASTS.

Two women were seated in the small
drawing - room of Garshill Abbey. The
late summer evening was already dying,
and lamps and candles were lit. The elder
of the two, who might be thirty-one or-two
years of age, sat by a little table, busy
with a bit of lace-work; and the lamp),
towards which she bent her head, cast a
strong light upon her features. She was
exceedingly handsome, with a fair, calm
beauty, which gave one the idea of being

rather the result of many storms withstood,
than of a never ruffled tranquillity. She
had fair hair and blue eyes, like all the
Meredithss; her eyes were very beautiful,
soft and deep, with a little sadness in
them, as if they had looked on sorrows.
Her mouth too, was beautiful, with a great
tenderness in its soft curves. No one
looking at her could doubt that she had
lived, and lived to some purpose ; she conveyed
the impression of having outlived
the excitement of youth, and of having
acquired the strength and staying power
of maturity. She looked a good, kind
woman — one to whom one would gladly go
in trouble.

In truth she had her story, as every
woman has. Twice had she been disappointed

in the dearest wishes she had ever
cherished. In her early youth she had
wished to be a nurse, — unable to reconcile
with her conscience the life which is usually
led by girls in her position. With
great difficulty she had won the consent
of her parents to this scheme. Her wish
was a deep disappointment to them : they
had hoped to keep her with them until she
married. She had gone as a probationer to
a London hospital, and had fought her way
through the drudgery and weariness which
belong to that form of training, as to
all others ; her hard - won certificate was
scarcely gained, she was just beginning to
reap the fruit of her labours, and was entering
upon her new career with both enthusiasm
and a full knowledge of what

it meant, when her mother's health failed
and she was called home. She nursed her
through a long and trying illness — not
less trying perhaps to nurse than to
patient ; and then, when her mother was
dead, and she herself at liberty again, all
hope of returning to hospital life was at
an end. Her place was at home, and
she took her place, fighting down her disappointment
in silence, so that no one
knew how great it had been. This went
on for a year or two. Her dreams and
ambitions had become things of the past,
and she had found another source of happiness
in the love of a man whom she
had known from childhood, and for whom
her regard had developed into love without
her being aware of it. It was not

until he asked her to marry him that she
really knew what her feeling was, and the
deep roots it had struck into her whole
being. She engaged herself to him with
the consent of her father ; but stipulated
for a year's engagement, on the ground
that she could ill be dispensed with at
home. The delay was agreed to, but
grudgingly, perhaps with a foreboding of
evil. Two months before her marriage,
in the midst of her preparations and the
congratulations of her friends, her father
met with the accident upon the hunting-field
which deprived him of all power of
movement, and rendered him a helpless
invalid for life. This was an awful blow
to Gertrude. She had a long struggle
with both herself and her lover ; she could

scarcely say which was the most clifl&cult
to conquer, and then she stood alone,
having made her choice, having thrown
off all thought of self, — resolved to be
her father's life companion.

As she was the eldest of a family of
four, and her companion was the youngest,
there was a great difference between their
ages — the other being a girl of one-and-twenty.
She was an exquisitely pretty
blonde, and no more. Blue eyes, rosy
mouth and straight nose, pure complexion
and snowy brow, bird-like head, with
its masses of golden brown hair, and small
delicate figure, were all perfect in their
way. But the perfectly pretty features
were almost devoid of character, and the
graceful head was equally empty of brains.

Her likes and dislikes were of no importance
to any one but herself. She loved
sweets and cakes and new gowns, and
young men who paid her attention, and
did not converse beyond her intelligence ;
and as she was one of the favoured ones
of fortune, there was an unfailing supply
of young men naturally adapted to fulfil
her requirements. Not long before
this she had engaged herself to the most
eligible of these young men, — a wealthy
landowner in the neighbourhood. He
was just now on the Continent with her
brother Eupert, and she paid him the
compliment of sometimes wishing he was
at home. He was the only man who kept
her regularly supplied with the kind of
chocolate she liked best ; and she found it

rather tiresome to have to write to him
every day. She finished the book she was
reading, and put it aside, saying —

Was aunty asleep when you last went
up, Gerry?"

Yes, she is considerably better to-night.
I daresay she will be able to see Diana
when she comes."

Have you told aunty yet that she is
coming? What did she say?"

*' I told her this morning. She did not
say much, except that we had given Guy
a good deal of trouble, and that Diana is
of no use in a sick-room. She could not
even nurse her father when he was dying."

"Clumsy, I expect," said Dora, with a
grimace. " I wonder what she is like ? I
don't suppose she is pretty."

Aunt has never said she was. I think
if she had been, aunty would not have let
her go away alone."

No," said Dora ; " and we have no
photograph of her, — aunty says she never
would be photographed. It all looks tome
as if she were plain, excessively plain,
and conscious of it."

She heaved a little sigh of relief as she
spoke, and her face took a happy, tranquil
expression. It was so pleasant to feel that
she herself was exceedingly pretty, and
that in that respect this unknown cousin
would probably be beneath contempt.

I wish Guy had told us more about
her," she went on. " He only sent such
a scrap of a note, and did not say a word
about her."

Perhaps there was nothing to say,"
suggested the fond elder sister. " There
is nothing to say about some people, you
know."

I wonder what she will think of this
house. She can't have seen anything like
it, either in Whitfield or Poland."

She looked round complacently as she
spoke, for she had a vulgar little soul, and
loved to think that other people might bedazzled
or impressed by what were everyday
matters to her.

"You go too far, Dora," said Gertrude,
in mild reproof. "Diana is not likely to
be common, and you speak almost as if
you thought she would be."

Oh no, not so bad as that, or how
could we bear to have her in the house?

But I don't suppose she is used to things
as we have them here ; and probably she
won't know quite how to behave.

Well, she will be here very soon, and
then you can judge for yourself, dear. I
am curious to see her, I admit. It seems
so strange that we have never met."

"That is entirely her own fault," said
Dora, with a hard ring in her voice, which
surprised a great many people the first
time they heard it. *' I am not at all
curious to see her. I am very sorry she
is coming, and I see no use in pretending
we are glad."

We must be civil, Dora."

Oh yes, we can be civil, but I don't
intend to be more. She refused to come
and live here when a home was offered

her, and I am sure it was very kind of us
to offer it ; and now that she has to come,
she can't expect a very warm welcome.
Besides, we don't want her ; she will be
in the way. I don't see any place for
her amongst us."

Well, dear," said Gertrude, soothingly,
for the spoilt child's voice had risen to a
very angry pitch, '' I don't suppose she
will be much in your way ; she will be a
great deal with aunty, of course."

I hope she will, and that she won't
expect to join in what we do, and to visit
with us. It will be such a nuisance, having
to introduce her to all our friends.
I expect she will be shabby, and badly
dressed. Oh, I am angry that she is
coming ! I wish we had never sent for

VOL. II. D

her. I feel sure she will spoil everything,
and be a regular drag upon us. Why
did you send for her, Gerry ? "

"My dear child, do not excite yourself
so," said Gertrude in alarm. "Aunty was
so ill, there was no choice. We thought
she was dying, and we could not let her
die without sending for her only daughter."

"Yes; but she has not died. That is
just the provoking part of it ! "

"My darling!" said Gertrude, very
gravely.

I don't mean it is provoking that
aunty has not died. Poor aunty ! I am
very fond of her, and would not have
her die for anything; and it would be so
terrible to have a death in the house.
But it is provoking that she should have

been so alarmingly ill, that we all thought
she was going to die, and sent for this
girl in such a hurry. Then aunty rallies,
and by the time Diana comes is quite on
the way to recovery. I do call it provoking,
and I am sure that in your hearts
you all think the same thing."

Well, love, it cannot be helped now."

No ; that is the worst of it ! How long
do you suppose we shall have her here ? "

"Till aunty is well, I suppose. Perhaps
papa may again offer her a home
here."

Oh dear ! I^ hope not. But if she sees
she is not welcome, perhaps she won't want
to stay."

Don't do anything — unkind, dear," said
Gertrude, rather apprehensively. " I am

LIBRARY

University OF lUINOiS

not glad she is coming, but we could not
do otherwise than send for her. When
these sudden emergencies arise, it is very
difficult to know the best thing to do. But
at the same time we must be kind ; she is a
perfect stranger to us, and it would not be
right to make her feel awkward and not at
home. I think the best way will be to let
her see we mean well, and then leave her
to find her own place amongst us ; she will
soon do that."

Dora received all this in silence. It was
the nearest approach to a lecture which
Gertrude ever made, and at least showed
Dora one thing, that if she behaved badly
to Diana, she would meet with no support
from her sister.

"I believe the carriage is coming," she

said presently. "Yes, it is. Gerry, you
must go out to meet her. I am afraid of
the damp from the river."

Gertrude folded away her work in her
methodical manner, and went out into the
hall, which she reached just as the travellers
entered it. She saw Guy, who looked
much relieved at having reached the end
of his journey, and Diana, pale and heavy-eyed
with fatigue, but so different from
what she had expected, that words failed
her, and she only looked at her in silence.

Her astonishment was so great that she
forgot to hold out her hand, neither did
Diana offer hers, but stood, also in silence,
with a half smile upon her lips, looking into
her cousin's face.

"T beg your pardon," said Gertrude,

recovering herself in an instant. I ought
not to have looked surprised, but you — you
are not at all like aunty," she finished
rather lamely. She held out her hand
as she spoke, adding — " I am glad to
see you ; how tired you must be ! "

Diana put her hand into Gertrude's
outstretched one, saying, with rather an
odd tone in her voice —

"You are very like mamma."

"Will you see aunty now, or take off
your things and have something to eat
first?" asked Gertrude.

"I will have something to eat first,
please. I am very hungry," answered
Diana in the clear, sweet voice, which
was capable of expressing so many emotions.


*•'! will slow you your room, then,"
said her cousin, going towards the staircase.


Diana was ready in a few minutes,
and was taken to the breakfast-room, where
she found Guy and a small table laid for
supper.

As they ate, the conversation was
chiefly between Guy and his sister, but
Diana found an opportunity for saying —

I thought I had four cousins ! "

Guy bit his lip, and Gertrude said —

Dora is in the drawing-room — we will
join her after supper ; and Eupert is from
home."

Diana did not notice the half sigh which
accompanied Gertrude's last words, but
went on —

"And my uncle, shall I see him tonight
? "

"Papa is an invalid, lie has already
gone to bed. You shall see him tomorrow."


Oh, thank you. I will wait his convenience,
of course."

When supper was over they went into
the drawing-room, and Dora, who had sunk
into a doze during their absence, sprang upto
meet them on hearing the door open,
and confronted Diana.

For a moment the two girls stood looking
at one another, — Diana amused, Dora
speechless with astonishment as Gertrude
had been. Diana spoke first.

How do you do ? " she asked carelessly,
offering her hand. " I might really be

Medusa, for you all seem struck speechless
when you look at me. If I remember
rightly, there was rather a stricken look on
Guy's face when he first saw me at Jacewo.
How is it? Am I not like what you expected
? Or perhaps you are not accustomed
to strangers."

This was too much for Dora, — she regained
her power of speech at once.

"Oh yes," she answered, "we have a
great many friends. I only hope their
number will not frighten you."

I am not easily frightened," said Diana,
with another amused smile, as she looked
down from her height on to Dora's tiny
figure. " You evidently expected something
very different. I hope I have not
disappointed you."

No one spoke for a moment. It was
Gertrude who broke the silence.

Go and see if aunty is ready,
Dora, and then Diana can go to her
now.

The words were accompanied by a glance
which caused Dora to go at once; she
returned in a few minutes to say her aunt
was waiting to see Diana.

The two girls left the room together,
Diana wishing the others good night,
as she did not intend to come down
again.

"When Diana reached the door of her
mother's room, she turned a pale, grave
face to Dora, and said —

*' You need not come in ; I will see
mamma alone."

Dora was disappointed, but there was
no withstanding Diana's manner, and she
went away.

Diana entered the room and went upto
the bed. A shaded lamp was on a
table, and by it sat a nurse, reading. She
rose on seeing the young lady, but Diana
paid no attention to her, probably did not
even see her ; the coming interview occupied
all her thoughts. She went straight
up to the bed on which Mrs "Wentworth
was lying with her eyes open, and said —

Good evening, mamma. I am sorry
you are so ill."

She did not kiss her, nor did Mrs Wentworth
seem to expect or wish it. She
half turned her face away, and said fretfully—


"There was no need to send for you at
all. I told them so as soon as I knew
what they had done."

I am sorry my coming has vexed you,"
replied her daughter quietly, her eyes fixed
on an engraving which hung upon the wall
opposite to her.

The nurse, who had ceased reading for a
moment to listen to this dialogue, which,
under the circumstances, was so original,
now bent her eyes on her book again after
a long look at Diana's impassive face.

It was most unnecessary," went on
Mrs Went worth, moving restlessly. " You
are of no use in a sick-room ; you were
always more hindrance than help when
your father was ill."

I remember you telling me so at the

time. If my being here annoys you, I
can go away again."

What is the use of rushing to the
other extreme in that way ? Since you
have come, you had better stay, for the
present at any rate. But it was useless
trouble and expense to your cousin to
have to bring you."

*' I believe they thought you were
dying," moving as she spoke nearer to
the engraving, that she might examine
it more closely.

"Yes, I have been very ill — at death's
door; but I am better now, and could
have done without you quite well."

I am very sorry for the mistake,"
turning again to her mother and fixing
her dark eyes upon her. " It was exaggerated

solicitude on their part to send
for me, and an exaggerated feeling of
duty on mine which made me think it
necessary to come. I never expected
to find myself and my cousins so nearly
allied in motives."

"You are very impertinent," said Mrs
Wentworth.

"I am exciting you, I see. I think I
had better say ' good night.' I hope
you will feel better in the morning."

She lingered another moment, perhaps
for an answering *good night"; but as
none came she left the room, softly
closing the door after her.

Her own room was only a few doors
away from her mother's, and she did not
pause until she had reached it, shut the

door behind her, and turned the key in
the lock. The room was full of the soft
light of candles, and she stood in the
middle of the floor looking round her.
She was tired out, and she had to clench
her hands and set her teeth hard together
to keep back the nervous fit of crying
which threatened to overpower her. Not
even on New Year's Eve at Jacewo, when
John had just left her, had she felt so
lonely and unwelcome as she did here
and now. She dared not think of Jacewo
or John, it would have put the finishing
touch to her feeling of desolation ; and to
keep her thoughts from it she went to
the window and looked out. There was
a low, deep window-seat, and she sank
into it and leaned her head against the

frame. When she looked out of the
open window her hands sank into
her lap, and she uttered a long drawn
^'Ah!"

It was a perfect moonlight summer
night. Immediately below her lay the
gardens, then came the park ; between
the trees she caught the shimmer of water
flowing in the moonlight, and heard its
murmur over the stones. Near the river
was an ivy - grown ruin, — lofty walls
pierced by Gothic windows, but the whole
extent of which she could not see.
Across the river, on a hill, were the
red - roofed houses of Garshill, clustered
round the remains of an old castle, the
keep of which raised its head proudly
yet. And on every side, shutting out

the little town from the world, rose
great hills and long sweeps of moorland,
all fading away in the silvery moonlight.


Diana looked and looked, letting the
peace and beauty of it sink into her soul.
Tears filled her eyes, and her whole face
quivered. Then before her mind's eye
rose Jacewo, the wide lake, the vast and
lonely forests, the endless plain. There
were ruins too, the ancient Polish church,
the crumbling cross in the cholera burial-ground.
Her heart ached at the remembrance
of them, till tears came to her aid,
and she wept unrestrainedly.

Diana had scarcely left the drawing-room
than Gertrude turned to her brother,

VOL. II. E

and, laying her hand upon his arm, said,
almost in a whisper —

^'Guy— Eupert!"

I have thought of nothing else since
1 saw her," he answered.

I am thankful he is away ; but what
shall we do ? Aunty should have told
us ; how could she let us bring Diana
here, knowing what Eupert is ? "

We gave her no choice. If she had
known I was going for Diana, she might
have spoken."

Yes, yes," said Gertrude, hopelessly ;
"it is not her fault, but she should have
told us at the beginning. Diana is the
most beautiful girl I ever saw ; there is
something about her I have never seen
about any one else. You would have

thought aunty would have been so proud
of her. How could she let a girl like
that go wandering about the world alone ?
It is incomprehensible."

She is perfectly right ; she has struck
us all speechless."

"Yes; she is clever. She sees things
quickly. She saw in an instant that
she was not really welcome. And she is
not ; I do wish she had not come. I
shall not be easy while she is in the
house. Eupert will go simply wild over
a girl like that, and suppose — suppose
she should encourage him ! "

*you are meeting trouble half-way.
That is not like you, Gertrude."

"What a mistake it has been to bring
her ! and aunty is so much better abbacy.

I wish we could send her back tomorrow."



Guy raised his eyebrows, and only
said —

"You are not yourself, dear; you are
worn out with anxiety. You must not
take it for granted that the very worst
will happen. Rupert is not at home now,
and by the time he comes we shall know
more of Diana. To do her justice, I must
say I believe she has more head than
heart."

"We shall see," said Gertrude, trying
to look as if nothing had happened, as
the door opened and Dora came in again.

CHAPTER Xiii.

Marshall.

Mrs Wentworth's recovery was very
slow — her strength did not come back ;
and in spite of all that doctors and nurses
could do, she had more than one alarming
relapse. There was every prospect of
Diana's stay at Garshill being a long one,
and she made up her mind to it without
any demonstration of feeling. Her position
was rather peculiar. She was on
perfectly friendly terms with her cousins.
Every one at the Abbey was kind to her,

Guy's manner being totally different from
what it had been during their journey
from Jacewo. Her uncle, too, was very
kind. He was a great invalid, almost
wholly confined to his own set of rooms,
so that she saw very little of him. As a
Meredith, with a most tenacious memory
for all things concerning the family pride
and dignity, he had never forgotten how
she had once failed in duty and respect
towards him. Yet he was always kind
and considerate. With Gertrude she was
fast friends. Something in Diana had
appealed to Miss Meredith, and she grew
very fond of her. Diana returned the
feeling. She was powerfully drawn towards
Gertrude, and frequently yielded to her
influence. Indeed Diana complained of

no one, although Dora did sometimes show
ill feeling. The others received her in a
very friendly spirit, and she met them in
the same way. Yet she did not get on
with them. With the exception of Gertrude,
she had nothing in common with
them, and their intercourse never got
below the surface. She was free to share
the family life to any extent she liked.
Dora's hope of keeping her in the background,
was shattered the very first time
Diana had been present when callers
came. Dora took her defeat with an ill
grace, but was forced to accept it. Everyone
wanted to know Diana, every one was
struck with her, whether she pleased or
not ; and Diana soon found herself in the
midst of a totally new life. Among all

her new acquaintances, there was only one
who excited the least degree of curiosity
or interest in her. This was a girl called
Muriel Hope, Dora's bosom friend, and a
frequent visitor at the Abbey. She was a
handsome girl — " a brown beauty," with a
fine, rather fully developed figure, and an
unamiable expression. She looked neither
good-tempered nor happy, but seemed as
if she were constantly brooding over
some wrong, and considered every other
woman her natural enemy. There was
nothing particularly interesting about her,
and Diana took very little notice of her
until she observed this aggressive manner
and attitude, and began to wonder what
it meant. A glimmer of light was thrown
on the problem by some one telling her

that Muriel was deeply attached to Eupert
Meredith, and that if there was one girl
for whom he seemed to have a preference
it was for her. He was generally where
she was, and he paid her more attention
than any other girl. Diana asked why
they were not engaged, and was answered
by shrugs of the shoulders and shakes of
the head. No one knew. Every one felt
certain that if Eupert were to ask Muriel
to marry him, she would consent. The
general impression was that she had refused
other men for his sake. What prevented
his proposing no one could tell.
His people did not seem to encourage a
marriage, although they were all fond of
Muriel ; and the fortune to which she was
heiress was almost a necessity to any wife

for Eupert. This complication seemed in
some degree to account for the unhappy
expression Muriel wore ; but what was
the reason for the complication itself?
She thought a good deal about her cousin
Eupert. He was mentioned seldom at
home, and very often by outsiders. He
was apparently considered an unsatisfactory
member of the family, and as such
she felt a certain sympathy with him.

In spite of the kindness of her cousins,
Diana did not feel at home or friendly
with them ; they had no sympathies in
common. It was impossible that she
should not feel more in touch with the
stately harmonious life at Garshill, than
with the scrambling existence at Jacewo ;
that she should not feel more at ease in

these spacious rooms and galleries, than in
the narrow passages and steep stairs of
her former home. There was a grace and
charm about this English house which
appealed to her imagination, and was in
unison with one side of her nature.
Seeing her in the setting of this beautiful
old house and grounds, one would have
said she should never stoop to meaner
surroundings ; yet it had been practically
proved that, in the comparatively sordid
conditions at Jacewo, her charm had been
irresistible. In spite of all this, in spite
of the attraction which well - ordered,
luxurious English country life, where
everything went on well - oiled wheels,
without hitch or effort, or visible working
of the necessary machinery, had for one

side of her nature, — there was another side
which felt pinched and starved and dulled,
oppressed almost to desperation, by this
comfort and perfection. It is agreeable
to roll gently along a smooth turnpike
road without let or hindrance ; but a
healthy and vigorous spirit will equally
enjoy a jolt on a rough cart-track. It is
well that voices should be modulated, and
private tastes and feelings kept in subservience
to the common comfort ; but
comfort is not, after all, the one thing
needful, and there are times when a rough
contradiction is to be preferred to smooth-tongued
agreement, or polite demur. In
the stillness and decorum of this highly
civilised English household, where feet
fell silently on the thickly carpeted floors,

and highly trained servants glided noiselessly
about, speaking scarcely above a
whisper, Diana felt stifled, and often
longed to cry aloud to break the silence,
and wished for the tramp of heavy boots
on uncarpeted floors, the babel of unruly
voices, and Frau Camphausen's stentorian
tones rising above the rest.

With her mother she was, as she used
to say, on no terms at all. Mrs Wentworth
disliked to have her near her, and
with the self - indulgence of an invalid,
made no attempt to conceal the irritation
she felt at her presence. She would accept
no attendance from her, except a little
reading aloud. It was strange how quietly
Diana accepted the situation. She sat for
hours at a time looking out of the window.

across the garden and park and the shining
river, to the ruined castle and the
storm - swept hills beyond. What she
thought of, no one knew and no one asked ;
no one thought of that other landscape
which was often so vividly present to her,
as to blind her eyes to what actually lay
before them. She had a great deal of time
for thinking, and many and various were
the thoughts which occupied her mind.

She spent a great deal of time out of
doors. From her childhood she had loved
long, solitary walks, and now she explored
this new country alone and on foot.

Garshill lies in one of Yorkshire's finest
dales, where every mile of road brings into
sight new and unexpected beauties of
scenery. The Meredithss' home itself — a

hoary Elizabethan mansion, covered with
ivy and mellow with age, — was exquisite to
look upon — a treat in itself; but in the
situation it actually occupied — on a height
sloping down to the river, which slipped
and glided and murmured and swirled and
foamed along, with the ruins of the Abbey
within a stone's throw of the terrace, and
the quaint, picturesque little town, to
which not a house had been added for at
least five-and-twenty years, the majestic
ruin of its castle on the cliff overhanging
the river, and its monastic towers and gateways
in full view, — it was a place which,
to call one's own, made one's heart swell
with emotion.

The ruin was one of Diana's favourite
haunts. Past it the river ran shallow,

rippling over its stony bed, and then
spread out wide and smooth almost to
the size of a lake. To penetrate among
the ruins, and, turning her back upon the
house, to sit beneath the grey walls and
look up at the blue sky through these
great Gothic windows, noble and melancholy
in their crumbling ruin, to hear the
murmur of the water and the sounds of
nature, soothed and supported Diana as
just then no human intercourse could have
done.

But it was seldom she stayed so near
home. To stray alone in this country,
which had taken her heart by storm, was
purest pleasure to her; to take the
narrow walk, with the river shining
through the leaves on one side, and the

tree-clothed slopes on the other ; to cross
the bridge and climb the hill to the town ;
to cross the empty market-place ; to pass
under the old monastic archway and beneath
the shadow of the Grey Friars'
tower, its stones mellow with age and exposure,
the exquisite tracery of its windows
perfect yet ; to gain the high, rough road,
leading farther into the dale ; to go beyond
the race-course to where the beacon stood
in a high moorland field, to climb its steps,
and then sit there for hours looking into
the swelling hills and spacious plains " of
the most beautiful county in England, —
all this was meat and drink to her.

Here she was on the edge of a large fir
plantation, and the sight of the familiar
tree, the sound of the wind in its branches,

VOL. II. F

sometimes to stand beneath them and
imagine herself in a far country, brought
to her '' thoughts that did often lie too
deep for tears."

She roamed, too, along lonely moorland
roads, where walls and hedges ceased to
hem her in, and the purple heather spread
for miles on either side — empty of man, or
house, or beast. Standing on a rise in the
midst of this purple wilderness, she saw
through the haze the old grey pile of
Gorham s ruined castle to the south, and
Drayton's four square towers, so dark and
weather - beaten as to be scarcely discernible
against their dark background,
to the west. Go in which direction
she would, she scarcely ever lost sight
of great Marske Fell, who reared his

huge square bulk due south, surrounded
by others less vast, but all forming
a brotherhood of ancient mountains,"
stern and desolate," and not to be
surpassed.

She saw the river winding at the foot
of its limestone cliffs, the verdure which
clothed them lending its own colour to
the water. She saw white lines, which
she knew to be roads, leading farther
into the dale, and losing themselves
among the mountains ; she saw clumps
of fir-trees, standing still and sad upon
the moors ; she saw mellow sunsets, and
flaming skies glowing athwart their level
branches ; bursts of sunlight which threw
them into strong relief, and heavy storm-clouds
almost blotting them from sight.

She knew wind and calm, deepest stillness,
and the air filled with hurtling
sound ; she waded deep in the heather,
and tore the tough stems at the expense
of her skin ; she broke branches of crimson
and golden hips and haws, and long fronds
of waving fern and boughs of autumn
leaves. She inhaled the crisp northern
air with its pungent, earthy odours ; and
in all this feast of nature she tried to
find peace for her restless heart.

Perhaps she was not sorry to have this
time of solitude ; it may be that she felt
calmer as she weighed things in her mind,
free from the distracting nearness of the
subject of her thoughts. She knew she
could not have considered impartially what
had happened at Jacewo, where, wherever

she went, — on the shore of the vast blue
lake, in the shadow of the whispering
pines, out on the boundless plain, or to
the still more complete solitude of the
scene of her last talk with John, — she
would have been disturbed by associations
which this place had not. The
wind, which blew fitfully off these hills,
or swooped down over the moors, was
not the same wind which had swept
moaning over the great plain upon which,
for a few months, she had been a speck
of humanity. The plain of York, with its
orchards and rustling corn-fields and pretty
villages, — clusters of red-roofed farmsteads
and cottages, all running into one another,
and of which, at no great distance, the
green sea formed the boundary, — was in

no way like the plain of Eastern Europe,
which, not bounded but only interrupted by
the long, low line of mountains, stretched
to the other side of the world. There you
might go a day's journey and scarcely see
a village or a farmstead ; there your companions
were the pine - trees, whispering
to one another in an unknown tongue ;
there the greatest variety was to come
upon a lonely sheet of water, over which
the gulls wheeled, crying sorrowfully.
These exquisite English woods, filling the
valley and clothing the hills, with every
tree a different green, and alive with the
songs of birds, did not move her in the
same way as had done those far-stretching
pine-forests, melancholy and songless. She
often fancied that, had she remained at

Jacewo, her thoughts about John must
have been very different from what they
were here.

As a matter of fact he was seldom out
of her thoughts. Day and night she
found herself constantly going over all
he had said at their last meeting, upto
the very words at which he had been
interrupted, and had perforce left her.
She longed for him inexpressibly ; everyday
she missed him more, but she still
shuddered away from the idea of an
alliance with people such as he had
described : she still had a strong feeling
of pain and disappointment when she
reflected that John belonged essentially
to the people. She still had the feeling
of bitter rebellion against the fact that

he was not alone in the world, and that
was always followed by a feeling almost
maddening in its intensity — the remembrance
of her promise to Tom. Why had
she made it? Why had things turned
out so differently from what her expectations
had been ? There had been a kind
of tacit understanding that she should
not stay at Jacewo more than a year,
then she was to come and stay with
Amy Fairbairn; she would meet Tom
in the natural way of things, and she
would be free. That was to have been
the natural and sensational termination
of that affair; and how differently everything
had turned out ! She was at Gars-hill,
a place to which it had been her
intention never to come ; she had not

met Tom, and there was no prospect of
her meeting him. If by any chance she
were to meet John again, she would like
to feel that, if he renewed, or rather
completed his offer, she would be refusing
him entirely by her own free will. Bound
by her promise to Tom, she could not feel
this, and the knowledge of it chafed and
angered her. During all the months she
had spent at Jacewo she had scarcely
thought of Tom — never of her promise to
him ; it had not even come into her mind
while John was speaking. Now it was
often in her thoughts, and worried hera
good deal. She told herself again and
again that she would refuse John if he
spoke again, but she wanted to be free
to refuse him.

The last words Jolin had spoken were
in her mind incessantly. "Your people

and mine are not strangers, they live "

What had he been going to say ? Could
he have meant that his people lived at
or near Garshill ? Her eyes wandered
over the cottages and small houses of the
little town. Was one of these his home ?
Without knowing why, she felt sure it was
not. She could not make up her mind to
speak his name to her cousins — there was
too little sympathy between them ; and any
inquiries could only result in the revelation
of the fact that she and John had
been together at Jacewo, — a fact which
she did not intend to make known. So
she held her peace and remained in
ignorance; but it seemed to her that

every day she missed him more, and
more clearly realised all he had been to
her.

About this time she made a discovery
which brought back to her for a moment
the odd feeling she had had when, just
before leaving Jacewo, she had stood looking
at her pile of unopened letters, with
a certainty that among them was one
containing something it was of importance
to her to know.

Mrs Wentworth was considerably better
for the time. She had left her bed and
been carried to the couch in a room adjoining
her bedroom. Diana had been
reading to her, but had ceased on the
entrance of Gertrude and Guy. When
two or three members of the family were

gathered together, it was Diana's habit to
withdraw from the conversation ; so now,
when her cousins came in, she went to a
chair near the window and looked out.
Gertrude, who was always kind, sought a
subject of conversation in which Diana
should take a prominent part, and so
began to ask questions about Jacewo.
Diana had never told them much about
her life there ; she answered their questions
in more or less detail, but never
volunteered any information.

"How much longer did you think of
staying there?" asked Gertrude.
"Not much longer, I think."
*' I thought," said Guy, "that you
were so fond of it, you could not forgive
me for bringing you away. You

said at first it was impossible for you to
leave."

^^Did I?" indifferently. "You came
so suddenly, and ordered me to come so
peremptorily, I suppose I felt angry with
you. As a matter of fact, the novelty
had worn off, and I was just on the verge
of getting tired of it."

You are very inconsistent."

' With consistency a great mind has
simply nothing to do,' " she quoted, with
slightly upturned chin.

On what grounds do you lay claim
to a great mind ? " he asked, rather sarcastically,
— he never could help speaking
sarcastically to Diana ; "I don't understand
it."

On the ground that great minds are

always misunderstood," she replied, with
a half smile.

Gertrude laughed.

That is right, Diana," she said. '' We
look up to him too much, and he begins
to think too well of himself. I like to
hear you contradict him."

Mrs Wentworth frowned. She did not
wish Diana to become too intimate with
her cousins, and she hastened to interpose.

But where should you have gone when
you did leave ? "

I don't quite know. I never make
my plans long beforehand — that always
means making them twice over ; but I
expect I should have gone to stay with
Amy Fairbairn."

'' I suppose you mean Amy Cartwright ;

why can't you call people by their proper
names ? "

Amy Cart Wright ! " repeated Diana.
Is she married ? "

"Of course she is married; she was
married some time in the spring, about
May, I think. Do you mean to say she
never sent you word ? "

Diana did not reply. Those unopened
letters reproached her silently ; when she
thought of Amy's feelings, she was lost
in dismay.

I had no idea," she said at last.

It seems very strange. Perhaps her
letter was lost."

Or perhaps you got it, and did not
read it," put in Guy, who had been watching
her face.

Still she said nothing, and Gertrude,
thinking she was coming to her cousin's
rescue, said —

"What nonsense he talks, does he not,
Diana? He wants to make it appear we
don't care for over friends."

"No, it is not nonsense," said Diana,
calmly. " I got a great many letters at
Jacewo which I did not read. When I
came away, I destroyed a whole drawerful
of letters which I had never opened."

Diana ! " exclaimed Gertrude, while
Mrs Wentworth said querulously —

I have no doubt there were many of
mine among them."

^ " No, only one. The last one, in which
you said you were ill, I did not open.
There was one from Tom Sherlock at

the same time ; I did not open that
either."

"Diana, my dear child," said Gertrude,
half laughing, half puzzled, " what were
you thinking about? Why did you doit?"


I did not care about letters out
there," she said brusquely, already repenting
of the expansive mood which had
come upon her, she knew not how or
why.

Well, I should have thought "

began Guy; but Gertrude, having seen
that Diana was angry at the continuance
of the subject, made a sign to him, and
he said no more.

"I hope," said Mrs Wentworth, after a
pause, 'that you will write to Amy."

VOL. II. G

Yes, I will write," said her daughter ;
but she disliked writing letters, and put
it off from day to day, so that in the end
it never got done at all.

CHAPTEE Xvii

RUPERT.

It was about a week after this that Rupert
came home, quite unexpectedly, not having
sent even a telegram to announce his coming.
He had left his companion, Fred
Addison, in London, detained there on wedding
business, he said, and had come north
alone. He arrived during lunch, and Diana
could not help seeing a change come upon
the faces of all present when he came into
the room ; and she again wondered what
was this kind of mystery which hung about

her cousin Eupert. Guy looked stern,
Gertrude troubled and apprehensive, Dora
pouted, because he was alone. She looked
at him with some curiosity and some pleasure,
for he was an exceedingly handsome
man, fair, like all the others, as tall as Guy,
and of larger build. There was something
about him which Diana liked, and she at
once jumped to the conclusion that he
would be an acquisition. He greeted his
sisters rather carelessly, gave his brother
no more than a nod, and even while he was
doing this, his eyes had strayed to Diana,
and he was looking at her with a fixity and
openness which she found exceedingly disagreeable.
Her colour rose a little, and she
turned her head aside, her brows meeting
in a frown. She always resented unabashed

and staring admiration. Gertrude saw her
feeling, and the cause of it, and she and Guy,
entering into a conspiracy on the spur of
the moment, contrived to keep a sufficiently
animated conversation going to prevent
Eupert exchanging more than a few
words with his cousin. As soon as lunch
was over, Diana went up - stairs to her
mother's room. Something about Eupert
had made her feel a strong repulsion for
him, and she began to doubt whether he
would in reality prove an acquisition. She
was destined to receive a further shock
without delay, which, following so closely
upon the irritation she was already suffering
from, was too much for her self-control.
She had scarcely reached her mother's room
before sirs Wentworth began —

I hear Rupert has come home."
He came while we were at lunch."
Rather told me when she brought my
chop, and since we are alone, I should like
to speak to you about him. Rupert has
already given his father and Guy a great
amount of trouble, and I do not wish to bethe
innocent means of adding to it. Whenever
Rupert is in a house with a pretty girl,
there is sure to be trouble. He flirts with
her and pays her attention ; ten to one he
gains her affections, and makes her miserable,
and spoils her chances, because he
himself will not have a serious thought
about it. Rupert never had a serious
thought about anything in his life. He
has not the slightest wish to marry, and he
could not if he would ; for he is practically

dependent upon his father, who would
never consent to Eupert's marriage. He
is not suited for domestic life, and the girl
who married him would be very much to
be pitied. Rupert knows all this perfectly
well, and has too much sense to oppose his
father. I just tell you this that you may be
on your guard against him, and not think
too much of any attention he may pay you."

Afterwards, by the light of later events,
Diana pondered deeply upon these words
of her mother; now they only served to
change her irritations into exasperation.

Why do you say this to me ? " she
asked bluntly, in a tone which, if Mrs
Wentworth had been a woman who learned
by experience, might have warned her that
she was getting into dangerous ground.

Because that is just the way in which
he is sure to behave to you."

That is as I choose."

*' No ; if he begins, you will follow. I
know him well, and I have seen it again
and again. No girl can resist him."

"Perhaps I have powers of resistance
with which you are not acquainted."

"You are a wicked, headstrong girl, with
no respect for any one. However, I have
done my duty — I have told you that Rupert
is a dangerous man for any girl to know.
I have given you a fair warning, and now I
wash my hands of you. If you get into an
entanglement with your cousin, and estrange
your uncle and break my heart, perhaps you
will be satisfied; my conscience, at any rate,
will be clear."

There is nothing more comfortable thana
clear conscience," said Diana, whose anger
had by now reached white heat. "It is
most generous of you to give me this warning,
of which I do not stand in the slightest
need. Pray keep it for the girls about here ;
if they are like Dora, I should say it would
be a priceless treasure to them. As for me,
I am not in the habit of letting people behave
just as they please to me. Perhaps it
would gratify you if I were to meet Eupert
on his own ground. Perhaps I can flirt and
make men fall in love with me without serious
intentions. Perhaps I shall turn the
tables upon him, and give him a lesson in
serious intentions, — what should you say to
that ? "

She stood before her mother with a whiteface

and burning eyes, her body quivering
a little, her voice unsteady with anger. It
was long since she had felt so angry.

"You will kill me before you have done,"
said her mother, wiping her eyes and leaning
back among her cushions as if exhausted.
Wicked, ungrateful girl ! what have I ever
done to deserve the punishment of having
such a daughter ! "

You take things too much for granted,"
went on Diana in her low, clear voice ; " you
make up your mind that only one thing can
happen. Have you no more respect for me
than to believe that I am ready to fall in
love with a man who makes a trade of getting
girls to fall in love with him ? "

You do not know what you are talking
about. If you knew your cousin better,

you would not waste your breath in such
foolish talk."

Then, the better I know him the safer
I shall be. I will begin to cultivate his
acquaintance at once."

Never had mother and daughter been so
opposed as they were now. All Diana s old
feeling of antagonism to her mother and her
mother's people, was back in full force, filling
her heart with wrath and bitterness,
and giving to her tongue the keenness of
a barbed arrow. The entrance of a maidservant
put an end to the conversation, nor
was it resumed ; the afternoon passed as
usual.

Contrary to custom, Diana did not go
upstairs again after dinner. She went
with the others into the drawing-room, and

stood at the window, half hidden by the
curtain. Rupert joined her as soon as he
came into the room.

What a cosy nook you have chosen ! "
he said. "There is just room here for
two."

I have never yet found room in it for
any one but myself," was her reply, given
without looking at him.

That is because you have had no inducement
to admit any one else."

Say rather no inclination."

How was that ? You are not intended
for solitude, — you can't pretend to think
that. You must find companionship
pleasant. "

"Everything has its beginning."

I see," with a pleased laugh, which told

Diana how little used he was to a rebuff.
You are very kind."

I see what you mean," she said, coldly ;
you can, if you choose, put that construction
on my words."

\yhat other interpretation can I put
upon them? That is what they seem to
mean, and I am a simple, straightforward
sort of fellow, who only sees things on the
surface. If you and I are to get on, you
must not indulge in hidden meanings and
veiled allusions, because I shan't understand
them in the least."

I don't remember saying that I wanted
to get on with you. You take things too
much for granted, it seems to me."

All this time she had never looked at
him. The fit of passion provoked by her

mother had had its usual effect of making
her feel depressed and tired for hours afterwards.
At dinner she had scarcely spoken ;
she had worn an air almost of austerity,
which had become her curiously. But as
she spoke these last words, she turned and
looked him full in the face with her dark,
clear eyes, which had a look of sadness in
their depths. There was something at once
pathetic and defiant in her attitude and
manner. Eupert had never encountered
quite the same thing in any other girl he
had met, and it set his pulses beating with
a desire for conquest.

What do you speak like that for ? " he
asked.

It is a habit I have, that is all."

You should try to get out of it. It is a

great mistake for a girl to practise her sharp
tongue upon a man."

A great mistake for the man when he
gives her reason to do so, I suppose you
mean."

The girls here don't talk in that way."

"Perhaps they cant."

He laughed. " I don't believe they can.
It seems to me that you are slightly cleverer
than they are. But don't quarrel with me,
Diana, because, in the natural order of things,
you and I ought to be friends, not enemies.
I am the bad boy of the family, as I have
no doubt you have already been told ; and
I have always heard of you as being the
naughty girl of your family."

Not Charlotte Bronze, placed in the category
of those who wrote " naughty books,"

could have felt more repulsion for the
unfortunate speaker than Diana did for
her cousin when he said this. She answered
nothing, she only looked at him,
but it was a look which made him say —

Why do you look at me like that ?
What have I said ? You are like no other
girl I ever knew."

"That is rather to my advantage, I
should think," she answered briefly ; and
she was just moving away to join the
others, when Gertrude suddenly addressed
her with a reproachful look.

I think you have forgotten, Diana, that
aunty is alone all this time."

Then, why don't you go to her ? " asked
Rupert, breaking in before Diana had time
to speak. " Is Diana the only person who

is admitted into aunt's room ? That won't
suit me, because I intend to go myself and
pay my respects to her tomorrow."

"Diana always sits with her at night,"
said Gertrude, and Diana moved away,
saying —

I will go now ; I had really forgotten
the time. Good night ; I shall not come
down-stairs again," and she passed out of
the room without another word to Eupert.

VOL. 11. H

CHAPTER XIX.

Blunders.

From the time of Rupert's return, Diana's
position at the Abbey was materially
changed. She saw it, although she did
not at first know to what she should
attribute it. Dora at once became openly
hostile, and her friend, Muriel Hope, appeared
to share her feelings ; for she
scarcely ever spoke to Diana, but withdrew
from her the slight amount of intimacy
which had once existed between
them. Gertrude began to look anxious

and worried, and to find every day fresh
reasons why Diana should spend more
time in her mother's room. Diana herself
was passive in the matter. As the time
she had spent at Jacewo faded more and
more into the past, her thoughts dwelt
ever more exclusively on John Garthwaite ;
and all her musings in her long solitary
walks were on the intercourse they had
enjoyed, and especially on that last long
talk which had been so provokingly interrupted.
More and more she regretted that
promise to Tom ; nay, her feeling was not
regret, but passionate, unceasing rebellion
against it. Her only hope — and it was
founded on belief — was that Tom himself
would prove faithless. She had no belief
in his love for her ; she looked upon it as

merely accidental — a love of the eyes only,
in which heart and reason had little, if any,
place. She knew she was not the wife for
Tom, and she hoped he would find it outby
falling in love with some one else, and
that he would in that way set her free.
But she got no tidings from him. Before
they had parted, she had half laughingly
told him she did not believe he really loved
her; and in the same mood she had charged
him, should he change his mind, to let her
know. He had promised, but she had heard
nothing. Now and again she thought she
would write to him, but there seemed no
sufficient reason, and she never did. It
was months since she had had any news
of him.

With Rupert she was friendly. He had

seen that the first impression he had produced
upon her had been a disagreeable
one, and he had been clever enough to
change it materially. Perhaps Diana was
glad to have it changed. He had brought
a new element into life at the Abbey, and
that was on his side when he had set to
work to make Diana look upon him with
more friendly eyes. Yet underneath all
her friendliness was a feeling of distrust
and repulsion for which she could not
account, but which prevented her from
enjoying his society as much as he intended
she should enjoy it. She began
to doubt if he were really attached to
Muriel. As far as she could see, he was
as happy with herself as with Muriel ; and
the importance which she might have attached

to his manner and that of all the
others at any other time, was now lost
sight of in her absorbing thoughts of John.
She lived more in her thoughts than in
real life, and that was the reason why she
walked blindfold into the position she
occupied later. They were of necessity
thrown much together. Mrs Wentworth's
health was much improved, and her daughter
could leave her safely for hours at a
time. Both she and Eupert were exceedingly
fond of outdoor exercise, while Gertrude
and Dora were only moderately so ;
and they walked and rode together nearly
every day. Mrs Wentworth had maintained
perfect silence on the subject ever
since her daughter's summary rejection of
her proffered advice. Rupert was well

aware that his intimacy with his cousin
was looked upon with no friendly eye, but
he paid no heed to it, it not being in his
nature to deny himself any enjoyment.
Diana's manner with him was perfectly
frank and careless — so different from that
of the many girls living around, and who
all had, as he expressed it, their eye upon
him, that he was more attracted and interested
than he had ever been before. He,
like many other people, enjoyed hearing
her talk. There was a piquancy in her
ideas and modes of expressing them which
he had not encountered before ; and they
had long conversations on many odd subjects,
often begun by him merely to hear
what she would say. She began conversations
too, sometimes, but it never occurred

to him that her object in beginning them
might be the same as his own. As yet she
knew very little about him, and had no
clue to the position he held in his family ;
and sometimes she wondered what was the
hindrance to his marrying, for he seemed
to her the very kind of man whose people
are usually anxious that he should " settle
down early with some nice girl." One day
Eupert himself gave her the key to the
enigma.

They were riding home, having been out
nearly all the afternoon. It was now the
end of September, and the evenings closed
in betimes. They had ridden eastward out
into the plain of York, along the level
country roads, which wound past villages,
orchards, and corn-fields, and from which

they, seated high in their saddles, commanded
a view scarcely to be equalled
anywhere for peaceful, sylvan beauty.

They were not thinking about it. Eupert
was not a lover of nature, and he only
approved this broad, rich plain because he
got good hunting on it ; and Diana, a lover
of the rocks and hills and wild bare heaths
which rolled westward, never paid much
attention to the kind of country in which
they were now.

They had been silent for some time, and
Eupert spoke first, in the tone of one who
continues a conversation which has been
interrupted.

You don't believe me, I know, when I
say I have practically got the whip-hand
of the old man and Guy. The popular

belief is that they have got the whip-hand
of me, because I am almost entirely
dependent upon them for supplies ; but it
is one of those things that cut both ways.
I have only to threaten them with my
marriage, and they will give me pretty
nearly everything I want."

"You say so very often, but I believe
you are only boasting. What reason have
they for objecting to your marriage ? "

"None that I can see, but very strong
reasons in their own opinion ; and it's
because I don't care and they do, that
I am stronger than they are, and can
get from them almost as much money as
I like."

"What do you do? How do you manage
it ? "

"Have they been telling you anything
about me ? "

Mamma said uncle did not wish you to
marry, and that you were a very dangerous
man for a girl to know."

Did she say that ? " with the smile of
gratified vanity which showed the relationship
between himself and Dora. In many
ways they were much alike, — both loved
flattery, to be told that they were invincible
and irresistible, and to think that
others were impressed by what came as a
matter of course to them. Diana had soon
discovered this common quality, and it was
that which alienated her from them. Gertrude
and Guy were quite free from this
taint. " I daresay you agreed with her,"
he concluded.

I did not know you then."

"But you know me now : do you think
she was right ? "

I should think you would be very dangerous
for some girls to know."

What kind of girls ? "

Girls like Dora, for instance, or girls
very unlike her, — trusting, simple-minded
girls."

His face fell.

"Dora!" he echoed, contemptuously.
"Do you give me credit for being able to
score nothing better than a girl like Dora ?
And what do you mean by trusting ? Do
you think I am not worthy of trust ? "

"Nay," she answered, "you know best
about that. I have had no experience

yet."

Wei], but," he said, " why do you take
Dora, my own sister, as an example? There
is another girl really in the running — I
mean Muriel Hope."

Muriel Hope ! " she echoed, suddenly
remembering all she had heard about her
and Eupert. " Why do you bring her
in ? " she asked, cautiously ; for intercourse
with Rupert was developing in her many
hitherto unexercised qualities.

Because she is the very person I gain
all my points with. When the old man
and Guy refuse supplies, I threaten that I
will go and ask Muriel to marry me ; that
brings them to their senses at once."

But why ? " asked Diana, thoroughly
interested.

Because she would accept me."

He laughed as he spoke, the triumphant,
self-satisfied laugh Diana hated so ; but she
was too much interested to heed it now.
She only said —

Why should she not accept you ? Why
do they wish you not to marry ? "

Well, you see, I have no money ; my
father would have to find me an income,
and he does not like forking out."

'* That's not the reason. Muriel is rich ;
he would give you nothing."

Then I am the black sheep of the
family, you know. I am not steady. I
like cards and horses and billiards, and
they are afraid my wife might not be
happy."

Nonsense ! These are just the men
whom people always want to get married."

He looked at her, and then was silent
for some little time ; at last he said. —

If I tell you, you will know what nota
soul outside the Abbey knows, and
Dora does not know it. You will be let
into the very heart of the family secret,"
he added ironically. " I would not tell a
soul but you, but I rather want you to
know. I should like you to know the
worst about me, and I believe you
wont think about it as these idiots do.
I am telling you in confidence ; but
I have told you a lot of things in
confidence, and I believe I am quite
safe."

Perfectly safe."

To tell you the truth, then," he said,
I am under a cloud. No one knows it

but ourselves, but I once signed a cheque
for my father without his permission."

He waited a moment for her to speak,
but she said nothing, and he went on —

It was found out, and my father and
I had some talk about it, then we settled
down as before. I daresay you are wondering
what this has to do with my marriage,
and it is rather difficult for an unprejudiced
mind to understand. My father
and Gertrude and Guy have odd notions
about some things ; they think that if I
were ever to ask any girl to marry me, it
would be their duty to tell her and her
people about this. They would not for
anything on earth that it became known,
and so they are ready to do anything to
keep me single. Whenever they refuse

me anything I want, I just say I will go
and propose to Muriel Hope, and they give
in directly, because they know she would
accept me. Do you understand, now?"

'' Perfectly."

You see I have a pretty strong hold
on them. I am glad you know, and I
will tell you why. I did that thing on
the spur of the moment. It was the old
man's fault ; he knew I had to have money,
and he would give me none, so I had to
take it, and that was the only way. Still
I did it, and whatever the girls themselves
might say, their people would one
and all refuse their consent to the marriage.
This makes it very hard for a man
to keep straight. How can I do anything
but amuse myself with girls, when

VOL. II. I

I know I may never marry any of them ?
Now, if a girl knew, and after that did
not turn her back upon me, it would give
me a chance of showing there is something
in me — even if I did make a slip
when I was desperately hard up. But ina
place like this, it is in for a penny, in
for a pound. If they catch you once unsteady
on your feet, they call you a confirmed
drunkard for the rest of your life ;
and if, under stress of circumstances, you
take from your father what he ought to
have offered you, they call you a thief.
There is no sense in people."

They are quite right. What would
you have them do?"

*' Why, do you consider me so guilty,
too ? "

"You are a forger," said Diana, almost
sternly.

You're only like the others, after all."

I don't know ; I don't know what the
others think about it, but I do not see
how any one, once knowing it, could ever
have any confidence in you again."

I tell you," he said, angrily, " that I
did it on the spur of the moment."

She was silent. She could have said
nothing he would have liked to hear, and
he went on —

Up to now I have not wished to
marry, and so we have got along pretty
well ; but I shall want to some time, and
then we must quarrel."

She said nothing. This was the first
time she had been brought face to face

with crime ; and the criminal, instead of
being a poor, uneducated man, was a
gentleman born and bred — a man bearing
the oldest name in his county — her own
cousin. She felt sick ; she wanted neither
to see nor to speak to Eupert again. Forgery
! the lowest of all crimes, the sin for
which there is no forgiveness. Words
she had once heard, passed through her
mind. " Some of the greatest liars and
cheats I have known, have been gentlemen.
The most dastardly deed I ever
heard of, was done by an English gentleman."
She felt more deeply shocked
than she had ever done in her life before.
She could not speak of it, she could not
reproach him ; she felt bitterly humiliated
that this shameful deed should have been

done by a man who was related to her.
She rode on in silence, feeling as though
her mind had been sullied by contact
with the impurity which had just been
revealed to her.

This same afternoon a conversation,
bearing closely on Diana's future, was
being held in Mrs Wentworth's room.
Gertrude had taken afternoon tea with
her aunt, and Guy joined them later.

Where is Diana ? " asked Guy, presently.


She is riding with Eupert," answered
his sister.

They are a great deal together, and
it cannot lead to any good. Is there noway
of preventing it ? "

I know of none," said Gertrude. " We

cannot forbid them to meet, as if they
were naughty children, and I fear any
show of disapproval would only encourage
them. I am very sorry, I don't want
Diana to come to any harm."

I spoke to her the very day Rupert
came home," said Mrs Wentworth, "but
she paid no attention to what I said. She
is one of those girls who always do precisely
the opposite to what you ask them
to do."

Gertrude said nothing, but in spite
of her affection for her aunt, she was
thinking — " If you knew that, why did
you not go to work in a different
way {

"It is very unfortunate," said Guy.
*' There can be only one end to it; and

after an explanation with his father,
and a disappointment to Diana, we
shall be just where we always are with
Eupert."

Mrs Wentworth raised no voice in
her daughter's defence, she only said —

** Whatever happens will be her own
fault. I warned her, and she knows what
to expect."

No one spoke for a time, and then Gertrude
said, with a little hesitation —

I don't think it is quite fair to speak
of Diana like that. I have seen no signs
of her caring for Eupert in that way ; T
almost wish I had, for I do think he cares
for her."

This was too novel a situation to betaken
in, all in a moment, and some little

time passed before Guy had grasped it
sufficiently to be able to say —

In that case it is even more perplexing
and difficult to deal with than usual.
If this continues, he may wish to marry
her, and the explanation, from which we
all naturally shrink, would be inevitable."

Still," said Gertrude, " it would remain
among ourselves, and if he married her
there would be an end of this terrible
fear lest he should marry some one else.
Every time I see him and Muriel alone
together, I tremble lest he should be asking
her to marry him. Every time he
goes from home, I dread lest we should
hear that he has got entangled with some
girl, in such a way as to force an explanation
from us. I am never rid of this fear.

and I think it would kill me to have that
thing made known."

No one spoke. Guy looked gloomily
into the fire, and Mrs Wentworth put
her handkerchief to her eyes. Gertrude,
in speaking for herself, had spoken also
for them. At last Guy broke the
silence —

*then, do you mean that you would
encourage the idea of a marriage between
Rupert and Diana, if you thought either
of them wished it ? "

"Yes, if I thought they really cared
for one another, I should feel happier
than I have done for a long time. I
shrink from the idea of telling Diana, but
better tell her than an outsider ; and it
will come to that one day, I am convinced.

Eupert is not the kind of man
to remain single all his life. I only fear
Diana has not that kind of feeling for
him."

'eat any rate, we can give them the
chance," said Guy, who always listened
with respect to what Gertrude said. " There
is a great deal in what you say. I will
tell my father. It might be the very
best thing that could happen for Rupert.
Only I do not know if he would make
her happy."

'' If he were fond of her, he would.
There is a great deal of good in him.
If he got the right wife, it might be the
making of him ; and the right wife will
be the one of whom he is the fondest."

"My dears," said Mrs Wentworth, who

had listened to this dialogue in silence,
I have a plan. Do not make yourselves
uneasy. If Eupert should wish to
marry Diana, and you approve the marriage,
it shall take place. I take upon
myself, as her mother, to decide that. As
for the necessary disclosure, leave that
entirely to me. I will choose my own
time and place to tell her all she needs
to know. I do not myself consider it
necessary to tell her anything. If Eupert
were to engage himself to another girl, it
is her parents you would tell of this ; and
as regards Diana, it is enough if I know
of poor Eupert's mistake. It is quite
enough if I know the character of the
man who is to be my daughter's husband.
If I, knowing the truth, offer no objection

to the match, that is all that is
necessary. "When I think of all that
your father has done for me and mine, I
consider Diana ought to feel very glad
that she can take some anxiety from him.
If Eupert wishes to marry her, it is her
duty to marry him, and I will see that
she does it."

"Do not force her, aunty, dear," said
Gertrude, who was rather impressed by
her aunt's sudden volubility, and who
was too relieved at the unexpected ending
to the conversation to offer any stronger
remonstrance.

And, above all," said Guy, " let her
understand clearly what she is undertaking.
Let there be no discoveries after
the marriage."

*' Leave it all to me. I have my own
way of dealing with Diana, and I think
I am generally successful."

Her niece and nephew said no more.
The idea commended itself to them, and
they were only too glad to leave the
carrying out of it entirely to their aunt.

"By the way," said Guy, turning at
the door as he was about to leave the
room, " I hear that fellow Garth waite
has come to grief again, and this time
will certainly sell; there is no help for
it. I wonder he has held out so long."

"Then you will buy?" said Gertrude.

"Certainly. The land will at last be
ours; it never ought to have belonged to
any one else; and it will be an immense
relief to have it. The soil is simply full

of lead, and when we are working that,
we shall be able to meet Eupert's most
unreasonable demands without any difficulty."


"But I thought he had a brother; perhaps
he may want it."

Oh," said Guy, easily, " 1 don't think
there is any need to take him into
account. Even if he should bid against
us, and if money were more difficult to
be had than it is, I do not think we
need think of him. He disappeared from
the place thirteen years ago, and, as far
as I know, has not been heard of since.
I suspect he has come to no good. He
is scarcely likely to reappear as a millionaire
at the eleventh hour."

CHAPTER XX.

LIGHT.

Mes Wentworth made her plans quickly,
and once made, she carried them out with
promptitude. Two days after she and
Gertrude and Guy had talked together,
she had a conversation with her brother,
in which they agreed that, all things
considered, a marriage between Rupert
and Diana was a highly desirable thing.
She had her brother's permission to act
with perfect freedom ; and the arranging
the matter with Diana was left entirely

to her. It was just the kind of thing
she enjoyed, and she entered upon it with
pleasure and a perfect confidence of success.

She took the first opportunity of speaking
to her daughter. Since Rupert had
made his revelation, Diana had avoided him.
The disgrace he had brought upon himself,
and which hung over the whole household,
seemed also to touch her. She felt as if
her lustre were dimmed, and she could not
forgive her cousin for what he had done.
For a day or two she declined to ride with
him ; and it was this which gave her mother
an opening for what she wished to say.

Where have you been ? " she asked
one day, when her daughter came to pour
out tea for her, her whole appearance
showing that she had been out of doors.

I have been for a walk."

With Rupert ? "

No— by myself."

"How is that? Have you quarrelled
with him ? "

No ; we have had no quarrel."

I hope you are not playing with him.
He is not used to that kind of thin 2;, and
it would be in very bad taste, considering
that you are his father's guest."

Thinking of the subject of their last
talk, and the effect it had had on her, she
answered, with the unmistakable accent of
sincerity —

"We are playing at nothing. Rupert
and I are quite serious."

She put her own meaning into her
words, her mother put hers; it is little

VOL. II. K

wonder, then, that they completely misunderstood
one another. Mrs Wentworth
was delighted ; things were turning out
exactly as she had hoped, and, in her own
mind, expected.

I am very glad to hear it," she said ;
"it is really time Eupert began to grow
serious. He has had time enough to sow
his wild oats, and he ought now to be
occupying himself with the future."

"I don't think he cares much about
the future, he is happy enough in the
present."

They were idle words, idly spoken. She
did not know why her mother talked about
Rupert, and her last words were intended
rather as an indication of his general character
than as applying to any particular

occasion. Again Mrs Wentwortli put her
own meaning into the words. Diana was
clearly ready to meet her half-way, and
she then made up her mind on a point
about which she had hitherto been uncertain.
She had thought a great deal
(for her) about how much of Eupert's story
it would be wise to tell Diana — she did
not herself think it necessary to tell her
anything ; and when she found, as she
thought, that there was a serious and
well - rooted feeling between them, she
decided that it would be a pity to run
the risk of disturbing it by raking up
the past. The matter had been left to
her discretion, and it seemed to her best
to tell nothing. It was quite enough, she
repeated within herself, that she knew and

approved. All this passed very quickly
through her mind, so that there was no
long pause between Diana's last words and
her reply.

Well, after all, it is only natural ; one
could scarcely expect anything else yet,
and I am truly glad. I shall feel at last
that there is some proportionate return
being made for your uncle's very great
kindness to me and mine."

Yes, uncle has been very kind," said
Diana, rather absently."

"And there is a kind of poetic justice
in the person whose lot it is to make that
return. I little thought I should ever
have such a satisfaction. I assure you,
Diana, it has quite changed my feelings
towards you, and I do hope you will now

see that your happiness is bound up in that
of your relatives, who are in reality your
best friends ; and that all these unhappy
suspicions and disputes will be at an end."

Before Diana could reply, Dora came in
and the conversation had perforce to be
broken off'. She did not all at once understand
it, and she sat for a few minutes
hoping that Dora would go, that she might
ask her mother what she meant. But
Dora had come to stay, and Diana presently
went to her own room.

It was a long, wide room, and Diana was
fond of walking up and down it when she
could not go out, and considering matters
as they rose in her mind. This is what
she did now, and by degrees things became
clear to her, and the light which lightened

her lead been given by Rupert. She now,
for the first time, understood all that
Rupert had said at the conclusion of his
story, about the girl, " not like other girls,"
who, knowing his story, was yet to undertake
his regeneration. She was to be
that girl. Rupert wanted to marry her,
and his people were trying to bring about
the marriage. As soon as the idea had
entered her mind it advanced by strides,
and a kind of instinct showed her what
the whole plan was to be, and that the
necessary explanation " would not be
considered necessary to her. Wrath and
bitterness filled her soul. She walked up
and down twisting her hands together,
lost for the moment in the whirlwind of
passion which swept over her. Then, as

by magic, it was stilled ; she ceased to walk
up and down, but sank, tired and depressed,
upon her couch. Her first impulse — to
hurry to her mother and tell her that she
had discovered their intention, and that
she repudiated the part allotted to her
passed, and she became cool and calm.
I will tell them nothing," she said
within herself. " I will keep my own
counsel and play into their hands. I will
fight them with their own weapons. Eu-pert
is a bad man, and they know it. I
will find out how bad he is, — I will see to
what lengths they would have gone, and
to what kind of creature they would marry
me. He told me that, and he will tell me
other things. I can make him talk, and
when he begins he says more than he intends.

I can get into the depths of his
nature, and I will. I will know him, and
then I shall know them. Muriel Hope ! "
she whispered. "He does not care for
her, and never did. She has no influence
over him. I have; and I believe that, if
I did marry him, I could regenerate him, fora
time. My will is stronger than his, and
he is like an animal — he would yield to a
stronger will. I might even make something,
a moderately human being of him,
permanently, at the expense of my whole
life. But I am not a saint, and I will not
be a martyr."

She was rather surprised at the gentle
way in which her mother had spoken. It
was her general custom to employ coercion
with her daughter, and her unwonted persuasiveness

of manner was owing to what
she considered Diana's pliability. She was
not usually pliable in her mother's hands,
hence the use of coercion ; but on this occasion
it had been absolutely needless, and on
the whole, Mrs Wentworth was glad of it.
The next morning Diana still felt sore
and bitter, and soon after breakfast, feeling
stifled in the silence of this well-ordered
house, she put on her walking things and
went out. She wanted to be alone, and
she took a little-frequented path through
the park, which she knew would bring
her out into a lonely road, which she had
never thoroughly explored. As long as
she was within the park she went fast ;
but as soon as the wooden gate had fallen
to behind her, she slackened her pace and

strolled leisurely along. She had partially
walked off her anger, and she stood
still, after walking a little way, and looked
around her. She was on a very lonely
road, leading into the very heart of the
hills, and apparently not much used.
There were no houses within sight, — the
hills rose up almost from the edge of the
road, which was fringed in places with
narrow belts of trees, chiefly firs and
birches. It was a dull day in the autumn,
the air was still, and the clouds hung
low. Now and then came a whispering
and swaying among the trees, and the
sound died off in the hills, otherwise
there was no wind. There was a sullen,
brooding spirit in the air, which seemed
to communicate itself to Diana, and fitted

in well with her moocl. For the moment
she felt almost helpless. She would have
liked to leave Garshill, but at present that
could not be. She and John were parted,
probably never to meet again ; she thought
of him with a feeling she had never had
before. Eupert's revelation, and her discovery
of the night before, had placed
John before her in a totally new light — a
light towards which she had been groping
ever since she had been at Garshill. He
seemed all at once to become a tower of
strength, — a support which, if she once
accepted it, would never fail her, — a companion
of whom she would never weary.
But he was gone.

Many thoughts passed through her
mind as she walked on, her eyes fixed

on the ground, unheeding where she was
going. The growing gloom of the sky
at length caught her attention, and she
halted and looked round. She was where
she had never been before. The road had
narrowed to a mere track, — the hills were
higher and barer, hemming her in on each
side. She was in a deep and narrow
valley; a shallow stream, spanned by a
slight wooden bridge, ran at the foot of
the hills; the summer had been long
and dry, and in spite of autumn rains,
much of its stony bed was visible, the
water winding along it like a thread.
There was no house to be seen, only here
and there an empty barn, or a ruined
cottage. In places there came a cleft in
the hillside by which one could penetrate

to wilds and solitudes greater, perhaps,
even than this. Savage and stern and
desolate it was, the dull, grey sky hung
low over the bleak hills, blackened with
exposure to rain and storm. Deepest
silence reigned, except for the flow of the
brook and an occasional and far-distant
knocking;, which came out of the hills,
more like an echo than the real sound.
She wondered if she had got into an enchanted
country — she almost believed it ;
and, fascinated beyond her powers of resistance,
she went farther up the valley.
Turning a corner, she found herself out
of sight of the path which had brought
her here, and completely encompassed by
these gloomy hills. The path mounted,
and she found herself leaving the stream

at the bottom of the valley, so that its
ripple grew fainter and fainter, and at last
became inaudible. Still she went on ;
the mountains seemed to be drawing her
to them, and she must obey. She forgot
time, she forgot her mother and Rupert ;
she was once more under the influence
which had possessed her on the last stage
of her journey to Jacewo — the feeling that
she was lost, and yet in the hands of some
unknown power which urged her on in
spite of herself; the feeling that something
out of her experience was going to happen
to her — something which would influence
her whole future life. Again she stood
still and listened. She could hear her heart
beating : except that, nothing but the wind
among the hills, and the distant tapping.

as of ghostly miners at work on some unearthly
task ; not the bark of a dog, the
low of cattle, or the bleat of sheep ;
and yet she was near a house. She had
almost attained the purpose for which she
had come here.

She turned another corner, and the
scene changed. The valley widened out
and the hills sank ; trees clothed their
sides, and filled the ravine through which
the stream flowed ; and far below her
she heard the sound of water tumbling
over rocks. Before her was the open
country, sinuous moors and green fields,
and in one field a small house.

It was so lonely, so utterly cut ofi" from
the world, that she went nearer to it, and
as she approached she saw that it was old

and dilapidated beyond anything she had
seen near Garshill. It made pretensions
to be called a farm, — there was a small
and dirty farmyard, and a few aged and
decrepit sheds were near the house. Of
animals, she saw only a collie pup, which
barked at her and brought a man to the
door of the cottage.

He was dirty and shaggy, and almost
in rags, and he stared at Diana in sullen
silence and with a disagreeable scowl. He
was bent and stiff; he did not look as if
he had ever stood upright in his life — a
true son of the soil.

He looked at her and said nothing. She
was a strange apparition in such a place ;
he must have wondered how she got there,
yet he said nothing. She, too, gazed at

him. One glance had sufficed to take in
his general appearance, and after that
came a strange, vague feeling, that something
about him — what, she could not tell
was familiar to her. Forgetting herself,
she stood looking at him, trying to account
for this odd feeling. She failed
completely; she could connect him with
no one she knew. Yet when he spoke,
there was again something not strange to
her in the tone of his voice, although
she had never before been addressed in
such a manner and accent.

*'Wottn yo' coom for?" demanded the
man, surlily; and so uncouth was the
speech, and so unexpected the address, that
she had to ask him to repeat it. This time
she at least partially comprehended.

VOL. n. L

"I beg your pardon," she replied, in her
clear, polished accents. " I was walking
past and stopped to look at your house,
and your dog barked at me. I was doing
no harm."

Yah ! " growled the man. " Wot sort
o' talk's that? The devil's got into your
tongue, missis ; I canna make nowt o'
wot yo' say."

The greater part of this was lost upon
Diana, and before she could speak he
went on —

"Wot for an' yo' coom to look at
my house ? Do yo' think o' buying'
un?"

Diana said nothing ; so strange an idea
was growing up in her brain, that she
began to think she must be going out of

her mind ; and yet she could not throw
it off.

"Go your ways, an' leave my house and
me to yourself ; it's non o' your business, I
reckon."

He was turning away and shutting the
door, when, moved by a sudden, uncontrollable
impulse, Diana said —

Do not go yet ; tell me, first, what is
your name."

Name ! " he repeated, probably because
it was the only word he had caught.
"An' wot's my name to yo' ? I'm non
'shamed o' my name. It's Reuben Garth-waite,
an' I arena who knows it."

Garthwaite ! " repeated Diana, as if ina
dream. " Reuben Garthwaite ! Tell me,
have you a brother John ? "

Brother John ! " he echoed, and the
very tone of his voice told her that he
and his brother John were not friendly.
"Ay, I've got a brother John — a regular
gentleman he is. Pray, do yo' know him ?
if I may mak' so would as to ask."

"Yes, I know him."

"Ay, I thowt as mich. Brother John
knows a mint o' fine folks, but yo' be t'
finest of t' lot, I reckon."

He measured her with his eye from the
poise of her head to her narrow arched
foot, and then he sniggered and repeated —

"Ay, yo' beat 'em a', I'll be bound."

Forgetful of all but what she had just
heard, Diana turned to go, but the man
checked her.

"Not so fast, missis," he said; "nowt

for nowt is law i' this country, an' sin' I've
told yo' my name, I'll thank yo' to gie me
your."

My name is Diana Wentworth."

'* Diana Wentworth," he minced, in attempted
imitation of her tones. " Lord,
wot a name ! Wi' a name like that, I
wonder yo' coom asking after a chap called
John Garthwaite. Who's John Garth-wait
e ? He plays at been' a gentleman, but
he'd t' same feather an' mother as me.
Wot do yo' think o' that, now?" and he
sneered vilely.

I have told you my name," said Diana,
and now I am going. Good morning."

An' where do yo' coom fro' ? if I may
ask. You'll non be a fairy, for a' yo'
mince your words so."

I am staying with my uncle, Mr Meredith
of Garshill Abbey."

He recoiled as if she had struck him,
and after gazing at her in silence for a
moment, he broke into a torrent of words,
in which oaths were mingled, and from
which Diana, bewildered and shocked,
only gathered that he considered her one
of a bad brood — that he looked uj^on her
as a spy who had been sent to take stock
of his farm — :that his brother John was on
the road to ruin, — and more to the same
purpose. He now became even more
anxious to get rid of her than she was
to go, and in a very short time she found
herself standing outside the farmyard,
again on the rugged mountain-path.
Her mission was accomplished, and she

walked home, scarcely looking at the
scenery which had so fascinated her on
her way hither. Her mind was in a perfect
tumult. She had found John's home,
had talked with his brother, and anything
so mean and sordid she had never seen.
She had had a rude shock, and yet by
one of those seeming contradictions which
occur in human nature, and in human
nature alone, the current of her feeling
was towards John, not from him. By a
flash of inspiration the whole situation
was revealed to her,— she saw clearly into
her own heart, and what had lain hidden
there, and she could not all at once look
upon it.

CHAPTEE XXL

THE GARTHWAITES.

She reached home just in time for lunch,
and hastily throwing off her things, joined
the others at table. Mr Meredith, feeling
tolerably well, had been wheeled into the
room, and was also present. Diana found
it very difficult, after the morning's excitement,
to behave as though nothing had
happened. There was so much to think
about that she was constantly tempted to
lean back in her chair and sink into a
reverie. To prevent this, she talked more

than usual, and about her morning's adventure.
She was most anxious now to find
out all she could about the Garthwaites.
Who were they ? What relation did they
bear to her own people ? Now that she
could make inquiries without introducing
John's name, she lost no time in doing
so. It was easy to bring them into the
conversation. She was asked where she
had been, and she answered she had
been for a walk. " I went on a road
where I had not been before," she continued
; 'rit led into a valley, very
lonely and beautiful, and when I got
through to the other end, I came upon a
farm, such a lonely place, the only house
in sight. There was a man there, and I
talked to him. He said his name was

Eeuben Garthwaite. Is he one of your
tenants, uncle ?

She had brought out the name with difficulty,
conscious that her heart was beating
fast, and that, in spite of all efforts, her
voice was not quite natural. She feared
lest her emotion should be seen, but the
name of Garthwaite seemed to affect her
hearers even more than herself. Her
uncle's face became sterner than she had
ever seen it before ; Guy's mouth tightened
; even Eupert frowned ; and Dora and
Gertrude looked positively frightened. Fora
moment no one spoke, and seeing something
was wrong, she began to speak of
something else, and by degrees the others
looked as usual.

As soon as luncheon was over, she put

her arm within Gertrude's, and drew her
into the morning room, which was empty.

"What was the matter at lunch, Gertrude
? " she asked. " Who are these
Garth waited ? The very mention of their
name seemed to turn you all to stone.
Tell me about them."

'' Perhaps I had better. It would never
do for you to speak again of them in
that sudden way ; it would be very dangerous
for papa. And yet, I scarcely know ;
we never mention them; papa might not
like it."

'■ If you don't tell me, I shall go and
ask uncle now," said Diana; and Gertrude,
knowing that her cousin was quite
capable of carrying even such a threat as
that into execution, said hastily —

'you must not think of such a thing,
Diana. I will tell you myself, and then
you will understand that you must never
speak of them again.

They are people who have always lived
here," she began ; they say their family is
older in the place than ours, but that, of
course, is mere boasting. The farm they
live on belongs to them, and always has
done. I don't know whether they were
ever in a better position than that they
occupy now ; as long as I remember them,
or as long as papa and his father remember
them, they have been as they are now —
just contriving, no one knows exactly how,
to keep possession of their bit of land,
but miserably poor, and only half-civilised
through living up there and avoiding all

intercourse with other people. They are
scarcely ever seen down in the village ; and
I have heard that they admit no one, no
matter on what business he has come, into
their house. Of course I know nothing of
all this myself; but in a little place like
this, one hears things whether one will or
no. They are on bad terms with everyone
; and no one has a good word to say
for them."

But what has all this to do with uncle,
or any of you ? I don't understand."

*'I will tell you. Their bit of land is
just outside papa's estate ; and this land,
which is practically valueless in their hands,
because they have no money to do anything
with it, would be of the greatest
value to us. It is full of lead, and would

be worth almost anything to people who
would work it. It has been known that
there is lead there for a long time, and
there have been continual efforts made at
negotiation by our people ; but the Garth-waited
won't sell. They will do simply
nothing. It is most extraordinary : although
they are so poor and miserable,
no money seems to tempt them, and they
prefer to live on as they are. They have
only got this ridiculous bit of land, which
is practically barren, — no one could farm
it by itself to any advantage, — yet they
cling to it as if it were a fine estate, and
they the first people in the place ! It is
most presumptuous. Papa is lord of the
manor, and they are only common working
farmers : it is their duty to let him have

the land for any price he chooses to offer.
It is offensive that he should have to make
the first step in a negotiation with people
who are almost beggars, and, naturally,
he cannot endure to hear their name mentioned.
It is a shocking story, is it not ? "
She finished with an air and tone of such
perfect sincerity, that Diana, unable to restrain
herself, burst out laughing.

There was not much mirth in her laughter.
It held amusement and satisfaction,
but it was of a grim and sarcastic kind,
which Gertrude could not understand, and
she looked at her cousin in astonishment.
Diana came and stood opposite to her.
There was a droll look in her face, and a
light in her eyes which bespoke no goodwill
to any one. There was a bond between these

Garthwaites and herself. Both resented
the supremacy claimed by the Meredithss ;
both had withstood it to the best of their
ability. She felt that an effort was being
made to undermine her position. How did
it stand with them ? She resolved to
know, but Gertrude spoke first.

Why do you laugh ? " she asked. " I
see nothing to laugh at in what I have
said."

I laugh because I see so much more in
it than you do. If you could review the
whole situation with an unprejudiced mind,
as I am doing, you would laugh until you
could laugh no more."

"I don't understand you. I think you
are very unsympathetic," said Gertrude,
turning away. "You seem to take a

delight in anything which annoys or
troubles us."

"Perhaps I do," answered Diana, quite
seriously. " You seem so wrapped up in
yourselves, so firmly persuaded that whatever
concerns you all is of the very first
importance, — that your convenience and
comfort ought to be the first care of everyone,
— that sometimes when, in spite of this,
things will go as you don't wish them to,
I can't help feeling a little pleasure in it.
But do not go yet," laying her hand on Gertrude's
arm. " Tell me more about these
people — I am interested in them. What
family is there besides the man I saw?"

"He has a mother; and there is a girl
who lives with them — a cousin, I think,
but I do not know. There is another

VOL. II. M

brother too, but lie does not live here ; he
has not been here for some years. I do
not know anything about him."

She spoke with some constraint, and
Diana noticed it at once, and wondered
why it was, but she only asked —

'* Where is he ? "

'* I don't know — somewhere out of England,
I think. I would rather not talk
about them any more."

"And how much longer do you expect
this land dispute to be carried on?"

Not much longer. Guy told me the
other day that Garth waite is going to sell
at last ; he can hold out no longer. Then
we shall buy, of course."

But suppose some one bids against
you?

Oh, but no one would. Every one
about here knows that papa wants the
land."

But the younger brother may come
back and buy it."

T thought of that, but Guy does not
think it is in the least likely. He thinks
he has come to no good, or he would have
come home long ago."

I don't see that it follows at all. When
will the sale be ? "

"I don't know — but before very long, I
expect."

Diana said nothing. She stood for a
moment deep in thought, and then turned
to leave the room.

She went out to the old Abbey, and
stood by the shallow, flowing river, looking

at it, but hardly seeing it, not hearing its
murmur. Her mind was full of other
thoughts, which filled her brain to confusion.
She had found John's home ; she
had learnt that which he had probably
been going to tell her when they were
interrupted. Before long she might see
him ; she remembered various times when
he had spoken of his home, and she did
not believe he would let it pass into the
hands of people towards whom he felt ashe
had seemed to feel towards her people.
She suddenly asked herself why he felt
like that. In all that she had learnt, she
could find no sufficient reason. She could
not yet know all, and she wondered what
remained behind. He had good reason for

his feeling, of that she was convinced, and
he had known all this all the time they
had been at Jacewo. She thought of it all
for a long time, and then went back into
the house.

CHAPTER Xxii

MARY Metcalf.

There was unrest in the air at Garsliill
Abbey ; every one felt uneasy about something.
Mrs Wentworth was anxious about
her daughter, who had simply ignored the
hints given to her a little while ago, and
although she had resumed her intimacy
with Rupert, her behaviour was not altogether
satisfactory in her mother's eyes.
Dora's Chance had returned, and was pressing
the question of an early marriage,
which gave Gertrude much to think about ;

Mr Meredith and Guy were absorbed in
the approaching sale of Becktop Farm, and
in their certainty of acquiring it, lost their
reluctance to utter the name of Garthwaite.
They were full of plans for the future, and
it was often on their lips. Diana grew
familiar with it, and began to realise how
bitter was their feeling against the despised
race. She said nothing ; no one had
any suspicion that the name was well
known to her. She could not find out,
from all she heard, if John would be at
home for the sale. She wondered where
he was, and hoped it would not leak out
that he had been at Jacewo. Her thoughts
and anxieties centred entirely round her
absent friend, and in them she almost
forgot the new position which Eupert occupied

towards her, and her resolution to
make him talk. It was recalled to her
rudely enough one day.

Kuperfs position to Diana was a common
one — too common to be dwelt upon.
Setting out with the intention of achieving
a victory, he had been vanquished. Instead
of enjoying the sight of Diana's love
for him, he was in the pain and stress of
his own love for her. He had never really
cared for Muriel Hope, and now he completely
forgot her. His one thought was
to win Diana. It was this which had led
him to tell her of the reason why his father
wished him not to marry. There was a
peculiar mixture of brutal candour and almost
cunning reticence in his nature; and
he was persuaded that if he were perfectly

frank with his cousin, and told her the
very worst about himself, she would be far
more likely to listen favourably to him
than if he talked vaguely about " wild
oats" and youthful follies. Diana had
been right, too, in saying that she could
make him talk; and perhaps he felt her
power over him, and thought she would
have a better opinion of him if he voluntarily
told her all of which he had been
guilty, instead of letting her draw it from
him by the force of her influence over him.
He proceeded with caution as long as he
believed that his marriage with her would
not be approved of, but when his father
sent for him and told him nothing would
please him better, — that he had the best
wishes of them all in his endeavours to win

Diana, and that they had understood from
her mother (this was the conversation with
Diana which had made Miss Wentworth so
angry) that she was not indifferent to him,
he threw off all disguise, and proceeded to
woo his cousin in his own highly original
manner. Diana, we said above, had almost
forgotten Eupert in her preoccupation about
John, and was suddenly reminded of him
by an incident which took place one day.
They had been riding one afternoon,
and, on their way home, crossed the railway
line at a point distant from the village
or station, and completely isolated.
By the line stood the little house which
is usually occupied by some one who has
charge of the gate on either side on the
line. The gates were shut, and a woman

came out to open them. Diana noticed
lier at once. She was young, and must
once have been beautiful, but a deep sorrow
seemed to have undermined her health
and almost destroyed her beauty. All that
was left of it was a pair of brown eyes, the
most beautiful Diana thought she had ever
seen. They were like a dog's — deep and
soft and yearning. She fixed them upon
both Diana and Rupert, and looked at
them with a long, searching look. When
Rupert had first seen her, he had frowned
and bitten his lip ; afterwards he shrugged
his shoulders, as though careless of the consequences
of this meeting. Diana was too
intent on looking at the woman to notice
her cousin. She saw the woman's look,
and it aroused her curiosity. They had

almost passed through the second gate,
which she also opened for them, when a
boy came out of the cottage. She noticed
the boy at once; her cousin must have
looked very like that when he was a lad.

"How absurdly like you that child is,
Eupert ! " she said as soon as they were
fairly through the gate.

Do you think so ? " he answered, with
a laugh.

Something in his tone, and still more in
his laugh, made her turn in her saddle and
look at him.

"Eupert, is it your child?" she asked,
suddenly.

"I suppose it is; they tell me so," was
all his answer.

She said nothing, only looked at him.

and he never forgot her as she appeared
then : turned in her saddle, one hand resting
on it, and with such a startled, virginal
look upon her face. For a few
seconds she kept her eyes fixed upon him,
and then rode on in silence.

She had made a great discovery — a further
glare of light had been thrown upon
her cousin's character. He was wooing
herself, she knew it now, by more than
one indication, and he did not think it
worth while to hide from her this episode
in his life ; he owned it frankly, and with
no trace of shame. What were his real
feelings towards her? what had been his
feeling towards the woman she had just
seen? The cynicism in her nature was
uppermost now ; she remembered her self-imposed

task to learn Rupert's nature
thoroughly. If her researches took her to
depths hitherto unimagined by her, she
must not for all that shrink ; if she did
not herself find out these things, they
would remain for ever hidden from her.
She must know what manner of man he
was who intended to ask her to share his
life.

She turned to him again and spoke
abruptly —

Tell me about that woman ; I want to
know."

He stared and laughed. He knew no
other girl who would have taken a thing
of this kind in this way, or who would
have made such a demand in such a tone,
peremptory and cold, as though she had

divine right in the matter, and had nothing
in common with ordinary humanity.

What do you want to know ? " he asked.

"Who is she? Where did you meet her?"

She was a girl in the village, — the village
beauty, the village coquette, — with notions
of a grand marriage which was to make
her into a lady."

"And in such a matter she pinned her
faith to you f "

'' Faite che mieux. I was not her first
choice."

"What do you mean?"

She was engaged to a fellow in her
own station, — the younger brother of that
same Reuben Garthwaite whose patrimony
is about to pass into our hands."

For a moment Diana felt stunned, the

blood rushed to her face, her heart beat
suffocatingly. She felt as if she were
choking, — it was impossible to speak.
Rupert went on, taking pleasure in these
revelations when he had fairly begun, as
his manner was.

''He had always had a hankering after
her, and before he felt the place, some
years ago now, he asked her to marry
him, and to wait for him until he came
back. Needless to say she promised;
needless also to say that, when I appeared
on the scene, soon after he had turned
his back, I had only to whistle, and she
came to me like a bird."

She felt sick with disgust and horror,
but she forced herself to go on.

"And he?" she demanded.

*'He was away, he could not come
back."

"Did you know that?"

"Yes, I knew it. I don't suppose it
would have made any difference, but I did
know it."

Then you stole her from him, knowing
he could not call you to account."

The colour mounted to his cheeks under
her tone, but he answered carelessly —

I don't see how you can call it a theft
when she came to me of her own accord."


I see : and having come of her own
accord, I suppose she could not expect to
be welcome long. Still, she gave up something
for you. I suppose the other manit
was beyond her strength to say his

VOL. IL N

name) "would have married her. What
have you given her in exchange ? "

Her child is all in all to her,"

Rupert ! "

He turned and stared at her : never had
he seen her look like this. She was half
maddened by all he was telling her, and
the thoughts it called up. Her hand was
clenched on her whip ; for a moment
he thought she would have struck him
with it.

"Do not forget that she and I are both
women," she said, her voice half choked
with emotion, her whole figure trembling
with passion.

Rupert looked at her for a moment before
he spoke.

How beautiful you are, Diana I " he said

at last. " I never saw any woman so
beautiful. Gertrude and Dora and Muriel
are not to be thought of in comparison ;
there is not one among the whole pack
round here who is fit to hold a candle to

you."

"Go on with your story," she said
brusquely.

** Well," he said, " the woman is well
enough off. Her people are poor ; she
would not go back to them if she could,
and of course she can't : they left the place
when her child was born. She is very
comfortable where she is, and I got her
the post, at least she has that to thank
me for. I have been kind to her."

"Did she expect you to marry her?"

*' I have no doubt she did."

'did you ever tell lier you would?"

'' How persistent you are ! " frowning.
I may have done ; I can't tell, it is so
long ago."

"That means lie did," said Diana to
herself, and she was silent, considering.
Here was a woman who had trusted Rupert,
with how much or how little reason
was not to the point. She had trusted
him, and he had deceived her. That was
what stood out from all the rest.

'what is her name?" she asked presently.


"Mary Metcalfe."

"Do they know about this at the
Abbey?"

"Yes, they know. They never speak
of it, of course, but they know."

She did not speak again before they
reached home, and she sat down in the
window-seat in her bedroom and looked
out upon the river and the old Abbey.

"That was what he meant," she whispered
to herself; "that is how it came to
an end." He had known all — who she was,
and all about her. What had he thought
of all the things she had said about old
lineage being a prop to support a weak
man or woman ! How ridiculous such
things seemed now, — how small and paltry
before the actual reality ! He had scorned
them ; he had been a man and she a
woman, — that was all he had thought.
They had been separated by an immense
gulf, not of class alone ; or rather he had
been separated from her by a gulf, and

she from him by a ditch. He had cleared
the gulf at a bound, while she had stood
shivering and shrinking on the brink of
her ditch. The colour rose to her cheeks,
and she hid her face in her hands. How
unworthy she was of him ! Knowing what
she knew now, could she ever look him in
the face again ? Her hands sank into her
lap, and again she looked out. She saw
the grey walls of the Abbey and the grey
sky through the arched windows, — she
heard the sound of the rippling river.
A grey look settled down on her face as
she whispered, "I know now, I know
now''

This same evening Reuben Garthwaite
was slowly and painfully composing a letter
to his brother. When it was finished, a

translation of it into ordinary English
would have run as follows : —

"To John Garthwaite.

I can keep going no longer, and the
land must be sold. I promised not to let
it go without telling you, so I send you
word ; but I tell you at the same time
that Meredithss will bid for it, and it shall
go to the highest bidder, pride or no deride,
so now you know.

*' Reuben Garthwaite."

This letter was addressed to

CHAPTEE XXIII.

COMING HOME.

John Garthwaite returned to Jacewo the
day after Diana had left it. For a little
time he refrained from going to the Camp-houses',
hoping to meet Diana out of
doors : it would have been painful to both
of them to meet in an ordinary way, with
his half-finished declaration in their minds.
The days went on and he did not meet her ;
a week passed and he had not so much as
caught a glimpse of her. He was surprised
at first, and then surprise changed into

uneasiness. Was she ill ? Had she ceased
to go out for fear of meeting him? He
bore the suspense and anxiety for a few
days, and then he made up his mind to
go to the Camphausens', and at least get
tidings of her. He called early in the
afternoon, when he thought it was not
very likely that he would see Diana, and
found Frau Camphausen lounging over her
fashion-paper and her cup of coffee. He
was scarcely seated before she launched
out into a lengthy and elaborate account
of Miss Wentworth's sudden departure
for England. He listened in silence with
a feeling at his heart that this boded no
good to him. When she had finished he
said a few words of regret that he had not
been able to say good-bye to Miss Wentworth,

and then the subject dropped. He
had a little talk with Herr Camphausen,
then went away — nor did he mention
Diana's name again during the rest of
his sojourn at Jacewo.

He thought of her often. Abstracting
himself from his surroundings, he called
up in his mind Garshill with its ruined
castle and abbey, its swelling moors, its
winding river. Woods and hills grew out
of the plain surrounding him, the great
lake shrank to the dimensions of a
mountain tarn, the corn and potato fields
changed into seas of heather, the ruined
Polish church became a crumbling castle,
its broken tower a stately keep. The
church bell tinkling sounded to his ears
like the curfew ringing from the quaint

old church in Garshill market-place, with
which he had been familiar since childhood.
The stuccoed Stages vanished, and
were replaced by old stone dwellings of
Yorkshire squires ; and oldest and most
beautiful of all was Garshill Abbey. In
the gardens he saw a beautiful girl wandering,
to whom all his heart went out ;
and when he said "Diana!" she turned
and looked at him with eyes half gay,
half sad, so that he could not read their
meaning, and felt restless and unhappy.

But this was only a dream which stole
upon him unawares in his lonely hours,
sometimes when he passed the very spot
where he had found Diana s handkerchief
caught on a bush. Sometimes he thought
of that scene in the wood, and he asked

himself what it meant. Was her loveliness
really only of face and figure ? Had she in
very truth no deeper charm than that of
airily light manner and speech ? Many
and many a time had he recoiled from
facing these questions, feeling that whatever
revelations might disappoint and vex
his soul, he would still love her.

These thoughts came only occasionally;
his general reflections were of a more
practical nature. He knew that whatever
hidden capacity for love and endurance
Diana might have, she had a very open
and declared love of elegance and refinement,
and so far the life at Garshill would
suit her perfectly. He thought of the
people among whom she lived, and said
half aloud —

'• If she gets among that set, she runs a
very fair chance of being ruined. I hope
she may have strength to resist their influence
; but I dare not say more than
that I hope it."

*' No," he began again, after a pause,
I won't believe wrong of her. There is
the making of a fine and noble woman in
her, if she only gets into the right hands.
I could have made her into one — I know
it ; I had that influence over her. If her
nature had not been warped by prejudice
and a ridiculous education, she would have
consented to what I was going to ask her.
We are separated now, and for good, I
fear; or if ever we meet at Garshill, and
she knows who I am, she will not speak
to me. I can see her turn her long neck,

and lift her lip and her eyebrows at the
sight of me among my people when she is
among hers."

Then a sudden look illuminated his face,
and for the moment lent it absolute beauty.
He was thinking.

"It is just possible that among those
very people she may find her true self,
and work out her own salvation. If she
does that, she will be the noblest woman
in the world."

In the autumn his work was finished,
and he left Jacewo, and went for a brief
holiday to Dresden, before returning to
England. He did not know what he
would do when he got to England: he
was strongly tempted to go to Garshill,
and while he was debating should he go

or not, he got his brother's note, which
was equivalent to a peremptory summons
home. He travelled with all speed, and,
having reached Garshill by the last train,
took his portmanteau in his hand and set
off to walk the five miles to Becktop Farm.
It was dark, and he met no one ; and ashe
strode along, in spite of his efforts to
concentrate his thoughts on the matter
which had so suddenly brought him back
to a place which he had not visited for
thirteen years, they would wander to
Diana. With this sale impending, she
must have heard his name. Which side
had she espoused ? He could not help
thinking of her as he trod quickly and
with certainty the path which he had
not seen for thirteen years ; but he never

took a wrong turn or made a false step,
and about nine o'clock he reached the
farm.

In spite of his long absence there was
no greeting for him. Eeuben, sitting
brooding over the fire almost lost in a
cloud of suffocating tobacco - smoke, just
looked up and grunted : his mother, who
had always resented the fate which had
bestowed both brains and looks on her
youngest son, begged that he would shut
the door, and not " mucky " her clean floor
with his boots, clogged with the mud of
country roads, saturated with autumn
rain.

He complied with her request, shut the
door, and took off his boots without moving
from the spot on which he stood ; then

he came forward and wished them a collective
" good evening."

The words were echoed from a corner of
the kitchen, and then one saw that there
was a second woman in the room. She
was thirty years of age, but looked ten
years older. Her figure was spoiled with
rough work ; her face was old and careworn.
There was neither beauty nor grace
about her — she looked commonplace and
uninteresting, until she raised her eyes to
those of her cousin John, and then any one
watching her knew at once that there was
a romance in her life — a hidden love in
her heart.

John turned quickly to her as soon ashe
heard her voice, and, crossing the floor,
shook hands with her, his whole face

VOL. II. o

relaxing with a smile of pleasure and
affection as he did so.

''Ah, Susan," he said, " you are as usual
the only one to give me a word of welcome,
and no doubt I have you to thank
for this!"

He nodded towards the table which
was laid for supper ; and Susan turned
her face aside, and got up, saying rather
hastily —

'you must want something to eat; you
have come far to-day."

It is like your kind self to think of me.
I could do with a mouthful of bread and
cheese, and a glass of ale."

I have something better for you than
that," she said, with a smile, going to the
oven and taking a brown stew-pot therefrom

; after which she busied herself with
setting a hot supper before him.

He accepted her service passively. He
felt grateful to her ; but the clearest
thought in his mind, as he watched her
rather under-grown figure moving about,
was the recollection of something Diana
had once said. He had told her that he
had a cousin at home, and soon afterwards
had taken her shawl to wrap it round her.
Watching her, and not thinking of what he
was doing, he had held it too low, and had
been roused from his dream by hearing her
say—

I realise one thing about your cousin —
that she is not as tall as I am."

He had forgotten the little incident ;
now it came back to him, and he smiled

at the words — they were so like Diana.
The thought of her nearness to him sent
a glow through his heart ; and when Susan
had put the dish before him, and turned
to resume her sewing, he caught her hand,
and stopped her, saying —

If you do not share it, I shall eat
nothing; it will not taste good alone."

She smiled rather sadly, but did his
bidding ; and they sat and talked without
interruption or attention from the others.
John inquired after her health, asked what
she had been doing with herself all these
long years, hoped she was not working
too hard ; he knew his mother and brother
were exacting. Now that he had come
home, he said, she should have some rest ;
he would help her with the heavy work.

He was as kind and considerate as he had
ever been ; and Susan heard him with an
aching heart, and a wild senseless desire
to snatch up his hand, press it to her lips,
and, having bathed it with her tears,
to rush from the room, and be seen no
more.

Supper over, John helped her to clear
the table ; and when she wanted to wash
up the supper things, insisted upon her
packing them together and leaving them
until morning. He said she was tired,
and he was tired too ; he wanted to sit
still, and unless she sat by him he should
not enjoy it. Besides, he had brought hera
little remembrance from Dresden ; he
would unpack it, and give it to her now
he had strength for that.

The remembrance was a fine engraving
of the Sistine Madonna; and Susan knew
that her eyes were full of tears as she
looked at it, and thanked him for it.
Thirteen long years he had been away,
and if she could but have schooled her
foolish heart, the joy of this home-coming
would have repaid her for all the years of
weary loneliness.

So they sat and talked. Susan's speech
was much less rough than that of her
cousin Reuben. She had had some little
education, and she had also tried to speak
well to please John. She used to think
the efforts she made to improve herself
would touch him, and incline his heart
to her; aud she had this reward, that he
always liked to talk to her.

By-and-by Mrs Garthwaite rose grumbling.
Although she had not addressed half-a-dozen
words to John, she seemed to hold
him responsible for keeping her up long
after her ordinary hour for going to bed.
Susan, too, folded away her sewing and
went up-stairs with her aunt. The two
men were left together, and now, at last,
Reuben spoke. It may as well be said at
once that there was no man on earth whom
Reuben Garthwaite disliked as he did his
brother. Their characters were antagonistic,
and he was jealous of the way in
which John, some years his junior, had
raised himself by means of brains and hardwork
; while he, having no brains, and
hating hard work, had only sunk lower
and lower in the world. In reality, Susan

was the only member of the family who
had any idea of John's real position. He
had kept up a constant, though irregular,
correspondence with her, and she was the
only one at home to whom he did write.
She had at first shared the letters with her
aunt and cousin, but her news had been
so unsympathetically received that she had
soon begun to keep it to herself, and it
was years since Eeuben had heard any
tidings of his brother. He had no clear
idea of the nature of his profession, and
no news from the outside world penetrated
to Becktop Farm, whose inhabitants
shunned all possible intercourse with their
neighbours. John was completely forgotten,
and those in Garshill who knew
the name of Garthwaite the engineer, had

no idea what Garthwaite he was. Eeuben
had at once noticed his brothers altered
bearing and manner, and only felt the more
embittered against him. The thought that
the old farm might be bought by this
stranger, who yet was no stranger, was
gall and wormwood to him. He would
have preferred the Meredithss to have it,
so his first words were —

Kemember t' farm goes to t' highest
bidder."

In talking with his brother, his speech
became, if possible, more uncouth than
ever. He so hated the plain, strong
English which John spoke.

"Very well," answered John, serenely;
if I bid highest then, I suppose you will
have no objection to its coming to me."

'wotton yo' mean? You'll non bid
above Meredithss."

'' I think it is very likely I shall."

Where an yo' gotten your brass fro' ?
I'd no idea I'd a brother as was a millionaire."


It doesn't need a millionaire to buy up
Becktop Farm."

Ay, but Meredithss have set their hearts
on't."

Perhaps I have set my heart on it too.
If I have to bid the last penny I have in
the world for it, I will do so. I'll beggar
myself and begin afresh, rather than let
the place pass out of our hands into theirs,
of all people in the world."

Reuben sat and smoked, saying nothing.
He did not want to part with the land,

and he hated the Meredithss; but he was
tired of fighting against fate, and it was
not in his nature to feel that deep and
passionate love of the little homestead
which-made John willing to sacrifice all
he had to keep it. Indeed his brother's
determination seemed a kind of tacit
reproach to him, and still further alienated
him. The plan he nursed in his
secret soul was to get enough money for
the place to enable him to go away, and
keep himself and his mother for the rest
of their lives. He had an idea that he
would go to America ; at that distance he
would get over the sting of feeling that
he had sold his land to the Meredithss.

'' I don t believe," went on John, '' that
they are prepared to give so much for it.

or have got the money to give. They
think there will be no competition, and
that they will get the place cheap. They
probably don't take me into consideration
at all."

"Thourt a foot," retorted Eeuben. "I
tell thee Meredithss have set their minds
upo' it, and they'll have it whether thon
be their or no."

They'll not go beyond a certain sum,"
returned John, doggedly.

An' if they don't, it's a bigger sum than
thee's got, I reckon."

We'll see that when the time comes ;
and, by the by, when is the sale ? "

*day after to-morn — an' I wish it was
o'er, that I do."

After this their conversation became

purely technical, and John learned all he
wished about the state of his brother's
affairs, and somewhat of the causes which
had brought about this disastrous result.
He urged Reuben to pause before going sofar
as to sell the farm; he offered him
money to clear him from debt, and set
him on his feet again. Eeuben refused to
hear him. Such pride as he had rebelled
against taking help from his successful
younger brother ; and it had taken him
long to make up his mind to this step,
but having taken it, he would not go
back. It was midnight before they went
to bed. The cottage had only three
bedrooms — two of moderate size, one
scarcely more than a closet. The two
largest were occupied by Eeuben, his

mother and Susan. The other had been
made fit to sleep in by Susan's capable
hands, and there John rested — lulled to
sleep by the monotonous rush of the water
over the rocks.

CHAPTER XXIV.

MEETING.

The day began early at Becktop Farm.
It was the day before the sale, and there
was much to be done. John was up at
daybreak, and making a tour of inspection
round the two or three fields and the half-ruined
outbuildings. The whole place
looked in worse condition than, in spite
of all he knew, he had expected to find
it. It had deteriorated terribly during his
long absence, and what he saw gave him
much to think about. It was an exquisite

autumn morning, with a soft damp-looking
blue sky, and early rime on the grass and
hedges. The hidden waterfall roared
below him ; the heavy rains of the past
few days had swollen it into a " sounding
cataract," and he would have made his
way down to it, had not his watch, and a
still more powerful inward reminder, sent
him back into the house.

He found the table laid for breakfast,
with a loaf and butter, three bowls of milk,
and the same number of spoons. Susan
was dividing her attention between a pore
and a coffee-pot, and his mother
was scolding her for waste. The waste
consisted in the making of coffee for him,
Susan being under the impression that
thirteen years' absence from home, years

spent chiefly in foreign lands, must have
rendered him incapable of eating porridge.
He laughed at the idea ; and as the coffee
was not yet made, it wanting still some
minutes to breakfast-time, he forbade her
to proceed with its manufacture, demanding
that his cup and saucer should be removed
and replaced by a basin and spoon,
such as the others had. This done, he
persuaded Susan that there was time to
shake hands and wish one another good
morning. He also gave her a frost-tipped
stock which he had found blooming in a
sheltered corner of the garden. When
the porridge was ready, he lifted the pan
off the fire and himself poured the contents
into the four plates standing on the
fender. This done, he carried the pan

VOL. II. p

into the back-kitchen, having first, according
to Susan's directions, filled it with hot
water to facilitate cleaning it later. When
it came to the point, he cleaned the pan
himself, on the ground that it was not
suitable work for Susan.

He had, on getting up, dressed himself
in a white linen working - suit, such ashe
had often enough worn at Jacewo, such
as he had often had on when walking with
Diana. It had seemed to him the most
appropriate raiment to wear at the farm,
especially on this day when many odd
jobs would need doing.

In the middle of the morning he and
his brother went out together to an outlying
field some distance from the others.
From there they strolled further. Reuben

had become more communicative, and was
wishful to show him something on the
Abbey estate at the point where it joined
his own bit of land. They were walking
along, John in his white linen suit,
Eeuben in his dirty shabby corduroys,
battered hat, and clumsy boots, standing
in urgent need of repair, when there came
a clattering of horses' hoofs along the road,
and round a corner a whole cavalcade came
into view. The road was narrow, scarcely
more than a lane ; there was nothing for
the two on foot to do but to stand on
one side until the horses and their riders
had passed. It was a party of half-a-dozen
or so, young men and women,
whose voices and dress, the animals they
rode, and the way in which they rode them,

marked them out as belonging essentially
to the "barbarian" class. They all saw
the two men on foot, they all looked at
and probably recognised one of them, but
their faces remained unchanged throughout
the length of the stare which they
bestowed upon them. Eeuben could not
bear the scrutiny: he scowled, turned away
his head, and swore under his breath.
John looked at them all one after another,
and a smile came upon his lips. These
were Diana's companions ; they interested
him. In a couple of minutes — they were
going at a foot-pace down a rather steep
hill — they had passed, and the brothers
were able to go on ; but both men caught
the . words " Garthwaite," " Meredith,"
which showed that Eeuben had been

recognised, and the words were followed
by laughter.

Eeuben was furious. He drew his stooping
figure upright for a moment, and
swore deeply through his clenched teeth
as he struck his stick upon the ground
and glared after the riders, who were now
out of sight. He spoke of them for a
long time — for him ; their insolence and
pride formed the burden of his speech.
He wished there had been a Meredith
amongst them, that he might have struck
him in the face, and shown how he despised
the whole race of them. John
said nothing. His heart had beat for a
moment with the thought that Diana
might be of the party. When he saw she
was not, his emotion passed, and he looked

at them with only curiosity, and a little
interest, as the kind of people who were now
her daily companions. Their "insolence
and pride" had only amused him. One
of the ladies in passing had inadvertently
touched his shoulder with her foot, and
had looked down at him without speaking.
He was so far beneath her, she had
not considered it necessary to apologise
to him any more than she would have
apologised to the wall for touching it with
her dainty boot. No one had appeared
to recognise him. Thirteen years' absence
had blotted him out from the place of
his birth.

They walked on, stopping to talk every
few minutes, Reuben leaning over gates
biting a straw in true farmer fashion ; his

MEETING. 231

well-ventilated hat slouched over his eyes,
his round-shouldered, stooping figure making
him look older than he was, and his
unwashed, unshaven face making him look
lower and less human than he really was.
John stood near him, his tall spare figure
naturally erect, his keen eyes and clear-cut
firmly moulded features presenting a
striking contrast to his brother's bovine

o

visage, — his quick, authoritative tones
sounding oddly after Eeuben's involved
and lagging speech. Eeuben's hand was
large and rough, course in texture and
heavy in touch ; John's, though neither
very smooth nor very white, — had he not
just washed a porridge-pan with a skill
which showed that he was no stranger
to rude manual labour? — was light and

firm, well moulded, with long flexible
fingers. Few seeing them thus standing
together would have taken them for
brothers ; the fact that they were brothers
once grasped, would have caused a shock
more or less lasting and painful, and would
have opened up far-reaching reflections.

All this time they had scarcely progressed
after meeting the party on horseback.
Every few yards they came to a
gate, and at every gate Eeuben halted and
held forth in acrimonious terms regarding
his neighbours. John scarcely listened, —
he was renewing his acquaintance with
his birthplace, and was lost in thought.
Thirteen years ago, a lad of twenty, he
had left this place to make his way in
the world ; now he came again a man,

with a man's thoughts and feelings, having
put away childish things. What changes
in himself ! nature how much the same !

Yet, though he only partly heard what
his brother was saying, he was not deaf
to every other sound, and he turned
quickly as he again heard horses coming
along. In another minute they came insight,
and he saw it was the same party
that had passed them a short time before,
with the addition of five or six more.
His own recollections, and a smothered
oath from his brother, told him that some
of the new members were Meredithss ; and
as he realised that, he saw that, foremost in
the procession, by the side of a young man
whom he did not know, rode Diana.

His heart least up at the sight. She

was not looking this way ; she did not see
him; and he watched her almost breathlessly.
Her companion had bent his head
very close to hers, and seemed to be speaking
eagerly ; but she was not listening :
her eyes were wandering, her face wore
the stately look he knew so well. John's
whole heart went out to her, as he stood
waiting to see what she would do. He
had resolved at once to leave it all to her,
to let her follow her own impulse in the
matter. Now that he saw her again, he
realised how inexpressibly precious to him
she was. All at once she turned her head,
and her eyes fell upon him and Reuben.
For an instant she looked gravely at them
both, then her whole face changed and
became illumined as by an inward joy ;

her horse was checked, her whip on the
ground ; he stood before her, her two
hands in his ; her eyes were looking into
his eyes, and she was saying —

How glad I am 1 I was afraid you
would not come in time."

There was a sudden silence. He knew
that all the riders had perforce halted
behind Diana ; he knew his brother was
gazing at them, muttering sustaining oaths,
much as a devout Catholic might cross himself
and invoke his patron saint. He heeded
nothing : he was filled with the thought
that he and Diana had met ; she was not
spoiled, she was her true self. He did not
know how long it was before the others rode
on and he was left alone with Diana.

This day was ever remembered by
Diana. Sbe rose, glad that it was fine. A
party of friends of the Meredithss, and all
known to her, were coming that morning.
The Abbey party would join them, and
they would ride to Drayton for luncheon,
returning home for four-o'clock tea. Her
thoughts were wholly occupied with the
sale which was to be on the next day.
Would John come, or would his home pass
from him ? She had heard nothing of him,
she could only wait in suspense, and she
found it very difficult to conceal her
anxiety.

When their friends came, they described
their meeting with Eeuben Garth waite,
adding that he had been accompanied by
another man in a white linen suit. She

knew at once it must be John ; and Gertrude
and Guy, too, said it would be the
younger brother who had been away so
long. They did not appear to know his
name ; and one witty youth, with a dim
recollection of early Bible lessons, suggested
it was David, David having, ashe
said, rashly engaged in single combat
with a giant. The idea gave great delight
and was much applauded ; and the youth,
feeling that he was beating Miss Wentworth
on her own ground, almost burst
with pride, until Diana remarked that, to
the best of her knowledge, David had
overcome and slain the giant.

It was her only contribution to the
conversation, and she was silent again
when they mounted and rode away, — the

rest of the party in very gay spirits. Her
heart was beating fast, her pulses were
galloping. John was here ; she might see
him at any minute, perhaps to-day. She
scarcely noticed who rode beside her.
Eupert, fortunately or unfortunately, was
not of the party ; his father had claimed
him that morning. She did not hear
what her companion was saying, she made
no effort to hear; she was conscious of
only one thing — John was here. After a
long separation they were again in the
same place ; she might meet him any day,
any hour; perhaps she was riding forth
to meet him now. Under the influence
of this concealed emotion, she looked fascinatingly
beautiful, her eyes shone with a
soft radiance ; sometimes she smiled without

any apparent reason ; again, she looked
austere in her self - control, for mingled
with her joy was another feeling, — a fear
of how John would look upon her — a fear
lest, once in his presence, she should lose
her self-control, and betray herself byword
or act.

So she rode on, guiding her horse almost
by instinct. They turned a corner ;
some unseen influence made her turn her
head — she looked, and John stood there,
his eyes fixed upon her face. As by
magic all the surrounding scene vanished
from her eyes ; she saw nothing, and no
one but John ; she knew nothing but that
her hands were clasped in his hands, her
eyes looking into his eyes ; she utterly
forgot to consider if she was betraying

herself or not. The old fascination was
there, and she could not withstand it.

She had no idea how long they remained
in this way ; she did not see the
blank consternation on the faces of her
companions ; she did not see Guy make
his way through the group, stopped in
their progress by the fact that her horse
stood across the lane and completely
blocked it. She knew and saw nothing
of this ; but she did hear when Guy came
close to her and said, in a voice which
was unsteady with outraged pride and
restrained anger —

"Will you either come with us, Diana,
or allow us to pass ? "

She did hear that, and she turned to
him with a smile, saying —

"Ah, Guy, I beg your pardon, you
must go on without me ; you see I have
met a friend."

It was John who took her horse's rein
and led the animal to one side, and then
there was a clattering of hoofs, the others
rode on, and she and John were left together,
Reuben having vanished.

They paced to and fro, talking, but she
did not know for how long, and then she
rode home.

She went straight to her room, and remained
there, kneeling on the floor, her
elbows on the cushioned window-seat, her
eyes, dim with unshed tears, looking upon
the scene she had by now grown to love
so well. All her life just then was introspective,
and it was with a feeling of being

VOL. II. Q

called down from immeasurable heights
that she heard and answered a knock at
the door.

It was hours since she had come in, and
the maid stared to see her still in riding-habit
and hat.

'* Master wishes to see you in the study,
Miss," she said.

"Tell him I will come," she answered,
shutting the door again.

The maid returned to her own quarters.
A groom had been with the party out of
doors, so the story of Miss Wentworth's
strange conduct had already spread among
the servants.

Diana exchanged her habit for the dress
she had worn in the morning, and rearranged
her hair. Before the glass, at

the sight of her own face, she fell into a
dream again, so that nearly half an hour
had passed before she went to the study.
She found there assembled her mother, her
uncle, and Gertrude.

You have been long in coming," said
her uncle.

I am sorry to have kept you waiting.
I was changing my dress ; I had not taken
off my habit when Davis brought your
message."

"Why was that?" asked her mother.
What were you doing all the time ? "

I was thinking."

Her answer was received in silence, and
after waiting for a moment, she went on —

Why have you sent for me, uncle ? "

I want you to be so good as to explain

your conduct this morning. Guy
tells me you did not ride with them to
Drayton."

I met a friend whom I had not seen
for a long time, and I wished to speak
to him ; I told Guy to go on without
me.

And who was your friend ? "

Mr Garthwaite— Mr John Garthwaite."

"Brother of the farmer whose farm weare
going to buy tomorrow?"

Yes, his brother."

"May I ask where you made his acquaintance,
and how you came to call
such a man as that your friend ? "

His tone was perfectly polite, but there
was a note of raillery in his voice which
Diana did not fail to notice.

I made his acquaintance at Jacewo,
and I call him my friend because he has
been exceedingly kind to me."

"An excellent reason under ordinary
circumstances, but I cannot imagine how
a man in his position could ever have
it in his power to be *kind' to you, in
the ordinary acceptance of the word. He
might, of course, render you services which
would for the time being place you in his
debt ; but such debts are easily discharged
between a lady in your position and a
man in his. There was no earthly reason
for recognising him here."

"How do you mean?" she asked. "I
don't quite understand."

A douceur proportioned to the service
he had rendered would have acquitted

your debt and have given him every
satisfaction."

Diana had come down-stairs in a heroic
mood, prepared to defend herself before
all and every one, and for an instant her
uncle's words sent the hot blood into her
face, and fire into her heart and eyes.
Then all in a minute John's real position,
and the intimacy between them, came
into her mind, her anger vanished, and
she felt inclined to laugh aloud. Her
whole face changed, and in the twinkling
of an eye she had entered into the spirit
of the scene. She would reserve her
heroics : here they would be out of place,
later they might come in with fitness.

I see," she said, " you evidently think
I went too far ; but what would you have

had me do, when we had been so intimate
at Jacewo ? "

"His presence at Jacewo will need explaining
later," said her uncle. "I do not
understand that part of the story at all ;
but as for recognising him here, considering
who he is and the circumstances of his
return to this country, which he quitted
thirteen years ago under most suspicious
circumstances, it was highly undesirable
that you should accord him any
recognition at all; but if you. really
thought it necessary, it would have been
enough to bow and pass on."

"Eeally," said Diana, "I am sorry to
differ from you, but he had done so many
things for me, I should have felt most
ungracious if I had not stopped to speak.

You see lie came positively to my rescue
on several really critical occasions. You
may remember my telling you of an accident
I had on my journey, and that I was
most awkwardly placed, until a gentleman
came to my assistance, and drove me on to
Jacewo in his own carriage. That gentleman
was Mr Garthwaite. Then, again, I
I told you once how I went too far along
a lonely road, and a disagreeable man
tried to rob me of my watch, and would
have succeeded, had not some one come
up and sent him away. That some one
was Mr Garthwaite. The Camphausens,
the people I was with, were not fond of
nor particularly kind to me, and they
would, no doubt, have made themselves
very disagreeable, had I not had a compatriot

in the place, who, they knew,
would visit upon them any discomfort
they inflicted upon me. That compatriot
was Mr Garthwaite. Any comforts I enjoyed
while I was there were due entirely
to his presence in the place."

She had begun to speak quite calmly,
but she became a little excited as she
went on, and when she paused her voice
was not quite steady. She stopped, more
in order to regain her self-control than
because she had said all she felt. Her
uncle's voice, when he began to speak
again, sounded very cold and hard.

I really fail to see that he did anything
which any other man would not
have done. I see no occasion for making
him into a hero."

"I did not say no other man would
have done it, but the fact remains that
it was he who did do these things and
not any other man."

The fact did remain, and could not be
gainsaid, Mr Meredith therefore left that
point.

"What I do not understand is, how a
man in his position could have influenced
the people with whom you were living.
Supposing, for the sake of argument, they
had positively ill-used you, what could he
have done? How would he have known
of it ? I presume you would scarcely have
taken the story of your suffering to a
common working man. The difference in
your positions would have forbidden even
you to do such a thing as that."

Yes," said Diana, looking straight into
her uncle's face, "the difference in our
positions. I don't think you realise how
great it was. The people out there were
a benighted race, they had never heard
the name of Meredith. To them I was
only a governess, hired for £16 a-year to
teach their children, and I must have
been very poor and friendless, or else I
should never have travelled so far to
earn so little. That is what I was. He
was the most important man in the
place."

She stopped for a minute, and then
asked —

"Did you ever hear of an engineer
called Garthwaite ? "

Of course, but "

"He is that engineer, that Mr Garth-wait
e."

There was a dead silence, no one spoke.
At last Mr Meredith said —

*' Impossible. It is a mere coincidence
in names, of which this man took advantage
to win your confidence. No doubt
he told you this story."

"He told me nothing, I learnt it from
other people ; it was not a fact which
could remain hidden. He was there making
a railway, and it was not long before
I was told who he was. That," she went
on, " is your common working man. A
man who is known pretty nearly all over
the civilised world, was to be repaid for
having taken the trouble to help me out
of more than one disagreeable position by

a douceur which would acquit me and
perfectly satisfy him. That is the man
whose brother's farm you are going to
buy tomorrow. Do not be so sure of it.
I am proud to call him my friend."

"Diana, be silent," said her mother,
who was alarmed at the expression on
her brother's face. "You are speaking
most unbecomingly to your uncle. I forbid
you to say another word."

Diana was silent, but whether in obedience
to her mother cannot be known
with certainty. She turned to her uncle,
waiting for him to speak. Mr Meredith
controlled his anger, and began —

"Let me hear no more of this. You
do not know what you are talking about.
There can be no question of friendship

between people in your respective positions.
The position to which lie has succeeded
in raising himself, by what means
it will perhaps be better not to inquire,
does not in the least alter his birth. He
is and will remain one of those Garth-waited
here, who are about as disreputable
a lot as you would find anywhere.
Not one but has drunk himself to death,
and I have no doubt your ' friend ' will
end in the same way."

He went on speaking, but Diana did
not hear. Reuben's words had come back
to her. " He plays at being a gentleman,
but we'd the same father and mother ;
what do you think of that, now?" She
thought of Eeuben Garthwaite as she had
seen him then, as she had seen him this

morning. What if behind John's qualities
and manner, which had such a powerful
influence over her, there were lurking
something which, under given conditions,
could turn him into a creature like his
brother? If Eeuben had had John's advantage,
he might have been as John was
now. If John had occupied Eeuben's
position, or were ever by circumstances
to be degraded to it, he might sink to
Reuben's level. This thought, which had
never come to her before, struck her now
with overwhelming force, and for a moment
she shrank before it. Then she shook
it off. John was no creature of circumstances,
nor would ever be. What he was
now was the result of force of character.
Under no conditions could he become

such as Eeuben was, under no conditions
could Eeuben become as John. She cast
the doubt from her with the strength of
inborn conviction, nor did it ever assail
her again. Once more she gave ear to
what her uncle was saying; it bore oddly
upon what had just been in her mind.

"What is bred in the bone will come
out in the flesh. However he may have
contrived to raise himself, you can't lose
sight of the low level from which he
sprang, — you can't separate a man from
his family. Because he happens to have
better manners than his brother, who is
a mere drunken brute, you cannot put
him on a level with yourself. You must
keep him in his proper place ; it is a
farce to call him your friend ; you cannot

keep it u^d. You cannot call upon his
mother or sisters, if he has any ; you can't
ask them here. How are you going to
carry on your intimacy?"

He had endeavoured to speak moderately,
as if he were reasoning on a point
which might be maintained ; but his dislike
and contempt for the Garthwaites
was heard in every word — neither was
he able to keep his voice free from the
sarcastic and sneering tone which represented
his real feelings on the subject.
He had expected a fiery retort from his
niece, but to his surprise she said nothing
at all. He was encouraged to revert
to his original manner.

"You should have thought of all these
things this morning before you acted on

VOL. II. R

your mad impulse, insulting us and compromising
yourself by a show of intimacy
an assumption of equality — with a man
so far beneath you in every way, that
your conduct would have been ridiculous
if, considering the peculiar circumstances,
it had not been — disgraceful," he concluded,
after pausing for a suitable word.

Diana had been standing in silence,
her face paler than usual, her eyes downcast.
She maintained this attitude all
through her uncle's speech. It was impossible
to tell how it moved her. When
he had finished, she came a step nearer
to him ; her face was, if possible, more
colourless than before, but in her eyes
burned a deep and steady fire.

Uncle," she began, and her voice was

not quite steady, " let me speak. What
I did this morning I did on no impulse
at all, but deliberately. I thought it
probable, when we left here, that I should
meet Mr Garthwaite, and it was my intention
if I did to stop and speak to him.
But hear me out. If I had not intended
to speak to him — if I had made up my
mind that, ' under the peculiar circumstances,'
I would cut him dead, I could
not have done it, — I should have been
forced to stop. If, remembering all he
had done for me, I had acted as you
would have had me act, I should have
disgraced both myself and you ; both he
and all of you would have had a right to
treat me with contempt all the rest of
my life. I should have been a coward,

and worse than a coward. I could never
have held up my head again. I have
the strongest admiration and regard for
Mr Garthwaite. I have never seen any
man to compare with him. I am prouder
of nothing in the world than that he
calls me his friend. The friendship of such
a man is better worth having than any
wealth or rank or position which the world
contains."

The heroics had come, and having
spoken out her heart, she stood glowing
with enthusiasm and spirit, looking as
they had never seen her look before,
striking them all dumb. Mr Meredith
recovered first.

"I think, he said icily, 'your interview

had best be terminated here ; you are
excited, and scarcely know what you are
saying. The gong will go in a minute or
two ; had you not better rest a little
before dinner ? "

CHAPTEE Xxi.

INTERCESSION.

For full two minutes after she had left
the room no one spoke. The same thought
was in the mind of all three people, and
Mrs Wentworth was but uttering the
general feeling when she said solemnly —

'•' Thank God ! Eupert knows nothing of
this."

He never must know," said Gertrude.
Oh, how bitterly disappointed I am ! "

I think the sooner he proposes the
better " said Mr Meredith.

Mrs Wentworth wiped her eyes.

"What have I done," she cried for
the hundredth time, " what crime have I
ever committed, that I should be afflicted
with a child like this ? Philip ! I do
assure you, you cannot be more upset
than I am."

*such violence," said Mr Meredith,
restlessly turning over the papers lying
on the table before him, — " such violent,
reckless words, and such an uncalled-for,
maidenly avowal ! "

"It is horrible, detestable!" cried Mrs
Wentworth, excitedly. " I tremble to
think what she will do next ; the next
step may bring disgrace upon us all."

"Do not speak in that way, aunty,"
said Gertrude, clinging desperately to

Diana, determined not to give her up
while there was a shred of hope for her
regeneration. " Diana was excited — I
don't think she knew what she was saying.
When she remembers, and thinks
what pain she must have given to us all,
I am sure she will be bitterly sorry."

Gertrude, you are too good to her,
you always have been," replied her aunt.
"You have defended her when there was
no defence possible, and now I cannot
hear a word in her favour. Your generosity
makes her conduct all the more
wicked and ungrateful. I know you feel
it all as much as we do, and you must
not do violence to your feelings."

But there is excuse," urged poor Gertrude.
" Diana is passionate and wilful ;

she does not like to be controlled and
found fault with, and she is not like us."

She is not like us." It was the
strongest condemnation Gertrude could
have pronounced, and after saying it she
was silent, feeling that she was blundering
terribly, and that her efforts to befriend
Diana were likely to do more harm than
good.

One thing is evident," said Mrs Wentworth,
with decision, " there must be no
more meetings between her and this
obnoxious man ; she must be made to
understand that any attempt at private
intercourse will be punished severely.
You agree with me, Philip, I am sure ? "
turning to her brother.

He seemed inclined to think so, although

he said he could do no more at
present. His niece's conduct had made
him feel very ill, and he needed some
degree of repose before giving any more
thought to the unpleasant subject ; and
he was sure his sister must stand equally
in need of rest. Gertrude, desperate with
the feeling that if the present moment
was lost, irreparable mischief might be
done, insisted on detaining them a little
longer.

One moment," she cried. " I do not
want to tire either of you, but I must
speak. Do not, I beg, impose any such
restraints upon Diana ; you will only
estrange her. She is not a girl to have
clandestine meetings with any one ; whatever
she does will be fair and open.

You will only insult her by suggesting
such a possibility. Indeed I do not think
you understand her. She is not like the
girls we know. She has self-control and
self-reliance ; she cannot be treated like
a child, or as if she were Dora, who just
does as she sees every one else do. It
would be much more easy if she were ;
but she has been her own mistress for
so long, we must not attempt to coerce
her. See," she went on, as a sudden
idea struck her, " you are both delicate,
and not in a fit state to deal with a
thing like this. Leave it to me. Let
me try to influence her. You have confidence
in me, and Diana is fond of
me ; let me try what I can do with
her."

It was SO arranged, though not without
much persuasion and tact on Gertrude's
part. But no one saw Diana again that
night. She sent word that she should
not come down to dinner, nor did she
come into the drawing-room later.

The next day the sale took place.
The Meredithss passed a morning full of
suspense. Diana, after her conversation
with John on the preceding day, was
perfectly calm ; nor did she wonder at
all as to the result. Guy was out all
morning, but came in during luncheon,
with such a look on his face that neither
of his sisters dared to address him. It
was Diana who asked —

"Is the sale over, Guy?"

"Yes, it is over."

And to whom does Becktop Farm
belong now ? "

"It belongs now to Holm Garthwaite."
She said nothing, but the look which
swept over her face was more eloquent
than words. No one spoke, and that
was all that was said openly at Garshill
Abbey about the sale.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

PRIirrED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.

3 0112 045843973

bmm

piiii

j?'.'''i'^'-'ir>-'

m.:^:o

wmM)

:'-^^^fi*Siip

■"n'i!it''('.-iri

iii

mm

I A N n

TI-l-Il^ '»» t

j»/y

li i:.

DIANA WENTWORTH

Where the grey flocks in ferny glens are feeding ;
Where the wild wind blows on the mountain-side.

What have those lonely mountains worth revealing ?
More glory and more grief than I can tell."

Emily Bronze.

BY

CAROLINE FOTHERGILL

AUTHOR OF ' AN ENTHUSIAST,' ' A VOICE IN THE WILDERNESS

IN THREE VOLUMES
VOL. III.

WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS

EDINBURGH AND LONDON

MDCCCLXXXIX

CONTENTS OF THE THIRD VOLUME,

Chapter XXVI.

COUSINS.

It was a week after the sale, and John
and Susan sat in the kitchen of Becktop
Farm. They were alone, and the only
people in the place. Two days after the
sale, Reuben, in possession of the money
paid by his brother, and which, under the
peculiar circumstances of the sale, — man

VOL. 111. A

bidding against man in fierce rivalry and
determination to stand out to the uttermost
farthing, — meant a fortune to a
man of his training and habits, had left
the farm, taking his mother with him,
and with the intention of sailing for
America in a few weeks. The parting
between the relatives had been brief and
unemotional, perhaps because it was not
the final parting : John and Susan would
see them ofi* when they sailed from Liverpool.
When John had asked Susan to
stay in England and she had agreed, the
others had made no attempt to alter her
decision.

The cousins sat by the fire talking.
The furniture of the room was poor and
old, but it was arranged with an order

and neatness dear to Susan's soul, and
which, though often attempted, had never
been preserved in the old days. The
fire glowed, the hearth was clean, so also
were the checked cotton curtains and
the old darned tablecloth. The blue-glass
lamp upon the round table burned clearly,
the copper kettle on the tall, brass kettle-stand
inside the fender, shone like a
mirror. Susan was sewing, and John sat
on the other side of the hearth, engaged
on a bit of carpentering which he had
undertaken at his cousin's request. Susan's
face, though sad, was serene, — free from
the gloomy look it used to wear, and she
stitched busily as she listened to what
John was saying.

Eeuben ought to make a good start

in the States. The farm fetched more
than it was worth, with two interested
people like young Meredith and myself
bidding for it."

"Yon said the other day it had beggared
you. Did you really mean it?"

I did really mean it. Ashen I had
written Eeuben his cheque, I was left
with some £50 in the world, and that is
all."

"But what will you do?"

He laughed at her tone of alarm as he
answered —

"Fifty pounds will go a long wa' ina
place like this, and then — I have not
told you yet — I shall not be here long.
I have a big railway to make in Brazil,
and after the next month or so I must

hold myself in readiness to start any
day."

John ! " cried Susan, letting her
work drop into her lap in her dismay.

I will tell you all about it another
time," he said kindly, seeing how her
face blanched and her eyes filled. " Don't
let us think of it now, when we have
only just met again. We have a month
before us at all events."

'* Will it be long ? " she asked.

Yes, rather. I don't know how longsome
years probably. Don't let us speak
of it now."

And what shall you do in the meantime?"


In the meantime I shall live quietly
here on my estate."

"Shall you dig for lead?"

I shall not dig for lead. No doubt
if I did I might be a millionaire before
long. But I like the old place as it is,
and as long as it belongs to me it shall
not be disturbed."

*' I am so glad," said Susan ; her face
quite bright at this realisation of a hope
that they might spend some time together,
which not all her determination had been
able to keep from creeping into her heart.

"It is very kind of you to be glad, but
I fancied you would be, and I thought
of you when I made up my mind. It
struck me that it would be very pleasant
for you and me to renew our youth
together in this old place."

Susan's face, half happy, half sad, was

almost beautiful. She had dropped her
sewing, and sat with her eyes fixed on
her cousin's face. Painful though this
pleasure would be, it would be pleasure ;
and she could scarcely believe it was in
store for her.

You mean we will go walks together
? " she asked, rather timidly.

More than walks. There's that old
shandy in the shed out yonder, and the old
horse in the stable. I'll rig them both up a
bit, and we'll go drives. Winter isn't here
yet, there will be some fine days still, and
we'll enjoy ourselves. Then in the evening
we'll draw round the fire and talk as we are
doing now. I don't believe you've had
much enjoyment since I went away."

Susan's eyes filled in spite of her

efforts to show no emotion, and she only
murmured —

There was always so much work to
be done. Aunt was getting old, and
Eeuben and I were never great friends."

No ; Eeuben was always inclined to bea
hard taskmaster. I often used to think
of you, Susan, when I was away, and of
the fine time we had when we were
youngsters. Do you remember when we
stood at the top of the Force, and I let
you down into the basin at the bottom
by a rope ? "

Susan laughed. Did she not remember ?
She could have told him many things he
had forgotten years ago.

Then there were the days when the
mother sent us to gather bilberries, and

we went after butterflies and lost our
basket on the moor. Eeuben whipped us
both for our pains."

*' Nay," said Susan, " you would not
let him strike me, and he would only let
me off if you took my share as well as
your own, and you did. I remember
thinking after that, that if I had ever a
chance of giving my life for you, I should
be as happy as a queen. You were always
good."

He laughed, not hearing the note of
repressed passion in her voice ; and after
sitting in silence for a minute, she put
down her work and set about preparing
their simple supper.

All this time her heart was full to
breaking. Every kind word and look and

tone was delicious to her, and at the
same time exquisitely painful. Her heart
was burdened with a question she longed
yet feared to ask him. She was thinking
of Diana. She had heard of her coming
to the farm without knowing who she
was. Reuben had come in and told of
Diana's visit ; he had described her in his
own way, and mentioned both her name
and that she had asked after John. So
her heart was full of vague, half-formed
fears, which she could not ignore yet
dared not face. She had no idea who
Diana Wentworth was. She only thought
the name a fit one for so delicate a lady
as Reuben had described. She lived too
far from the village, and avoided intercourse
with any one too much, to have heard

anything of Miss Wentworth ; but she
longed to see her, and wondered if she
ever would. Before John had come home,
she had thought she would some time
question him about Diana, but her courage
had always failed her. This evening,
however, he was so kind she thought
she might venture, and when supper was
over and the things had been cleared
away, she took her courage in both hands,
and disregarding the uncomfortable beating
of her heart, asked suddenly —

John, did Reuben ever tell you about
a lady who once came here and asked
for you ? "

No ; what was that ? "

She told him, and he listened in silence.
When she had finished, he asked —

Did you see her ? "

No ; Reuben said she was beautiful, but
I did not see her."

He said nothing, and at last Susan
asked —

Have you ever seen her again ? "

I saw her the day after I got here."

That time you went out with Reuben,
and he came back alone ? You did not
come back until long afterwards."

Yes, that time."

And you never told me," she said,
reproachfully.

"Did you think me unkind ? I am
sorry, but seeing her again meant a great
deal to me. I could not speak of it."

Where did you first know her ? " she
asked, in a low voice.

'' At Jacewo."

And you love her ? "

'' Yes."

It was only what she had expected, yet
when it came her heart failed her. She
felt herself trembling, and if she could
have looked at her face she would have
seen there was no colour in it.

'* Does she know ? " she asked, almost
in a whisper.

I was telling her — I was asking her to
marry me — when we were interrupted. I
was called away. She went home and
found her cousin waiting to brings her
here. We never met again until that
day I tell you of."

Susan's heart stood still. But she must
know the worst.

"But," she forced herself to say, "she
found time to say she returned your love,
and would marry you ? "

She said nothing. But she would have
refused. I know it; I saw it in her
face."

Refused ! John, was she mad ? "

Mad ! no ; only she did not love me,
or not enough."

John ! how could that be ? What
was she made of ? "

He laughed. "Every one does not seeme
with your cousinly eyes, Susan," he
said.

She did not speak at once, then she
said —

"Tell me something about her, John.
I do not like her ; she has behaved badly

to you, because she must have done
something to make you believe she loved
you, or you would never have asked her
to marry you. But I should like to
know something about her."

He began to tell her about Diana, and
Susan listened with deepest interest. He
spoke well, with a lover's enthusiasm,
and low rating of his own claims to her
regard, yet with the dignity of a man
who respects himself, and knows that his
love is strong and enduring. Not even
to Susan did he make any apology for
his humble birth. He evidently looked
upon Diana's feelings about that rather
as an unfortunate prejudice, which time
would remove, than a genuine obstacle
inherent in her nature.

Susan listened, her heart swelling with
pride and grief. Never had she loved
him so well as now when he told, in,
quiet, manly fashion, of his deep and
abiding love for Diana. She felt prouder
of him with every word he spoke ; and
with every word he spoke her grief increased,
for the more he spoke of Diana
the stronger became Susan's feeling against
her, and the more unworthy of John's
love did she hold her to be. John naturally
dwelt at greater length upon that
which had charmed him most in Diana;
and Susan got the impression that Miss
Wentworth was a pretty flimsy thing, with
neither head nor heart, — both unworthy
and unfit to be John's wife. Her heart
rebelled against the way in which she

believed he was going to throw himself
away. She felt bitter resentment against
Diana for not clutching at John's proffered
love, and yet she felt thankful that
he was still safe.

I don't like her," she said, when he
had finished. " I think she is vain and
light, and fond of admiration and flirting.
I am glad she would have refused you.
If she had said " yes," you would have
repented it all your life."

"Nay, Susan," he said, the dark colour
coming into his face, " you go too far.
You do not know her ; you have no right
to judge her in that way."

I judge from what you say," she
retorted, half wrathfully half tenderly.
You describe her as very beautiful, and

VOL. III. B

very delicate and dainty ; but as long as
she can say a clever thing, she does not
seem to care that it carries a sting
straight into a heart that loves her.
Clever sayings are all very well when
the heart is light, but they sound
very thin in a house where there is
sorrow and mourning. It's love and
sympathy you want then, not a clever
tongue."

There was a momentary pause, and then
she went on without waiting for John to
speak.

And if she is as dainty and delicate
as you say, what would she do in this
house ? It's not big enough for airs and
graces."

Poor Susan was doing her best to alienate

John in her very love for him. His
only reply to her last words was —

I shall not live here, you know quite
well, Susan."

Yes, I know," she rejoined bitterly.
Now you've got the old homestead,
you'll leave it to please her who ought to
be proud to share a crust with you."

I shall leave it to please no one, least
of all a woman who will probably never
set foot in it, but because my calling
prevents my having a settled home anywhere."


The tone in which he spoke smote
Susan's heart, and she cried impulsively —

John, I am sorry I've vexed you ; I
did not mean to."

You have not vexed me, Susan ; only

I am sorry you are so prejudiced against
Miss Wentworth."

I should not be prejudiced against her
if I thought she could make you happy.
But indeed, John, she does seem very
light and full of faults."

Of course she has faults ; no one who
is worth anything is without," he continued
paradoxically. " And her manner
is very airy at times, but it is only her
manner. If I have made you think more,
it is because I don't use the right words
in speaking of her. It is very difficult
for a man to describe a woman like Miss
Wentworth. Her heart is sound and
sweet, and she has the making of a very
noble woman in her. She has been
brought up in these ridiculous prejudices,

but she is already beginning to throw
them off."

How do you know ? "

I'll tell you. You must know that
the world she moves in is a very different
world from ours ; and even if I were nota
Garthwaite, the mere fact of my having
risen from the people would cause her
relations to oppose her marriage with me.
I don't take this difference into account
at all, and I don't believe she will
when she has seen more of life ; but at
Jacewo these things had great weight
with her, and influenced her very much
when I told her I loved her. She thinks
much less of such things now ; perhaps
even she thinks nothing at all of
them.'

How do you know ? " repeated Susan,
breathlessly.

"I know it by the way she met me
that day."

But you said you had been friends at
Jacewo."

"Yes; but she knew nothing about me
there, although I used to tell her I
belonged to the people. She knew nothing,
either, of the special circumstances of
this particular case. We met on an
equality, and were the only English
people there. I used often to wonder
how she would meet me here, in this
very place, when she came to know all.
We have met," he went on, his voice
deepening with the growing strength of
his feeling; "she knows all about me;

she had seen Eeuben ; I had just appeared
on the scene in an aggressive and disturbing
way ; she had just been hearing
her companions exercising their nimble
wits at my expense ; she knew what a
contempt they all felt for me and mine,
and yet, when we met, she did not hesitate
what to do, — she acknowledged me
then and there, in the most unequivocal
manner, as her friend and equal. She
would not have done that at Jacewo, if
exactly the same circumstance had been
brought about. When we met the other
day her whole face lit up, there was joy
in every feature, and she did intend both
them and me to understand that she and
I were friends, and that under any circumstances
she would manifest her friendship.

That is the change I meant, and it is no
slight one. I don't know what has
brought it about, but it is there. She is
working her way out of the labyrinth in
which she has been entangled since her
birth ; and when she is ready to take the
last step of all, it is my hand that shall
lead her into the new world and the pure
air. God bless her ! "

His head was high, and his face proud
as he said the last words, and Susan
looked at him with very mingled feelings.
She saw there was nothing more
to be said, his heart was fixed, and she
said earnestly —

I hope you may win her, John ; I believe
she would make you happy."

"Thank you, Susan, your good wishes

will help me, and if you ever know her,
you will admit I have chosen well."

Then they shut the house-door, and one
after the other mounted the steep ladder-like
stairs to the low rooms above.

CHAPTER Xxvi

REJECTED.

Gertrude had every reason to rejoice that
she had obtained the promise from her
father and her anne that she should have
the management of Diana at this crisis.
She treated her cousin with a gentleness
and forbearance which did her infinite
honour, seeing that her prejudices were
all against Diana's view of the question.
She made very little way with her. Diana
could not be induced to confide in her;
but she saw enough to convince her that

any other treatment could only have disastrous
results. John's name was not
mentioned by either of them, and what
Diana's thoughts and feelings were all
this time, Gertrude could only guess at ;
but it is significant that if she did not
mention John, she was equally silent about
Rupert. She dared not mention him.
There was something in her cousin's bearing
which hindered her from committing
that mistake. At the end of a week all
she had achieved was that Diana seemed to
be losing her wish to hold completely aloof
from the rest of the household, and was
once more taking her usual place amongst
them. The confession she had made in
the study had been wrung from her; she
had given her testimony emphatically

enough then, but she was not a girl to make
such a display unless she were driven toit.
She suffered at the time and long afterwards,
nor could she forgive those who
had forced her to unlock her heart to
them. It was her affection for Gertrude
which had induced her to lay aside her
reserve sooner than she would have done ;
and it was at Gertrude's instance that
she allowed her name to be included in
the acceptance of an invitation to a
tennis-party, given by some friends in
the neighbourhood. These people, the
Flemings, had been away all the summer,
and Diana had only seen them
once since their return. They were a
good old family, but catholic in their
tastes, and did not disdain to bid to

their feasts the wealthy merchants of
Bellingham.

Rupert did not want to go. His love
for Diana had become very jealous. He
hated to share her with any one, and made
an unavailing attempt to persuade her to
join him in a refusal ; but she had promised
Gertrude to go, and would not listen to
him. It was an exquisite October day;
the premonitions of winter, held' in morning
and evening chills, were forgotten in
the generous beams shed by the sun in
the middle of the day. The changing
hues of the trees seemed rather an addition
to the beauty of the country than
the creeping on of decay and death.
Diana loved this time better than the
boisterous youth of spring or the placid

maturity of summer ; and she enjoyed the
drive to the Flemings' house, which was
situated down in the plain four or five
miles from the Abbey.

There had been a mistake made in
ordering the carriage, and they arrived
late — the last of all the guests. Diana
thought it a beautiful old place, with
richly-laid-out gardens and velvety lawns.
She herself was a very beautiful sight
too, in her grey gown and grey-plumed
hat ; and Rupert, to his disgust and annoyance,
found that he was not alone in his
wish to enjoy her society. All their friends
were there, all crowded round Diana, and
she paid very little heed to Rupert, but
allowed herself to be led away at once by
the eldest son of the house.

I will take you round and tell you
who people are," he said, as they walked
along the gravelled terrace. " There are
sure to be a lot of people here you don't
know, because we ask people to our house
who are not invited or visited by any one
else."

What kind of people ? " she inquired ;
"the lame, the halt, and the blind?"

"Yes, socially," he answered, with a
laugh. " Shopkeepers and manufacturers,
who have made their money in Bellingham,
and are wishing to be received into
good society, but good society won't receive
them."

I think good society is very snobbish,"
was Diana's reply.

Young Fleming had not expected this.

and scarcely knew what to say. There
was a somewhat lengthy pause, during
which he tried hard to think of some reply,
but could not, neither did Diana help him
in the very least. At last he said —

*well, there is a great deal to be said
on our side too, don't you know."

Oh yes ; one could go on talking forever.
But tell me who some of these
people are."

At that moment they came upon the
great tennis - court, where half - a - dozen
sets were going on at the same time.

It is a pretty sight," she said, after
watching the scene for a minute or two.

^^Let me make up a set," he said. "I
could do it in a minute, and we should find
room directly."

OL. no, thank you, I would rather
not."

"Don't you play?"

'' Yes ; and that is the reason why I
never join in a set of strangers. Everyone
works at tennis nowadays, and I only
play at it, so I spoil the game."

"Do you see that dark man in the far
court to the left ? " asked her companion.
He is a son of Smithson, the great coffee
man."

I should have guessed it, — his prevailing
hue is coffee-coloured," she replied.

Young Fleming laughed, and looked at
her admiringly.

"And there is Dewhurst, a very good
fellow ; his father made nearly a million
by some new kind of tooth-paste."

VOL. III. c

Yes," said Diana ; " look how lie
smiles ! "

"That girl playing against him is the
daughter of a man who began life as a
shoemaker, and ended by buying up two
estates not far from here."

She is pretty," replied Miss Wentworth,
but her feet are broad."

Mr Fleming bit his lip. He had not
met Diana before, and he began to find
her humour a little Satanic. Truth to tell,
she was in an angry, bitter mood. She
had only come to this place to please
Gertrude, and she already wished herself
away. These people were intolerable to
her, and her mood was not sweetened by
her companion's next words.

"I hear that Mr Meredith has been

disappointed about Becktop Farm. Someone
else bought it."

"Yes; Mr Garthwaite's brother."

He had never heard the owner of
Becktop Farm spoken of as "Mr" Garth-waite
before, and it sounded odd. He
had heard of what had taken place a
week before this, and he want on —

Some one told me that you know this
brother."

He is an intimate friend of mine."

He is very fortunate."

"No; it is I who am fortunate. Mr
Garthwaite has been exceedingly kind tome
more than once."

He was in luck's way to get the
chance."

Chance is very elastic," she answered,

rather drily; then they found themselves
in a group of other people. She was
claimed by some one else, and she scarcely
saw her host again.

It had been decided beforehand that
the afternoon should be prolonged until
evening, and it was evening before Eu-pert
could get near Diana. He was very
popular, and in universal request, which
this afternoon gave him less satisfaction
than it usually did. Time after time he
tried to get to his cousin, but always in
vain. Each time he tried to approach
her, he saw her move off with some one
else, or he himself was captured just
before he reached her side. Dancing
had been going on for some time, and he
had been watching her triumphant progress

and increasing popularity in growing
anger before he at last got a word with
her. The mere sight of her dancing set
his pulses beating fast, for she danced exquisitely.
She was exceedingly fond of
it, and at Jacew^o had conquered the
graceful Polish women on their own
ground. She had been dancing with
young Addison, Dora's fiance, and had
forgotten Rupert as completely as if he
were not in existence, when she suddenly
heard his voice thunderous and growling
in her ear —

You might at least keep one for me."
"You should have asked me sooner,"
was her only reply.

"Do you mean to say you have not
even one left ? "

She showed him her programme, which
was full.

He stood for an instant speechless
with disappointment and jealousy, and
then announced with decision —

There shall be an extra now. I suppose
you will not refuse me that ? "

"You must ask for it properly," she
replied curtly, drawing her eyebrows together.


He obtained her consent, and then
hastened away, and so contrived that
then and there an extra was struck up
by the man at the piano.

He returned to his cousin's side and
claimed her for it. He was a good dancer
too, and as they floated round and round
the room Eupert felt in an ecstasy of

enjoyment. He had never held her in
his arms before, and it needed all his self-control
to restrain him from hugging her
to him and kissing her again and again.
He began to talk.

*shave you enjoyed yourself?"

*' Yes, very much."

I am very sorry."

"You ought to be glad."

"I should have been glad if you had
enjoyed yourself with me ; but it only
enraged me to see you smiling on all this
lot here, as if you were as happy with
them as with me."

** Perhaps I was. I am like the sun, —
I shine alike on the just and the unjust."

"But you ought not to. I don't like
you to shine unless you are with me."

"Then you would be the sun, — I should
be only the moon."

"That is as it should be. Women
ought not to be as noticeable as men."

I don't think the moon's position
would suit me — it is subordinate."

"And you don't like a subordinate
position. I know you are as wild as a
hawk, but you would not mind being
subordinate to your husband, would you ? "

It would depend upon the husband,
who is at present a creature of the imagination
alone."

Come outside," he said abruptly ; " we
can't talk here."

The dance was over, and every one
was leaving the room. Eupert, who was
familiar with the house, took his somewhat

unwilling companion to a small
and seldom used room, which did not appear
to have been entered that evening.
It lay at some distance from the more
frequented rooms, at the end of a long
passage, with a heavy curtain hanging
before the door.

"At last," said Rupert, when he had
reached this haven, " I have got you to
myself. I can't tell you what torture
I have been in all evening, seeing you
talking to every one else, and never able
to get a word with you myself."

"Do not be so absurd, Eupert. Even
if I wanted to talk to no one but you,
I could not do it — it would be ridiculous."

"But I hate to see you talking and
laughing with other men."

"You have no right to talk about
hating anything which I either do or
leave undone; and why have you come
here ? We can talk just as well where
other people are. Take me back; the
next dance will be beginning immediately
and I am engaged for it."

Well, so am I ; our discarded partners
can dance it together. I brought you
here to ask you something, and you shall
not go away until you have consented.
Diana, will you marry me ? I have loved
you for ever so long — months — ever since
I knew you, and I want you for my
own."

Indignation kept her silent for a moment,
then she said —

How dare you ask me such a thing ? '

\Yhat do you mean ? Say yes or no.
I can't bear to be kept in suspense. I
like plain words."

Diana colour rose at his imperious
words and manner, and her answer was
as short and plain as he could desire.

"No, then," she said, decidedly.

"No?" he repeated. "You don't mean
that. You don't know what it is to me.
Your answer means life or death to me.
I love you. I swear I never loved any
girl before I knew you, and there is not
another girl in our set who would dream
of refusing me."

"But I don't belong to your set, — I
am an outsider. Go to some of these other
girls by all means."

Don't speak like that ; don't make

fun of me," lie said, between his teeth.
Tell me plainly why you say no ? "

Because of all you have told me about
yourself partly, and partly because I do
not like you''

"Because of what I have told you?
Do you mean about my father and that
woman ? "

"I mean these very things."

But that's no reason. There is nota
single man who, if he were honest,
would not have such things or worse to
confess."

I have nothing to do with other men ;
we are talking about you. You have
shown me again and again what you are,
and nothing on earth would induce me to
marry such a man."

If I had known," he said, passionately,
"I would never have breathed a word to
you. I thought if I hid nothing from
you, you would like me the better for it ;
but I see you are only like the rest. So
long as a man keeps quiet you don't
care how bad he may be, but if he makes
an honest confession, you are down upon
him at once."

To this tirade Diana made no reply
at all, and after a moment Eupert continued
—

If you marry me you will please all
the people at the Abbey. They want me
to settle down, and are anxious I should
marry you."

Diana smiled. She was quite familiar
with all that now. She only said —

I can't marry to please other people,
whatever you may do."

'' I am not marrying to please other
people," he flashed out angrily. " I marry
to please myself alone, and am answerable
to no one for the wife I choose."

"At least grant me the same liberty."

"It is quite different with women.
They always marry as their people think
best."

"I am the best judge for myself; and
if I ever marry, I shall choose my own
husband."

He stamped his foot.

Don't try me too far, Diana ; it would
not be wise. I do love you like my
life, but if you try me too far I might
forget it."

"Yes," she replied. "You are not much
higher than a brute, Eupert. But I am
not afraid of you, although I will not
trust my life to your keeping."

He seized her in his arms and held
her to him so tightly that she felt almost
faint.

You must marry me," he said, fiercely
"you must, else I would not answer for
your safety. I believe sometimes I am
only half human. I don't feel like a man
when I am in one of my rages. But you
could make a man of me, Diana; if I
have you for my wife I shall grow better ;
and if you don't marry me, I shall go
down and down, till I have got to the
very bottom, and you can't call me a man
any longer."

"You ought to be ashamed to speak
in such a way," she replied, contemptuously.
" Make a man of yourself — I can't
help you. I often find it difficult to govern
myself. I certainly could not undertake
to keep you in hand as well. You have
a hot temper, and if you ask mamma she
will not give you a very encouraging report
of mine."

"You are angry now, and you look
more beautiful than ever; your whole
body trembles, and your eyes burn like
fire. You must be my wife, Diana ; if
I thought you cared for any man more
than you do for me, I would shoot him
down like a dog."

You revolt me," she cried, passionately.
" Is this the way you would talk if

we were engaged ? I should be sick with
disgust in a day."

If I were sure of you, I would talk as
you pleased."

"Say no more, Rupert; it is quite impossible.
This scene has lasted quite long
enough. Take me back to the drawing-room."


Listen, Diana," he said, suddenly changing
his tone, and speaking with a gravity
and earnestness which she had not expected
from him ; " I want to tell you once again
what the consequences of your refusing me
will be. Perhaps I spoke with too much
excitement before; I forgot myself, and I
beg your pardon for it. I did really tell
you those things, because I thought you
would understand that a man may be

VOL. III. D

strongly tempted and yield to the temptation,
and yet not be a bad fellow in reality.
I have it in me to be a better man, I know,
only I can't do it by myself, — I must have
some one to help me, and you are the very
woman for it. You are the only woman I
ever met who was not frightened at me when
I got into a rage ; you are the only woman
whom I ever feel inclined to tell all about
myself. You could keep me straight, and
I can't keep myself. And I love you so,
that I should dread your displeasure more
than anything else in the world. Say 'yes,'
Diana. Consent to an engagement, at any
rate ; just give me a trial. I will show you
I am better than you think. Be my good
angel, will you ? "

Diana listened in silence. How far he

was speaking sincerely she could not tell,
but almost in spite of herself she was
touched. The tears came into her eyes,
and had it not been for John, she might
have been tempted to believe that she
could do what was out of the power of any
human being— make a decent and civilised
man out of Rupert Meredith. Fortunately
there was a force which held her back from
that, and she only said —

Rupert, I cannot do it, and you distress
me infinitely by insisting in this way. Say
no more, I beg, and take me back to the
others; I am very tired."

"My future be on your head," was all
his reply, as he gave her his arm and they
left the room together.

Library

CHAPTER XXYIIL

AN EXPLANATION.

A WEEK went by and nothing happened.
Rupert had not renewed his offer, which
rather astonished Diana, though at the
same time it relieved her from anxiety.
She had not spoken again to John, though
she had seen him once. It was one morning
when she had been out with Rupert
and Dora and Fred Addison. They were
returning to the Abbey by a short cut
through the little town, and as they went
down the sloping market-place, Diana and

Rupert first, Dora and Fred following,
Diana saw John standing outside a shop
talking to a man. The shop was a
butcher s, and the day was market-day ;
perhaps he had driven over in his gig, like
other farmers, with his beasts and produce.
She could not repress a smile as the
thought passed through her mind. He
looked so unlike a farmer, with his keen
townsman's face, and the difference in his
dress. It was a raw autumn morning ;
Diana and her cousin wore furs, and the
familiar fur - trimmed overcoat hung on
John's tall figure. The smile was still
lingering in Diana's eyes and round her
mouth, when she caught his eyes and
bowed. He raised his hat, gave her rather
a long look, and they passed on. Comment

on the greeting was made on both
sides.

'* That's Miss Wentworth ; she's staying
at the Abbey. Do you know her ? " asked
John's companion, who was not a butcher,
but a veterinary surgeon.

I know her very well. She was at
Jacewo part of the time I was."

Ay ! I heard she came from foreign
parts. It's odd you should be on friendly
terms with one of that brood. [Somehow
the Meredithss were not popular among
their tenants and the townspeople.] She
can't be like them."

She is not ; she is very unlike them.
You have only to look at her to see that.
Does she look like them ? "

He looked after the retreating group ashe

spoke, and his companion looked too —
first at Dora s pretty little figure and her
small, fair features, with their spoilt-child
expression, set in a frame of flaxen locks,
and then at Diana's tall slimness, delicate
yet commanding, her chiselled, rather
haughty features, and her masses of dark
hair. Both men looked after them until
they were out of sight ; then John smiled,
and his companion said —

No ; she's not like them."

Diana met with blame.

'* The sight of that fellow makes me ill,"
said Eupert, who had only heard a very
much modified account of Diana's extraordinary
conduct the day before the sale.
I wish you would not look at him when
you are with me. Infernal cheek, taking

off his hat ! If he had scraped a bow and
pulled his hair, he would have shown a
better knowledge of his position."

You see," said his cousin, who was ina
mischievous mood, "he has lived much
abroad, where even peasants take off their
hats to ladies."

It is a pity he did not stay abroad.
Such a coat, too ! It is quite like a gentleman's
coat."

Yes. I have seen that coat before, and
I assure j^ou it is made of the best cloth
and the most expensive fur."

He was going to say more, when Dora's
rather shrill treble came from behind.

"Eeally, Diana, I wish you would not
force your disagreeable acquaintances upon
us. After the way that man has behaved

to papa and Guy, I should think you would
have known better than to take any notice
of him."

He has done me no harm, Dora, and I
cannot identify myself with your quarrels.
I have been too long a stranger to you all
for that."

Nothing more was said. It never occurred
to Eupert to think of John as a
rival. To him, he was only one of " those
Garth waited " — a semi-civilised lot, despised
for their ill-luck by all who knew them,
and remarkable for their rude uncouthness
even in this land of rugged Northerners.
His jealousy was of the young men roundabout,
of former acquaintances of Diana
in Whitfield.

Diana was mistaken in thinking that

Eupert had not told the others of her
rejection of him. The very next day he
had gone to his father in the study and
made a scene which neither Mr Meredith,
nor Guy, who was present, wished to go
through again. He said they had made a
fool of him ; Diana did not care for him in
the least, and unless she were coerced, he
felt sure she would not consent to marry
him. He was determined to have her, and
he requested that pressure might be used ;
he had done all he could. If his father and
her mother insisted upon it, she would give
way ; she could not hold out against them
all. He said he would wait a week ; if at the
end of that time they had not reconciled her
to marrying him, he swore that he would
go straight to Muriel Hope, and the consequences

might be what they would. It was
the old threat, but it was not uttered in
the old way. There was something about
Eupert this time which showed he was in
earnest, and caused both his father and
brother the gravest anxiety. If Eupert
were really driven to extremity, he might
do mischief which could never be repaired ;
and they promised that every effort should
be made to induce Diana to change her
mind. Since the affair with John, there
were additional reasons why the marriage
with Eupert should take place ; and the
young lady must be made to understand
that her personal wishes must give way
before the family need. They did not ask
themselves what Diana might do if driven
to extremity. No doubt she would be

harder to move than other girls ; but that
she would, in the end, do as they wished,
they did not doubt for an instant. They
therefore told Eupert to be of good cheer.
Mrs Wentworth and Gertrude were consulted,
and only one opinion prevailed
amongst them. Gertrude, who had at first
been on Diana's side, was now heart and
soul with her father and Guy. The more
she thought of the tone in which Diana had
spoken of John, the more alarmed and
uneasy she felt. Her cousin was undoubtedly
peculiar ; there was no possibility of
measuring to what lengths she would go
in this matter. Shocking mes alliances had
been made before now in families of distinction,
ending always, as she firmly believed,
in disgrace and ruin. At all costs

Diana must be shielded from such a fate as
that. Before long, Gertrude had come to
feel convinced that, in promoting this
marriage with Eupert, they would be
effecting not only his happiness and salvation,
but Diana's also. She would have
been glad if the task of "persuading"
Diana might have been intrusted to her ;
but Mrs Went worth was not disposed to
forego her rights as a mother, and no one
could dispute her decision that she would
manage the matter herself.

Nevertheless she shrank from it, and put
off the explanation from day to day ; and
it was only on this day, when Diana had
seen John in the market-place — the last
day of grace accorded them by Eupert —
that she made up her mind to speak.

It was in the afternoon, and mother and
daughter were sitting together. Diana had
been reading; but pausing at the end of
a chapter and looking at her mother, she
saw that she lay with closed eyes as if tired
or asleep. She laid the book down, and
leaning forward in her seat in the window,
looked out upon what had now become so
dear to her. It was late in the autumn,
and the trees were almost stripped of their
glory ; between their half-naked branches
she could plainly see the river flowing full
and sullen after the heavy rains. The sky
was grey, more rain would yet fall, and
the grey walls of the Abbey rose against it.
Diana, looking at it, felt that she had lived
much and deeply since that summer night
when she had first looked upon aU these

things in their haunting beauty. Just now
she seemed to have reached a pause in her
life. This present calm she felt to be deceptive,
— it rather sharpened her senses
than lulled them ; and she wondered what
note would be struck next. She had not
long to wait. Even as she sat there her
life took a step onward. Her mother spoke.

Diana ! " she said.

She turned, startled out of her reverie.

I thought you were asleep, mamma.
Do you want anything?"

"I was not asleep; I was thinking. I
want to speak to you. Is the door shut ? "

"Yes. Shall I lock it?"

No ; but come nearer to me, and then
I shall not have to speak so loudly."

Diana obeyed, but she did not sit down ;

she leaned her elbow on the mantelpiece,
and stood looking down at her mother.

Eupert has asked you to marry
him ? " said Mrs Wentworth, going to
the point with a directness worthy of her
daughter.

'eyes," replied the girl, with equal directness.


What answer did you give him ? "

Did he not tell you ? "

He said you refused him."

"Yes, I did. Why do you ask what
answer I gave ? "

I wanted to hear it from yourself. And
why did you refuse him, if I may ask?
Perhaps you do not think me worthy of
being treated with such confidence."

I don t want to marry him."

"Why not? What have you against
him ? "

*' I could not possibly marry him. For
one thing, I have no respect for him."

Eeally ! " said her mother, sarcastically.
How has he failed to win your respect ? "

But Diana had no intention of telling of
the confession Eupert had once made. Instead
of that, she asked a counter-question.

'how did you know Eupert was going
to ask me to marry him ? "

We had agreed that it was desirable he
should marry and settle down. By we, I
mean your uncle and Guy, myself and Gertrude."


But why did you think it advisable that
he should marry me ? They are not fond
of me ; why was I chosen ? "

VOL. Il E

Eupert is fond of you, and there are
family reasons why he should marry you
rather than any one else."

Diana did not speak at once. Everything
was becoming very clear. She had
guessed well. It was all as she had thought.
Her heart beat fast with excitement, but
she forced herself to keep calm, and to say
steadily —

What are these family reasons ? If you
wish me to marry Rupert, you ought to tell
me them."

*' There is no necessity at all. It is
quite enough that I, your mother, know
them, and see in them no obstacle to the
marriage."

It may be enough for you, but it does
not satisfy me. These reasons concern my

marriage, not yours. I think it probable
that Eupert will ask me again ; and although
I should not have consented, any
chance of my doing so is quite done away
with by the idea that the marriage is being
got up for family reasons which I am not
to know."

You are a wicked, undutiful girl," said
IVIrs Wentworth, as usual meeting argument
with the form of persuasion peculiar to her.
"You have no respect for me or any one
else, and you are behaving with abominable
ingratitude to your uncle. You will do as
you are told."

"I don't understand why you want
Eupert to marry," went on Diana, ignoring
these remarks. "You told me, and
Eupert also told me, that his father would

never consent to his marriage. Why have
you all changed your minds ? "

She was watching her mother narrowly
as she spoke, and saw plainly the change
which came over her face at these words.
It was a look of fear, which changed to relief
as her daughter stopped. She said nothing,
and Diana hardened her heart, and going
to the couch, stood looking down into her
mother's face. Her own face was pale, and
her eyes were dry, but there was a look in
them which startled Mrs Wentworth, and
made her say —

"Why do you look at me like that?
What do you want ? Are you not well ? "
And she might well ask, for the look in
Diana's eyes was the look of a soul in
pain.

Why did they encourage his marriage
with me, whom they do not like ? " persisted
the girl.

Her mother moved restlessly. She had
not been prepared for this catechism, and
Diana's questions were terribly pointed.

Probably there was every reason against
his choice," she said at last.

*'No. He mentioned Muriel Hope, and
she is a friend of Dora's ; you are all fond
of her."

Mrs Wentworth's tongue clove to the
roof of her mouth. How imprudent Eu-pert
had been ! How much more had he
told? How much more did Diana know?
She longed to know, but dared not ask;
and Diana stood looking at her with deep,
inscrutable eyes, and a very puzzling smile

hovering round her lips. Mrs Wentworth
turned hot and cold at the bare idea that
Diana knew the real reason why they wished
the marriage.

I think," she said at last, speaking with
as much dignity as she could summon up,
when all her strength was needed to keep
her voice steady, — " I think that you and
Rupert have spoken on topics which are
better let alone between young men and
women."

Diana laughed, a laugh with very little of
either amusement or gaiety in it. Knowing
what she knew, and seeing how eager they
had been to make a tool of her, how simply
they had taken it for granted that she would
allow herself to be made a tool of, she was
filled with indescribable wrath and bitterness.

Much had passed between her and
Rupert which has not been recorded here.
She had seen her cousin's heart to the core ;
she had read him through and through ; she
understood perfectly what manner of man
he was ; she knew what kind of love he
could feel; and she would have died any
death sooner than have become his wife.
His relatives also knew him more or less,
perhaps both more and less than she did,
and they, were ready to move heaven and
earth to make her marry him ; they did not
scruple to deceive her to gain their ends ;
and she was in the midst of them, with only
her stout heart and strong will to save her
from them. Involuntarily she thought of
John, and almost unconsciously stretched
out her hand as if to clasp one which had

been extended to her, and then she closed
her fingers and drew back her hand. He
was not here ; she could not ask his help.
Her mother broke the silence by saying —
And now let us have done with this foolish
scene. We all wish the marriage, and
Rupert is very strongly attached to you.
You cannot set us all at defiance, and upset
all our plans in this way. You must marry
Rupert, so there is an end of it."

I will not marry Rupert," was Diana's
reply. She spoke neither loudly, nor with
any show of excitement, but it was the tone
in which she had once said, " I will not goto
Garshill." If her mother had remembered
that, she might have desisted at
once. As it was, it only startled her a little,
and made her feel that her daughter must

be reckoned with whether she liked the idea
or not. It was not like Diana, as her mother
had always known her, to speak like this.
It was her usual way to get angry, and thus
give her enemies an easy victory over her.
And had she behaved in this way now, her
mother would have found this matter very
much more easy to manage. She did not
know how to meet her daughter in a mood
like this. Since their last serious conversation,
Diana had in many respects been born
again, and it was this which made her now
appear to her mother a being as unknown
to her as a woman born a century hence.
Mrs Went worth went on rather fretfully —
I can the less understand your refusal,
since you told me yourself you cared for
him."

I am surprised at nothing now," said
her daughter, "but my memory fails me.
Tell me when I said that."

Her mother repeated words Diana had
once used, and which she had construed in
accordance with her wishes.

*' Ah," said Diana, lifting her head, " you
thought I referred to Rupert ? "

*' Certainly. Was not that what you
meant ? "

No," speaking dreamily, as if to herself;
"you were quite, quite wrong. I meant
something — oh so different ! " with a sudden
flashing smile, which suggested both rapturous
joy and bitter scalding tears.

Well," said her mother, " I beg you will
reconsider your answer, and think not only
of yourself, but also of those belonging to

you. I know Eupert will ask you again,
and let us hear no more of those foolish
objections."

You shall hear no more of them," washer
daughter's answer ; and then Diana rose
and left the room suddenly, without another
word.

Just as she reached her bedroom door she
met Gertrude, and catching her hand, drew
her into the room with her.

Gertrude," she said, as she shut the door,
'' that day we were at the Flemings', Eupert
asked me to marry him, and I refused.
Mamma has been talking to me about it,
and I hear his offer was the result of a
scheme got up among you, because you
thought it expedient he should marry me :
is that true?"

She was taller than Gertrude, and she
stood over her with her dark eyes looking
straight down into her cousin's blue ones,
and by force of will drawing from her a
true answer to her question.

Part of it is true," said Gertrude. " It
is true we thought it would be a good
thing for you to marry ; but we thought
so because we saw Eupert was in love
with you."

And you did not think it necessary to
ask if I returned his feeling at all ? " asked
Diana, with a smile which made Gertrude's
eyes-fill with tears.

"You are unjust, Diana," she cried.
"We did think of you. Aunty told us
you cared for Rupert."

It was — a mistake," she answered ;

and you did really get up this scheme
amongst you?"

We thought it was for the happiness of
you both. We had no other end in view,"
said her cousin, distressed and embarrassed,
and anxious to end a scene which threatened
to become very awkward.

Gertrude ! " cried Diana, bursting
into bitter tears, "you had — you had
another object, and I know what it was.
How could you enter into such a plan ? I
liked you best of all, and I thought you
cared for me too."

Shocked and distressed, Gertrude knew
not what to say. She had never seen Diana
weep before, and she felt that such bitter
agonised tears could bring no relief, but
would rather exhaust than calm. She

knelt down beside the couch on which
Diana lay, and put her arm around her,
saying—

Diana, I do love you, — I love you very
dearly. I thought you would be glad, — we
all thought so. Is it really true you do
not care for him ? "

The shudder which ran through the girl's
figure was sufficient answer ; and then
Gertrude's love of her own people led her
wrong, and estranged Diana completely, so
that she never afterwards believed that
Gertrude's affection had been disinterested.

Are you sure you could not love him,
Diana?" she whispered. "He loves you
so ! He is brave and handsome ; there is
not another girl he could ask who would
say no. We are very, very anxious he

should settle down and become a goodman.
Won't you help us ? It would bea
noble work. You could make him what
you would ; and love would come, I am sure
of it, if you would only have faith. Say
yes, Diana ; do try him. We should all be
so glad, — we should love you so. Take him
and see what you can do with him."

"And suppose I could do nothing with
him ? I should be fast married, — I could
not get free. You know Rupert very little
if you are talking sincerely. He would be
very kind to the woman he loved; he would
load her with presents, and dress her like
an empress, but he would not change one
habit, or give up one cigar after dinner to
please her. For three months he would
idolise his wife, then his love would go,

and he would turn her life into a martyrdom.
I know everything. Eupert told me
why he is not allowed to marry, and I
know why you are trying to make me marry
him. You think I know nothing, and you
would let me marry him without undeceiving
me, purposely leaving me in the dark.
I know everything, but not one of you all
spoke, and I cannot forgive you."

Each word came slowly and separately
from her lips, and there was a long silence
after she had spoken. Gertrude had covered
her face with her hands. Diana spoke first.

"Leave me, Gertrude, please," she said.
I am sorry I cried, I did not intend to — I
was excited ; now I should like to be alone.
You said just now you loved me. If you
do, please tell no one of this."

Her tears had long since ceased, and on
her first reply to Gertrude, she had risen
from the couch, thrown off her cousin's
arm, and was now standing in the middle
of the room, with a very pale face and dry
eyes, which shone with a strange brilliance.
There was such a strange look on her face,
mournful yet wild, that Gertrude felt uneasy,
and said —

I don't like to leave you, Diana — you
look ill ; are you fit to be alone ? "

"Yes, quite. I shall be better when I
am alone ; " and scarcely knowing what she
did, she opened the door and stood there as
if waiting for her cousin to go. And Gertrude
went in silence, and with a heart full
of foreboding.

VOL. III. F

CHAPTER XXIX.

ON THE OLD ROAD.

Scarcely pausing to think, only feeling
that the air in this house was poisonous,
Diana put on her hat, wrapped herself ina
warm shawl, and left the house by a
side-door without meeting any one, and
walked some distance before she was sufficiently
calm to notice what road she had
taken. She was on a rough road, which
wound over moor and fell to a neighbouring
market town, once the only road, but
now superseded by a more level and circuitous

one down in the valley, and hence
almost deserted. She had passed the last
wayside farm, and the road lay straight
before her — low walls covered with ivy
and brambles separating it from the spreading
moorland on either side. She walked
on until she got to the top of a rise where
a little plantation of fir-trees grew amongst
the heather. She had often seen these very
trees from the other side of the valley, and
had wished to reach them. Now she was
here, and she felt no pleasure in them at
all. She sat down on the wall, shut her
eyes, and listened to the sound of the
wind in the trees. Strange thoughts flitted
through her mind, and her closed eyes
beheld strange visions. The grey daylight
faded into dusk, — the dusk had almost disappeared

in darkness, before she opened her
eyes again and looked around her.

Her ear had caught a sound ; some one
was coming along this lonely road. She
realised it with indifference ; she was too
taken out of herself to feel afraid. Then
she recognised the step, and clasped her
hands tightly in the darkness, and held
her breath as he came nearer. He could
not see her, she thought : she was leaning
back against a tree, and her slight figure
and dark dress might well keep her concealed
in this darkness. A great longing
came upon her to stretch out her hand
to him and call him by name, but she
kept her hands clasped and her tongue
silent. Yet when he was close to her, he
lingered, stopped, and said — •

"Diana!"

*eyes, it is I, Mr Garthwaite," she
answered.

I beg your pardon ; I ought to have
said ' Miss Wentworth ' ; you were in my
thoughts as Diana."

It is my name, why should you not
say it?"

What are you doing here ? " he asked.
"You have a perfect passion for lonely
roads and darkness."

I have some owlish qualities, I know.
Sometimes I want to hide. I did now."

"What for? What have those people
been doing to you ? "

She did not answer at once, and he
went on —

"Walk with me, and tell me as we go.

It is late for you to be out alone, and
they will be anxious about you at home."
They do not know I am out ; I came
to avoid them," she answered, rising to do
as he suggested.

Why was that ? " he asked, as they
walked on side by side. ** What is
wrong ? "

^^They want me to marry my cousin
Eupert."

An hour ago she had thought that under
no circumstances could she speak Eupert 's
name, much less mention this matter to
John, and now she was speaking of it
calmly in answer to a general question.
She felt almost frightened as she realised
the strength of his influence over her;
but this feeling was succeeded b}^ one of

peace and calm, born of the knowledge
that he would never misuse this influence.

You must not do that," he said quickly,
almost sharply, as soon as she had spoken.
You must not think of it."

I am not thinking of it ; I could not
do it. I would rather die than be his
wife."

*' I am glad you say so, — you are quite
right ; " and in spite of his endeavour to
keep his voice indifferent, an accent of
triumph would penetrate it. " If you
were married to him, you would probably
wish you were dead every day of your
life. Perhaps," he went on, as she said
nothing, " you do not think I am justified
in trying to influence you against your
cousin ; but I cannot get out of the way

of considering myself in some sort your
guardian, and answerable for your safety,
and I happen to know your cousin's character
very well. Besides, you know, you
need not take my advice unless you like ;
we are in a free country, I believe."

She thought of Mary Metcalfe, and was
still silent, and John went on —

"Why do you so hate the idea of
marrying him ? "

He is a bad man."

"What makes you think so? Few
people would agree with you. I believe
he is very popular."

"I have talked to him," she answered,
slowly. "Long before he asked me, I
knew he was going to do so, and I wanted
to know what kind of man he really was.

I had heard much about him. I talked
to him, and I let him talk to me. I think
that there are now few things about him

o

that I do not know, and I found he was
bad, bad all through. Was that wrong ? "
She stopped to ask.

No ; it was right. You are not a child,
you are a woman, and you had a right
to know the man who was ofoinof to ask
you to marry him, whether you intended
to accept him or not."

I did not for an instant intend to
accept him."

"You could find out in no other way,
I suppose ? "

In no other way."

And you found out your cousin was
full of faults ? "

''No," she answered, " I found no faults,
only vices. He is both vicious and weak.
He has neither the wish nor the will to
throw them off."

''I am glad," he said, "that you had
the strength and courage to do this, but
it was a terrible task for you to undertake ;
was there no one to do it for you ? "

'' No one."

Not even your mother ? "

Mamma is almost more anxious than
the others that I should marry him."

"I see. Why have they chosen you
for the sacrificial lamb ? "

His voice was deep and full with suppressed
scorn and bitterness ; and dark
though it was, Diana, in imagination,
could almost see the grim, wrathful expression

which his face would wear. Her
mood was changing too. Grief and disappointment
were turning to scorn and
anger, and she answered his question
truthfully —

He cannot honourably ask any girl to
marry him. A certain confession would
have to be made, which they think could
be dispensed with if he married me."

Excellent ! That is the kind of thing
they call a family arrangement, is it not ?
But how do you know this ? "

He told me once, but they do not know ;
they have no idea that I know they are
trying to make a tool of me. They think
I am in perfect ignorance of the inner
working of their scheme."

Loud and ringing was the laughter which

broke from her companion's lips as soon
as she had finished speaking. " Admirable
! " he said — " truly admirable ! Keep
your counsel, and as long as you live you
will never be at a loss for amusing reflections.
A mothers love is indeed a
beautiful and holy thing. God ! I

could almost "

He broke off" suddenly ; what he had
been going to say she never knew. He
was glad it was dark, that Diana could
not see his face, and guess from it what
was passing in his mind. Wrath and pity,
hatred and love, stern resolve and boundless
longing, bitter, passionate scorn and
deepest tenderness, were all doing battle
together, and striving to overturn a slight,
intangible thing called human will.

But human will conquered, and after a
long silence John spoke again in his usual
voice, in which the only trace of the recent
struggle was a slight vibration as he spoke
the first few words.

Let us leave this subject, Miss Wentworth.
You have a stout heart and a
clear head. I know I need not exhort
you to persist in your decision. I feel
perfectly sure that nothing on earth
would induce you to marry your cousin ;
and as far as that is concerned, I
shall always think of you without uneasiness,
however far apart fate may
drive us."

He could not see how she started at his
words, neither could he tell how they
stabbed her heart ; but he could hear that

her voice was not quite as usual as she
asked —

** Are you going away again ? "

Not just yet, I think, but after another
week or two I must hold myself in readiness
to be sent any day to Brazil. Meanwhile
I stay here."

She was stricken with a strange, unreasoning
terror, and in her terror she
spoke.

Brazil ! " she repeated ; " so far away !
What shall I do without you ? "

"Ah," he said lightly, "do not flatter
me. I am not really necessary to you,
although we have enjoyed some pleasant
hours together, and may enjoy some more,
perhaps, if we ever meet again."

She said nothing, and he went on —

Let us rattler talk about yourself.
You will not care to stay here longer,
will you?"

*'No, I shall go as soon as I can. I
came because my mother was ill; she is
better now, and there is nothing to stay
for."

What are your plans ? "

"I have made none yet. I suppose I
shall look for work again — what servants
call a ' light place.' You know I need not
work hard. I have some money — enough
to live on, I suppose, if I took great care,
but not enough to be comfortable on."

*your comfort being other people's
luxury, I suspect."

Very likely. I am fond of luxury. I
have always enjoyed it at the Abbey."

96 DIANA WENT WORTH.

/

I can believe that. ' I remember thinking,
when I heard at Jacewo where you
had been translated to, that you would be
among congenial surroundings."

"It is different from the Camphausens'
house, is it not ? "

I never was in it."

The reply was almost like a blow, it
was so downright. Before she had recovered
from it, he went on —

You know I belong to a different world
from yours. The Camphausens' house was
luxurious compared with mine."

She felt herself blushing hotly in the
darkness, and she bit her lip in her annoyance.
His snubs were as thorough as
everything else of his, and she had brought
it upon herself.

Promise me one thing," he said, as she
did not speak. " Do not try teaching
again, at least not that kind of teaching.
People of the Camphausen type are not
so rare as you might think ; and do not
go out of England again ; you might get
to some foreign town where there was no
one at all to look after you, and you know
you need looking after. You are very self-reliant,
and although it is an admirable
quality, it has the same drawback as other
good things — there may be too much of it."

You limit my choice, so that it is only
fair you should tell me what career is still
open to me."

She tried to speak lightly, but she had

gone through too much that afternoon,

and in spite of herself her voice sounded
VOL. TIL G

flat and spiritless. Holm noticed it at
once.

"You are tired," he said; "lean on
me."

Only once before had he said "lean on
me," in that gently peremptory tone —
after he had rescued her from the forest
at Jacewo ; that occasion and their conversation
during their walk home, was in
the minds of both of them now, and
John, drawing her hand more forward
into his arm, went on —

"If you must teach, get work in some
large school where discipline is maintained,
and you will know what your
work is, and when it is over for the
day. Private teaching is a mistake ; don't
try it again."

She said nothing ; she felt chilled to the
heart. She longed for one reminder of the
past — one sign that he had not forgotten
that golden summer of long brilliant days
and balmy nights, which ordinary people
had counted by weeks and months, and
which to her had passed like a dream,
unbroken and flawless ; anticipation idealising
reality, and reality, when it came,
far surpassing anticipation. She could
not bear to think of it. She forced
herself to contemplation of the future —
when John would be in Brazil, and she
where ? "

By this time they were close to the
Abbey. Their walk was nearly over ; ina
few minutes they would have parted,
and who could tell when they might meet

again ? She must say something ; she
could not treasure up as his last words,
Private teaching is a mistake ; don't
try it again," but rack her brain as
she would, she could think of nothing
except —

Will you let me know when you leave
England ? "

If you will let me know where to send
you word."

She gave him Mrs Burland's address,
adding —

''Of course I cannot tell where I shall
be, but anything sent under cover to Mrs
Burland will always reach me."

"You shall certainly know when I
leave."

And," she added, desperately, feeling

that the minutes were slipping away, and
that each step brought the parting nearer,
if you are in London before you go — and
you are sure to be — would you try to call ?
I might be there, and I should like to say
Good-bye ' to you."

I will certainly call, and shall hope to
see you."

Thank you," was all she said, and then
the ruined Abbey rose above them, looming
through the darkness. He opened the gate
for her, — they had shaken hands — he was
raising his hat, and she was turning away
with a sickening sense of desolation at her
heart, when he stopped, turned, and said,
in the voice which always put new strength
into her —

If you should be in any serious difficulty,

Miss Wentwortli, and I could be
of any use to you, remember that I am
always at your command."
So she went in comforted.

CHAPTER XXX.

ST John's in the wilderness.

Three days had passed. Rupert had
been told at once of the failure to persuade
Diana. He had said very little,
much less than they had expected, and
had not mentioned Muriel. He said he
was sorry they had not been more successful
; if he had thought they were going
to fail, he would not have come back
from London so soon. He had gone to
London, no one knew why, the very day
after he had told them Diana had refused

him, and that had been the day following
her refusal. He said he would wait a day
or two, and then speak to her again; he
by no means despaired. He hoped they
would not tease her about it any more.
He was out of the house a great deal,
and they saw scarcely anything of him.

Gertrude had had an explanation with
her cousin, and had convinced her that
she had misjudged them in thinking
they wished her to marry Eupert without
knowing the truth about him. The
matter had been left in Mrs Wentworth's
hands ; she was to tell Diana, and they
supposed she had done so. Diana had
listened in silence, her face pale, her eyes
troubled. When Gertrude had finished,
she only said slowly —

"Mamma told me nothing; she never
meant to."

And Gertrude had said nothing, feeling
instinctively that it was so.

There was no ill feeling between the
cousins ; they spoke much together.
Diana said she must go away, it would
be impossible to remain here now. She
hoped in a few days to have made arrangements
to go to Mrs Burland : she
was at present from home, but would
probably return in a week. She had not
seen her mother again. Mrs Wentworth
was deeply incensed against her, and had
forbidden Diana to appear before her, or
to enter her room. There was a gloom
over the whole house, which not even
Dora's approaching marriage could dispel.

Diana, pale and silent, and with a look
of suffering on her face, only shared the
family life to please Gertrude, who implored
that nothing might be done which
should cause the servants to think there
was anything wrong. Above all, she besought
her to keep up appearances with
Eupert. And her cousin, listless and indifferent,
said she would try to do even that.

Three days after all this had happened,
Diana sat in the morning room, trying
over some new music. She bore her
banishment from her mother's room with
fortitude. The recollection of the last
time she had been there was very painful
to her ; she was by nature averse to
scenes, and the thought of a repetition
of that one was horrible to her.

As she sat at the piano, Eupert came
in and addressed her as if nothing had
happened.

Diana ! " he said, " you are just the
person I wanted. Will you drive with me
this morning ? "

She was rather surprised at his tone,
but, after all, it would be best, for the
short time she would still be here, to
behave as if nothing had happened ; but
she hesitated before replying, and he went
on —

Do come ; it is so long since we had a
drive together."

"Yes," she answered, "it is a longtime."


"You've hardly spoken to me since
that day at the Flemings'. I am sorry I

vexed you then. I spoke too soon, but
1 could not keep it in any longer. Some
day I will ask you to give me another
chance, and in the meantime let us befriends
again, as we used to be."

This bluff straightforwardness aroused
no suspicion in Diana's mind. It was
Rupert's way of expressing himself, and
would have been the same up to a
certain point if he had been talking
to the woman he loved or the man he
hated.

."I wish you would come," he went on,
as she still said nothing, "just to show
you forgive me. I promise not to talk
about anything you won't like."

She looked out of the window. It was
an exquisite morning, with hoar-frost still

on the grass. Clouds were on the horizon ;
no doubt the day would end with rain — at
present it was perfect.

"Where are you going to drive to?"
she asked, giving way slowly and grudgingly.


*' I thought of Stanton ; it's a good road,
and you have never been there."

Stanton," she repeated, instantly thinking
of Mrs Burland. " I should like to go
there. I have a friend who used to live at
Stanton, and who has often told me about
it. How long will it take us ? Shall we
get back to luncheon ? "

No ; we'll take a sandwich with us, and
I'll bring you home in time for your four-o'clock
tea."

I will come with you," she said, after

some reflection. " I will just tell Gertrude
I am going."

I am so glad you are going," said Gertrude,
kissing her, when Diana had said
how she was going to spend the morning.
The drive will do you good, you are so
pale ; and I think those very long walks are
too much for you. It will do Eupert good
too, and I am sure he will keep his word."

So for the last time in her life, Diana
went out of Garshill Abbey.

It was an exquisite morning, and their
road was beautiful, almost beyond description.
All the way they went by the river ;
no longer a thin stream, rippling over the
stones with a tinkling, empty sound, but
swollen with autumn rains, and filling its
bed from bank to bank, it roared along

angrily. They had it first on one side
and then on the other, for the Swale is a
winding river. The woods retained only
the shadow of their former splendour ;
winter had touched them with her finger
as she passed through, claiming tribute ;
and at her bidding they had shed their
magnificence of gold and crimson. Now
they stood shivering and almost naked in
the chill wind. They were driving '* up
dale," so that the hills grew higher and
the river narrower as they went on.
Turning off the highroad, and crossing
an old bridge all overhung with ivy, they
got into a road which was little more thana
lane, and jolted along, with the river still
flowing alongside, until a few cottages and
farms appeared, and just short of them, in

the middle of a field, an old stone house
with motioned windows, which was the
rectory.

Here Rupert pulled up, and Diana
asked —

"Is this Stanton? I thought it would
have been a longer drive."

No, we have not come to Stanton.
While you were getting ready, I thought
that, after all, I would not drive you
there to-day."

'why not? I am sorry; I wanted to
see Stanton. Why did you change your
mind ? "

There's nothing to see there, and there
is here. There's a queer place in a wood
called ' the Nuns' Walk,' and I should like
to show it to you."

You might have told me before."
'' I did not think of it. What does it
matter? We can go to Stanton another
time ; tomorrow if you like."

"It does not signify; but I can't tell
what made you change your mind so
suddenly."

I thought you would enjoy this more."

*' It is certainly a beautiful place."

Yes," he answered, and then called to

a boy who came out of the stable, and

getting down from the dogcart, he went

and held parley with him.

Diana sat and watched them idly. She
had enjoyed the drive. Rupert had been
as agreeable as, when he chose, he could
make himself. He had not said one word
on the forbidden subject, but had talked

VOL. III. H

about general things in his own pleasant
way. They had eaten their sandwiches,
and now Diana looked forward to seeing
the Nuns' Walk.

She could not hear what her cousin and
the boy said, and she did not listen, but
sat looking at the hills, which rose on all
sides of the little village, and still hearing
in her ears the flow of the river, which
they had got some little distance away
from.

Presently Rupert came back to her,
-saying —

Will you get down here, Diana ? they
will put the cart up for us. 1 know
the parson here. I wanted the key of the
church, but it seems the parson is down
there, so we will go to him."

Diana got clown, and Eupert, having
given a few directions to the boy, led his
cousin away. It struck her as strange
that Eupert, who was always so careful
in seeing that his horses were properly
attended to, should be willing to leave
his beast in the hands of a rough country
stable lad. She said nothing, however,
and as Eupert seemed in haste to reach
the lions of the place, she humoured
him by putting a little haste into her
movements.

He took her right away from the village,
across some fields to the edge of
a wood which ran down a steep sIo^dc.
There was a path through the wood, and
very curious it was.

"This is the Nuns' Walk," said Eupert;

I will go first to show you the way, and
to keep the branches from striking you.
They grow very low, you will have to
stoop sometimes."

It was the first time he had spoken
since they had left the dogcart. He had
grown very silent, walking with eyes fixed
upon the ground, and now and then sending
a sidelong glance at his cousin.

She did not notice his manner, she was
looking at the Nuns' Walk ; she had never
seen anything so curious before.

Eight through the wood, following its
slope from top to bottom, ran this walk,
in reality a flight of narrow stairs, very
shallow, and made of stone flags of irregular
shapes and sizes, worn by the feet of
many generations, and damp and mossy

with being under the trees and completely
hidden from the sun. At the
side, at intervals, were mouldering moss-grown
stone benches ; and hanging so
low over them, that they had to stood) to
avoid them, were the branches of the
trees, still in this sheltered spot thickly
enough covered with leaves to keep the
path almost in darkness. Look behind
or before, there was nothing to be seen
but the damp, mossy steps, nothing to be
heard but the rustle of the wind in the
remaining leaves.

Is this the only way to the church ? "
asked Diana.

"Yes, unless you go by the road, which
takes you three or four miles round. In
winter it is often so slippery that the

church is closed for weeks, no one will
venture."

'they should toboggan," she said, with
a sudden vivid recollection of the favourite
amusement of her childhood. "It is a
capital place."

Just then they cleared the hundred and
fiftieth step, and came out at the bottom
of the wood.

What a place ! " cried Diana ; " it is the
end of the world."

She could not have described the place
better. They stood in a small, deep
valley or basin ; high hills, covered only
with grass or heather, now brown and
withered, rose on every side. There was
no house in sight, no animal, only a little
old church — one end of it a reclaimed bit

of the old priory which had once stood
there. On the other side of the church,
almost washing it, ran the river, and its
sullen roar was all that broke the deep
silence. Diana could hear her heart beat ;
it was an uncanny place, not one in which
she liked to think of being alone with
Eupert. She was glad when she remembered
that the parson was there too.

She looked round her, and as far as she
could see, the Nuns' Walk was indeed the
only outlet. She thought of being here
alone at night with the moonlight silvering
the river, and the shadows of these
great hills all around, the only sign
of humanity this little grey, deserted
church, with rusty iron gate and churchyard
all choked up with weeds and thorns.

It was like an enchanted place, and the
only way out was by the haunted Nuns'
Walk.

What is the name of this place ? " she
asked, and her voice seemed almost a
shout.

St John's in the Wilderness," answered
her cousin, mechanically.

"It is a fit name. Let us go and explore
the church ; will it be open ? "

I expect so ; the parson is there, you
know."

They walked across the grass to the
church, the rusty gate yielded to their
pressure, and announced their coming by
a hoarse creak; they passed through, and
stood in the churchyard. Diana walked
round, stumbling over gravestones hidden

in the long grass, and deciphering such
epitaphs as she could. The tombstones
were old and moss-grown, and she got
little for her pains, finding out nothing
except that the dwellers in St John's in
the Wilderness lived to a very ripe old
age ; two of them, at least, had seen a
hundred years, and had both survived four
wives and a large number of children.
Eupert did not accompany her on this
tour of inspection. He stood silent and
sullen, a frown on his brow, and his face
absolutely colourless as he watched her
moving about among the graves. He
roused himself after a while, and looked
at his watch. Then he called to her —

"It is getting late, Diana, let us go
inside."

She came and walked with him to the
church door. He pushed it open for
her to enter, but on the threshold she
lingered and took another look into
the valley. The hills brooded in silence,
the valley slept at their feet, the sky
was glooming over, and the grey clouds
seemed almost to touch their summits.
A low wind had arisen, and moaned round
the church ; the river, invisible from where
they were, rushed and swirled along. It
was a strange and dreary scene. Yet
Diana looked at it as if she could not
tear herself away, but Rupert shivered,
and said —

Come in, Diana."

"Yes, it will rain before night, perhaps
before we get home," she answered, going

in, and the door fell to behind them
with a loud clan* which echoed through
the building.

As a piece of architecture, or the expression
of an idea, the church was beneath
contempt. Bare plastered walls, blank,
white windows, and high, painted pews,
were its prevailing features. The floor
was flagged with tombstones ; in parts it
had sunk ; everywhere it was damp and
greenish ; the same green shade was in
places creeping over the walls ; a damp
earthy odour penetrated the atmosphere.
A thoroughly commonplace church it was,
without one remarkable feature, yet to
her dying day Diana could describe every
detail in its arrangement, as if it stood
bodily before her eyes.

"The clergyman is not here," she said,
looking round.

"He will come directly," said Eupert.

She walked to the other end of the
church, peeped into the font, which was
carved in rather a curious way, laid
her hand on the bell-rope, and looked up
the yawning space of the tower ; then
turning round, she saw Eupert walking
to meet a man clad in a white surplice,
who was coming out of the vestry.

She stood looking at them for a minute,
and then came along the church to the
chancel, where they were standing. As
she came, she had time to see that
the clergyman's face was a very disagreeable
one, — and why did he wear
his surplice? A feeling of terror crept

over lier, and she felt more and more
uneasy.

The two men were talking, and did not
notice her approach. Rupert started perceptibly
when he heard her say —

Is there going to be a service ? "

'' I beg your pardon," turning to her.
This is Jones, rector of St John's in the
Wilderness."

She bowed slightly, ignoring the Ev.
Jones's outstretched hand, which did not
look particularly clean.

Is there going to be a service ? " she
repeated.

Mr Jones looked at Eupert, who was
now flushed instead of pale.

"Yes," he answered, "there is."

Where is the congregation ? "

We are the congregation."

She drew her brows together.

*' What do you mean ? The service is
not being held for us alone, is it ? "

"Yes, for us alone; you have exactly
hit it."

"Then what kind of a service is it
going to be ? "

"A marriage service."

The words struck her dumb ; she looked
straight at him in silence. Then she
pulled herself together, and said —

What do you mean ? Is it some kind
of joke you have got up ? "

"There is no joke about it, it is solemn
earnest. You and I are going to be married.
Jones here is going to marry us."

Is this what you brought me here for ? "

*' Precisely."

"The whole thing was just a trick?"

I don't know what you mean by tricks.
I asked you to marry me, and you would
not. I saw you meant it, and as I am
determined to have you, I have taken my
own way of securing my end. I have
brought you here, and you only leave
this church as my wife."

Here I " Her heart sank as she thought
of the loneliness, the utter desolation of
the place. She dared not dwell upon
it. She cast off the recollection of the
Nuns' Walk, and this hidden valley
amongst the hills. She forced herself to
speak quietly.

"You might have saved yourself the
trouble. I will not marry you here anymore

than in Garshill church, or anywhere
else. Even if I consented, it would
not be a true marriage without banns,
and at this hour."

Do not trouble yourself about that ;
I have a special licence. We can be married
at any time, and in any place. I
have been very busy since you did me
the honour of refusing me that day at
the Flemings."

Your special licence is of no use without
my consent, and if you keep me here
for ever, I will never give it. I knew
you were not a good man, Rupert, but
I did not think you were as bad as
this."

Don't let your tongue go too fast.
Kemember you are wholly in my power."

You are quite mistaken if you think
you can frighten me into doing what you
wish."

Keep up your courage by all means ;
it is easy now at the beginning, and while
it is still broad daylight ; but we will see
if you keep the same tone when it is
getting dark, and you are tired of being
here."

Long before then they will have sent
from the Abbey. I left word where we
were going."

I know you did ; but you see I have
not brought you to the place I said I
should. They don't know where we are —
no one does, except ourselves and the
people who will witness our marriage, and
who will do just what I tell them. At the

VOL. III. I

Abbeys, it will be dinner-time before they
begin to wonder where we are. It will
take them hours to make up their minds
to go to Stanton in search of us, and
when they don't find us there, they will
conclude we have run away together.
By that time the night will be far spent,
and the day at hand. By daylight everyone
will know what has happened, — there
are servants at the Abbey, — and then you
will be obliged to marry me, so that I
am sure of you any way."

Then you never intended to go to
Stanton ? "

Never."

I understand you," she said, quite
quietly. "You are perfectly bad, and
also a perfect coward. But do not for

one instant suppose that anything you
or an}^ one else can do, — not all the evil
tongues or cleverly contrived situations
in the world will induce me to marry
you. I never will."

He shrugged his shoulders. He had
recovered his nerve and presence of mind
and all his ready resource.

"My dear girl," he said, "don't talk in
that way ; it does no good. Call me a
villain, if it will relieve your feelings, but
don't say you will never consent to marry
me, because you will. I have made up
my mind that you shall be my wife, and
when I make up my mind to have anything,
I get it sooner or later, eh, Jones ?
Of course, the sooner the better for everyone
concerned."

"I have nothing but loathing for you.
I would sooner die than marry you."

"Far be it from me to place the very
slightest restraint upon your tongue, but
I imagine that when we are man ana
wife you will scarcely like to remember
that you once said such things ; and in
the long-run, my wife you most assuredly
will be."

She leaned against the pew by which
she stood, and looked round the church.
The sun had left the valley, and the corners
of the church were growing shadowy. The
door and windows were shut, heavy grey
clouds sailed through the sky, and the
river rushed past.

I would rather throw myself into the
river than marry you," she said at last.

This is childish," he said, frowning.
Let us waste no more words. Jones,
go to your place, and, Diana, give me
your hand."

Jones, who had stood a silent and apparently
indifferent spectator of the scene,
went to the altar and began to turn over
the leaves of the Prayer-book. Eupert
went up to his cousin and put his hand
on her arm ; she started erect, and recoiled
as if he had struck her.

Do not touch me," she cried, in a voice
full of disgust and indignation.

Do not be ridiculous, Diana," he said,
angrily ; "do at once as I ask you."

I think you are mad ! " she said, in a
voice which was not quite steady. " Have
you any idea of what it is you want to do ?

You are trying to commit an abominable
sin, and that man who calls himself a
clergyman is as wicked as you are."

I want to marry you," he said, folding
his arms and looking full in her face. " I
asked you once, and you refused me ; if it
will please your fastidiousness I will ask
you again. Diana, will you be my wife ? "

"No."

"Then I will take you by force; you
see it comes back to the same thing. Now,
come."

He took a step towards her as he spoke,
and she put out her hand, saying —

Stay where you are. I forbid you to
come one step nearer."

For all answer, he seized her hand and
covered it with kisses.

'' Rupert ! " lie cried, struggling to free
herself, " loose my hand at once, — at once,
I say. You shall not touch me, — you dare
not. Rupert, you coward ! "

She could say no more. He held her
tight in his arms, her head was on his
shoulder, and he was covering her face,
her neck, her still resisting hands, with
kisses which stung and burned her, and
filled her with an ever-increasing loathing
for him.

"Now, will you marry me?" he asked,
when at last he set her free, and she sank
faint, breathless, and trembling upon a
seat.

She pressed her hand to her heart and
tried to say one word which should repeat
her former answers, but she could not — no

sound would come ; she could only shake
Iter head.

Do not drive me desperate' he said.
My blood is up, and if you provoke me
far enough, I could do murder — anything.
Don't look upon Jones as a protection. He
will do what I tell him, and will see and
know just as much as I wish him to. You
had better make up your mind at once."

She said nothing. Her head was bowed
upon the ledge of the pew, her face hidden.
She was not crying, nor did she tremble,
only from time to time a long shiver shook
her figure.

Rupert looked down upon her. How
frail was her figure, how indomitable her
spirit ! He was moved in spite of himself,
and he began to speak gently and persuasively,

but she still made no sign. But
for that ever-recurring shiver, she might
have been dead.

He talked long ; the shadows lengthened,
the daylight waned, the dusk crept on
apace. At last he began to get alarmed at
her silence and motionlessness, and said —

"Diana, are you ill? Speak one word
to me."

Leave me," she said, without raising
her head ; "let me go, or leave me."

You consent ? " he cried, taking courage
from her languid voice.

I can do nothing," she said, slowly
raising herself. " I beg of you to leave
me and let me think."

Eupert went into the vestry, to which
Mr Jones had betaken himself some time

before this. They spoke together for a
while and then he came back.

We are going to the rectory ; we shall
be away some time. When we come back,
I hope you will have seen the uselessness
of refusing any longer."

She said nothing, and they left her
sitting there and went out. She heard
the door bang and the key turn in the
lock, then the groan of the churchyard
gate, then nothing but the river.

She drew a deep breath and stood up.
She trembled all over with the effort, but
she felt stronger when she had made it.
Broken and exhausted she was, but her
head was clear ; and it had occurred to her
that if she were alone she might find someway
of escaping from the church. She

thoroughly explored the building, only to
find every means of escape closed.

As she stood resting from her labours
and swallowing her disappointment, she
remembered the vestry, and with a new
hope in her heart she went there. She
tried the door — it was locked ; the window
was too little, even could she have removed
the small, leaded panes. In the
middle of the room stood a table covered
with a litter of things; she passed her
hands amongst them and touched a key.
She caught it up and tried to fit it into
the lock. It fitted, but was too strong
and stiff" — she could not turn it. She tried
again and again, tearing her skin and
bruising her flesh, and all in vain. She
stamped her foot, and clenched her hands

in rage and desperation. To be so near
escape and yet as far as ever from it.
She wound her handkerchief round the key
and then her skirt ; she made a mighty
effort, straining every muscle and nerve,
and the key moved and slipped back,
moved again and turned. The door
opened with the rebound of the lock, she
felt the fresh night wind blow on her face.
She was free.

CHAPTER XXXI.

DIANA AND SUSAN.

She drew a long breath and took a few
steps away from the church, as if to assure
herself that she was really outside
it, then she looked round her. It was
lighter here than in that dismal little
building, and she had no difficulty intaking
her bearings as far as she knew
them. There was the wood which covered
one side of the valley, and that gap
in the trees was the entrance to the
Nuns' Walk.* It was the only way out

of the valley of wliicli she knew, but she
felt she would rather run the risk of
losing her way than venture there. Her
cousin would return to the church that
way, and if she met him, it was not dark
enough to hide her from him. She decided
to climb out of the valley at another
point, and make her way to the
river. As long as she kept by its side,
she could not lose herself.

She lost no time in doing this. She
climbed the steep hill all in a breath, and
when she reached the top, found herself,
as she had hoped, some distance from the
wood. She had formed a kind of plan
while she was alone in the church, and
although she felt that it was rather desperate,
she could not tell wlj^t else to do.

She was determined not to go back to the
Abbey ; nothing should induce her to place
herself under the same roof with Rupert.
She had her purse in her pocket, and it
happened to have a considerable sum of
money in it. Her intention was to make
her way on foot to Bellingham, and take
the first train she could get to AVhitfield.
There she would stay with Amy Cartwright
until Mrs Burland should return home.
She knew that if she found the right road,
it would probably take her nearly all
night to walk to Bellingham, but she felt
she would rather pass the night out of
doors than go back to the Abbey.

She set out bravely in the direction
which she believed would bring her out
on the road along which she had driven

in the morning, though at a point much
lower down than the rectory. She would
thus get a good start of Rupert, and by
the time he had discovered her escape
and was returning home it would be
quite dark and she could easily elude him,
as the dogcart would give her notice of his
approach.

She walked for some time and then
stood still ; she was very tired, and a faint,
sick feeling was creeping over her. Joined
to the fact that she had gone through great
agitation, she had since her early breakfast
eaten nothing but a couple of small
sandwiches. She was exhausted from want
of food, her knees trembled, her head
swam.

She made an effort to collect her

strength and looked about her. It was
dark now, and she did not know where
she was. There was no sound. She did
not even hear the river, and she feared she
had wandered from instead of towards it.
The rain had begun, and beat in thick
blinding masses on her face. If she could
have remembered from which quarter the
wind had blown in the morning, she
would have had some clue as to the direction
in which she wished to go. But
though she strove hard to think she
could not; her thoughts went round and
round in a disordered whirl, and she could
concentrate them on nothing. She walked
on again for a while, and then the thought
came to her that she might be retracing
her steps, and would presently find her-vol.

III. K

self once more in Eupert's clutches. The
idea filled her with frantic horror and
loathing, and in her panic she almost
turned and walked back.

She strained her eyes through the mist
and darkness, but she could see nothing —
not the outline of a hill, or the glimmer
of a light from a house ; there was nota
sound — she was alone on the mountains.
She stood for some time, afraid to go
either back or forward, feeling her limbs
grow heavier and her head lighter, while
the thick fine rain soaked into her clothing
and chilled her, till she shook with
cold.

So she went on for some time, now
standing, now walking a few yards, until
she could stand no longer, and sank in a

heap on the ground in the shadow of a
stone wall.

She did not know how long she had
been there ; she had heard nothing, seen
nothing, when suddenly a man's voice
said close to her —

What is the matter ? Are you ill ? "

She had half risen at the sound of a
mans voice, but before he had finished
speaking, she had staggered to her feet,
saying—

"Mr Garthwaite! Oh, thank God!"

"Diana!" he cried. What are you
doing here ? Where have you been ? "

I have lost my way."

"You are nowhere near the road to
Garshill. What has happened ? ''

Give me your hand. Let me feel you

are really here, then I will tell you as well
as I can."

He took her hand and drew it within
his arm, saying —

You are wet through, and you tremble
like a leaf. You must not stand still.
Walk a little way, and as you feel inclined,
tell me what has happened."

But where are you taking me to, which
way are you going ? It's all dark ; I don't
know where I am."

Where do you wish to go to ? "

She put her hand to her head, she felt
dizzy and confused; but for his support
she must have fallen.

I don't know, I can't think," she
answered, in a faint, broken voice. "Not
to the Abbey — anywhere else."

"You are not fit to walk," he said;
but my house is close by — can you walk
a very little way? You will be safe
there, and can tell me just what you
please."

Oh, thank you," she said, wearily.
"Yes, let me go there."

They walked on a little way, slowly
and heavily, each step costing her a great
effort, and then she said —

"You always come when I am in
trouble. Why are you here ? Where
were you going ? "

I was going home, I had been to Held.
Some people are staying at the inn there,
and my cousin Susan supplies them with
farm stuff. To-day she was busy with
other things, and I saw it was going to

rain, so I took the basket from her. I
was on my way home, and was getting
through the stile, when I saw something
lying on the ground. It did not move.
1 touched it, and found it was human — a
woman, and I spoke. You answered.

She gave him an outline of what had
happened to herself She was tired and
weak, and there were long pauses between
her words, but she told enough to enable
him to understand what had taken place.
At the end she repeated that she would
not return to the Abbey.

You must not go back," he said, in
the authoritative tone he had often used
in speaking to her at Jacewo. *ein
another minute we shall be at my house,
and it is well, for I see you can walk no

further. My cousin will attend to you
and prepare you a room. Take no more
thought for anything until to - morrow,
when you will be rested and able to
think."

As he spoke they turned a corner and
heard the rush of the stream, the thunder
of the fall below them. John pushed
open a gate, and led her up a narrow
garden-path to the door.

Susan had been busy all day, and it
had been a great relief to her when John
offered to carry her basket of butter and
eggs and fowls to Keld. She watched
him go, and could not repress a smile at
the contrast between his unfarmerlike appearance
and the rusticity of the errand

on which he was bound. But it was a
proud and tender smile, and there was a
moisture in her eyes as she turned away,
murmuring —

"He is good. He's the manliest man
that ever lived."

Her work was done by six o'clock, and
she made up the fire and tidied the
kitchen for John's return. She drew his
chair to the fire, and put his slippers
before it, laid the table for supper, and
put on the porridge-pan. The plates and
basins were new and whole, and pretty to
look at. Then she drew up her own chair
and settled to her sewing.

All her thoughts ran on John — it was
inevitable, there was no one else to think
about; and she went over, for the thousandth

time, all the kindness lie had
shown her since he had come home, the

'' Little, nameless, unremembered acts
Of kindness and of love,"

which cost him nothing, coming spontaneously
as he drew breath, but which
were all the world to her.

From John her thoughts turned to
Diana Wentworth, this teasing creature,
of whom John had told her, but whom
she had never seen, and whom she would
rather have seen than any other woman
in the world, not excepting the Queen
herself.

Time passed. The fire glowed and the
clock ticked. Although the rain made no
sound, Susan knew it was raining, and she
wondered what made John so late : it did

not usually take him so long to go to Keld
and back.

Five minutes later lie heard his step
and his voice, and she laid down her work
to listen. To whom could he be speaking ?
Visitors never came to Becktop Farm, and
then she heard another voice reply, and
she rose from her chair with fast-beating
heart, and a curious thrill passing through
her. For it was a woman's voice, and she
knew whose it was.

John came in first, Diana following with
dazzled eyes, and a sudden feeling of shyness.
John looked stern yet happy.

Come in. Miss Went worth," he said ;
do not be afraid of soiling my cousin's
clean floor;" for he had seen how she

looked first at her own dripping garments
and then at the spotless flags at her feet.
I have already done it, and she will forgive
us. Susan," letting his eyes fall on
his cousin's wonder-struck face, "this is
Miss Wentworth, whom I have brought
in out of the rain ; can you find her some
dry things ? "

Many women would have resented such
an introduction ; but besides the fact that
John was emphatically " master in his own
house," it never entered Susan's head to
say him nay.

She came forward to the girl, who stood
near the door, as though only half certain of
her welcome and right to enter, and said —

Will you come to the fire. Miss Wentworth,
please ? "

"You are Mr Garthwaite's cousin?"
asked Diana, as she came up to the glowing
fire.

Yes' answered Susan, not shortly, but
because habit and nature had combined to
make her chary of speech.

"I know you quite well by name,"
holding out her hand. "Mr Garth waite
used often to speak of you. I am glad
to see you ; it is so good of you to take
me in."

Susan took the slender white hand in
her broad, brown one, and looking up
into Diana's face, thought —

"It's no wonder he loves you. I shall
never think of him again."

Aloud she said, as she knelt down and
felt Diana's skirts —

I am very glad to do anything for
you, Miss Wentworth. You must get off
these wet things. If you will come upstairs,
I will give you some dry ones — if
you will wear mine, that is. John, put
me a bit of fire in the back-kitchen, please,
and I will bring Miss Wentworth 's things
down here.

Despite her weariness, and the feeling
she had that all spirit had been washed
out of her, she could not repress a smile
on hearing what Susan commanded John
to do.

When Susan came down-stairs ten minutes
later, with Miss Wentworth's clothes
hanging over her arm, she found the
fire in the back-kitchen already burning
brightly, and John standing before the

fire in the living-room with an eager look
upon his face.

"Have you got her everything she
wants, Susan ? " he asked, as his cousin
began hanging the wet things on a clothes-maiden.


I've got her everything I could, John ;
I can do no more."

Of course you can't. Why do you
speak like that ? Are you angry about
anything ? "

No ; but, John, what made you bring
her?"

I will tell you afterwards, if she gives
me permission. She has had an unpleasant
experience at the Abbey, and will
not return there."

"But her mother is there. People don't

leave their mothers and all belonging to
them in that way," said Susan, slowly.

"It is not an ordinary case. I quite
approved of her decision, and asked her
to come here ; she will stay all night."

*but how did she get into the Keld
Road ? "Was she coming here ? "

Good heavens ! no. She had lost her
way. I cannot tell you now, you must
trust me till tomorrow."

And she will stay all night ? "

*' Of course; she could not go out again
now. "Will you give her your room ? You
can have mine ; and there's a mattress on
the floor of the little slip over the back-kitchen
that will do for me."

"I can have that. Do you keep your
room."

No ; arrange it as I say."

"Very well," replied Susan; and then
they heard Diana coming downstairs, and
said no more.

She came in smiling at herself, and very
quaintly did Susan's homely garments
hang upon her. John made her take his
own chair, and then said —

*' It is our supper time. Miss Wentworth.
Will you join us ? "

If you will wait a minute," said
Susan, " I will make Miss Wentworth some
tea."

Do you want tea ? " asked John.

"What are you going to have?" asked
Diana.

"Porridge and milk, and bread and
cheese."

I will have porridge, too, please ; I
like it."

They drew round the table and ate together.
Diana, in the peace and safety of
this farm-kitchen, felt very happy, though
in a dreamy, languorous way, which was the
result of all she had just gone through.
Susan watched her and John closely. She
could not help admiring Diana's ease in
these strange surroundings ; and John's
manner filled her with pride in him. He
was so deferential to Diana, yet in no way
humble ; he did the honours of the homely
fare with as much unconcern as if he were
presiding at a royal banquet. There were
no apologies. He had offered her his hospitality,
and she had accepted it ; there was
no room for apologies. When supper was

VOL. III. L

over and they drew round the fire again,
John said —

I have been thinking, Miss Wentworth,
that you might like your mother to know
you are in safety. I will walk over to the
Abbey and let her know where you are."

"You are very kind," said Diana, with
heightened colour. " I do not think anyone
but my cousin Gertrude will be really
anxious."

"Still you owe it to them to let them
know where you are."

"Yes, perhaps," she said, after an instant's
reflection. " If you will go, I shall
be very grateful to you ; but please see
my uncle, he is the right person, I think."

I will see Mr Meredith," he said, rising,
"and if you have any message I will deliver

it ; but first let me assure you that
my house and myself are at your command."

I have no message, except that on no
consideration will I go back to the Abbey.
If you will be so good as to — to let me
stay here to-night," she went on with some
hesitation, "I will not trouble you longer.
To-morrow I will go to a friend at Whitfield.
For the rest — please act and speak
as you think best, I know it will be right.
It is very good of you to go," she concluded
; " I wish it were not so wet."

He laughed at her concern, took his
coat and hat from the peg where they
hung and set ofi", leaving the two women
together.

Susan saw him go with terror. In spite
of Diana's cordial manner, which she instinctively

felt to be perfectly sincere, she
was overwhelmed by Miss Wentwortli's ,
whole personality. She wondered what
she could find to talk about, and she expected
to find the time of John's absence
very long indeed. She had taken up her
sewing again, and now sat with her eyes
bent upon it, racking her brains for something
to say. Diana saved her the trouble
by speaking first.

Please put down your sewing, Miss
Garthwaite. You make me feel so idle,
and yet I can do nothing."

"My name is not Garth waite," said
Susan, as she laid aside her work, feeling
that she would best please John by complying
with all Diana's wishes.

'' I beg your pardon," said Miss Wentworth;

"I fancied it must be, as you are
Mr Garth wait e's cousin."

"Not any more than yours is Meredith."

Diana started at the name of Meredith,
which might so easily have been hers
that afternoon ; and she went on rather
hurriedly —

"What is your name? What must I
call you ? "

My name is Morrison ; but call me
Susan — everybody does."

Susan Morrison," repeated Diana ; " it
is a pretty name. Tell me something
about your cousin, Susan. Have you lived
here always? Was he always what he is
now, so good and brave ? Do you know
that this is the third time he has come to
my help when I was in great need ? "

"He was always good," replied Susan,
rather sententiously ; " and I have lived
here nearly all my life."

*rare these his books?" asked Diana
again, as she stretched out her hand to
some book-shelves in the corner between
the fireplace and the window.

Susan answered in the affirmative, and
Diana rose and went to the shelves, where
she stood for some time looking at the
books, turning over the leaves, reading
passages to herself, and smiling from time
to time. While she was so engaged, Susan
looked at her often, and each time she
looked the beautiful face appeared more
beautiful, softer, more womanly. A little
sadness overspread it at last, which grew
and grew until the whole face was overshadowed,

and with a sigh Diana closed
the book in which she had been ferdinand
returned to her chair, where she satin
silence looking into the fire. Presently
she stretched herself upright and looked
across at Susan, saying —

'' Susan, it is good to be here ; don't you
think so ? "

"It is my home," replied Susan.

'' Yes ; but that is not the reason.
There is something in the atmosphere.
The people who live here spread something
of their spirit through the place, so
that when they are away they seem to be
still here. It feels like my home, too."

She was speaking in a low, dreamy tone,
more to herself than to Susan. Probably
she had forgotten Susan's presence, and

would have been startled if she had spoken.
But Susan had no intention of speaking —
she could not. Diana's last words had
sent a thrill through her heart which took
away all her breath, and opened her eyes
so that she said within herself —

** She loves him as well as he loves her.
It is only a question of time now, when
they understand one another."

CHAPTER XXXII.

JUDGMENT.

John reached the Abbey and asked for Mr
Meredith. He was taken to the library
and left there for some little time. He did
not sit down. He had often told himself
that no consideration would induce him
to enter this house ; yet here he was for
Diana's sake. The door opened and Guy
came in.

You cannot see Mr Meredith," he said,
abruptly. " Your business, whatever it is,
must be transacted with me."

"The business is not my own, and my
instructions were to see Mr Meredith. I
must ask you to let me carry them out at
once."

In seeing me, you virtually see my
father. I am his deputy in everything."

"My business is with himself, not his
deputy."

He gained his end. After a little more
parleying he was taken into Mr Meredith's
private room and there left alone with
him.

He related his story briefly, as he had
heard it from Diana. Mr Meredith heard
him in silence. When he had finished, he
said —

"My niece, Miss Wentworth, at your
house ! This is incredible. Being the bell.

if you please. " Grey," lie went on, when
his eldest son had been summoned and
had appeared, "do you hear this? Is this
story about Eupert true ? "

*' I believe it is, sir," answered Guy.
Rupert has just come in, and he says he
does not know where Diana is."

*' Would it be wise to send for him ? "
I think not ; he is rather excited."
This meant to the initiated that Rupert
had been drinking. Whether John understood
it in that sense cannot be known, for
his face betrayed nothing.

I will see him tomorrow, then ; he has
been guilty of the grossest misconduct ; at
present we must consider Diana's position.
I have just been told," with a glance at
John, "that she is at Becktop Farm."

Impossible ! " cried Guy. " My cousin
would not so far forget herself."

"If I had not been fortunate enough to
meet Miss Wentworth, and if my house
had not been close at hand, your son
would have had her life to answer for'
said John, addressing himself to Mr
Meredith.

Why did you not bring her here to
her own home and her natural protectors ? "
asked Mr Meredith. "You are probably
not aware that in taking her to your
house you are placing her in a very
unpleasant position."

Miss Wentworth was exhausted. It
would have been impossible for her to
come this distance. She is as safe in my
house as here, and she will remain my

guest as long as she chooses so to honour
me. Her message to you is, that on no
consideration will she return here."

Both Mr Meredith and Guy coloured
with anger. Diana, now grown to woman's
estate, and supposed to have attained her
full measure of reason, had repeated her
offence of taking the law into her own
hands, and herself deciding how far her
intercourse with her relatives should go.
They could scarcely believe what they
heard.

*' She has no doubt been worked upon
by some hostile influence," said Grey, at
last.

"Miss Wentworth's decision is her own,"
said John, quite undisturbed.

Then why are you here ? "

Simply to set you free from any
anxiety you might have felt on Miss
Wentworth's behalf."

Guy smiled sarcastically, as though
John's report could scarcely have allayed
their anxiety.

"Then you think," he said, "that we
shall be content to leave my cousin where
she is ? "

John smiled as he answered, " I imagine
Miss Wentworth herself will finally decide
the point."

"Guy, we must talk this over," said
Mr Meredith. "Your aunt must be con-suited."


Guy showed John into a room opening
out of the one in which they sat, and
Mrs Wentworth and also Gertrude joined

them. The restraint of John's presence
being removed, the subject was discussed
more freely than before. Mr Meredith
and Guy were bitterly angry, in a cold,
self-contained way. For the sake of the
family Diana must be rescued from her
present position, and the whole affair
hushed up as completely as possible.
But they retained the right to judge
her ; and the judgment was a harsh and
severe one. She should be received
amongst them again, and Eupert should
be sent from home ; but she had disgraced
herself and them, and could not
stand on the footing she once had done.
There must be no intercourse between her
and Dora. Something would certainly leak
out, and no doubt other parents would

object to her as an associate for their
daughters. Mrs Wentworth's anger was
much more violent. She reproached her
brother and nephew for unnecessary indulgence.
In her opinion Diana could not
expect to be forgiven. She was for cutting
her daughter adrift at once, without one
attempt to rescue her from the degradation
to which she had sunk. She must
be allowed to go to ruin in her own way.
For her own part, she never wished to
see or speak to her daughter again — she
washed her hands of her. Gertrude said
nothing — she sat and wept, silently and
bitterly. The family council was a
lengthy one, and the upshot of it was
the following letter, written by Guy, from
his father's dictation : —

*'My dear Diana, — It is with the
greatest pain I have heard of Eupert's
conduct towards you to - day. The fact
that he is my own son shall not tell in
his favour when I see him tomorrow.
At present we are concerned with yourself.
It is impossible to describe the feeling of
us all at the extraordinary step you have
taken. I cannot conceive what has induced
you to so entirely forget what is
due to both your relatives and yourself,
as to have placed yourself under the protection
of a man from whom — putting
aside the difference in position, which
makes all social intercourse absolutely
impossible — myself and my family have
never received anything but the grossest
insolence and disrespect. I am inexpres-

VOL. III. M

sibly shocked and grieved at your conduct
in this matter, and fear that the incident
which happened long ago, and which we
took for a mere bit of childish defiance,
did really indicate your true character.
Nevertheless, I am prepared, under certain
conditions, to overlook even this last deplorable
act. I send this letter by Guy,
who is prepared to bring you home. If
you return with him, and give me your
solemn word of honour to entirely drop
the acquaintance it has been your extraordinary
caprice to cultivate with this
man, never under any circumstances to
speak to or hold any intercourse with
him, you shall be received here again, not
as if nothing had happened — that could not
be — but as one towards whom we have had

much to forgive. If — which, however, I can
scarcely believe — you reject this offer, or if
you persist in your reckless purpose of not
returning here to-night, all must be at an
end between us ; you can no longer be
considered a member of this family, nor
can you ever enter this house again. The
decision you have to make is a very
serious one, affecting your whole future.
Consider well before you make it."

This letter was signed by both Mrs
Wentworth and Mr Meredith, and then
John was summoned again, and that part
of the letter relating to the arrangement
for bringing Diana home communicated
to him.

Before he could speak, Gertrude came

forward. Up to this point awe of her
father and brother had kept her silent,
now she spoke.

*papas' she said, in a voice which
trembled a little, "do not think I wish
to dispute your opinion, but let me take
that letter and go for Diana instead of

"Gertrude, my love," cried Mrs Wentworth,
"think what you are saying."

John turned quickly at the name. He
remembered that Diana had said if any one
were anxious about her it would be her
cousin Gertrude. He looked at her, and
saw a fair woman with a face full of a
beautiful yearning and affection. Tears
still hung on her eyelashes, the eyes
themselves were sorrowful and heavy.

She did not seem to see him — she looked
appealingly from her father to her brother.
He had been going to speak, refusing
Guy's services, and urging his own readiness
to brins Diana home if she decided
to come. Now he was silent, and hoped
in his heart that Gertrude would be
allowed to bring the letter. Her words
were followed by a short pause, then Mr
Meredith said —

Impossible, my dear ; let Guy go."
And Guy said — " It is kind of you to
offer to undertake this disagreeable affair,
Gertrude, but it is not a woman's work."

"It is," cried Gertrude; "it is just a
woman's work. Diana will never yield
to Guy, he will only harden her. That
letter is just, but it is very severe. Diana

will defy you when she has read it ; there
is nothing to soften her in it. Let me go.
I know her better than any of you ; she is
fonder of me ; she will listen to me when
she will listen to no one else. We cannot
let her go without one effort. If aunty
can cast off her own child, I cannot castoff
my cousin. She has done wrong, very
wrong ; but if any one can prevail with
her it is I. Let me go.

She had forgotten John, and the others
did not, even at her condemnation of her
aunt, remind her of his presence. Perhaps
they were all realising for the first time
that there are ways and ways of doing
everything — that there was an element of
tragedy in this business which had hitherto
escaped them; that outraged family pride

was not the only feeling in the world
which must be respected. John stood
aloof. Gertrude commanded his deepest
reverence. He was the last to wish to
intrude upon such sorrow.

And suppose you fail ? " said her
father, after a long silence.

Then I fail, but at least I shall have
done my best ; and even if I fail, I must
say good-bye to her."

It seemed tacitly arranged that she
should go, and John now came forward
and said —

"I will walk across the valley — I
shall be home as soon as Miss Meredith
driving round by the road, unless your
coachman is uncertain about the way,
then I could "

Gertrude shrank away from him, in a
way which no one could fail to see.

"Oh no," she said, hastily; ''I must be
alone."

I should have respected your solitude,
Miss Meredith," he said, gravely ; " I could
have sat with the coachman."

Assuredly he had never thought the day
would come when he would voluntarily
offer to drive on the box of a Meredith
carriage by the side of a Meredith
coachman.

"Thank you," she said, with equal
gravity; "I think he knows the way."

Then she turned to her brother, saying —

"Please order the single brougham forme,
Guy, and I will go and get ready."

"My dear Gertrude," said her aunt,

arresting her on her way to the door,
do stop and think what you are doing.
You are going on a wild-goose chase to
heaven knows what dreadful place. You
have heard your father's letter, in which
he offers to treat Diana far more generously
than she deserves. I assure you
I hesitated before signing my name to
anything so indulgent. I am convinced
you will do no good. If I wash my hands
of her, surely you may do the same.
She has behaved with shameful deceit and
ingratitude to us all, and in spite of repeated
warning, persists in rushing headlong
on her ruin. She deserves the worst
which can befall her."

John saw the shudder which shook
Gertrude's figure, but she only said —

I cannot argue with you, aunty. I
want to get off as quickly as possible ;
please do not delay me."

As soon as she had left the room John
also went. No one spoke to him, and
he went out into the large hall and found
it empty. He rang a bell, for he had
still a purpose to fulfil, and to the servant
who answered it he said —

Where is Mr Rupert Meredith."

In the billiard - room, sir," answered
the man, who had only been in the house
a week, and was not at home in local
distinctions.

Take me to him quickly," said John ;
and they turned down a passage and
presently stopped at a door.

What name, sir ? " asked the footman.

'never mind the name; stand aside
and let me go in."

The man obeyed. John entered the
room and shut the door after him.

Eupert was alone, lounging on a couch,
with a cigar in his mouth. He had not
heard the door open ; suddenly looking
up, he saw John. He sprang to his feet
with an oath —

'* What do you want ? " he asked.

I want to reckon with you."

"Do you? And how did you get inhere,
I should like to know ? "

I had business here, which we will
discuss later. At present I want to know
what you have done with Mary Metcalfee
? "

She's Mary Metcalfe still."

So I heard. Thanks to you."

You didn't think I should find
her a husband amongst my friends, I
suppose ? "

"You promised to marry her yourself."


'' Did I ? Sometimes people change
their minds."

When they change their minds, so as
to cause suffering to other people, they
have to be punished. Thirteen years ago
you stole Mary Metcalfe from me. I was
not at hand to punish you then, so I
am going to do it now."

Indeed ! " said Eupert, in a voice
which was almost choked with passion.
"How?"

This way," said John, giving him a

blow in the chest which sent him staggering
backwards.

He sprang erect with an oath and returned
the blow, and for five minutes
both men were too busy to speak. Then
Eupert rose scowling from the floor and
stood leaning heavily against the billiard-table.


I'll give you another caution," said
John. *' I know all about your behaviour
to Miss Wentworth to - day. It is not
likely, as things have turned out, that
you will ever see her again, but if you
ever should, and should ever dare to
speak to her, you will have to reckon
with me sooner or later. I will go
further. If you ever in my hearing so
much as mention Miss Wentworth's name.

I will give you the best horsewhipping
you ever had in your life."

"Keep your threats to yourself," said
Eupert, sulkily. " I am not going to be
dictated to by you. Since you know
so much, perhaps you know where my
cousin is. I am anxious about her."

"And you deserve to be left in your
anxiety. She is quite safe ; she is at my
house."

At your house ! " repeated Eupert as
if stupefied; and then a light broke in
upon him, and he said —

'then it was for you she refused me?
You are at the bottom of it all ! Good
Lord, what these women are ! Diana,
who always behaved as if she thought
an emperor not fit to hold her foot when

she mounted her horse. Who would have
thought it ? And at your house now !
Are you going to serve me as I served
you ? In this case, I grant you, the play
is somewhat better worth the candle."

Another blow sent him reeling back,
and there followed a terrible scene of
passionate recrimination. Eupert could
not but see that if John's defence of
Mary Metcalfe had been the accomplishment
of a long unfulfilled duty, his defence
of Diana was prompted by very
different feelings. It did not last long.
A quarter of an hour after John had gone
into the billiard - room, he had left the
house, and was standing outside in the
mist and rain.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

PARTING.

Gertrude and John reached the farm at
the same moment. Diana and Susan
sitting within heard the sound of wheels,
and Diana rose from her chair with a pale
face, and eyes which seemed as if they
would pierce the darkness, saying, in a low
voice —

*they have sent for me."

Susan also rose expectant, and they
waited in silence till the door opened to
admit Gertrude, followed closely by John.

Susan stared in amazement as Gertrude
came forward. She lead never in her
life seen anything like this woman with
the beautiful sad face, blue eyes and
golden hair, in a dress of soft, light,
clinging silk, and with jewels on her neck
and arms. She had loosened her hold of
the heavy wrap she wore, and it was
slipping from her shoulders. John picked
it up from the floor and put it on the
table without her having noticed that it
was gone. She saw neither John nor
Susan ; she came straight up to Diana
with hands outstretched, saying in a low,
thrilling voice —

"0 Diana! I have got to you at
last."

John made a sign to his cousin to come

VOL. III. N

out of the room with him, and as she went
she cast a last look at the two women
standing there. Gertrude had thrown her
arms round her cousin, and had hidden
her face on her shoulder ; her figure shook
with sobs. Diana stood upright, very
pale and with dry eyes, looking down on
Gertrude, her fingers touching her cousin's
hair with a little caressing movement,
but with a look on her face which, in
spite of its tender sadness, told John that
Gertrude had come in vain. They went
into the back-kitchen and shut the door.
Diana's clothes still hung before the fire,
which was growing low. Susan began
feeling them and moving them about, and
there were tears in both eyes and voice
as she said —

"Eh, John, but they are fond o' one
another."

Yes," he answered ; " Miss Meredith is
a very noble woman. I do not see how
she can be spared this sorrow, but I wish,
with all my heart, I had not helped to
bring it to her."

They said no more ; John had no wish
to talk. He stood with his back to the
fire, looking down on to the ground, and
Susan sat on the fender, her head on her
hand, feeling that she was learning many
new things which had never hitherto
entered her imagination. They could not
hear what the two women within were
saying ; only the lowest murmur of voices
reached their ears, sometimes not even that.

It was Diana who spoke first. Had

any one but Gertrude come to her she
would have left it to them to explain
their errand, would probably have scarcely
opened her lips in reply to their questions.
But Gertrude was different, and
as soon as her fit of sobbing was over,
Diana asked her very gently —

Why have you come, Gertrude ? to say
good-bye ? " *

Gertrude drew herself upright and dried
her eyes. This was what she had feared,
but what she had hoped to avert. She
must brace herself to the contest, and she
began by taking out her father's letter.
She had promised him at the last moment
that she would give this letter to Diana
and let her read it before trying any
persuasion of her own. This course was

against her own inclinations, but it was
only on that condition she had been allowed
to come. So in reply to Diana's
question she only said —

I hope not, dear. I hope to take you
home with me. That is what I have come
for. I have brought a letter from papa,
which I promised to give you before I
spoke myself."

She put the letter into Diana's hands,
and, quite unable to put herself into her
cousin's place, feeling only that this John
Garthwaite was a disturber of the peace,
an intolerable intruder into the privacy
of their family life, she fixed her eyes
almost hungrily on Diana's face as she
read, until at last she withdrew them from
fear of what she looked upon.

Diana read quickly, — her eyes skimmed
the paper in a few seconds ; but what
she read, though she read it but that
once, was burned into her brain so that
she never forgot it. Her face flushed
deeply and then grew very, very white,
so white that Gertrude feared she was
going to faint : but there was no suggestion
of fainting in that upright, defiant
figure, those blazing eyes, the hand
clenched so tightly, it seemed as though
the fingers would never relax, or in
the gesture with which, the letter once
read, it was crumpled up and flung
into the glowing coals. Gertrude watched
her in terror, too terrified to speak.
Diana drew two or three long breaths
before she spoke, then she said, in a

tone which Gertrude had never heard
before —

"They have made it impossible for me
to go back. How dared you bring that
letter ? "

** Diana ! " said Gertrude, passionately.

How dared you bring it ? " repeated
her cousin in the same low, breathless
voice. " If you did not know what was
in it, it was folly ; and if you did, it was
an insult, an outrage which I can never
forgive."

Diana ! " said Gertrude again.

Do not speak to me ; you have lost
all right. You have connived at that,
and mamma too, — my own mother to put
her name to a thing like that. I knew
she did not love me : I had ceased to

expect it ; but that ! You are mad, all
of you. You are so eaten up with pride
and ignorance and prejudice, you are like
machines, and you think every one else
is the same. You think there is no human
nature left in the world. But there is.
The whole world is against you in these
follies, and I am of the world. You make
crime into a virtue, and a virtue into a
crime. You have no natural feeling left.
But I am not of you. I do not belong
to you ; my name is not the same as yours,
and I will go my own way. You throw
me off if I do not conform to your rules,
which are dead, senseless things, without
a shadow of reason or justice in them.
I am glad, I am proud to be thrown off.
I will not wear your fetters, I will be free.

I will give my love to the man to whom
it naturally belongs."

She paused for breath. Her words had
come rapidly, involuntarily, as she walked
up and down the room, her head thrown
back, her face radiant with scorn and the
light of her love for John. She had exhausted
herself in her ecstasy ; now she
stopped, trembling from head to foot, forced
to grasp a chair for support. Gertrude
watched her, fascinated, horrified, with a
sick foreboding of what would be the climax
of it all. When it came she went quickly
to her cousin's side and seized her arm.

*' You do not mean that," she said.
You are only saying it in anger. You do
not really mean that you love this man,
Diana?"

*'Yes/' said Diana, turning slowly to
her, all excitement gone, nothing but
serious resolve in her voice and manner ;
*'I mean it. I have said it. I have told
no one else — not he himself knows it. I
did not know it myself once, but I know
it now, and I will abide by it."

"You will marry him if he asks you?"
demanded Gertrude, in growing horror.

No," said Diana, in a low voice. " I
could not; I should have to refuse."

'* Ah, thank God ! " cried Gertrude ;
you may be saved yet, Diana," she
went on in growing excitement. "You
do not know what you are saying, — you
are infatuated. In some way you are
under this man's influence, and as long
as you stay here you will feel like this ;

but come home with me to your own
quiet room — there you will be in peace,
and you will think differently. Now
you are tired and excited ; after a goodnight's
rest you will be yourself again.
You will see this cannot be — that you
would be committing suicide. Come,
Diana, the carriage is outside ; we can
be home in half an hour."

She was trembling all over in excitement
and fear, and she took Diana's hand and
tried to draw her to the door ; but Diana
resisted. Quietly and gently, but with
irresistible force, she drew her hand away,
saying —

"I cannot come, Gertrude; you must
go alone. That letter has meade it impossible.
Even if you could have persuaded

me, that letter shows me how
the others feel. I can never see them
again. I have made my choice. You
think that at the Abbey I should feel
differently ; it was at the Abbey that I
knew I loved Mr Garth waite."

"0 Diana!" cried her cousin, with the
tears streaming down her cheeks, *' I
cannot leave you like this. You see what
papa says : he means it, and I must obey
him. If I leave you now, I may never
see you again ; and where will you go ?
You do not think of staying here?"

No," said Diana, with a half smile,
*' I shall not stay here. To-morrow morning
early I shall go away. I have friends ;
I shall go to them. Do not stop longer.
It is late, and you have a long drive home.

Nothing you could say would move me.
I have made my choice, and I want to
be alone ; I am very tired. I have told
you what I have confessed to no one else,
and you will respect my confidence, I
know ; but what I have told you is the
truth, and I cannot change."

*^ I would give the world if you would
come home with me."

She shook her head. "Go now," she
said ; " they will be angry with you for
staying so long. Say good-bye, Gertrude,
and it must be a long one ; we may never
meet again."

They stood for a long time, hand locked
in hand, their eyes meeting in a long look
of parting. Gertrude's still swam in tears,
Diana's where dry; but she was pale to

the lips, and did indeed look weary to
exhaustion. Their lips met in a long,
clinging kiss, and then Gertrude went.

Those in the room behind heard the
outer door open and shut and the cessation
of the murmur of conversation ; but fifteen
minutes passed before Diana opened the
inner door and addressed them —

"My cousin has gone," she said, "and if
you will allow me, I too will go up-stairs.
I fear I have given you both a great deal
of trouble."

Her face was in the shadow — neither
saw it ; and having spoken, she turned
and went up-stairs alone and in silence.

CHAPTEE XXXIV.

LEAVING Marshall.

They met the next morning at breakfast.
Diana wore her own gown ; but John
had a quick eye for trifles where she was
concerned, and he saw that the little white
frill round her neck was Susan's, and so
was the handkerchief she drew from her
pocket. Diana was very silent. From
time to time she spoke and even smiled,
but it was evident that she was making
a great effort for the sake of those whose
guest she was. Her interview with Gertrude

the previous night had tired her
terribly. It had been easy to resist her
uncle's letter ; but Gertrude's pleading
had shaken her sorely, and that ten
minutes' agony she had gone through
after parting with her cousin would leave
its mark upon her through life. She
had slept badly too, and still felt weary
and languid. She thought she had reached
her limit of endurance, but this very day
was to prove her mistaken.

After breakfast, John lingered at the
fire talking to Diana, never taking his
eyes off her. Susan watched them, thinking—


Eh, how she loves him, and he never
sees it ! Men are blind, that they are.
He'll find it out before long, though, and

there will be two people in the world
who have got what they want, and what
they deserve too. For, after all, she's
given up something for him."

I have been wondering, Mr Garth-waite,"
said Diana, " if it would be convenient
to you to take me to the station
to-day."

He did not say the words which were
at his tongue's end, only —

It will always be convenient to me
to do whatever you wish."

You are very kind. I want to goto
Whitfield, to a friend I have there, a
]airs Cartwright — her husband is a clergyman,
— and I will stay with her until Mrs
Burland returns to London. Don't you
think that will be the best ? "

VOL. III.

Her appeal to his judgment made him
smile, and he said —

Whatever you wish will be best ; but
this journey is unforeseen. Have you
money enough ? "

Thank you. As it happens, I am quite
safe on that head."

What about your possessions ? "

I can arrange about them later. What
time are the trains from Garshill to Bellingham
? "

He saw that she was nervous and
anxious to be gone ; and, much though
he longed to keep her, he got Bradshaw
and arranged her journey right through
to Whitfield for her.

"We must leave in an hour," he said.
That is, if you can walk."

"The walk will do me good," she answered.


The hour passed quickly, and the
moment came for saying good - bye to
Susan. Diana held her hand and thanked
her for her kindness ; then, as if moved
by a sudden impulse, she stooped and
kissed Susan's cheek, and Susan returned
the kiss. Perhaps Diana had read Susan's
secret, as Susan had read hers.

She set out with John along the rugged
mountain-path, winding through the deep
valley, with the stream rushing at the
bottom. It was an exquisite morning
again, gem-like in the sparkling brilliance
of sun, and hoar - frost, and dewdrops.
The hearts of both were full to overflowing
of thoughts that lay too deep for

words ; yet they did talk from time to
time, and Diana grudged each step that
took them nearer to the station.

She shrank from the thought of entering
the station, where she might meet
people she knew, who would greet her
and ask for an explanation of this early
journey without luggage, or even a servant
to speed her on her way. It would
not occur to any one that John could be
her companion. It was to prevent such
a meeting that she had chosen the earliest
available train, and her step became
quicker as they went through the little
town and down the steep hill to the
station.

They were only just in time, and there
was no one she knew on the platform.

John put her into an empty carriage,
and then went to the booking-office. He
came back and seated himself opposite
to her, shutting the door behind him.

I will go with you to Bellingham''
he said. " You will have an hour to
wait there, and I have something to ask

you."

Instinctively she knew what that something
was, and her heart failed her. Such
a conversation was, she knew, impossible
in the train, which would stop at every
station between Garshill and Bellingham,
and at any station they might be interrupted;
but that short railway ride of
forty minutes seemed to her so many
hours.

It was still early when they reached

Bellingham, and there were few people
about. She was tired, yet restless, and
when John asked if she would like to
sit down, she said she would rather walk,
and for a time they paced ups and down
the platform in silence.

"You will let us know that you get
safely to your journey's end?" said John.

I will write tomorrow," she answered.

"I said I wanted to ask you something,"
he began abruptly after another
pause. *' It is this. Will you marry
me, Diana?"

She did not answer for a moment. She
was looking straight before her. Bellingham
station was not ; waiting-rooms, booking
offices, porters and newspaper-boys were
gone ; she saw not them, but her mother's

drawing - room at Whitfield ; the man
standing close to her was not John Garth-waite,
and words long ago spoken by herself
were still sounding in her ears : " I
promise faithfully to engage myself to no
man until you and I have met again."

The intense bitterness of the recollection
stung her into consciousness again,
and she spoke quickly, almost breathlessly.


"I cannot; you should not ask me."

I must ask you," he answered. " I
began to ask you long ago, and was interrupted
before I had finished. I know
that if I had finished you would have
refused me then. Is it not so ? "

"Yes; I should have said no, and I
must say it again now."

But why ? " lie persisted, not heeding
her white face and averted eyes. "You
cannot doubt my love for you."

She said nothing, and he asked again —

"Do you doubt it, Diana? Say yes or
no, I beg of you."

"No, I do not doubt it," she answered,
almost in a whisper.

I offer you all I have," he went on :
the strong and enduring love of a man
who is not wont to change. Is it not
enough ? What more would you have ? "

"Nothing. It is enough and more
than enough, but I cannot have it."

Cannot have it ! " he cried, catching
at her words. "You do not say you
will not."

She said nothing, and he went on —

*when I asked you before, I think
you woukl have said, 'I will not have

it.' "

"Yes," she answered, almost in a whisper;
"I should have said so then."

But now, now ? " he pressed eagerly.
"If it is not that you will not, why do
you still refuse ? "

I have told you that I cannot. Why
do you persist ? why will you torture me
like this?"

"Torture you!" he echoed. "Torture
is a strong word. Tell me one thing,
Diana — not. Will you marry me ? but. Do
you love me ? "

She could not dissemble ; she was weary,
and sad, and heart-sick. She had thrown
off all home ties ; she was going to throw

herself on the mercy of a friend. He was
the only being in the world who seemed
secure and firm. At another time she
might have denied the truth, now she
could not, and she answered simply —

With all my heart and strength."

They were sitting down now — her force
had given out ; she felt weak and shaken
in mind and body — the feeling of relief
which followed her last words was almost
too much for her.

And now," was John's next question,
"what impediment is there to our
marriage ? "

This was the question which Diana dreaded
most of all. She felt she would rather
do or suffer anything than tell John of her
promise to Tom ; and she knew perfectly

well, at the same time, that if he made up
his mind to know her real reason, she
would in the end tell it him. To his question,
therefore, she gave no answer at all.
John waited a moment, and then spoke
again.

"I am at a loss to imagine what impediment
can exist, except of your own
making."

"It is of my own making," she said,
rather bitterly ; " but it is none the less
real for that."

"But perhaps I could help you to
remove it ? "

No ; no one can help me. I have
acted very foolishly, and I am punished
for my folly. I believe it generally is so."

He sat by her side, bending forward a

little, his eyes fixed upon the ground,
a frown on his brow. He seemed to be
making up his mind to something, and
after a moment he spoke.

I am going to put the whole situation
before you," he said. " I don't want to
frighten you, but I do want you to understand
that our position is a sufficiently
serious one. I love you, I have loved you
for a very long time, and during nearly the
whole of that time it has been my dearest
wish that you should some day be my wife.
You have just told me that you have some
of that same feeling for me, and the knowledge
that it is so has made the world seem
different to me. For a long time I never
dared to think that you cared for me at all,
and only lately have I let myself think of

it as at all probable. Sometimes I felt it
almost a certainty, and again it seemed
nothing but a fantastic dream. Even now
you say our marriage is impossible, for
some reason which you refuse to tell me.
I cannot force you to tell me, but I can
assure you of this. This is probably our
last chance of understanding one another.
My time is up. I have a letter to-day telling
me that I must start in a week. The
day after tomorrow I go to London. I
may be gone by the time you get there ;
even should we be there at the same time,
it may be that, with the best will in the
world, I shall not be able to see you. I
shall have much to do, and my time will
be short. I shall be away for some years
four or five at least. It is impossible to

foresee what might happen to either of us
during that time, and it is equally impossible
to me to leave you without having
come to a clearer understanding than this.
To know I have your love is an infinite
blessing, but I want more than that — I
want yourself. I had intended, if you had
not brought forward this obstacle, to have
asked you to marry me at once, and sail
with me to Brazil, and I still hope to do so.
We have known one another long enough
to dispense with the usual ^ engagement.' I
believe I have your full confidence, as you
most assuredly have mine ; and I most
earnestly beg of you to tell me why, in
your opinion, we cannot be married. It
is not a time for hesitation and reserve.
If we are not quite frank now, we may lose

for ever the chance of being all in all
to one another. Do not refuse me this ;
you will be wronging both yourself and
me."

She was deeply moved; he could not
doubt it. His appeal had gone straight
to her heart. He had spoken in the tone
which she never could resist ; and she did
not resist it now. Flinging off all hesitation,
all shrinking, she answered fully and
truly as he asked her.

"Before I left Whitfield," she began,
speaking rather quickly, " a friend, a man
I had known ever since I was a child,
asked me to marry him. I refused. I did
not care for him in that way, and never
could ; but I was sorry for him, and I cared
for no one else. I promised him that I

would engage myself to no one else until
we had met again, and then lie might ask
me again. I never have seen him since,"
she concluded.

But it was not a serious promise ? "
** Perfectly serious. I promised him
faithfully on my word of honour. We
never thought things would turn out as
they have done. I expected that in a
year I should see him again, and that,
when I had told him I had not changed,
I should be free again. I never expected
to meet any one else. It seems a very
wild thing now, but it did not then."
Do you think you are bound by it ? "
Oh yes ; I could not break it. He is
waiting there expecting to see me and ask
me again some day. I could not break my

word. I see now how foolish I was to give
any such promise, when I knew I should
never care for him ; but I must abide by
it. He said he should spend all his time
working for me — he is a doctor, — and then,
if I did consent, we could be married at
once. I must treat him with good faith,
as he has treated me."

But suppose he has broken faith with
you ? " hazarded John, boldly.

She shook her head.

I thought of that, and hoped he would.
I told him he was free to change ; and he
promised, if he ever did that, he would
write and tell me. He never has written."

Cannot you write to him," urged John,
and say you wish to be free ? "

I don't know where he is ; he has not

VOL. Il P

written for montis, and in this last letter
he said he was thinking of leaving Whitfield,
as he had heard of a better opening
elsewhere."

*but if he is a doctor, his name and
address will be in a directory."

'' I have looked. There are several
Thomas Sherlock, three of them in Whitfield.
I cannot write to them all, and ask
if they are still inclined to marry me."

"It is undoubtedly a complication," he
said, frowning ; " and I suppose since this
young fellow has kept* his side of the bargain,
you must keep yours. I cannot but
believe the difficulty will be smoothed
away ; I cannot imagine we are to be
separated for ever by such a thing as this.
In fact, we will not be ; it is absurd, monstrous.

By all the laws of reason and commonsense,
you are free. You were free
when you gave your heart to me ; the promise
was binding only so long as you cared
for no one more than for this Sherlock.
You must see that I am right, Diana."

"Perhaps you are, I daresay you are,"
she answered ; " and if you take me
forcibly, I do not know if I can resist you.
But you must grant me one thing. I am
going to Whitfield ; tomorrow, to-day perhaps,
I can see Tom, and be free in word
as well as in spirit. Let me do that ; my
conscience will be clearer."

I don't know, I don't know," he answered.
"That seems reasonable enough,
and yet I shrink from it. I have a horror
of this whole journey. The time is so short,

I cannot bear to lose you out of my sight.
Any delay, the slightest, might be fatal.
Suppose this man is not at home, and you
cannot see him ? "

'she is sure to be at home; doctors
always are."

Will you promise to write to me the
instant you have seen him ? Then, if it
be possible, I will come down to you. If
I cannot do that, we must get married in
London ; you will come up to me for that?"

She put her hand in his ; she could not
speak ; and she turned away her face that
he might not see how moved she was. She
heard him say —

'' If there should be any hitch, any delay,
I shall come and claim you in despite of
this absurd promise. You will write tonight

or tomorrow, according as you see
this individual ; in any case I shall hear
from you before I go to London the day
after tomorrow. If I do not hear "

"You will hear."

"Yes, yes; I will not suppose you could
fail me. But remember, Diana, that every
moment is precious now. The delay of a
single post might ruin everything and
separate us for ever ; bear that in mind.
I wish there was more time. If I could,
I would give up this Brazilian affair, for
your sake ; but I cannot. For one thing,
I have no money ; and for another, I could
not honourably do it. I know I am asking
you to do more than women usually do at
such times. In all probability you will
have to come to me, not I to you ; you

will be married from my hotel, not from
your own home. Many a woman would
refuse, would rather let me go without her ;
but I can rely on you. It is a hateful position
for you, and it is my fault you are in
it. All my future life shall go to show you
that I do not undervalue the sacrifice you
are making for me. And remember, above
all things, if there is any difficulty with
this estimable young surgeon, you have
only to let me know, and I will carry you
off from under his very eyes. I feel I am
weak in yielding to you in this matter ;
but you have thrown a spell over me, and
at present I can only obey you. But, God
knows, I never thought my marriage would
be dependent on the consent of another
man."

"Ah," she said, " your pride is hurt, but
it is not his consent."

Well, call it what you will, I do not
like it, and only you could reconcile me toit.
God bless you, Diana ! you are most
precious to me. I shall wait impatiently
for your letter."

When you get home, tell Susan. She
knows nothing of why I came to you ; she
must have wondered."

I will tell her everything. I wish you
had not this long journey to take. I think
I will go with you, and see you safe to Mrs
Cartwright's house."

No, no," she said, " I could not bear
it ; let me go alone. We shall have to
part; I would rather part here."

"But I should like to interview this

precious Sherlock. I should like to tell
him what I think of him."

*' I shall see him soon enough," she said,
smiling faintly, " and I will send you word.
Is that my train, I wonder ? "

It was. The hour had gone. Very
grudgingly did John let her go, only yielding
to her earnest and repeated assurances
that she was stronger than she looked, and
that the journey would do her rather good
than harm.

CHAPTER XXXV.

FREEDOM.

Whitfield again, after nearly a year spent
in the clear skies of Jacewo, the haunting
beauty of Yorkshire. Diana felt tired and
depressed as she drew nearer and nearer
to the great city, its murky sky, its
crowded streets. Despite the understanding
arrived at between herself and John,
she felt neither happy nor hopeful. A
foreboding of disaster hung over her ; she
felt sick at heart. She had no sense of
having reached the end of her journey ;

she felt no relief when the cab drew up
before Mrs Cartwright's neat dwelling.
She paid and dismissed the cabman, and
then mounted the steps and rang the
bell. Mrs Cartwright was at home, and
Diana was taken into a room, which was
evidently a drawing-room, and which appeared
to have been furnished chiefly with
wedding presents. It was a chill, foggy
day, and there was no fire in the room,
it probably was not used every day.
Diana, chilled with her journey, and a
little faint for want of food, — it was now
early afternoon, and she had eaten nothing
since her very early breakfast at Becktop
Farm, — shivered as she sat waiting for
Amy to come in. She now realised
that she had never felt so tired or so

incapable of making any effort in lier
life.

She had sent up her name, but ten
minutes passed before Amy appeared. She
came in, looking just the same as ever ;
holding herself a little stiffly, rubbing
her hands nervously one over the other.
She uttered no word of welcome, only
held out her hand, and said —

Diana ! how do you do ? I did not
know you were in Whitfield, and," with
a little laugh, half nervous, half disagreeable,
" I really should not have expected
you to call. I thought you had quite
forgotten me, and I really have a right
to feel hurt ; for you never wrote, or
sent me any word of congratulation, or
anything, and I wrote three times. Mr

Cartwright agrees with me that you behaved
in a very extraordinary and unfriendly
manner."

She ended this harangue with a little
cough behind her hand, and Diana sat
staring at her in silence, and wondering
what was the meaning of this outbreak.
She had realised at last that she felt ill,
very ill ; her head ached, her limbs were
heavy, she felt as if everything she saw
were an immense way off; Amy's voice
seemed to reach her out of the far distance,
and she could not tell in the very least
what she was talking about.

"What do you mean, Amy?" she asked.
I don't understand. I have only just
come to Whitfield. I have come straight
here, and I am tired."

The green Venetian blinds were drawn
half-way down ; on this dim, foggy day,
the little room, across the windows of
which the white lace curtains were closely
drawn, was almost dark ; hence probably
the reason why Amy did not perceive
the almost deathly pallor of Diana's face.
She answered her question at once.

I mean that I am very much disappointed
in you, Diana. After our friendship
here, it seemed very hard that the
first time you went away for any length
of time, you should cease to care for me.
I wrote to you when Mr Cartwright got
his church here, and you never answered
my letter. I wrote again, telling you
when I was going to be married, and you
never answered that letter. I sent you

wedding cards, and you never acknowledged
them. I was very sorry and very
angry. I can never feel the same towards
you again. I made up my mind we had
better never meet again."

Diana had risen, but she grasped the
table firmly for support. She understood
it all now ; and she was silent, she could
say nothing. Amy had a right to feel
hurt, and nothing she could say, no explanation
she could give, would put things
right. Added to this, she could think
of nothing to say, and she was only half
conscious of her words, as she said —

I see you are right ; I have been very
careless, and have done very wrong. I
cannot expect you to forgive me; I will
go away again."

I am glad you see you were wrong,"
said Amy ; "you know neglect is just the
thing I can't forgive. But sit a little
longer, you have not told me yet how
it is you are in Whitfield."

"I have left them at home. I have
quarrelled with them all. I am on my
way to London, to my friend Mrs Burland ;
but she will not be at home for a few
days yet, and I came to ask you to let
me stay with you so long. I see now
I was wrong ; I could not of course expect
you to do so after my neglect of you."

By this time it was only by making
a very great effort that she could speak
at all, and in order to make that effort
she had to call up all her self-command,
so that her last words were spoken ina

tone which was almost forbidding in
its utter lack of emotion.

Amy coughed again.

*' Oh, indeed, I am sorry ! it is very
awkward. I am sorry you have left Mrs
Wentworth ; it is not quite nice you know.
Mr Cartwright always says that in disputes
between parents and children, the
parents are always right. I think, if I
were you, I would go back to Mrs Wentworth.
I would rather not do anything
to displease her, and I don't think Mr
Cartwright would like it either."

Almost blindly Diana made her way out
of the room, followed by Amy uttering
little trite moralists, which the other
never heard. She got to the front door,
and there she had a difficulty with the

latch, she turned it one way and the other
without avail. She felt a strange faintness
creeping over her, and she set her
teeth almost savagely in her determination
not to give way to it. Amy came
to her rescue and let her out.

The open air did her good ; after standing
for a second on the doorstep, she
turned to Mrs Cartwright, saying —

"Good-bye, Amy."

And then she walked firmly down the
garden path and stood out in the street
again.

"She looked tired," thought Amy, as
she shut the door and returned to her
work. " Perhaps I should have offered
her something ; but no doubt she will
get something at the station and take

VOL. III. Q

the first train back to Garshill, — I suppose
it is there she has come from. I could not
possibly ask her to stay after her behaviour
to me, and when she has quarrelled with
her mother. I am sure Reggio will say
I did right. I am glad she understood so
easily."

Diana walked a few steps and then stood
still. She felt she could not walk much
further, and she tried to remember where
the nearest cabstand was, that she might
take a cab to Tom's house. That was
the one thing which was now clear in
her mind, — that she must see Tom, and
feel that she was free. Beyond that she
was unable to think or care.

Fortunately there was a cabstand close
to, and in a quarter of an hour she was

standing in Tom's house. It was about
three o'clock, so that he was in, and she
sat down in the waiting-room with a feeling
that she had got to the end of her
strength. There was no one else there
when she arrived, but several people came
afterwards while she was still waiting, and
she wondered what they had come for.
At last the patient with whom Tom had
been engaged went away, and she was
called into the consulting-room.

Very slow and halting was her step.
She had sent in her name, and Tom was
half prepared to see her ; but when she
entered the room, walking as if each step
she took needed all her strength to take
it, with an absolutely colourless face and
eyes clouded and heavy, he came to meet

her with an exclamation which was almost
of horror.

"Diana!" he cried. "What is the
matter ? Why are you here ? You are
ill. My dear girl, sit down ; you are not
fit to be out of bed."

She sank into a chair and lay therefor
a moment unable to speak.

I have come from Garshill," she said,
rousing herself. " I have quarrelled with
mamma, with all of them, and I have
been to Amy's to ask her to let me stay
with her for a few days. But she is angry
with me, and offended because I never
answered the letter in which she told
me she was going to be married, and she
thinks mamma must be right. So she
won't have me ; she has turned me out."

She began to laugh hysterically, but
checked herself and went on —

So now I have come to you "

Quite right," said Tom, interrupting
her. 'rit is the best place you could have
come to, because I can see you are not
well, and I am a doctor. My wife and
I will "

Your ivhat f " asked Diana, rising from
her seat and confronting him with a look
which Tom used afterwards to say made
his blood run cold ; he thought she had
gone out of her mind.

"My wife," he repeated. "Surely you
have not forgotten. I wrote and told you,"
he went on, beginning to flounder about
in his embarrassment, "that I had changed
I mean I had seen some one else, and

was going to be married to her, so that
promise you made was all at an end. I
should have written again when we were
married, but you never answered mj^
letter, and so I thought you were angry,
you know, and I left it alone."

He spoke to deaf ears. Diana had at
last reached the limit of her endurance,
and now lay insensible on her chair.

There is more in this than meets the
eye," was Tom's reflection as he rang
the bell and bade the maid-servant send
Mrs Sherlock to him without delay.

** Lucie," he said, when she came in,
'there is a case after your own heart.
This lady is a very old friend of mine.
I once asked her to marry me, but she
would not hear of it, which showed her

extraordinary good sense, and was a very
good thing for three people — herself, myself,
and yourself. She is ill, and she is going
to be very ill, though I can't yet say
positively what is the matter with her.
You will have to take her in and nurse
her ; and if you will tell me if the spare
room is ready, I will carry her up thereat
once, and you must put her to bed."

All the time he was talking, he was
trying to bring Diana back to life, butin
vain. His wife let him finish in
silence : she was not in the least disturbed,
being quite used to this kind of
thing.

"It is not ready, Tom," she replied;
"it is impossible to get spare beds ready
at a moment's notice in a damp place

like this. I am very sorry ; what shall
we do?"

"I will carry her up to our room and
you must get the other one ready as
quickly as you can. If she can't be
moved into it, we shall want it for ourselves.
Now, then ; it is years since I
carried Diana up to bed."

CHAPTEE XXXVI.

Returning TO LIFE.

Diana lay upon her couch, and by her
side sat Antoinette Bureau. A fortnight
had passed since the day she came to
Tom Sherlock's house, and she was there
yet. She had been very ill, and had had
a hard struggle for her life, but in the
end she had conquered, and now she lay,
white and wan, but on the sure road
back to health and strength. Antoinette
was telling all she knew of the time
which was a blank to Diana. She told

how she had received Tom's letter, forwarded
to her from home, telling of
Diana's unexpected appearance at his
house, and of the dangerous state in
which she lay. He had further said that
when she should come to herself she
must have some one with her whom she
knew, and he begged Mrs Burland to
come down to Whitfield as soon as she
possibly could. She had come at once,
telegraphing her intention as soon as she
had read his letter, and she and Mrs
Sherlock had nursed her back to life
together.

Diana heard without heeding. Her one
thought was, " Two weeks ! He sailed a
week ago, without one sign from me.
What does he think of me ? I have lost

him for ever and ever ; " and in her weakness
she turned her face to the wall and
wept bitterly.

Diana, why do you cry ? " asked
Toinette. " What is it ? "

I will tell you some time," said Diana,
sadly. " Go on talking ; tell me all the
rest."

There was not much to tell. She
heard of the letter Tom had written to
her at Jacewo, telling her that he had
made the acquaintance of one Lucie Carew,
and desired her for his wife. It was one
of those many, many letters she had
never opened, and now the strange feeling
she had often had when she looked at
all those letters, and thought that one
among them contained something which

would influence her future, was explained.
That had been the letter freeing her
from that foolish promise. She had been
free all along, and she had never known.
She thought once more of that long
summer, when she had lived in paradise
and had neglected all earthly matters,
with this result. She thought of it till
she dared think no longer. All she had
held, all she had lost, nay, not lost, but
flung away as of no value, came so
vividly before her, filled her heart with
so unutterable an ache, that she dared
not think of it.

But she kept silence — she said nothing.
When 'Toinette begged her to let her
share this sorrow, she said —

"Not yet; some day, perhaps, I can tell

you, but not yet. I cannot speak of it
yet."

As soon as she could get Dr Sherlock's
consent, she went to London with
'Toinette ; Whitfield had grown unbearable
to her. As she looked through her
things before packing, she came across a
little white linen frill, and a coarse white
pocket-handkerchief. She looked at them
for a long time, stroking them gently
with her thin hand, dimly seeing them
through a blinding mist of tears.

"There is Susan left," she whispered.
I will write to Susan. As soon as I
am in London I will tell 'Toinette, and
write to Susan."

They went to London the next day, and
Diana received from Richard Burland the

kind welcome which experience had taught
her to expect. The fact that she had
come to Whitfield because she had quarrelled
with the Abbey people, had already
been communicated to 'Toinette, and by
her to her husband, but further than
that, even the cause of the quarrel, they
did not know. Neither did they press
for an explanation, which they felt sure
that Diana would give as soon as she
felt able and in the right mood. Things
had happened which had convulsed her
moral being, and until she had in some
measure regained her balance, she could
not talk about herself. Her clothes and
possessions had been sent for, and had
come without letter or message, and
Diana had unpacked and arranged them.

in the slow, listless way in which she did
everything now, but still she said nothing.
She was much changed. She appeared
to have kept her hold on life, and that
was all. Old tastes, pleasures, and prejudices
were gone, — swept away in that
storm which had wellnigh overwhelmed
her. She remained very delicate, and
her friends grew very anxious about her.
A spring seemed to have given way
somewhere, and all desire for life in itself
as the greatest of joys, which had
formerly been one of Diana's most marked
characteristics, was gone ; — seeing her as
she was now, one would have been
tempted to say, never to return.

One sign of weakness was that she had
completely given John up. That for

which she would have fought to the death,
had she been strong and well, she now
renounced without one effort to retain
it. It never occurred to her to make any
inquiry about him. A month, more thana
month ago, he had told her he would
leave England in a week. What was the
use of making inquiries which could have
as result only one bitter reality ? She
shrank from it, — she felt as though the
anguish of knowing all the circumstances
and details of his departure would kill
her. Had she been herself, she would
have insisted on knowing everything, she
would have inquired minutely into every
circumstance ; now she only felt that the
joy of life was gone. She put off writing
to Susan. With the cowardice of weakness

lie dared not inflict upon herself a
pain which lie knew would be intolerable.
Better keep out of sight, she argued.
She had ruined two lives — his and her
own ; let her creep away and be forgotten.

She did her best to conceal her trouble.
With her friends she made great efforts
to be bright and cheerful. But sometimes
she forgot that she was not alone,
and sat brooding silently in her chair,
or rose and paced the room, her hands
behind her, her head now sunk on her
breast, now held erect, as over and over
and over again she recalled all her outer
and inner life during the past year.

One evening she spoke. She and Mrs
Burland were alone. Mrs Burland had
just been singing, and by some odd

VOL. III. R

chance lead picked up '' Caressing." She
sang it through, and those who know her
voice do not need to be told that she
sang it exquisitely. Turning round at the
end to make some remark to Diana, she
saw that she lay upon the couch in an
agony of weeping. Now, through all this
trouble, since the time when she had told
her she had been ill two weeks, 'Toinette
had never seen Diana weep. It was not
easy to her to shed tears ; with her they
were the expression of the most poignant
anguish which sorrow can inflict. In this
case she augured good from them. At
last Diana might be persuaded to relieve
herself by speech. She was by her
friend's side in a moment, persuading
and cherishing her as only she knew how.

Diana's fit of weeping lasted long, and
when it ceased, she was at first too
exhausted to speak ; but by degrees she
became calmer, and at last said —

'antoinette, I want to tell you everything
— you ought to know; and I think
I can bear to speak of it now."

Yes," said 'Toinette, " tell me now.
Perhaps it will not be so hard to bear
when you have told it to some one ; and
it makes me terribly unhappy to see you
as you are now. Both Richard and I are
very anxious about you."

And Diana told the whole story, beginning
with her journey to Jacewo, and
going over every incident, her mistake,
her meeting with John, her liking for him,
and his racy, unflattering speech ; she told

of the long summer, during which she
had been as it were under a spell ; her
entire neglect of everything which did
not bear upon her intercourse with John
She described how her regard had grown
and deepened, and how she had tried to
forget his frequent reminders of the difference
between them in social position.
She told of his interrupted declaration,
and of her relief that it had been interrupted
; of her grief over the loss of her
kind friend, and her shuddering away
from any nearer relation ; her belief that,
under the manner she liked so well, lay
hidden of necessity a rough and churlish
nature. She described her meeting with
Guy, his errand, and her sudden return
to England. She told of her cousins : her

love for Gertrude ; her half liking, her
half dislike of Eupert ; his confessions to
her ; her discovery of the plan to marry
them, and her conduct on making the
discovery. Her voice deepened and her
eyes glowed as she told how, day by day,
she missed John more ; of her walk up
the strange, gloomy valley to Becktop
Farm, and of the light which broke in
upon her afterwards. Johns return, her
meeting with him, and explanation to her
uncle ; the sale, and John's establishment
at Becktop, were all dwelt upon ; also
Rupert's offer, and her rejection of it,
followed by his attempt to force her into
a marriage at St John's in the Wilderness.
Her breath came fast as she described
John's finding her and taking her to his

house ; his mission to the Abbey ; Gertrude's
pleading, and her uncle's letter;
her departure and explanation with John
the next day; her arrival at Whitfield,
with the ever-increasing feeling of illness ;
Mrs Cartwright's reception of her; her
arrival at Tom's house; his announcement
that he was married ; and the subsequent
blank. The story ended with the words —

"And now, 'Toinette, I have lost him
for ever and ever, all through my own folly
and weakness. I would give everything in
the world to have him back, and it is all
of no use."

'Toinette had listened with fascinated
attention. Her own marriage had been,
in the opinion of many people, a most
romantic affair, and with her sympathetic

nature, it was easy to enter into Diana's
position.

I am glad you have told me, very glad,"
she said. " Something may be done yet.
I cannot believe that, even though you did
not write, he would leave England without
making at least one attempt to see you,
especially when he had promised to call
here. We can at least find out if he did
that. I will go and ask Sullivan now."

She left the room for a few minutes, and
then returned, saying —

Sullivan says no one of that name has
called. Perhaps his leaving England has
been delayed. Things connected with
Government are always unpunctual."

I dare not think so," said Diana, shaking
her head. " If it were delayed at all,

it would scarcely be for so long, and if I
once let myself hope so, and then were
disappointed, I could not bear it. Besides,
he said he might not have time to call."

"That was before he knew what the
obstacle was, and that it might be removed.
If Mr Garthwaite is the man I
take him to be, he would never go away
for years, leaving everything in this state
of darkness, not even knowing where you
were. You must not give up hope. Richard
shall make inquiries, and you must
write to Susan. It is only because you
are ill and weak that you take so gloomy
a view of things. If you were your own
self, you would never have been content
to leave things in this way. I am thankful
you told me. You must let Richard

and me act for you ; I promise we will
do nothing without your knowledge and
approval."

Diana agreed, and promised to write to
Susan the next day, but it was rendered
unnecessary.

CHAPTEE XXXVII.

NO NEWS.

John did not tell Susan as soon as he got
home. He hoped to hear from Diana in the
morning, and he thought he would wait till
then. But no letter came, and although he
was disappointed, he was scarcely surprised.
The chances were a thousand to one against
her seeing Tom the very day she got to
Whitfield. This day, however, was the
last he would spend at home ; he would
be leaving early the next morning for
London. There were final arrangements

to be made, and instructions to be given,
which took up a great deal of time. When
these had been disposed of, he told Susan
all that Diana had asked him to.

I knew she would consent," said Susan,
when he had got to the end of his story.

How ? " he asked, quickly.

When she was here I saw she loved
you. Eh, John, I wonder you did not see
it too ! "

He did not answer, and Susan went on —

She is very beautiful ; I never saw anyone
half so beautiful. The Miss Meredithss
and the other ladies in this country-side
are not to be compared with her ; and she
seemed very kind and pleasant, for you can
see she's been accustomed to things very
different from what they are here. I do

hope you will be happy with her ; but,
John, I can't fancy her here."

She will not live here ; she will most
likely live in London."

"And I wonder," suddenly broke out
Susan, throwing down her work, and looking
almost yearningly at her cousin, "I
wonder if she knows what she's got when
she's got thee?"

"Why, Susan," he said, laughing, "she
does not think of me as you do, as if I had
got no faults ; she sees heaps of them, and
does not hesitate to tell me if I do anything
she does not like."

I'm sure she will do that, but the
woman you love ought to have a very
different feeling for you from any cousin's ;
and I thought that love was blind."

^'That is because you never have loved,"
said John, in blissful ignorance of what he
was talking about. " If you had, you would
know better. Love is very quick-sighted,
and sees a thousand flaws where affection
sees only one."

Susan caught her breath quickly. This
was rather hard, but being a woman, she
could conceal her feelings, so she only
said —

Well, maybe I am wrong ; " and soon
after that she folded up her work and went
up-stairs.

There was no post to Becktop Farm.
When letters were expected, or perhaps
wished for, some one went to Garshill and
asked for them at the post-office there.
That was one reason why John was taking

such an early train, that lie might get his
letter as early as possible. He and Susan
walked into the little town together, and
a very silent walk it was. John was preoccupied,
busy with thoughts of the work
before him, and recollections of this same
walk which he had taken with Diana
two days previously. The thought of the
amount of work he would have to get
through in London almost alarmed him.
He ought to have been there long before,
but had lingered in the country for Diana's
sake. He was silent, therefore, from preoccupation
— arranging his few days in London
to the best advantage, so that he could
give as much time as possible to Diana.

Susan's heart was too full to speak. She
guessed, too, of what John was thinking,

and would not intrude upon his reflections.
After this short reunion another parting,
again for years ; from which he would
return less her own even than now. It
was very bitter ; and the sight of the bare
hillsides, the few trees parting reluctantly
with their remaining leaves, the rush and
tumble of the stream below the steep narrow
path they trod, all-familiar sights and
sounds as they were, seemed to accentuate
her misery and loneliness.

At the bend in the valley, John paused
and turned. He took a long sweeping look
around him, baring his head and letting
the mountain wind blow on his face and
amongst his hair. He was silent, and Susan
was silent too. His lips moved ; perhaps
he was invoking the genius of this solitary

place, that spirit of desolation" which
brooded over it. Long he stood there,
drinking it all in, and a strange look swept
over his face. Susan turned her eyes away
from his face. At last he drew a long
breath and turned to her again, saying —

I shall never forget it — I shall keep it
in the other world; and, thank God ! the old
home is safe. No tropical scenery will ever
seem more beautiful to me than this old
English landscape — this corner of England
where I and my fore-elders before me were
born and bred."

There was no flower blooming, not a bit
of heather, a late harebell, or a scabious,
but he gathered a few rush-like grasses and
put them in his pocket-book, saying, with
a smile, 'there's for memory."

Together they entered the sloping marketplace
of Garshill. Susan remained in
the shadow of the old church, with shops
on the ground-floor, and from the tower of
which curfew still rings night and morning,
while John went into the post-office. Ina
few minutes he returned, with a face
so white and stern, that involuntarily she
asked —

John, what's the matter ? Is there bad
news ?

"I suppose not," he answered; "I suppose
I ought to consider it good, for there
is none of it. There is no letter from her."

No letter ! " Susan repeated the words

blankly, scarcely realising what they meant.

What shall you do ? What do you think

it means ? "

VOL. III. S

I suppose it means that she has not
been able to write ; perhaps she has not
yet seen Dr Sherlock."

But she ought to have written, anyway,"
said Susan, jealously. " After all
you had done for her, she ought to have
written a line to say that she got safely to
her journey's end. It's not manners to
leave people who have been kind to you,
and never send them a word of thanks."

She was not thinking of herself at all,
only of the slight which had been put on
him ; but he frowned quickly at her words,
and said —

"Don't speak like that, Susan. She has
not been able to write, that's clear ; as soon
as she can, she will. And yet," he muttered
almost to himself, '' nearly her last

words were, ' you shall hear and I told
her again and again that the least delay-might
be fatal to us."

They had left the market - place, and
were half-way down the steep hill to the
station before either spoke again. Susan
was thinking, 'perhaps she has found she
likes that doctor better than she thought ;
or maybe the grand people from the Abbey
have got at her again, and turned her from
him. If it's either of those, it will just
break his heart, and she will deserve the
worst she could get."

So argued Susan in her own mind.
John's reflections were of a different
nature. He was wondering if he could
not make time to call at Whitfield on his
way to London, but it was impossible ; and

what he would have time to do when he
got to London, only time could show.
He spoke first.

I gave them my address in London,
and told them to forward me anything that
comes ; so you will have no trouble in that
way, Susan, and I will send you the very
first news I have of her."

News of himself would have been infinitely
more precious, but Susan, though
no coward, had not courage to say so.
Their last talk at the station was broken
and unsatisfactory, and she had the misery
of feeling that at this parting they were
not entirely in sympathy.

In London John found oceans of work,
but the day after his arrival he took time
to call at Mrs Burland's, and ask if she was

at home. The maid-servant said she was
not. He then asked if a lady named Miss
Wentworth had called within the last day
or two. The girl, who had only recently
entered 'Toinette's service, and had never
heard of Diana, only said no ; no lady of
that name had called. Baffled and disappointed,
he went away, and after some
hesitation resolved that if he received
nothing from the Garshill postal authorities
on the following day, he would write
to Diana at Mrs Cartwright's. By this
time he had learned that the date of his
leaving England had been put off for at
least a month, so the reason for excessive
haste was gone ; but he had by this time
grown seriously anxious about her, and he
remembered, with ever-increasing uneasiness,

how tired and unlike herself she had
seemed when he parted from her at Bellingham,
and he began to fear some accident
had befallen her. He heard nothing
from Garshill, and wrote to her at the
Reverend Reginald Cartwright's, in Whitfield.
After a week of horrible suspense,
which only his constant occupation, and
the never-ending demands on his time and
attention, enabled him to bear, he got his
letter back again, with the words *' Not
known" scrawled across the envelope. By
this time he was nearly desperate. He
could not leave London ; night and day he
was in request, and this unceasing press of
business prevented his giving such consideration
to Diana as would enable him
to make any plan for communicating with

her. A fortnight had now gone by, and
he was utterly at a loss what to do next.
At last, after more than three weeks'
"slavery," as he called it to himself, he
was able to call a day his own, and
he employed it in going to Whitfield.
He had at first been unwilling to directly
question a stranger about Diana. There
might be many ways of accounting for her
silence. He never entertained any suspicion
that she might have seceded to Tom
Sherlock ; but he did think she might have
received some communication from her
cousin Gertrude which had caused her to
hesitate before finally allying herself with
him. Such hesitation and change of front
would not be like Diana; but it is undoubtedly
a serious thing for a young

woman to throw up all home and family
ties, and he believed she had done this
under very great excitement. Perhaps her
Whitfield friends had persuaded her to reflect.
There were many reasons why he
should give her a fair time before forcing
himself upon her and demanding an explanation
which she appeared to shrink
from giving. But human endurance has
its limits, and three weeks is a long time
in which to bear a constant and gnawing
suspense. There was his own side of the
question too, and time was gliding inexorably
away. On his first leisure day,
therefore, he took an early express to
Whitfield, and arrived there soon afternoon.


He had no difficulty in finding and

gaining access to Mrs Cartwright, and he
listened to the tale she had to tell without
speaking. When he heard how she had
turned her friend away — and his few questions
drew the whole truth from Amy —
without offering her either rest or refreshment,
he felt the blood beating hotly in his
temples with anger. But all he said at the
end of her story was —

*' I wish it had been your husband who
had done this, Mrs Cartwright. And
now," he said, when he found she made
no attempt to reply to his remark, "tell
me if you know where the Dr Sherlock
lives whom Miss Wentworth knew when
she lived here ? "

Amy gave him Tom's address, and he
went away without one more word. Yet

never had Amy felt so small in her life, or
so glad to be alone. She never told her
husband of this visit ; and it was the only
secret she ever kept from him.

John took a cab to Dr Sherlock's house,
feeling sure that he would here get news of
Diana. He saw both. Tom and Lucie, and,
strangers though they were, they had a
long and interesting conversation. It was
a week since Diana had gone to London
with Mrs Burland. John might rely on
finding her still there.

CHAPTEE XXXVIII.

MET TOGETHER.

It was on the afternoon following this
expedition to Whitfield that — as 'Toinette
sat alone in her drawing-room, thinking
of Diana and the story she had told her
the night before — the door opened, and
Sullivan announced —

"Mr Garthwaite."

'Toinette turned eagerly. This seemed
almost too good to be true ; she could
scarcely believe what she heard. But as
soon as she saw John and recalled the

description which Diana had given of him
the evening before, it was borne in on
her mind in a perfectly irresistible way
that this was indeed the very John
Garthwaite about whom she had heard
so much.

I cannot tell you how glad I am to
see you," she said, as she shook hands
with him,

You are very kind," was his answer.
I called here before, but you were from
home. Is Diana with you ? "

*eyes. It was only last night she told
me everything, and I am indeed thankful
you have come. My husband and I are
growing very anxious about her. Of
course you do not know she has been
ill."

Yes. I was in Whitfield yesterday
and saw the Sherlock, who told me
everything. I cannot express my thankfulness
that such people as you and
they exist. Where is Diana? Can I see
her ? "

I will send her to you. She is very
delicate, and the surprise will be very
great. She had quite given you up."

Ah ! " he said, '' will you tell me all
about it? Perhaps there are things I
had better know before I see her."

They talked for a quarter of an hour,
and then 'Toinette rose, saying —

'now I will send her to you; you
are very anxious to see her, and it is
not fair to keep her longer in ignorance."


She had scarcely spoken before the door
was opened from the outside, and they
heard Diana speaking to a servant.

Thank you," she was saying ; *' do not
trouble about it. I will ask Mrs Burland
myself."

'Toinette, glancing at John, saw how
shocked he was to hear the slow, languid
voice which yet he could not doubt to
be Diana's. He would have gone to
meet her, but 'Toinette laid a restraining
hand upon his arm, and he waited.

Diana came in, looking taller and slighter
than ever, — her face seemed very small,
her eyes very large : she took two or
three steps forward and then stopped. A
change like an illumination passed over
her face, and she said —

'john!"

She would have fallen, but he caught
her in time, and when she could look
round, she found that Antoinette had
gone.

The next fortnight was a very busy one.
There was time for little else than necessary
work. Susan came up for the wedding,
and was one of the witnesses of the ceremony.
A few days later Mr and Mrs
Garthwaite sailed for Brazil, and Susan
returned to her stewardship at Becktop
Farm.

Diana and Gertrude did meet again.
One summer evening, seven years after
they had parted at Becktop Farm, Gertrude

was returning home from some
visits she had been making to some of
the cottage people. She walked slowly :
it was an exquisite evening, the time of

That clear dusk of heaven, which brings the thickest

stars."

There was a thin moon in the sky, a red
glow of sunset still lingered in the west.
Very clearly did objects stand out against
the sky; and Gertrude, as she stood still
and looked around her, became conscious
that on a rise a little way in front of
her there stood sharply outlined against
the pale, clear sky, the figure of a child
upon a pony. Her heart beat fast. She
had heard, and had tried not to heed,
that Mr and Mrs Garthwaite had comedown

to the cottage, which had lately
been built for them close to Becktop
Farm. She had even seen the place,
drawn to it by an irresistible longing to
feel that there was still a link between
herself and Diana. It was not large, and,
built of rough-hewn, grey, native stone,
was in perfect harmony with the scene
in which it stood. She had been thinking
of Diana as she walked along, recalling
her deep, passionate love for this very
place, and trying to still the yearning
for her which filled her heart. She had
heard rumours of a child, and her pulses
beat sufibcatingly as she saw this small
upright figure alone in this wild place.
She half hoped half feared it would begone
before she reached the spot where

VOL. III. T

it stood ; but it was not, and when she
reached it she stopped because she could
not have gone on. She stood and looked
at the child : he seemed five or six years
old, and he sat his pony like a little
man. He had Diana's face and eyes,
and something else which, though she
had seen John Garthwaite but once, she
recognised as his. Drawing near, she
laid her hand on the pony's rein, and
said —

What is your name, my boy ? "

The child took off his hat as he
answered —

John Garthwaite ; but they always call
me Jack."

Gertrude noted the name. No Meredith
had ever been called John.

Have you no other name ? " she asked.

'' No," answered the child, with a little
laugh ; "I don't want two. Mother
says John is the finest name in the
world."

What are you doing here ? " she asked
further.

Waiting for mother. She's gone to
see some people in a cottage, but they
have scarlet fever, so she would not let
me go in with her."

Gertrude's heart leaped. If she waited a
little she would see Diana. Meantime she
would talk to this child — Diana's child !
How odd it seemed !

Are you not afraid to be here alone ? "
she continued.

Why should I be afraid ? Mother says

no one is afraid for himself unless he has
done wrong. Besides, I have mother to
take care of ; father gave her into my care.
Father is called John too," he added with
a child's inconsequence. "Do you know,"
he went on, waxing confidential, " when I
first saw you over the hill, I thought you
were mother coming ; wasn't it 'ridiculous
? " he finished, with a peal of delighted
laughter.

Gertrude laughed too. She felt so old,
and the child's frank assumption that it
was absurd to class her with his mother,
amused her.

Do you know mother ? " he asked
further.

I knew her very well once, — we used to
live in the same house," she answered ; but

almost before she had finished, and certainly
before her listening ears had caught
the sound, he turned in his saddle, exclaiming
quickly —

Here's mother ! here she comes ! "
Gertrude turned too, glad of the gathering
dusk, glad that the child had heard his
mother coming some distance off, that she
might have time to collect herself. Now
she heard the rhythmical trot of a horse,
and an instant later, she saw Diana ; she
could not measure the time that passed
before she found her cousin standing close
to her, and heard her saying " Gertrude ! "

It was the old voice, the old tone, the
same frankly stretched out hand as of yore,
and yet when she looked in her cousin's
face, the change startled her. Let us

rather say development than change. All
Diana's latent capacity for greatness had
been brought out and perfected by and
during her married life, and the face upon
which Gertrude looked, bespoke a beauty of
mind and soul as complete as the beauty
of form which was so fascinating. Yet
somehow the old Diana was there too.
Gertrude did not speak, she only put her
hand into her cousin's.

'jack," said Diana speaking to her son,
we were going to ride home together.
Would you rather ride home alone, or hold
my horse and wait for me while I talk to
this lady ? "

Jack said he would wait, and Diana dismounting,
walked a little way off with
Gertrude.

They went off the highroad, through a
field and a narrow stile to a great wide
space on the top of the cliffs, known as
the West Fields. Here they saw the river
winding beneath them, and on its further
side limestone cliffs rose to the height at
which they themselves were. In front of
them as they walked, the hills grew higher,
the dale narrower ; away to the south was a
dark shadow on the moor, formed by the
same plantation of fir-trees where Diana
had encountered John after that explanation
with her mother.

"I never thought to see you again,"
said Gertrude, as they paced to and fro.
I have thought of you often, every day,
perhaps; but I never expected we should
meet."

"We must meet here," said Diana.
Have you not heard we have built a
cottage, quite a small place, to which we
propose to retire from time to time when
we are tired of London ? We have purposely
built it small that we may not be
tempted to invite visitors. You will come
there, Gertrude ? "

She shook her head.

Papa and Guy would not let me," she
answered.

Are they still omnipotent as of old ? "
asked .Diana ; and then changing her tone,
she said —

How are they all, tell me ? "

"Dora is well; she has three children.
They often come down to us.
Papa, Guy, and myself are the same,

only older. Guy will be married in a
month."

To whom ? "

"You never knew the girl. She is very
nice, and we are very glad, Guy must
marry."

There was another long pause.

I heard of mamma's death," said Diana
at last. "I saw it in the 'Times,' and of
course there was legal business."

Silence again. Then Gertrude asked —

And are you really happy, Diana ? "

I live every day, every hour, every
minute. My husband is my husband,
and you have seen my lad. I am very
happy."

Up and down they walked, speaking in
low, earnest tones. The red glow had

quite faded, the moon was higher, the
stars clearer. Gertrude at last said —

"I must go. They will wonder what I
have been doing."

"Shall you tell them?" asked her
cousin.

eyes, I shall tell them."

"And you will come and see me? I
shall expect you."

"You must not expect me. I cannot
come if they forbid it."

"Well, well, I will expect you when I
see you. Shall you come back to the highroad
with me ? "

No ; I can get home as easily from here.
Good-bye, Diana."

They parted, and Gertrude groped her
way home through blinding tears, while

Diana cantered on to Becktop with her
lad.

It was their last talk. Gertrude never
called, and they never met again alone.

THE END.

PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.

^:,., .;-. .^

UNIVERSITY OP Illinois-URBANA

llillillllilllli

3 0112 045843981

\ ',1 *

. " ^M

, 'TV,
