I E) RAR.Y
OF Thun
Diversity
or ILLINOIS


T989g

1-

BY

M. E. FRASER-tatler

IN TWO VOLUMES
Vol. I.

"So young and so intended?"
"So young, my lord, and true."

King Lear, Act I.

Mention:

MARCUS WARD & CO., 67, 68, Hands STREET

And royal ULSTER WORKS, BELFAST


in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/griselromneynove01fras

%

CONTENTS

o

^

^

^

■I

I

CHAP.

I. — Summer-time,
II.— An Accidental Meeting,
III.— The Beginning of it,
IV.— In the Twilight,
v.— Tableaux Vivants,
VI.— Almost Told,
VII.— 'where the Brook and River Meet,'
VIII.— The House in Prince's Gate,
IX.— Sir James in Difficulty,
X.— Easily Solved,
XL— The Price,
XII. — Finished,

XIII.— Begun in Bitterness,
XIV. — Orange Blossoms,
XV. — Eternal Friendship,
XVI. — The New Love and the Old,

XVI L— Free,

Xvii— For the Best,






















CHAPTER I.

SUMMER-TIME.

VER the lawn, down into the beechwood,
the sun was streaming. The grass
looked brown and hot till it lay in the
cool under the beech trees, and there, forming
itself into mossy cushions round the old stumps,
temptingly invited the public to come from out of
the blazing sun into the shade.

So the Romneys interpreted it, as they came
sauntering over the path with rugs, books, and
work, prepared for a long afternoon out of doors.

We must not go out of sight, Sybil. Let us
sit near the swing tree. Reggie is sure to find us
there ; he said he was coming this afternoon to say
good-bye."

Poor La Grise could not go without Le Gris

coming to wish her good speed, could she ? Well,
it is only fair she should have her way to-day. Do
not you think so, Bryde ?"

"Yes," rejoined Bryde. "We are your humble
servants for to-day, La Grise, but it will be a very
different thing by this time next year. Then you
will be only the youngest of three grown-up sisters,
instead of the spoilt baby just going to school."

Never mind about next year, Bryde. Perhaps
I shall get my own way as much then as now."

Perhaps you will not — unless it be from Papa
or Reggie. Sybil and I will not be the least the
same. You will be only one of three," and Bryde
by no means looked as if she could be superseded
in the trio.

Bryde was the acknowledged beauty of the
family — tall and slight, nut-brown hair, glowing
complexion, soft brown eyes, that could sparkle
both in fun and anger when need be. She seated
herself now at the foot of the old beech tree,
determined to be comfortable.

A father, one son, and three daughters — such
elements composed the family of Romney, of
Romney Manor, in a hunting county in England.
Sybil, the eldest, aged four-and-twenty ; then came
the son, at present at Oxford ; then Bryde ; and
last of all, Grisel, commonly known as La Grise,
Grisette, or any other soubriquet — the pet of the

family — on the eve of going to school for a year,
before appearing on the world's stage as a
come-out " young lady.

She looked very much the reverse at the present
moment. The school to which she was going
would need to be of a most developing type, to
turn the childlike being into a woman in one short
year's time. Perhaps it was because she was so
V (try petite, and so very full of fun and life, and so
utterly without any knowledge of the world, that
the said world would never have given her credit
for having very nearly attained her seventeen
summers.

Sybil was sketching in water-colours — making a
study of a neighbouring beech tree. Bryde was
lazily knitting a stocking for her brother Tom,
raising her sleepy eyes at intervals to watch Grisel,
who, lying on her face on the grass, was trying to
induce Snipe, the terrier, to sit still while she tickled
his ears and nose with spikes of grass and twigs.

Snipe could not see the fun, being much relieved
when his tormentor, tired of the amusement, turned
her attention to her sisters.

Do you think you have forgotten nothing,
Sybil } Are you sure that you have not left out
some small trifles, that when I arrive at Miss
Tufton's I may not have to borrow various little
necessaries, such as slippers, or boot laces, or "

Or knives or string, or a racquet and balls —
that's much more in your line, La Grise." The
speaker was a young man somewhere about
twenty, who, unobserved, had come upon them
suddenly.

Oh, Reggie, you dear old thing, is that you ?
I said I was sure you would come. So now you
must make yourself useful, and give me a swing ;
you know it is my last for a long, long time."

"For a long, long time," repeated Reggie,
mockingly. "Will you please to remember that
when you return to your father's roof next year
you will be grown up ? It will be quite impossible
that you should then care for such childish pastimes."


"We shall see when the time comes. Sybil,
will you give Reggie Papa's message ? "

Sybil looked up from her sketch. " Will you
come and dine with us to-night," she said, "as it is
Grlsel's last night at home ? Do you think your
mother would spare you ?"

"Thanks, Miss Romney, I fear we have friends
at dinner to-night ; but I shall try and ride over
tomorrow morning."

How horrid of you to make an engagement for
my last evening ! You needn't trouble to come tomorrow,
as you could not keep to-night disengaged,"
exclaimed Grisel, pugilistically.

All right, Grisel. Perhaps as I would not keep
to-night disengaged, you would rather I did not
stay this afternoon. Good-bye, Miss Romney ;
good-bye, Bryde," and, without a glance at Grisel,
who was covertly watching his movements, he
walked off briskly.

"Well, Grisel, are you satisfied .^" Bryde asked,
composedly.

Oh, perfectly, thanks. I am going for a walk.
I do not want anyone to go with me."

Reggie's whistle was still heard from the direction
in which he had gone. He did not seem to
be making rapid progress in his homeward journey.
Grisel at once made up her mind. She would run
by a cross cut and intercept him, as if by accident,
before he could leave the park. Having gained
her station before anything was seen of him, she sat
down to recover her breath, and waited impatiently.
She planned the scene. How he would look so
glad to see her, and she would be just a little bit
dignified at first, and then she would forgive him,
and they would have a long afternoon together,
with lots to do and to say.

The same thing was enacted three or four times
a-week. Reggie, the only child of Sir Roger and
Lady Mainwaring, had always been Grisel's constant
companion. As children, the one was rarely
seen without the other, and after Reggie had

attained an Etonian age, the holidays were looked
to with as much delight as the half-weekly holiday
in the old days. At last the time came when
Reggie went up for his army examination, and
receiving, after the proper amount of delay, his
commission, the Romneys had seen but little of
him for two years.

He had been home for a month's leave now, and
the old intimacy was at once resumed. Grisel,
absolutely refusing to consider herself anything
approaching to a young lady, was allowed to be
constantly with him. Mr. Romney saw no harm
in it ; she was such a child.

To go back to Grisel awaiting Reggie's approach.

She was perched on the top of the stile commanding
a good view of the surroundings, but her
tormentor was nowhere in sight. The whistling
sounded horribly stationary, and her patience was
getting exhausted.

Two dainty feet tapped impatiently on the top
step of the stile, and two tiny hands were pulling
a crimson rose to pieces, the leaves falling ina
shower, forming a pleasant piece of colour on the
otherwise snow-white figure. " Is he coming ? Is
he not ? Is he coming .'* Is he not } Only a few
more leaves to pull. Coming ? Not ! Coming ?
Yes ! here he comes at last !"

Why did you hurry so, Grisette ? I gave you

plenty of time to take it quietly, and still meet me
here."

"You didn't expect to meet me here, did you ? I
thought you would be so surprised and "

"And what, little lady?"

"And pleased," with just the tiniest pout curling
the rosy lips.

Did I say I wasn't pleased } Come, child, we
must not fight our last afternoon. Let us go down
to the river, and I will row you up as far as the
island, and then we shall come slowly back, intime
for me to ride home for dinner, which is not
till eight o'clock."

What about afternoon tea > I should hate
missing that !"

Well, perhaps that is a serious consideration ;
but still, don't you think you might forget about it
for one day .^"

Oh, I couldn't possibly forget it ; but I might
try and not mind very much."

All right, then ; let me lift you down."

No, thanks," and she sprang past him on to the
grass. The two turned down one of the many
paths which led to the river. Laughing and
chattering gaily, they reached at last the boat.
Grisel at once jumped in and took her seat, while
Reggie went to the boat-house for the key to undo
the boat from her moorings. He returned shortly,

and then swiftly and pleasantly they glided up the
river.

All along the banks the wood crept down to the
water's edge ; at intervals streams came to add
their contribution, ferns and creepers forming an
exquisite undergrowth, the many winding footpaths
looking singularly inviting for exploration.
Still they held on their way, Grisel's school
anticipations amply supplying conversation. When
the island was reached, every corner must be gone
over and said good-bye to before Grisel could
make up her mind to turn homewards. At last
they were drifting down the river. Grisel, sitting
idly in the boat, had resigned her oar ; Reggie,
just opposite to her, watching her quietly, wondering
what sort of a woman she would make,
wondering over whom she would cast the spell of
her marvellous fascination, which even now as a
child had so much power over him. Would he
ever be able to teach her to forget their 
intimacy ? Grisel, all unconscious of
his gaze, was amusing herself with a pile of pebbles
she had in her lap, trying to hit the flat water-lily
leaves, so temptingly spread on the water at the
river's edge.

At last she broke silence.

I wonder how long it will be before we have
another row on the river ^ Do you know, Le

Gris, I think I shall keep a calendar, and cut off
the weeks as they go past. Do you think it-would
make the time seem shorter ?"

Do you dislike the thought of school so very
much, Grisel ?"

Oh no ! I dare say I shall like that part of it ;
only I hate leaving Papa and dear old Sybil and
Bryde. And then there are other reasons. I shall
miss our nice afternoons together, and, you know,
perhaps we may not meet again for years if you go
out to India, and by the time you come back you
will have grown quite old, and not the least inclined
to devote your time to a child like me. You
would think it nonsensical to spend an afternoon
at the swing-tree !"

Reggie sat watching her ; an amused expression
came over his face as she spoke.

Did it ever occur to you, La Grise, that if weare
not to meet * for years,' that you will be a
woman by that time, and that, perhaps, you may
not then care for our long afternoons together .?
You will have other pursuits and other friends."

What an absurd boy you are, Le Gris. Now
listen to me. To begin with, I am not seventeen
yet, and girls don't become women for ages — oh !
at any rate not until they are twenty-five or thirty.
Secondly, there is no fear of me getting to think
our afternoons stupid, because I have been accustomed

to them from a child ; I might as well think
it stupid to be with Sybil ; and, last of all, I don't
wish new pursuits and new friends. Are you
satisfied now ?"

Not exactly, child ; however, never mind, it is
not your fault," he added, as he saw a shade
coming over the questioning face opposite to
him. " But it is really not so bad as you make
it out to be ; there is no chance of my going to
India for two years yet, and you are to be home —
when .?"

In the end of next June. Oh ! dear, such a
long way off."

Well, then, the time will soon pass, and I will
tell you what we shall do. I shall get my mother
to give a ball in honour of the coming out of Miss
Griselda Romney. It shall be the day after you
come home ; I shall get leave and be at it, and
that will be the next time we shall meet, my queen.
Do you think you will promise to give me the very
first dance .'' I shall wait at the door for you, and
you will dance with no one till you have danced
with me ?"

Of course I will give it to you, and as many
more as you like ; you know I shall know no one,
and I will be very grateful to you for taking notice
of me."

Do not speak like that, child. You will know

far too many people, and may be sorry you made
the promise."

Certainly not by that time, Reggie — my very
first ball. Do you really mean it ? Do you think
your mother will not mind ? Oh ! it would be too
nice. I wonder what I shall wear. I wonder if
you will remember your promise to dance with me
the very first."

I '11 try to do so," he said, laughing at her
earnestness. " We are very near home now ; shall
we turn back for a little .^"

No, we cannot do that. Sybil will think I am
lost. How lovely it is ! How much I wish I were
not going away !"

Slowly Reggie piloted the boat to the edge of
the stream till it lay by the side of the small
stone pier. Grisel's hands were full of ferns, which
stopped her usual mode of disembarkation, and
required a more cautious procedure. Reggie
sprang on shore, but Grisel sat still, gazing
wistfully round, unwilling to take the goodbye
look. At last she rose with her ferny
burden.

Let me take them from you, child," he said,
with a strange tenderness in his look and voice.
Such tiny hands for so large a burden !"

In taking the ferns, he took one of the childish
hands in his, and raised it gently to his lips.

How odd you are to-day, Le Gris ! You stupid
boy, you never did that before."

The colour had crept over Grisel's face, her soft
grey eyes looked with a strange, questioning
wonder in them ; but Reggie had turned suddenly
from her, and was re-mooring the boat.

Never mind, my queen ; you will forgive me
for saying good-bye so."

Yes, I forgive you," she said ; " but it was very
odd."

So they wandered up to the house, and were
met with laughing questionings as to their disappearance
; then Reggie left, and the sisters spent
a busy evening finishing the last touches of Grisel's
outfit.

Next morning a party on the platform of the
wayside station waited for the train. Mr. Romney
was going with his daughter ; Bryde and Sybil
and Reggie Mainwaring were there to see the
departure.

They are in the carriage at last, good-bye has
been said, the train is moving off, and a laughing
face is put out of the window.

You will not forget it is to be the very first
dance, Le Gris .-*"

AN ACCIDENTAL MEETING.

THE Scotch express was just starting ; the
platform at King's Cross presented the usual
scene of bustle and leave-taking. Porters stowing
ladies' arks into seemingly impossible holes, small
portmanteaus flung in to fill up the corners ; the
guard, civil and obliging, passing from carriage to
carriage, promising owners of the arks compartments
all to themselves, with the usual reminder
of " I go only as far as York." It is but a delicately
insinuated hint that this world expects a substantial
acknowledgment of its works of supererogation ;
but it is a shame to say such a thing of railway
porters and guards — they are the most obliging
race on the earth.

The day was brilliant, but cold. December was
not far advanced, and as yet no great fall of snow
had confirmed the prophecies of a severe winter.

Walking sharply up and down the platform to

gain a certain amount of circulation before starting
was an elderly gentleman, accompanied by his
daughter ; a cockaded footman and lady's maid
guarded the door of the carriage, where an extra
supply of hot-water tins were being deposited.

My dear, we have got no papers yet. What is
George doing that he is not buying us papers } I
never saw a worse travelling servant. Here, boy,
I want to-day's Times. What else have you got t
Take your choice, Lenore. You had better get
the Graphic or Illustrated ; it 's better for you than
that yellow-backed trash."

Thanks, papa ; I have made my choice."

Eh ! what have you got — not that bigoted and
reviling Saturday f "

Why not 1 It amuses me, and that is the chief
end to be gained in railway travelling."

General Sir James Fenton had once suffered
from the weekly Review, on which he had since
expended all his superfluous bitterness. " Take
seats, all going north. Tickets ready, please."

A few minutes' confusion, the ticket inspector
had passed the Fentonss* carriage, and Lenore, with
her head out of the window, was watching the final
arrangements. Suddenly, from the far end of the
station, a slight increase of hurry, a man, enveloped
in Ulster, deerstalker, and huge fur collar well
drawn up, came rapidly down in the direction

of the express. " Take seats, all going north,"
repeated the impatient guard. A moment's delay ;
the stranger, whoever he was, jumped into the
smoking compartment next the Fentonss ; a portmanteau
and hatbox were thrown into the attendant
luggage van, but not before Lenore had
noticed the large " H." on both articles ; and they
were off, flying past the suburbs of the metropolis,
with the delicious sense of speed and getting away
from the trammels of civilisation.

Lenore sank back luxuriously into her corner by
the window, first removing her plumy beaver hat
for a more comfortable soft tweed one. Sir James
rubbed his spectacles, preparatory to a long and
thorough investigation of the news.

I can't stand this sort of thing," he grumbled ;
I can't abide wandering about visiting. It puts
one out of one's beaten track. Country houses in
December ! — the idea is preposterous. What am
I to do with myself all day ? I don't hunt, and
there will be nothing else to do. Men coming in
fit for nothing after dinner ! Where 's the use of
it all?"

I dare say it won't be so bad as you think. I
shouldn't fancy Mr. Wyld was much of a hunting
man. I have no doubt you will find he will be
delighted to have a game at your beloved ecarte."

Ecarte ! — ecarte is not everything. You women

always jump at conclusions. It 's the whole life ;
it 's the air you breathe, the rooms you inhabit, the
food you eat. Even the men you meet are of a
different stamp. The whole life is on a wrong
principle. Where 's your pleasant Continental
freedom ?"

"It's not too late to return yet, Papa. I am
fond of the sunny South. You know it was your
own wish to try how you liked a home winter.
Suppose, after our visit to Hurst Manor, we go
back direct to Pau?"

My dear, you seem to think I am made of
money. It 's not like a single, independent man ;
remember I have paid already a fortune for
luggage, and your maid, and the man. Plans are
not so easily upset as you seem to think."

There was no oil to be thrown on the troubled
waters, so Lenore raised her paper with a semblance
of reading, and her father, with a continued grumble,
rattled and crumpled his Times into proper dimensions.


He was really not so crusty generally, and was
very proud of his handsome daughter. He glanced
at her before settling to his reading, and almost
made some excuse for his temper ; but it was fully
borne in on him that it was unwise policy to renew
a discussion with any woman, which prevented him
acting on the impulse.

Lenore, in her corner opposite, was not a disagreeable
picture for any man to regard.

Leaning back, as she now did, certainly was not
conducive to showing the rounded lines of her
figure. Her hair was coiled simply round the
back of her head, which was exquisitely set upon
her shoulders. The delicately-cut nose, sharply-pencilled
eyebrows, and mouth and chin in which
were seen so much determination and power over
self, were hardly in keeping with the large, dark,
dreamy eyes that some day in the future might
not sleep so quietly as now. Her well-shaped
unloved hands lay idly on her lap ; there was
about her that indescribable air of good breeding
always so attractive in woman.

She fell into a pleasant reverie as the train
rattled on, a retrospect of the last two years. It
seemed a much longer time ago ; only two years
since her father arrived at the fashionable Brussels
boarding-school, six months before he was expected,
and had told the mistress of the establishment
that he was tired of his lonely life, and must
have his daughter with him. He would give hera
fortnight to make her preparations, she must be
suitably fitted with a wardrobe in keeping with
the only child of a man supposed to be of large
property, and a maid must be found of unexceptionable
belongings. So in fourteen days' time

Lenore found herself to have undergone a complete
transformation. From a carefully guarded school
life she suddenly became her own mistress. With
no woman near of kin to turn to, she learnt to
trust entirely in herself. She did not miss companionship
as another would have done ; she had
plenty of resources in herself to fill the vacant
hours, but the life they led did not leave her much
time to grow weary. On leaving Brussels, they
had spent the following six months in travel.
Sir James wished his daughter to hold her own
amongst the wanderers with whom they associated.
Then a winter followed at Pau, and as the spring
came on, and the tide of humanity turned northwards,
the Fentonss followed in the stream, and
found themselves wandering from one fashionable
watering-place to another.

The life suited Sir James ; he liked the freedom.
Homburg, Baden, each in turn. There was always
the Kursaal with its reading and card rooms, and
if at times Lenore thought with longing of a
settled home, she put it from her ; it would not
please her father — her one object in life.

A second winter was passed at Pau ; they had
come to be considered Jiabitucs of the place. A
second summer at the German baths, and now, at
last, they were in Britain, the first time since
Lenore was thirteen, when, at her mother's death,

her father being absent on service, she was placed
at the Brussels school.

They had spent a month in town on their first
landing, but November is certainly not the month
to choose to visit for the first time the city of the
world, and Lenore, accustomed to years of foreign
skies, was disappointed ; in the gloomy streets, the
smoke-laden atmosphere, she could find no resemblance
to the city of her dreams. She was thankful
when a pressing invitation from old friends of
her father led their steps northwards still. They
were to spend Christmas at Hurst ; then, probably,
some more visits in Yorkshire would follow ; and
there was a talk of the London season, and Lenore
being presented in the following spring.

But the next fortnight was all that was as yet
decided on, and on this visit she spent much speculation.
Mrs. Wyld had written, telling her that the
house was to be full ; there were to be theatricals,
a small dance, and varied merrymaking — a
charming picture for a girl who knew nothing of
the delights of country-house life.

Sir James's temper improved as the day wore on,
and as they neared their destination he employed
his time in pointing out the various landmarks of
the county he had known so well as a boy.

There is no more charming county," he said.
You will see something worth seeing if you will
c

keep your eyes open. Dear, dear, what an old manit
makes me, coming back again with a grown-up
daughter ! There, now, you see that rising ground
on the horizon ? Those are the woods of Hurst.
We are very near our journey's end now."

If speed of going signified it, they certainly
would soon come to the end. They were passing
through a winding part of the line with rolling
country all round. Suddenly, as they approached
the last of the wayside stations, the brake was put
hard on, checking considerably their speed, but it
was not in time. Only as they rounded a corner
did the engine-driver perceive that a single goods
waggon had become detached from several
standing in a siding, and was on the up line.

The Fentonss were in the third carriage from the
engine, but had no idea that anything was amiss.
Lenore being interested in the passing objects. Sir
James in pointing them out, they were hardly conscious
of the diminution of speed.

You will see better from this window, Papa.
Now, look, what is that we are passing?"

Sir James was on his feet, and Lenore had
scarcely finished speaking, when the smash came.
First the tremendous concussion, then the carriage
leapt from the rails, and was thrown violently over
on its side.

Lenore was conscious of nothing for a few

seconds ; she was stunned with the force of the
shock. Her father's voice recalled her to herself.

"Are you much hurt, father ?" she asked, raising
herself with difficulty to a sitting posture.

My leg is broken, my dear ; I cannot help
you."

Don't move," she exclaimed. " I will try and
call for assistance. Some one will be here
directly."

She managed, with some contrivance, at last to
raise herself to the window, and a scene of anxiety
and confusion met her gaze.

The two carriages in front of them had been
much broken, and the occupants of the latter
carriages in the train, who had not suffered from
the collision, were engaged in extricating the
sufferers.

"Can you help me?" she called out. "My
father is very much hurt."

Her voice attracted the attention of two men
standing near. One of the two was their fellow-passenger
from King's Cross. He turned at the
sound of her voice, and hastened to their aid.

Let me help you out first ; we can then more
easily render your father assistance. Give me
your hands, and I will promise to get you out
safely."

She raised her hands confidently, and placed

them in his, but drew back with a sharp exclamation
of pain as she felt the strain on her wrist.
I think I must have hurt my arm," she said
feebly, turning very faint and white ; but with an
effort she recovered herself.

Never mind ; I will try again."

I am very sorry, but I fear it is the only way,"
her deliverer answered ; another effort, a sharp
spasm of pain, and she was released.

The two servants, white and frightened, had just
extricated themselves ; neither seemed to be hurt,
and were hurrying to their master's and mistress's
assistance.

But you have hurt yourself, mademoiselle ; and
where is Sir James ?"

Not much hurt myself, Amelia, but I fear Sir
James is." Lenore was rendering what assistance
she could to the three men, and in a few minutes
Sir James was lying on the bank ; he had fainted
from pain, and Lenore, in despair, bent over him.
She dare not turn her eyes, lest she should
encounter some of the piteous sights with which
she was surrounded.

Have you any idea how far we are from
Hurst .'^" she asked, turning to her new friend. " I
am such a stranger here, and so utterly helpless, I
do not know what I shall do."

Do you mean you are going to Hurst ? If so,

will you let me render you such assistance as lies
in my power ? I know the Wylds well, and though
I am not going there — my destination is only a
mile beyond — would it not be best for me to hurry
there, and get them to send for you ? or," he continued,
seeing Lenore s colourless face, " perhaps it
would be better for me to stay with you, and I can
give your servant instructions so that he could find
his way ? "

I would be thankful if you would stay. I feel
so helpless. What should I do ?"

I think if we were to remove your father to a
cottage that is not far distant, he would be more at
his ease."

The man-servant was despatched to The Hurst
with a message on a slip of paper. Lenore
watched the business-like hand as it traced the
short, clear account of what had happened, and
the bold signature imprinted itself on her mind,
Jack Hunt."

There," he said, brightly, " that will bring help.
Now, Sir James, you are feeling better, are you
not ? and we are going to move you to a cottage
near this. We must make some kind of a temporary
stretcher ; you will suffer less, moved so."

Workmen were busily engaged removing the
debris y as the down train was expected. Most of
those who had suffered from the accident were

being taken to the neighbouring farm-houses.
There seemed to be no fatal case. The engine-driver
and stoker were very badly hurt ; they, too,
had been removed. The Fenton party were the
last to leave the ground.

Sir James bore the moving better than could
have been expected ; and, after an hour of weary
waiting, The Hurst carriage arrived. Mrs. Wyld
had sent all necessary appliances to make the
drive more bearable. When seated in the comfortable
carriage, her father in comparative freedom
from pain beside her, and Amelia regaining her
composure opposite her mistress, Lenore began to
feel a return of her old curiosity as to the people
into whose house she was so oddly now to enter.
Mr. Hunt absolutely refused to go in the carriage.
He preferred walking to the station, where he
expected to find his friends had sent for him.

We shall meet again tomorrow or next day,
when I shall hope to renew my acquaintance under
more favourable auspices."

They were met at the door by Mrs. Wyld. Her
husband was from home for the day, and she, full
of anxiety, awaited their approach. Lenore was
charmed with the kind and genial manner, by the
warm welcome she received. The doctor had been
sent for, and had just arrived. Sir James was at
once removed to a bright room on the ground

floor, where he could receive constant visitors from
the adjoining library and other public rooms. In
another hour the painful operation of setting the
broken bone was over. Mercifully, it was but a
simple fracture, and Lenore, having had her wrist
bandaged, was lying down in the bright, fire-lighted
room, resting before dinner.

Presently there came a tap at the door, followed
by it being opened, and a gentle voice, " Are you
asleep, or may I come in.-*" It was Mrs. Wyld
come to inquire after her visitor's comfort.

My husband has just come home, and has gone
to sit with your father. I thought I might come
and have a chat, and so begin our acquaintance in
this, to me, witching time of firelight."

I am so glad you have come," said Lenore,
rising to do the honours of her room.

Now, do not move, or I shall leave you. Lie
still where you are, and tell me about this
miserable accident."

Lenore graphically repeated what she knew and
what they had experienced, dwelling but for a
minute on the collision itself Her nerves had
received a shock. She could not yet feel calmly
about it.

Then your fellow-passenger from London was
no other than Jack Hunt ? What a mercy he was
there ! What a strange introduction to each

other ! You will see a good deal of him while you
are here. He is one of the men I depend on most
entirely for my theatricals."

"Who and what is he?" asked Lenore. "I
could not make up my mind as to which of the four
professions he belonged. The church and medicine
were cut off, but after that I was puzzled."

He cannot be said to belong to any of them.
He is a literary man, and is the editor of a leading
journal. He has travelled a great deal, is made a
great deal of in society — in fact, he is a universal
favourite."

I don't usually care for universal favourites,"
laughed Lenore; "but still there may be exceptions."


As to who he is," continued Mrs. Wyld,
that is a more difficult question. I never heard
him mention any of his relatives' names. I believe
his mother died when he was a child, and his
father, having quarrelled with all his friends just
as Jack was growing up, left this world for, we hope,
a better one ; but he had not improved his son's
path of success in life. Poor Jack had a hard fight
for some years with poverty and living down his
father's prejudices ; but he is getting on well now,
and I am sure you will like him. He is the life of
every party he is at, and is in continual demand ;
but he works hard, and it is only when he takes a

few days' holiday, as in the present case, that there
is any chance of catching him. I tried to secure
him for ourselves, and, on finding him engaged,
was only too thankful to hear he was to be a guest
with the Buttons. But you will be tired of Jack
Hunt. My husband calls him my own particular.
Let us turn from him to yourself. I want to hear
all about your movements for the last two years."

So the two ladies talked on, cementing their
friendship. They were reminded of the passing of
time by Lenore's maid arriving to dress her lady
for dinner. Mrs. Wyld rose to go.

I am so distressed at ail this trouble we have
brought on you," said Lenore.

I am too thankful, dear, that it happened near.
We are such old friends. You surely need not
regret making this a passing home. We are
alone to-night, so do not trouble yourself with
dressing if you are tired."

So began Lenore's country-house life.

THE BEGINNING OF IT.

3TXW0 heroines in a book are generally looked
^ on as a mistake, and yet how can this story
otherwise be told ? Fascinating and dainty
Grisel must be left at her school, and the reader
must with patience trace yet a little of Lenore's
history.

A fortnight has passed since the day of the
accident. Sir James is going on well. Lenore
still wears her sling, but she has promise of speedy
release.

The party has been growing gradually in size.
The Hurst has at last packed in all it can hold.
It is Christmas-eve, and in the old oak-lined
library a merry party is assembled. The fire is
blazing brightly. Old suits of armour catch the
glow, and reflect it again in steely flashes. The
curtains are not yet drawn ; outside, one can still
distinguish that the earth is covered with a snowy

pall. In the corner by the wide chimney is the
tea-table, at which Mrs. Wyld is presiding. All
around are grouped a chattering and laughing
assemblage.

The question on the tapis is the following week's
festivities. How will there be time for all the
learning and rehearsing of parts when so much else
is to be done 1 Mr. Wyld and one or two of the
elder men are in Sir James's room ; only the
youth of the party are collected in the old
library.

You are really too good, dear Mrs. Wyld ; you
take so much trouble with it all," softly coos fat
little Mrs. Dacre. Her two daughters, in a gentle
undertone, also let their tones be heard. Fair-haired
girls, of good temper and good looks,
indispensable in a household of mixed multitude.
Mrs. Wyld thinks of everyone," the first gently
murmurs. " She is far too good," the second
continues. A pasty-faced young barrister endorses
the sentiment. The rosy countenance of the
youngest Miss Dacre has secured his everlasting
admiration.

Has anything definite been agreed upon at
all.-*" asks Miss Jerningham, in her quick, decisive
voice. " We seem to be much where we were when
we began."

"Augusta is always in such a hurry," broke in

Miss Jerningham's brother Philip ; and the young
barrister contrasted her unfavourably with the
docile and ox-eyed Miss Dacre.

I am inclined to agree with you, Miss Birmingham,"
said Mrs. Wyld. " If we are really to have
our theatricals on Monday, there will be no time to
lose. I wish my right-hand man would come.
We can arrange nothing till then."

"We might at any rate fix which parts weare
to have," again suggested Miss Jerningham.
Her powers of organisation were largely developed.
What more fitting field for their display ? " Mr.
Hunt cannot settle everything. Whom do you
propose to take the leading woman's part in the
play?"

"That I do not know," answered her hostess.
Either yourself or Miss Fenton. There are
various tableaux to be acted. Mr. Hunt has
selected them, as I wished them to be all from
Shakspeare."

Lenore, who until now had not spoken, looked
up as her name was proposed. " I would much
rather not act," she exclaimed ; "that is, unless you
wish it very much."

No more was said ; the conversation flowed on,
and Lenore relapsed again into silence. She was
sitting on a low stool in the large chimney corner.
Her head rested against the signpost of the mantelpiece,

and the firelight flickered on her face, and
lighted up the dark brown velvet and the quaint
old lace at her throat and wrists. Though silent,
she was not an inattentive listener, her parted lips
and changing expression told of the interest she
took in the discussion.

The room and its occupants made a perfect
picture, as seen from the outside through the long
window-door which opened to the garden. Up the
path leading to the house, between the old close-cut
yew hedges, the figure of a man enveloped in
an Ulster was fast approaching. The gravel
sounded crisp under the tread of his sharp footstep
; a bright spark of light and a fragrant
whiff told of the cigar between his lips.

It was too good a one to throw away — he
stopped outside the window, and watched the
scene within. He had been once or twice at
Hurst since the day of the accident, but had both
times missed seeing Miss Fenton.

It was the first time he had seen her without
her hat ; the change was even for the better.

With the eye of an experienced manager, he
took in the conflicting elements which he was to
blend into a harmonious whole.

"Where shall I find a Titania'" he thought to
himself " Not one there who would do. I dare say
Mrs. Dacre would consider either of her daughters

capable of sustaining the part ; but they must be
used up in the witches scene in ' Macbeth.' Miss
Jerningham will make a royal Lady Macbeth.
And no lack of men for minor parts. Now for the
last. Who shall be Juliet ? Miss Fenton is cut out
for it. But where is a Romeo ? Are any of the
men fit ? No. We must think of some other part
for her. I cannot have her spoilt by an unworthy
Romeo .?"

The cigar was finished ; he went forward to the
window and knocked.

Ah ! here comes my trusty bulwark at last.
Captain Stanley, will you let Mr. Hunt in .?"

The man addressed by Mrs. Wyld crossed the
room and raised the sash of the window.

We are all at sixes and sevens, Mr. Hunt. We
require your business head. Have a cup of tea
first?"

Thank you, yes. Are all my troupe collected?"
he said. "Let me see. How d'ye do,
Mrs. Dacre?" A general handshaking, and the
chorus of voices increased. Jack Hunt crossed
over to where Lenore was sitting. She thought
she was unnoticed — she had withdrawn into the
shadow.

I may consider myself introduced," he said.
We seem quite tried friends."

Lenore flushed with pleasure at the recognition

in the dusky room. What was it in this man that
so attracted her }

Yes ; friends in misfortune are on a common
footing," pleasantly remarked Mrs, Wyld.

"It was more of a friend in need, wasn't it.^"
said Lenore, forgetting her usual reticence.

Jack Hunt gave an answering glance of
sympathy ; and Miss Jerningham broke in
impatiently —

We must really come to some understanding
of our parts. Mr. Hunt cannot expect us to know
them without." ^

I stand corrected, Miss Jerningham. Let us
to business with what speed we may."

Here are my ideas," said Mrs. Wyld. " I
jotted down in black and white a sketch of division
of work. I propose we first have this farce ; it is
not above amateur powers. There are three men's
and three women's parts. What do you say to
either Miss Fenton or Miss Jerningham taking the

part of ; then Captain Stanley and Mr.

Jerningham, and you Mr. Must," turning to the
young barrister, " can take the three men. Mr.
Hunt knows better than I do for which you are
suited."

I would very much rather look at the play, if
you can do without me," broke in Lenore. " I
never acted in my life."

That makes it more easily settled," Mr. Hunt
said. " Between two stars it is difficult to choose.
Miss Jerningham's powers have been well tried."

Augusta Jerningham was in good humour again.
She and Jack had been old friends ; she could not
brook the slightest interference in her kingdom.

The discussion continued amicably. The actors
were impressed with the solemn injunction of
knowing their parts. Four scenes from Shakspeare
had been selected. Lenore was, after all, to
act Juliet. There had been such a clamour for the
hackneyed balcony scene that Mr. Hunt had perforce
to give in, and Captain Stanley was to be the
favoured Romeo.

I would like to have finished off with a telling
tableau I once saw," said Mrs. Wyld. " We must
have two men and one girl. You, Mr. Hunt, must
be one of them ; you are acting in none. Then,
Mr. Jerningham, you can be the other. Lenore,
you are only appearing in one other act ; you will
make the third. I am not going to tell my tableau
till I present it to the public."

All was now settled, the conversation was
becoming general, lights were brought in, and the
party dispersed itself into groups ; some old
engravings were produced to gather ideas for the
different costumes, and a search had to be made
for a box containing dresses of the past century.

Lenore had risen from her lowly seat and found
a quiet corner, where, unobserved, she could see
and not be seen. She felt shy and reserved
amongst the gathering, in which she was the only
stranger.

It was all so new to her, the looking on was as
yet pleasure enough. Presently, her corner was
discovered, and the other low window-seat was
occupied.

"Far from the madding crowd?" asked Jack
Hunt, interrogatively.

Distance lends enchantment to the view," she
answered. " You know, outsiders see most of the
game."

"You look upon it all, then, as a play. The
acting has already begun for you !"

I am interested," she answered. " This is a
side of life I have never seen before."

Is it as a philosopher you watch poor struggling
humanity .^" he asked, smiling at her earnestness.
Or perhaps as an actor ready for his part .?"

"Neither as acknowledged philosopher nor
actor ; only one of the interested mob !"

You despise, then, to enter the lists with the
defence of armourers" he said. "You will not play
an acknowledged party

trial has not yet come ; I may have to don
my armour some day," she answered him, gravely,

looking away past him into the room from under the
drapery of curtains by which they were surrounded.
There was silence for a few minutes, then Lenore
looked round, laughing, and suddenly changed the
conversation.

"The armour we spoke of!" she exclaimed, as a
rattling suit of chain mail was disentombed.
"Who is that decoration for .'*" she asked, raising
her voice, and with one hand holding back the
curtain.

It has been found expressly for Juliet," retorted
Captain Stanley. " I, as Romeo, have got a captivating
costume, which looks exceedingly like my
great-grandmother's gown."

Really, Captain Stanley is so amusing!" Miss
Dacre exclaimed. "You do not mean what you
say .?"

I never was more in earnest," he answered,
gravely. In the window-seat. Jack had turned to
Lenore.

The fates have conspired against you," he said.
Even Captain Stanley has declared that the
armour must be donned !"

She would not pick up the gauntlet he had
thrown down, but again asked some questions as
to what was passing in the room.

Somebody had suggested a skating party, and
plans were being laid for the day following Christmas.

Old Mr. Dacre came in from Sir James's
room.

"No hopes for you young people," he said.
The wind is rising. We shall all be out with the
hounds again by Wednesday."

His news did not seem to damp the general
spirits ; the last amusement was even better than
the first. The dressing gong sounded, there was a
move amongst the company, the ladies were going
to their rooms. Jack Hunt prepared to take his
departure ; the Buttons expected him to return for
dinner.

The meet is at Sutton Hall, on Wednesday.
Good-bye till then," and he was gone.

IN THE TWILIGHT.

DINNER passed pleasantly ; round the table
not a single break in the conversation — except,
perhaps, where Mrs. Dacre was all intent upon the
good things provided, and Mr. Must — whom unkind
fate had placed next her — looked with envious
eyes at Mr. Jerningham monopolising Miss Susan
Dacre. He turned in despair to Lenore, but she
and Captain Stanley were deep in foreign experiences
; so he had to follow Mrs. Dacre's example,
until Mrs. Wyld, seeing his forlorn condition, asked
some question that he alone could answer, and so
the conversation became general at her end of the
table.

In another hour and a-half they were all collected
in the billiard-room, and Captain Stanley
was initiating Lenore into the mysteries of pool.
Two hours more and they had dispersed, but the

evening's amusements had gone far to rub off the
last remnants of Lenore's strangeness.

Christmas Day dawned with none of its proper
whiteness — a leaden sky and fast-melting snow,
not tempting for foot passengers.

Breakfast was not till ten. Some of the ladies
were going to church, others would not brave the
weather. Captain Stanley and Mr. Jerningham
had not even made their appearance. The smoke
party had sat up very late.

The omnibus came to the door before breakfast
was finished, and there was some hurry to be at
the church in time.

Service was beginning, and the organist was
lustily playing the final chords previous to the
development of the voluntary into the Christmas
Anthem. Lenore felt conscious that their party
attracted a good deal of attention, and was only
too glad to find herself at last seated in the front
row of the gallery. She did not raise her eyes
until the hymn was over, and became aware that
the Sutton Hall seat was opposite to them, and
Mr. Hunt was there. He was watching till she
saw him, and their eyes met. After that one
recognition, Lenore did not turn that way again.

It was raining when they came out of church,
and the Christmas greetings were crowded into a
small portico. The Sutton carriage was at the

door, and being filled, when the Wylds' party at
last emerged from the narrow aisle. Two dripping
umbrellas formed a canopy in the doorway. There
was a few minutes' delay, Mrs. Sutton had some
message to give Mrs. Wyld about the programme
for the following week. " You are all expected at
lunch tomorrow," she said. " I trust to your
bringing as large a party as you can, Mrs.
Wyld."

Happy Christmas, Miss Fenton. What a
dreadful day it is ! I hope we may have a good
one tomorrow." Hunt's raiment looked impervious
to moisture. Not so Lenore, who had
stupidly forgotten her cloak.

Yes ! I suppose you huntsmen are all rejoicing
at the rain. I am selfish enough to wish the frost
had continued."

Do you not follow the hounds, Miss Fenton ?
It is such glorious sport!"

No ; I never have done so. Mr. Wyld promised
me a mount for tomorrow if my wrist had been
better, but it is not recovered sufficiently yet."

*' You will, at any rate, drive to the meet ?"

I do not think I could stand only looking on ;
it would be too tantalising."

Take care. Miss Fenton ; you are contradicting
your statement of last night, that a place among
the interested mob was all-satisfying."

It's only a woman's change of mind," she said,
laughing. '* You surely do not hold the female
sex responsible to-day for what it thought
yesterday?"

Mrs. Wyld is waiting, Miss Fenton ; here comes
Captain Stanley for you. Let me take you to the
carriage."

Do not trouble. Captain Stanley's umbrella
is already wet. Good-bye."

Then we do not meet tomorrow .-*"

Oh ! I cannot promise ; tomorrow is not today.
I may have changed my mind by that
time."

But Lenore did not change her mind, and she
saw the party start at ten o'clock the following
morning, determined to devote some hours to her
father. Mrs. Dacre was also left behind ; all the
rest went off in high spirits. Miss Jerningham was
at her very best on horseback, and with Lenore
Fenton not of the party, she expected to have a
day of unclouded enjoyment.

But things did not turn out all that her fancy
painted. The fox did not behave as was expected,
and went off in a wrong direction, the consequence
being that the party got separated, and did not
meet again during the run. Miss Jerningham had
gone with the other ladies to the probable end of
the cover, and though it only threw them out for a

few minutes, yet three or four of the men had got
a start, amongst them Mr. Hunt.

In the meantime, Lenore was almost beginning
to regret the part she had chosen. It was not
lively sitting listening for some time to Mrs.
Dacre's remarks on the news of the day, from
which she gradually dropped into the all-engrossing
topic of housekeeping botheration. Having
borne it patiently for an hour or so, she made the
excuse of going to her father, and spent the time
with him until luncheon hour ; but he was getting
irritable from the long confinement, and abused
fate for ever letting them be mixed up with the
untoward railway collision.

But the longest morning must have an end, and
the longest lunch be finished at last ; and Lenore,
in thick boots and well looped-up tweed costume,
determined to brave the muddy roads and explore
the country round.

The air was refreshing after her father's hot
room, and she quickened her pace, with the intention
of taking a round Mrs. Wyld had spoken
of.

She had been walking for upwards of an hour,
when she became conscious that the afternoon was
closing in, and that she had not found the road she
had expected that would lead her home again.
Presently she heard the sound of horses' footsteps,

and turning, saw Miss Jerninghann, Miss Dacre,
and Captain Stanley.

You are some way from home, Miss Fenton.
It is very adventurous of you going so far alone,"
the former said, as they rode up.

I have lost my way," Lenore answered. " Perhaps
you can tell me the shortest cut home. I
will make good speed, and not be long after you."

The road was pointed out, and the riders
went on.

"Have you had a good day?" Lenore called
after them.

Oh ! so charmingly delightful," exclaimed Miss
Dacre.

Not very," said Augusta Jerningham in the
same breath.

Conflicting statements, thought Lenore ; and
she fell into a pleasant train of thought respecting
the past week's experiences. She had turned off
the high road, and was crossing a grass park,
picking her steps with caution, the path in many
places lying under water. It was getting dusk,
and the air was full of a hazy blue mist ; a crimson
light in the west told of where the sun once had
tried to be. A feeling of frost in the air and the
sharp exercise had brought a bright colour into
her face.

"If you always walk at that pace, Miss Fenton,

you will manage to cross a good deal of country
during your life."

Lenore started ; she had not heard the sound of
footsteps on the turf

Oh ! it is you, Mr. Hunt. I neither heard nor
saw you. I like walking fast, and, besides, it is
late. I lost my way, but, fortunately, I met some
of the others returning from their day's sport, and
Miss Jerningham told me of this short way to The
Hurst. But I must go, as it is too dark to be out
alone."

She made a movement as if to say good-bye, but
he did not appear to notice it.

It is too dark," he said. " I am sure Mrs.
Wyld would wish me to see you home."

Oh ! please do not come out of your way."
But he had dismounted, and was leading his horse
beside her before she could stop him. The lights
from The Hurst shone brightly through the trees,
and Lenore hurried her steps.

You need not walk so fast now, Miss Fenton ;
you know, you are no longer alone. Tell me, do
you often take solitary walks like this V*

I could do nothing else to-day, when I was left
in solitary state with Mrs. Dacre ; besides, I like a
walk with no company but my own."

I wonder," he said, glancing at the bright, calm
face looking so fully up at him, " if you will ever

know the feeling of dread of your own company.
There do come times in one's life when the one
wish, the one endeavour, is never to be alone ;
when the rush of business, the whirl of gaiety, the
society even of jarring companions, is preferable
far even to the silence in which one stands alone
with the knowledge that I am I."

There was a moment's pause before Lenore
spoke, and then she said with some diffidence —

Surely all men, and some women also, must
pass through it who ever attain to any intellectual
greatness. I may be wrong, but it seems to me
that it is not till this second birth, if I may call it
so, has been passed through, that anyone can really
comprehend what he is, or be able to help effectually
his storm-tossed brethren."

You understand it then," he answered ; " you
have felt what I mean ; and, having established
your footing, you love your solitary walks, you
know where and what you are .''"

I did not mean to infer my own experiences ;
they are yet too crude to be of any value. I speak
of what I have noticed in others."

If you watch so closely and so calmly, would
you from your standpoint of safety reach a hand
to some struggling brother .?"

My help, I fear, would be but inefficient. I
would gladly throw the rope that would save him.

University Of ILLINOIS
LIBRARY.

It would lie with himself whether he would accept
it or no. I could not be the rope myself."

"And the rope, what do you say it is?" he asked,
eagerly. They were within the hedge of The
Hurst garden by this time. Down the pathway
the light streamed in a ruddy glow from the fire-illumined
library. The eagerness of his question
startled her. She stood still a moment, and waited
before she gave the answer.

And the rope, what do you say it is V he again
repeated. " Can one find an escape from oneself
in the closest of all ties in human life V

The saving povv^er, the rope I speak of, is it not
Faith, which can pierce the veil of the unseen,
which can unite one so with the other world that
one no longer is overpowered with one's individual
solitude } It seems to me that human companionship,
even of the closest kind, can be a help —
nothing more."

She stopped, suddenly aware of the earnestness
with which she was speaking. There was a shadow
fell across the path.' Some one had entered the
library.

I must really say good-bye now," Lenore said
at last ; " we have dropped into a philosophical
discussion, in which I have aired some of my old-world
theories."

Forgive me for detaining you so long," Jack

answered. " The old-world theories have a ring
of truth in them. Will you another day be my
teacher?"

You reverse the order of things," she said, and
held out her hand.

Good-bye," he said. The door opened, and he
left her.

She was conscious of the parting pressure, even
after she had taken off her things, and formed one
of the merry group round the afternoon tea-table,
where she was laughingly cross-questioned as to
how she had lost and found her way ; but she
kept a discreet silence as to the companion of her
homeward walk.

TABLEAUX VI V ANTS.

A CHANCE meeting, a new friendship, a few
days' companionship, perhaps a few conversational
tete-actes, perhaps not even so much, and
it has been done, the channel of life has been forever
changed. All this has been written hundreds
of times, and yet humanity has not yet learnt that
one's course in this world rests entirely on the
little things. Women, and men also, are always
watching for the great events which are to form
their destinies, and the trivial meeting is unnoticed ;
afterwards, looking back, it is the peg on which is
hung the man's future history.

And so it was with Jack Hunt and Lenore. He
had not lived for fifteen years in London, continually
moving in the best society, without having
formed some idea of what a woman ought to be.
In the crowded salons of Belgravia, he had often

looked for the face which was to claim his life's
devotion. " Many a time he had loved for a
minute," and with the ardour which characterised
his whole nature, he had followed up the new
acquaintanceship, only to find that for him the
exquisitely beautiful fruit contained at heart
nothing but ashes. And now, at last, surely he
had discovered what he sought. The fruit was
not so fair, perhaps, to look upon as what had
tempted him in the past years ; it seemed to him
to hang far above his reach, more as if a star from
heaven had fallen and become entangled in the
topmost branches of the tree which he longed so
to climb.

And yet what had he to offer to tempt this
desirable star to shine for him ? To have begun
to make a name for oneself by no means implies
having begun to make a fortune ; and though a
horridly matter-of-fact view of the subject for any
lover to take. Jack knew quite well he need not
approach Sir James on the subject of his admiration
for his daughter, without being able to back up
the admiration so well expressed by a similarly
well-expressed system of ways and means — the
pounds, shillings, and pence of daily life.

He could not yet tell if he had awakened any
interest in Lenore, and after leaving her at The
Hurst on the afternoon before mentioned, he discussed

seriously with himself if the more honourable
course to pursue would not be to throw up his
mastership and flee from the charms of the syren.
Then a long string of objections immediately presented
themselves against this mode of procedure.
It would be unfair to leave Mrs. Wyld in the lurch ;
it would spoil the pleasure of the Christmas party.
He was strong enough surely to live through the
next week without either letting himself or anyone
else take much harm. It would be pusillanimous
to run when no one was in danger but himself.
The last argument was decisive ; he would stay and
brave it out.

But it is difficult always to control the actions
and events into which one is thrown when one is
but a unit in a whole ; and for the week following
Christmas there were no end of meetings, at which
the newly-kindled flame gathered strength. It was
not his fault that the staff of actors were wholly
unequal to their parts, and that to get the acting
to a proper state of perfection there must be daily
rehearsals.

Nor was it his fault that Lenore did not act in
the play, but formed audience, or assisted as stage
manager, or made herself generally useful.

It was all very pleasant and delightful, and the
week was running fast away ; in another day all
danger would be over — they would part, in all

probability not to meet again. Surely not to sip
the honey of life would be ingratitude.

How plausible it all sounded. There is nothing
that man cannot talk himself into thinking.

And over Lenore the subtle spell was unconsciously
creeping — an intense enjoyment of her
daily, nay, hourly existence, a slight amount of impatience
against her father's demands on her time,
always stamped down and rewarded by an extra
half-hour spent in his society, when the beguiling
voices crept across the passage from the library,
where the rehearsals took place, and peals of distant
laughter told of the fun within.

She did not make an analysis of her happiness.
She lived and learned to love unknown as yet to
herself.

The day of the acting dawned at last ; all
morning the final touches were to be given to the
different costumes. A full-dress rehearsal was
immediately to precede the play. A large gathering
of neighbours were to be assembled, and after
the acting was over, the festivities were to end
with a dance. Such was the programme prepared
by the Wylds for the amusement of their guests.

In the week spent together, a kind of friendship
had sprung up between Augusta Jerningham and
Lenore, sorely against the inclinations of the former
; but Lenore was utterly ignorant of any cause

why her society should be disagreeable to Augusta,
and Miss Jerningham on her side found her policy
best to be on good terms with the general
favourite.

After lunch on the day in question, Mrs. Wyld
proposed that they should go for a walk to refresh
themselves in the evening, and chance threw the
two girls together. Immediately following them
were Mrs. Wyld and Miss Dacre ; while still further
in the background, the rest of the party were
linked together in twos and threes. Conversation
flagged at times between Lenore and Miss
Jerningham, and snatches of what those behind
them were saying filled up the pauses.

Lenore heard her own name mentioned, and involuntarily
she overheard what was said ; but as the
talk became personal, Mrs. Wyld's voice dropped
to a lower one. Suddenly she was roused from
silence by Miss Jerningham's voice —

You are really in dreamland. Miss Fenton. I
have asked the same question three times, and can
get no answer."

"I beg your pardon," Lenore answered, utterly
confused at her own obliviousness.

For the fourth time, then, what is the tableau
that you and Philip and Mr. Hunt are to act
to-nights?"

Has your brother not told you ? It is a most

sensational composition, and I rebelled against my
character, which is to be your brother's good angel.
He and Mr. Hunt are to be playing chess. Mr.
Hunt, as Mephistopheles, is supposed to be playing
for his victim's soul. I, in the background, with
wings and all in keeping, am watching the final
play of the game. I suppose it is a good piece of
effect, and your brother looks horrible, with his
disordered hair, an empty bottle and glass beside
him, and his nervous hands clutching at the pieces ;
while, with a diabolical sneer, Mephistopheles is
preparing for the checkmate move."

It will suit Mr. Hunt very well ; he likes to put
on a show of cynicism even in ordinary life. He
thinks it goes down well with women," added Miss
Jerningham, with a laugh.

Does he ? I had not observed it. He is
always so bright and pleasant, I should not have
given him credit for such devices."

Wait till you know him a little better. He is
always so devote at first, but it soon passes off.
Mrs. Wyld, I am trying to instil some of my
opinions about Mr. Hunt into Miss Fenton."

Don't believe Augusta, Miss Fenton. I quite
take your side in defence of the absent."

But I was defending no one," laughed Lenore.
"I only said I had not yet discovered that Mr.
Hunt was a cynic."

There are cynics and cynics," answered Mrs.
Wyld, " which my husband would say was my usual
clear way of putting things. You may go a very
long way before you find a man who has lived so
much with so small a vein of cynicism."

Why, Mrs. Wyld, I had no idea that Mr. Hunt
had so staunch a supporter. May we add you to
the list of his devotees ? He must be rather proud
of his string of conquests. Miss Fenton, I think,
bids fair to become one also."

Lenore coloured uncomfortably, and did not
speak, but Mrs. Wyld answered, with some sharpness,
" Don't talk nonsense, Augusta. If the list is
really to be made, it must be done alphabetically,
and I suppose you know what that implies ; but
enough of such nonsensical talk. I think we ought
not to go much farther, or you ladies will be overtired
to-night."

The conversation turned to general subjects, but
Lenore was silent. She was glad to find herself at
home again, and slipped away to her room for
half-an-hour's rest.

She drew an arm-chair towards the fire, determined
to be lazy for a short time. She felt
irritable and out of humour. Augusta Birmingham's
words had struck sharply, and Lenore was
cross with herself for being so easily put out of
temper. She was indignant, too, at the imputation

of being only too ready to be one of Mr. Hunt's
admirers, and the glimmer of truth in it made her
indignation all the more poignant.

She would studiously avoid him all evening, and
show Miss Jerningham what utter nonsense her
words had been.

She went downstairs, determined to carry her
resolution into effect, and hearing Mr. Hunt's
voice amongst those in the library, she turned into
her father's room. The post had just come in, and
Sir James was opening a pile of letters when his
daughter entered.

"Pleasant to be remembered," said he, good
humoured. "Not by you, my dear," seeing his
daughter's look of surprise. " It was only a letter
from an old friend that made me benignly philanthropical.
There, you can look at it for yourself.
The man 's a good deal younger than I am, and in
the days gone by he had every right to owe me a
grudge, as I won what he also desired. I suppose
it is the memory of your mother, child, which
makes him so desirous of seeing you."

Lenore lifted the open note from the table, and
read the kind, formal expressions of sympathy
with her father's misfortune, and passed on to the
latter half, in which he warmly pressed an invitation
to Sir James to come and see his old friend,
and bring his daughter; he Ravished to make

her acquaintance for the sake of "auld langsyne."


Who and what is he ?" asked Lenore, as she
came to the end and read the simple signature of
Meredith."

Fred Barton joined my old regiment when I
was senior lieutenant. He did not remain long in
the service. Unfortunately for him, we both fell in
love with your mother. He was some years her
junior, but the liking was no less lasting. He left
the army, and wandered about the world. His
uncle, then Lord Meredith, gave him a liberal
allowance ; Fred was his heir, and the old lord
died only three or four years ago. Fred must bea
man of fifty now — dear me, how time flies !"

"We must find him out whenever we go
up to town. I like his letter; it is out of the
common."

A knock at the door, and Captain Stanley
entered.

"You are required. Miss Fenton, about something
or other. We are to dine at five o'clock, to
give plenty of time for dressing and rehearsal, and
things are not yet all settled; your valuable advice
is wanted."

"What it is to be a person of consequence, Captain
Stanley !" said Lenore, following him out of
the room.

I agree with you, Miss Fenton, especially when
it is so well deserved."

No civil speeches, please ; I don't like them."

The words did not escape Jack Hunt, who was
standing near the door when they entered ; and
when Lenore passed him without notice, though
they had not previously met that day, apparently
engrossed in aimless repartee with Captain Stanley,
Mr. Hunt's temper was not improved.

Here you are, Lenore. We require your valuable
advice. There is a discussion as to which of
the tableaux is to be acted first."

I should have thought you ought to settle that,
Mrs. Wyld ; but it cannot much signify."

Now, Miss Fenton, listen to me," said Philip
Jerningham, crossing the room and planting himself
before her. " You must hear the whole state
of the case. Augusta says "

No, no, that 's not fair, Mr. Jerningham ; no
names mentioned, please," exclaimed the hostess.

Well, then, to begin again. Some one says
that the tableau in which you and I are to take
such conspicuous parts ought to precede the Hesperian
ones, being of a much lower order of merit
not very civil to you and me, but never mind
that. Secondly, some one else says that as a piece
of stage effect it would make a good wind-up. Now
what we want to know is this : Whether would

you prefer remaining for the rest of the evening in
the dress of Juliet, or as my good angel ?"

Don't be ridiculous, Philip," exclaimed his
sister.

Thank you ! If that is all, I am going to
change my dress before dancing," Lenore answered.
I leave the decision to Mrs. Wyld."

In that case," Mrs. Wyld said, " it shall rest as
it was first arranged. Do you know dinner is to
be in ten minutes ? So we had better make haste."

There was a general, hurried dispersion. Lenore
and Mrs. Wyld were the last ladies to leave the
room.

Miss Fenton, there is another thing Mr. Hunt
is anxious to know," said Philip, mischievously
following Lenore to the door, which Jack was
holding open. " In this wonderful tableau, are
you going to regard me sorrowfully or Mr. Hunt
viciously, for it is of great moment to both of
us?"

Oh, you most sorrowfully, certainly. Angels
have nothing to do with the powers of darkness."

That 's one for you. Hunt," and Lenore gave
Philip a laughing nod as she left the room.

Dinner was over ; all the actors had retired to
don their various costumes, and already a motley
group was collecting behind the scenes. The
Hurst was peculiarly well adapted for theatricals,

as wide, sliding doors separated the drawing-rooms,
and in the smaller of the two a stage and footlights
had been put up.

Lenore was finishing her toilette ; neither of her
parts was till near the end, and she heard the
various bedroom doors close as the occupants,
armed cap-d-pie^ descended to the arena.

At last she could no longer delay, though much
more inclined to remain where she was. She felt
as if things were all crooked ; she did not understand
her mixed feelings.

She opened her door, and passed swiftly along
the old oak corridor, hastening down the dimly-lighted
stair. A door opened on the first landing,
and Lenore started back. Mephistopheles was
beside her.

I beg your pardon. Miss Fenton ; I did not
mean to startle you."

You look horrible," she exclaimed, continuing
her course past him downstairs.

Won't you speak to me t What have I done
to offend you .-* Tell me."

We are late," she said ; " they must be all
waiting for us."

I forgot that you would have nothing to do
with an angel of darkness," he exclaimed, bitterly;
but you are not yet robed in angel garb. Has
Juliet no sympathy V

Do not talk nonsense, Mr. Hunt. I am both
an unwilling Juliet and angel."

Then as your own true self you will not thus
utterly despise me. You will promise me the first
and last waltzes to-night, will you not }"

They had reached the drawing-room door, and
Lenore put forward her hand to open it, but stayed
a moment in the act ; she turned her face towards
him, and a bright smile played about her mouth
and eyes.

"If Mephistopheles will also be himself, I will
dance with him."

No time for more ; she instantly turned the
handle, and they were amongst the others.

Mrs. Wyld saw the light in Lenore's eyes as
she entered. She wondered what had brought it
there.

The bell was ringing for the curtain to rise.
The rehearsal had been a complete success, and
Augusta, with triumph and excitement written in
every feature, was just going before the audience.

The non-actors of the moment were watching
from behind the screen. There was a roar of
applause as the first scene closed. Mrs. Wyld left
the spectators for a moment to assure the actors
of the universal approval.

It is all owing to you, Mr. Hunt. We could
never have achieved the success without you."

He answered the correct speech for the occasion :

Not me, Mrs. Wyld ; the actors deserve the
thanks."

The wheels may all be there," she said ; " it
requires the mainspring to set them going."

And now things went on rapidly. The play was
over. Augusta had been called before the curtain.
She had made the success of it.

You did splendidly. Miss Jerningham," said
Mr. Hunt ; " let me congratulate you."

She was passing behind the scenes on her way
to the green-room to change her dress for the part
of Lady Macbeth. The other characters were
already most of them in costume.

"Where is Juliet.-^" asked Romeo, and the two
were soon arranged. The curtain rose, waited a
minute, and fell again. A clamorous demand
arose for a repetition, and once more the curtain
drew slowly up. Lenore felt a nervous disposition
to laugh, and was thankful when released from her
balcony.

Then followed the other three tableaux, and
before the last all the performers had joined the
audience.

When the curtain rose, there was a murmur of
applause. The subject might verge on clap-trap
effect, but it was a telling picture. As before
described, a chess table formed the centre of the

group. Mephistopheles and his victim were deep
in the game ; the complete misery and recklessness
of the man were splendidly portrayed. His hand
was on a piece, but there was hesitation in the
movement — a better influence was making itself
felt — his sable majesty bending forward, watching
the play with a sardonic grin. In wonderful relief
to the horror of the picture was the figure of the
angel in the background.

Something in the scene had really touched
Lenore, and a wonderfully pitying expression
rested on her face. Her hair fell to her waist in a
dark rippling mass, and the perfect purity of
her snow-white dress and wings completed the
whole.

The curtain rose and fell three times, and yet
the spectators were not satisfied. They must have
one more look. It rose for the last time, was just
falling, when some one among the audience gave a
scream.

Mephistopheles sprang from his seat and tore
down the drapery behind Lenore. It was some
flimsy material, and a fortnight at the corner,
wafted by the successive rising and falling of the
curtain, made it take fire.

There was a few minutes' scuffle, it was out, and
they were all congratulating themselves it was no
worse. Mr. Hunt had burnt his hand, and Miss

Fenton had had a very narrow escape ; her wings
were singed, and the curtain was in ashes.

The forms were being cleared away, and the
company were moving to the old hall, where
dancing was to take place.

Lenore went up to her room to change her dress.
Her face was deadly pale, but she had not uttered
a sound, even when, on looking round, she had
seen the burning curtain behind her.

Philip Jerningham was crossing the hall as she
once more descended the staircase.

You have to thank Mr. Hunt for your life,
Miss Fenton. I never saw a thing more pluckily
done."

ALMOST TOLD.

y T was late the following morning before any of
^ the party assembled in the breakfast-room.

Dancing had continued until an early hour, and
not even the knowledge that they were to disperse
that day proved sufficient to collect the scattered
forces. Lenore had slept but little ; the unwonted
gaiety had chased the god away who is wooed
back with such difficulty when once put to flight.

She was in her father's room at the usual hour,
and she, with Mrs. Wyld, had finished breakfast
before any of the others appeared. Mrs. Wyld
went to her household duties, and Lenore found
a resting-place in the window seat of the library.
She 'was suffering from the reaction of the previous
evening, and the general break-up of the party did
not tend to raise her spirits.

It had all been very pleasant and delightful, but
it was over, and what had been the good of it all,

save making pleasant friends and arousing new
interests which, as far as she could see, had but a
poor chance of ever going any further? There
had been plans laid for meeting in town in May,
but May seemed a long way off, and town was a
wide word. She was in an overtired, overstrained
mood, ready to make mountains of molehills.

She' opened the glass door and let the air blow
on her heated temples. The day was too mild for
the time of year, and through the leafless branches
the distant country looked damp and hazy from
rising moisture ; a stillness lay on everything —
even the rooks cawed lazily.

Outward objects were acting on Lenore's frame
of mind with a lulling mesmeric influence — in fact,
she was very nearly asleep, when her eye was
attracted by a figure coming along the path to the
garden. There was no mistaking who it was, and
her pulses gave a quick throb of pleasure. She
had not said good-bye to Mr. Hunt the previous
evening ; Mrs. Sutton had carried him off before
the final dance, and Miss Jerningham had said he
had told her that he was going south by the first
train.

He was making his way to the front door, but
turned up the path, as he espied Lenore's figure at
the window.

I thought you were leaving this morning," she

said, " and I was sorry not to have seen you again ;
because "

You did not think I was going away without
saying good-bye ?" he broke in.

Because," she continued, " I did not thank you
last night for what you did ; believe me, I am very
grateful."

Jack scarcely had courage to stop her thanks ;
she looked so charming, standing in the fresh
morning light, too shy to raise her eyes, and the
faintest flush stealing into her face.

"And you know," she went on, as the silence
continued, " but for you, I hardly dare to think
what might have happened."

Still the silence remained unbroken.

Are my thanks too tardy, Mr. Hunt, that you
take no notice of them t I could not thank you
last night for such a service amongst all the dazzle
of light and whirl of music."

•' Do you think," he answered at last, very
gravely, " that I remained silent because I was unheeding
} No — a thousand times, no ! — but because
I have grown to love the sound of your voice more
than any other sound that is in nature, and not
even when you were giving me such undeserved
thanks could I rouse myself from the spell."

It was Lenore now to be silent. What could she
answer to such an avowal t She stood and waited

for what must come next, and her eyes rested
dreamily on the slumbering landscape. She was
all unconscious of the gaze fastened on her. It
seemed as if she had lived the scene before in some
other life — it was but the echo of a dreamt-of chord
that came to her.

Complete silence rested on all their surroundings
; in the distance was heard the cackle of
geese at the neighbouring farm, and the call of
the ploughman to his team. It was too far off to
disturb them ; only when a ripple of laughter came
to them through oak-lined walls from the adjoining
breakfast-room did Jack rouse himself from his
reverie.

He turned to Lenore, and in tones rendered
hurried by the sound of approaching footsteps, he
exclaimed, " Do you think that this fortnight is to
pass from my life and leave it as it was before ?
Do you dream that the shadow of so much purity
and goodness has been permitted to fall upon my
path, and no trace of the snow be left which has
fallen from heaven ? Thank God, I may return to
the grimy atmosphere of my town life with a
firmer sense of the goodness and truth still left
in the world ; and for this I have to thank you,
Lenore."

Oh, hush ! you must not call me that ; and they

There was the sound of the dining-room door
opening, and the hum of voices increased.

Only one thing will you promise me — that
when you come to town in spring I may come
and see you, and then, perhaps," he said, " you
will let me tell you what I have no right to
say now ; not," he added as if more to himself
than her — " not until I see my way clearer before
me.

There was time for no more ; the door opened
and the Jerninghams entered, followed by Miss
Dacre, but Lenore had escaped by the glass door,
and had gained the shelter of her own room. Fora
few minutes, at any rate, she would rather not
face the public.

The ubiquitous !" exclaimed Philip. " I thought
you were going by the first train, Hunter'"

I usurped a woman's privilege, and changed my
mind."

Dear me," said Augusta, scanning the room,
Mrs. Wyld said Miss Fenton was here. I want
her to show me that piece of work."

You have not seen her. Hunt .?" asked Philip.

I have just entered the room. Has Miss
Fenton been seen this morning?"

Oh yes !" said Miss Dacre, good-naturedly.
She was with her father at the usual hour."

It 's very strange," said Augusta ; " I know she

was here five minutes ago, for Mrs. Wyld told
me so."

Well, Miss Jerningham, it 's my loss, as
I am at this moment on my way to the
station, and must say good-bye to everyone here
assembled."

If you had come in by the door, instead of this
way, you would have found us all in the breakfast-room,
Mr. Hunt"

Except Miss Fenton, Augusta ; you forget
that," said her brother.

Shall I let Mrs. Wyld know you are here ?
She will be sorry to miss you ;" and Miss Dacre
hurried off to find their hostess.

The lost one has been found. Your disappearance
has been causing us all much anxiety. Miss
Fenton, as we had Mrs. Wyld's testimony that you
were in the library, yet no one would own to having
seen you."

Lenore had entered almost unobserved, when
Mr. Jerningham's remark turned the attention of
the company upon her.

Good morning, Miss Fenton ; you are just intime
to say farewell. I am on my way to the
station."

Lenore had forgotten the necessity to appear as
if they had not already met, and she felt Miss
Jerningham's sharp eyes watching her.

I did not think we were to have the pleasure
of seeing you this morning, Mr. Hunt."

Miss Jerningham did not tell you, then, of the
pleasure in store for you V

"You did not leave me charged with a message,
Mr. Hunt," Augusta exclaimed. " The chances of
your appearance from what you said seemed to be
so very problematical, that I saved them the pain
of disappointment."

"Always the same. Miss Jerningham, always
thinking of others."

Jack bowed low as he laid the above compliment
at Augusta's feet. She did not receive it as he
expected, and answered sharply —

There are two ways of thinking of others ;
which do you mean V

Now for a passage of arms between my sister
and Hunt. There is something about you, Jack,
that seems to raise the pugilistic tendency in
Augusta. It is most refreshing to have a discord
at times ; the harmony of our party might otherwise
prove monotonous."

"I fear, Philip, I have no time to lay myself out for
general amusement this morning. My time is up."

Then came "Good-bye" all round, and Mr.
Wyld accompanied his guest to the door. Footsteps
were heard returning, and once more Mr.
Hunt appeared.

Do you think I might disturb your father so
early, Miss Fenton ? I do not like to go without
seeing him."

I will come and see," Lenore answered.

In the hall they were alone, and he had time for
one word more before they parted.

You gave me no answer," he said. " You did
not give me leave to hunt you out when you come
to town."

Didn't I — yes, of course, you may come. I
know my father will be delighted to see you."

He gave the slightest stamp of impatience.

That is not what I wish to know. Will soit be
glad to see me } I will not come near you unless ;
this cannot continue as an ordinary friendship.
It lies completely in your hands whether we are
ever to meet again or not. Better far to give mea
decided answer now, and so save misery in the
future."

You are unreasonable, Mr. Hunt. I see no
reason why in the future we are to avoid each other.
I, for one, will be very glad to meet in spring."

Thank you ; you need not say more. I must
go."

You have not seen my father."
He pulled out his watch. " I have not a moment
to lose. Will you say all kind things from me, and
wishes for his complete recovery ?"

Good-bye," he continued, taking both her hands
in his. " Good-bye, Lenore."

She raised her eyes one moment to his, and a
bright warm colour stole over her face. Then
softly she said the form of farewell so much more
to her than our cold good-bye — " A Dieu !"

A Dieu !" he answered, and she was left alone
in the large, quiet hall, surrounded by a great
happiness that she had never felt before.

Moments of bliss are not of long duration, nor
of frequent occurrence either, and Lenore was
awakened from her earthly paradise by the sound
of her father's voice. His temper was not gaining
much of the heavenly element, and Lenore had to
make every allowance to herself for him, that her
filial sentiments should undergo no disarrangement.
It may have been that she was less in a
humour to bear with him, but he certainly seemed
to her more than ordinarily cantankerous that
morning.

My dear, I thought you were never coming in.
Whom were you talking to in the hall } John went
away some time ago and forgot to give me my
newspaper, and here I am, an utterly cumbersome,
useless log — must wait for some Samaritan to give
me a thing lying two yards off."

I am so sorry. Father. I hope you had not
been waiting long. Mr. Hunt came to say goodbye,

and he sent you all kind of messages and
hopes for your speedy recovery."

*' Why couldn't he come in and give me them
himself? He was near enough my room."

I saw him in the hall, Father, and he was in a
great hurry."

It looked very like it, when he could stand
chattering to you for so long. Really this house
is so abominably full of echoes that one never has
peace to read or anything."

Lenore busied herself in arranging her father's
papers, knowing that silence was by far the safest
course. But the storm was still muttering, and
presently broke out again,

I suppose those people all leave to-day. It 's
just as well. In my young days, such a thing was
never heard of as a house filled with young men
and women, allowed to do just as they like without
anyone to say them nay."

But, Papa, you forget Colonel and Mrs. Dacre;
they are surely chaperon enough."

Old fools ! Would not have sense to see,

though you were all going straight to the

humph!"

Besides, you know, after all, what have we
done save amuse ourselves most innocently ?"

It 's all very well, very well ; but we were
taught in my young days that too much familiarity

breeds contempt. The present generation would
do well to study that."

Would you like me to read you the leader in
the Times? I heard Mr. Hunt say that it was
well worth looking at to-day."

"There you go! — always Mr. Hunt this, and
Mr. Hunt that. Now understand, once for all,
that when you go with me to London I will have
none of these goings on. I will have no Mr. Hunt
or any young man coming to loaf about the house;
so you may make up your mind to do without
them. A pack of hungry fortune-hunters continually
round my daughter ! I won't stand it !"

Lenore had kept perfectly calm till now, but
there was an angry flash in her eyes at the last
imputation.

I had better tell you at once, Papa, that Mr.
Hunt asked me for our address in town, which
I gave him. He is coming to see us. I never
dreamt for a moment that you could possibly
object."

Hunt be hanged !" Sir James finished with a
final growl, and took up his paper without another
word.

Lenore left the room without speaking. It was
a troublous ending to her bright morning, and she
felt there might be dangers in the unknown waters
in front of her.

Dear me, how I wish we had never met !" But
no ! the thought just passed through her mind ; it
could find no resting-place. Above all the bother
and worry, she was conscious of a happiness, all
her own, which was yet too new and strange for
any rubs of daily life to soil.

"WHERE THE BROOK AND RIVER MEET."

THE months ran on, and Easter was come and
gone. London was awaking from its winter
sleep, and preparing itself for the coming campaign.
In the parks the trees were bursting into green ;
the air was full of the soft, life-giving feeling never
known at any other time of year. In a garden,
surrounded by four high walls, stood a large,
old-fashioned mansion, respectability indelibly
inscribed on everything appertaining to it. It
was the school selected by Mr. Romney's two
elderly and very maidenly sisters at which their
dear youngest niece was to receive the polish to
her education. The choice had been a subject
of grave consideration, for neither of the Miss
Romneys could at all approve the advanced
system of education which characterises the
present day — the liberal system of thought, shall
we call it ?

From their house in Cavendish Square, they
could at intervals descend upon the training establishment
they had selected in Upper Wormwood, and
see what progress their niece was making.

It was a very happy life Grisel Romney led with
the eight or nine other girls who had also been
entrusted to Miss Deborah Tufton's care — a life
of work and play and bright anticipation of the
future. Grisel's room was at the very top of the
house, and, sitting at the window learning her
lessons, she could watch the sun flash on the
palace roof, and hear an echo of the music, sometimes,
as it floated to her on the sun-kissed air ;
and when the lessons were learnt, she would produce
her oft-read packet of home letters, pages
from Sybil and Bryde, interspersed here and therewith
a few lines from Tom at Oxford, more valued
because they came at all than for what they contained,
brevity .being their leading feature; and
then one other letter, with which she always ended
her inspection, the only one she had ever received
from Reggie Mainwaring, telling her all had been
settled, and his mother had consented to give a
ball, at which she, Griselda Romney, was first to
burst upon the world. The letter had been received
some time before, and it wanted but a few weeks
of the long-desired month of June.

Grisel was sitting one morning, as usual, at her

window, idly watching the man working in the
garden ; her pile of books lay beside her, a newly-written
exercise was drying in the sun — Grisel's
blotting-paper was never to be found.

Presently she heard wheels stop at their gate ;
this was an unusual piece of excitement at so early
an hour.

She went forward to the window to see what
daring intruder had ventured to break upon their
convent-like seclusion. The path from the gate
led through a shrubbery, and at last Grisel, breathlessly
watching, descried a man's hat. It was only
seen for a moment, and then disappeared behind a
bush, and Grisel drew back with her curiosity
unsatisfied.

A few minutes passed, and a message came that
Miss Romney was wanted in the drawing-room.
Grisel dashed downstairs, and halted for a moment
behind the door that she might make her entrance
decorously. Miss Deborah was standing talking
to a tall young man, saying something about herself,
Grisel heard. " Miss Romney would be much
missed when she went away "

"Tom!" exclaimed Grisel. "Oh! why didn't
you let me know you were comings"

The tears were in her eyes from the gladness of
her surprise, and she threw her arms round Tom's
neck as he stooped to kiss her.

That will do, Grisette. Miss Tufton will think
you a very demonstrative young lady."

Grisel drew back hastily ; she had forgotten the
presence of a third party.

Grisel, my dear, your brother has come to ask
if you can be spared for a day. Your aunt
wishes you to be with her this evening, and has
undertaken to see you safely home again tomorrow."


"May I go, Miss Tufton.? Please say 'yes'"
impetuously exclaimed Grisel.

Yes, you may go ; but you must make haste,
your aunt's carriage is waiting."

Grisel darted off.

"Take an opera cloak with you, Grisette, or
whatever is necessary. I believe we are going to
Her Majesty's house to-night."

Miss Tufton offered apologies for leaving Mr.
Romney alone, and followed her pupil to see that'
all was right.

Half-an-hour later, Tom and Grisel were on their
way back to town.

You will find some one you do not expect at
Aunt Griselda's, Grisette. I persuaded them to let
me bring Bryde up with me from home. It was
all settled in a few hours' time, and she is to stay
at Cavendish Square till you return, six weeks
after this."

And Sybil — is she there also ?"

No ; Sybil had to remain to look after our
father. We only arrived yesterday, and I am due
at Oxford tomorrow."

Oh !" said Grisel, with a deep sigh of content ;
it is too delightful. Whatever made you think
of it?"

'* When are you going to grow up, La Grise ?
Do you know you look as much like a child as
ever?"

Tom made the above remark as they were
nearing their destination, and all the way Grisel
had laughed and talked in the old childish
manner.

Aunt Griselda told me I would be so surprised
at the great improvement — so much quieter and
less boyish than you used to be."

But I am not grown up yet, Tom. I needn't
be quiet for six weeks yet. Of course, I was like a
white mouse when both my aunts and Miss Deborah
inspected me ; but it was all put on, Tom, I can
assure you."

And what would Miss Deborah say if she
thought it was all put on .?"

Oh, Miss Deborah is a dear old prig ; but you
needn't tell our aunts that."

You are incorrigible, Grisette."

You wouldn't expect me to be different to my

dear old boy. You wouldn't like it, Tom, would
you?"

Grisel laid her hand with an endearing gesture
on her brother's shoulder. Tom did not shake it
off. He was like the rest of her slaves. Though
he hated any demonstration of affection, he would
bear anything from Grisel.

What a day that was in Grisel's history ! She
was so glad to see Bryde, and it was such fun to
go about town with no one but Tom ; and even
her aunts seemed pleased that she should have one
day without any restriction upon her.

At last the evening came, and Grisel went to
attire herself for dinner.

There is a friend of your brother's to be at
dinner, Bryde," Miss Romney said.

Who is it, Tom .'*" asked Grisel.

An Oxford chum — Philip Jerningham."

Grisel never could tell collectedly afterwards
how it all happened. She had a hazy idea of
feeling very shy on being introduced to Mr.
Jerningham, and proud of Bryde, who was completely
at her ease.

The dinner passed in pleasant, lively chit-chat.
The two elderly Miss Romneys were very wide-awake,
and entered fully into the badinage that
passed.

Then the carriage came to the door, and after

that Grisel, for the first time in her life, entered an
opera house. She found herself sitting between
her aunt and Tom. Mr. Jerningham was next
Bryde ; he was giving her his undivided attention.
In her sparkling beauty, with her scarlet cloak
thrown round her, she was perfect in Philip's eyes.
His half-dictatorial, half-playful way of asserting
his own opinion had a charm for Bryde.

Bryde and Philip seem to be excellent friends,
La Grise. What fun it is watching them!" Tom
whispered.

Bryde is friends with everyone," answered
Grisel, " so long as they are not afraid of her."

So you have found out Bryde's peculiarities.
Miss Grisel. When did you begin to open your
eyes to other people's doings .?"

*' I learnt it at Miss Tufton's. She always says
that she particularly dislikes young ladies being
unobservant of others' feelings."

Did you read all Miss Tufton's rules backwards.
La Grise } But we must be silent. You
are missing all the overture."

I am listening with one ear," answered Grisel,
meekly, " which is more than either Bryde or Mr.
Jerningham is doing."

But the curtain was rising, and Grisel's attention
continued unbroken until the end of the first act.
She was wrapt up in the story of Leonora in

Verdi's " Trovatore." The prima donna was singing
gloriously, and the first act ended in a roar of
applause.

Oh ! isn't it perfect, Tom ? I never imagined
it could be half as nice. How I wish Aunt Sybil
had been able to come ! Don't you think it
charming, Aunt Griselda .^ I never enjoyed anything
so much before."

Grisel, with laughing eyes and quickly varying
colour, turned from one to another to claim their
sympathy.

Mr. Jerningham was leaving his seat for a few
minutes ; he saw friends in the distance, and was
going to speak to them. He disappeared, but
presently they saw him join an elderly man and,
evidently, his daughter. Both welcomed him
cordially, but there was only time for a few minutes'
talk before Philip resumed his seat.

That is Sir James Fenton," he said to Bryde,
and his daughter. I spent a charming fortnight
with them last Christmas at a mutual friend's
house in Yorkshire. That military-looking man
next them is Lord Meredith, an old friend of Sir
James, with whom they have been staying for
some weeks. I believe he has put house, carriages,
everything at Miss Fenton's disposal while she
is in town. On dit, that she might be Lady
Meredith."

G

He is far too old, and she looks too nice to do
such a thing," Grisel broke in. She had been
listening to what had passed.

Not so very much difference after all, considering
the title put into the balance, Miss Romney ;
only about five-and-twenty years."

Grisel's attention wandered from the second act,
which had just begun, to Miss Fenton, whose face
had an irresistible charm for her ; but presently
the Lenore in the boxes was forgotten, her double
on the stage was acting out her story.

The opera was no unknown power to Lenore, as
it was to Grisel. Often before had she seen the
heroine go through her dismal tragedy ; so now
she watched with more interest the human elements
of the house than the make-believe behind the footlights.
The party, of which Mr. Jerningham
formed one, had attracted her, and Grisel's utter
abandonment to the play, regardless of surroundings,
struck her as something fresh.

She had not wished much to come that evening,
but their host had taken their places, and she did
not like to appear ungracious. Her father was
fidgeting beside her, and proposing to leave her
early. He had an engagement at his club, a very
frequent occurrence with Sir James.

Lord Meredith said he would take good care of
Miss Fenton, but Lenore had not the slightest wish

to have a tete-astute drive home. Her father looked
on their host as a contemporary, and it was useful
at times to have some one to whom he could
entrust his daughter. Lord Meredith favoured the
idea in the meanwhile. It was not time yet for Sir
James to think otherwise.

But the opera finished at last, and the house was
emptying itself slowly. In the passage, the
Fentonss and Romneys met for a moment.

"Will you come to tea tomorrow afternoon,
Mr. Fern Ingram .''" asked Lenore. "We are staying
with Lord Meredith. I shall be at home by
five o'clock."

Thank you. I shall be delighted."

Come away, Lenore ; no time for talking ; I
am late for my appointment already."

Sir James spoke irritably. Lord Meredith
looked annoyed, and, turning to Lenore, begged to
be allowed to help her. She was hurriedly putting
on some extra wrap. The difference between his
manner and Sir James's was marked ; his courtesy
was in pleasant contrast. Lenore let him help her,
and thanked him with one of her sweetest smiles.
Then they hurried on, and were lost in the crowd.
Philip Jerningham offered Bryde his arm — Tom
was taking care of his aunt and Grisel in advance.
Presently, some one spoke to Philip. Bryde heard
the question, asked impatiently with a ring of

demand in the voice, as if it had a right to
know.

When did the Fentonss come to town, and who
is that with Miss Fenton ?"

"Why, Hunt, is that you ? I did not see you
before ?"

I came in late ; but you have not answered my
question."

Oh ! The Fentonss are staying with Lord
Meredith at his house in Prince's Gate. You
should go and see them."

I don't know Lord Meredith."

He will be delighted to see you. He is an old
friend of Miss Fenton's father. I am going to tea
there tomorrow, about five o'clock. Come with
me."

I '11 see about it."

"Poor Jack!" Philip said to himself as they
parted. " I am not sure that Lord Meredith will
be quite as glad to see you as I made out ; but I
couldn't let you go home with such a dolorous and
woe-begone expression."

Next day Tom went back to Oxford, and Philip
with him, and Miss Romney drove Grisel home to
Miss Tufton's. Grisel's first taste of gaiety had
been very attractive, and the six weeks seemed a
long while to her before she would spread her
wings for good ; but there was no help for it. A

few days spent in a judicious mixture of useful
knowledge and other improving exercises reconciled
her again to work ; but her dreams in her
idle hours had taken more definite forms since the
night at the opera ; they were peopled now with
living men and women, not with the shadowy
heroes of a school-girl's fancy.

THE HOUSE IN PRINCE'S GATE.

LORD MEREDITH'S house in Prince's Gate
was one in which you instinctively felt the
want of the home touches which a woman's presence
must always give. He was a man of taste.
In his numberless wanderings, he had picked up
many a thing of beauty ; there was nothing jarring
to the most sensitively artistic eye ; subdued
colouring in everything, harmony everywhere ; in
each corner some old china or antique bronze found
shelter, while many a perfectly-chiselled souvenir
from the land of sculpture showed that beauty
of form even more than of colour had been studied
in the perfect collection — for collection it was.
Herein lay the feeling of dissatisfaction in the
rooms. It was the temple set aside and adorned
for the worship of beauty, but living beauty was
wanting ; it was the beauty of the past, utterly
dead.

So Lord Meredith, having completed his work,
looked round on all he had done, and retired more
than ever into his study. He rarely entered them
now. " It is beautiful," he said, " but it does not
please me as much as I expected."

When the Fentonss first went to stay with him,
he had made the oft-repeated remark, and had
then taken them to his own den. " I shall be
delighted to see you here, Miss Fenton, as much
as you like."

So it was ; for the first few weeks Lenore spent
much of her time in the study, or her own boudoir.
It seemed quite natural that she should do so, and
listen to her father and his friend go over reminiscences
of past years ; but that was only at first,
she was growing to prefer the drawing-rooms, lifeless
though they were. Lord Meredith would have
followed her there, but he could not utterly ignore
Sir James, who much preferred comfort and ease.

Lenore would sit here if she were dull, my dear
fellow. Do not put yourself out of your way for
her ; she is used to being alone."

Sir James had found many old friends in town,
and was perfectly contented. A quiet whist party
met nearly daily in Lord Meredith's study. There
was quite a laugh against Sir James, who in the
old days had been well known for his high play.
That was before Lenore's mother's time. The

spirit had returned to the empty, swept, and
garnished house, and found it very comfortable.

As Sir James's acquaintance grew he gave less
and less time to Lenore, so was much relieved
when Lord Meredith proposed that an elderly
cousin should come and pay them a visit of indefinite
duration. It would give his daughter more
freedom to come and go as she felt inclined.

Miss Griffiths was a subdued little spinster with
a story. No one knew very well what the story
was, but that did not much signify ; the story was
there, or at least Miss Griffiths believed so. She
hugged her precious secret more closely to her,
rejoicing in the belief that the slight mystery was
interesting ; and it made her a far more agreeable
companion, as she sympathised deeply with all
love affairs. In fact, poor Lenore began, after the
first few days, to weary of the continued topic.
That Lenore had some attachment that would tell
sooner or later on her damask cheek was quite a
settled fact in Miss Griffiths' mind. How otherwise
could Lenore's complete silence on the
subject of all individual men be accounted for }

A gentle flutter was at last felt by the anxious
woman when Lenore mentioned that she must be
home early one afternoon ; it was the day following
the opera, and Lenore expected Philip Jerningham
to tea.

She would not have missed seeing him for
anything. It was a pleasant reminder of her
Christmas fortnight.

Lenore was in the drawing-room, Miss Griffiths
was still putting a few finishing touches to her
toilet, the door opened, and Philip was announced.

I have brought an uninvited guest, Miss
Preston ; but I hope none the less welcome."

Two men entered the room. Lenore rose to
receive them. She could hardly suppress the start
of pleasure as she greeted Jack Hunt.

None the less welcome," she said. " I thought
Mr. Hunt had forgotten us, as he had not been to
see us before."

I did not even know you were in town, Miss
Fenton ; so you must forgive my apparent
negligence. My time has been very much occupied
lately."

Mr. Hunt has turned over a completely new
leaf," Philip said. " There is not such another
hard-worked man about. When I first knew him
he was of some use, able to give some of his time
to the exigencies of society. Now there is but one
excuse, * too much to do.' "

Isn't it better than having too little to do, Mr.
Jerningham. At least so it appears to me."

Now if you are going to back Hunt up, there
is no use of me saying anything more. You disappoint

me. I have been counting the hours till you
came to town, Miss Fenton, for I was certain you
would effect a reform. No wonder I fail, when
another and stronger influence is at work."

How you run on, Philip. A bystander would
think you had but one more hour's speech allotted
to you, and that you were making the most of
it."

Only one hour's speech in such society, and
behold, even already it is interrupted."

The door opened, and Miss Griffiths entered.
Jack Hunt looked annoyed. Here was a lynx-eyed
duenna come to play spy. Philip, on the
contrary, in a fit of good nature, remembering four
were company, three were none, determined to
make himself captivating to the new arrival. Miss
Griffiths was sorely perplexed. To find two where
she only expected one quite upturned her ideas.
Which was the right one .-* What ought she todo
? But the young people settled for her, though
contrary to all her ideas. Philip, so bright and
self-confident, ought to have claimed the attention
of Lenore, but he didn't. Miss Griffiths found
herself seated on the sofa beside Mr. Jerningham,
whilst he engaged her in an amusing stream of
talk. She could only look with despair at Lenore,
whom she felt had fallen a victim to Mr. Hunt.

There was a slight embarrassment between Jack

and Lenore for a moment ; their last meeting was
clear in the minds of both. Lenore, woman-like,
was the first to recover.

You have not asked after my father, Mr. Hunt.
He has made a marvellous recovery."

I was just going to do so," he answered ; " and
your wrist, is it quite strong again .-*"

Oh ! my wrist was nothing. How did you ever
remember it .''"

I was not likely to forget it," he said. " It was
the beginning of our friendship."

I wonder," she continued, " if that accident had
never occurred, should we have become such
friends ? "

Surely, yes. We must have met sooner or
later, and then, whenever we did so, the end must
have been the same."

I am not the least so sure," she answered.
Seeing her power, she could not resist the temptation
of the moment. "At least I will not answer
for myself We should have met as strangers, with
no mutual standing ground."

We did meet as strangers, knowing nothing of
each other. What mutual standing ground had
we .'*" His tone was vexed ; her remark had jarred
on him.

Oh ! accidents and help and gratitude, and all
that kind of thing," she answered, carelessly. " It

must develop into friendship or acquaintance, or
something of the sort."

I suppose what you say is true," he answered,
bitterly. " You are always right, and gratitude to
many is a load under which they labour all their
lives. It is in some natures not to be able to
receive the smallest service without it being carefully
weighed, and, grain for grain, paid back in
full. The service I rendered was of the most
trifling ; the repayment will not take you long.
I trust you will not suffer from the weight of the
burden!"

I beg your pardon ; I was wrong in what I
said. I trust," she continued, dropping her voice,
mine is not such a nature as you describe. It is
the lowest grade of humanity which will not be in
debt for kindness received — so utterly despicable."

Miss Fenton, you misunderstand me ; I was a
brute to speak as I did. I did not for a moment
dream you would take my weariness home to
yourself. What must you think of such a temper ?
You will be sorry I ever found out you were in
town."

Please do not say any more. I know it was
my own fault. I will not try the atrocious temper
again," she added more lightly. " Come, shall I
give you tea — woman's panacea for all ills ?'*

"A very good panacea it is, Miss Fenton,"

Philip said, having heard the last sentence, and
having had some difficulty in not hearing what
went before. Miss Griffiths' slight deafness had
been an admirable excuse for talking in a louder
key than society usually warranted.

Miss Griffiths turned at once to Mr. Hunt.
Here was the opportunity she wanted ; she effectually
kept him in conversation until the quartette
was joined by Lord Meredith and Sir James.
Philip did not object ; having talked to the old
lady for half-an-hour without cessation, he considered
his good nature deserved some recompense.

Lord Meredith welcomed the young men with
his usual courtly manner. He was delighted to
see them as Miss Fenton's guests. He trusted
the day was not distant when Lenore, as Lady
Meredith, would be receiving a select party of
friends at tea. He watched her with a quiet
persistency which was not lost upon Jack, and
anticipated her every wish. Lenore was vaguely
conscious of a wish that he would not be so very
attentive — it might be misconstrued by her old
friends ; that anything more was intended, she
would not for a moment allow to herself.

Sir James drank his tea quickly, paid very little
attention to either Philip or Mr. Hunt, save asking
a few commonplaces of Philip about Oxford, and
supposed in a general way that Mr. Hunt was

very busy, and unable for much society. Then he
retired to the study. He was out of humour, and
did not care to be much in Lenore's company.
His daughter had been watching anxiously a
change comines over her father. It was no new
thing; for more than a month his temper had been
singularly easy to disturb. She could not understand
it all.

Her face, usually so calm, clouded over for a
few minutes after her father's departure. Both
Lord Meredith and Jack exerted all their energies
to chase away the shadows. They succeeded,
however, or rather she drove her uneasiness from
the field. Lord Meredith certainly shone in his
own house ; he charmed his guests, and Lenore
too began to appreciate what manner of man he
was.

But time was passing, and Philip had still some
things to do before going down to Oxford ; so,
unwillingly, they rose to go.

"What chance is there of our meeting again V'
asked Jack of Lenore. Lord Meredith was showing
Philip some interesting marvel at the other end of
the room.

None, as far as I can see. T am not my own
mistress."

Have you done the galleries yet, or the watercolour
exhibition .^ Might not I go with you there

some day ? I must see you soon again. I have
so much to tell you of my own life and plans, so
much that may affect you nearly, if you will but
listen to me, Lenore ; and how can I speak in this
man's house, who, if he knew what I would say,
would never let me darken his door again. I
cannot be false to him as his guest."

"You mistake Lord Meredith's feelings, Mr.
Hunt ; he loved my mother once. I am interesting
to him as the child of her whom he loved."

If that is all, he will more readily forgive me.
I trust you are right. A woman's instincts usually
tell her true in such a case ; yet "

A doubt flashed across Lenore as to whether
she were dealing truly with herself, whether she
were not stifling her real impressions ; but she
would not listen to the truth clamouring within
her, the truth asserting itself with such unwelcome
persistence, that what she was now doing was
entering the gate of a rough path to happiness
a gate at which her father stood holding a drawn
sword.

Why was it that only now, when her happiness
seemed so close, did she for the first time realise
to what the last few weeks had been tending ^
Her father's manner even was accounted for, his
long absences, his continually throwing her into
the company of Lord Meredith ; it had all been

done with a meaning. Surely her father, her idol,
was not willing to sell her for a coronet. Surely,
behind, there must be some graver, stronger reason.

An awful feeling of impending fate seized her.
She stood silent where she had risen from her seat
to say good-bye.

Across the large room came a murmur of voices ;
for a few moments Lord Meredith was revelling
in his antiquities. Philip never had been more
interested ; he was absorbed in the collection.

Lenore still was silent; Jack stood watching her;
she did not know it. Her gaze went past him as
they stood by the window. She saw and saw not
the string of carriages slowly passing from the
Park gates — Vanity Fair going home to refresh
itself Her eyes had a restless, hunted look in
them ; her whole soul was rising in rebellion,
struggling against the net into which she had so
unsuspectingly been led, the meshes of which
seemed to be so closely round her.

Suddenly her resolve was taken. In a calmer
moment she would not have acted so. Even now,
her maidenly feeling made her hesitate a moment;
but it was only for a moment. She must see Jack
Hunt again, come what might of the meeting.

I have not been to the water-colour exhibition,"
she said. " I am going there tomorrow morning.
Perhaps we may have the pleasure of meeting "

More appointments, Miss Fenton," said Lord
Meredith, crossing the room. " I hope not for
tomorrow. You remember you have promised to
ride with me at twelve o'clock, and it is a pleasure
I would not willingly forego."

I have not forgotten," she answered. " Mr.
Hunt was talking of the water-colour exhibition,
to which I have not yet been, but I must try and
make it out some day."

I did not know you were so anxious to go,
Miss Fenton ; surely by this time you know, if you
had expressed the wish, we might have accomplished
it."

"You are only too good, Lord Meredith, in
humouring my whims and fancies. It is a dreadful
thing," she continued, laughing, '* to get a
character for exacting so much."

Jack held out his hand to say good-bye. Lord
Meredith accompanied him to the door. When
he returned, Lenore was at the piano, crooning to
herself some favourite air. Miss Griffiths, well
pleased with the afternoon's work, was sitting
listening approvingly.

Worthy woman," thought my lord, " I wish
you had been anywhere but where you are just
now."

CHAPTER IX.

SIR JAMES IN DIFFICULTY.

IR JAMES was in Lord Meredith's study;
his lordship was in his business room. So the
two men usually passed their mornings. Sir James
had made an appointment with a lawyer for eleven
o'clock. It was nearly that hour now, and he was
awaiting uneasily the approaching interview.

A pile of letters lay before him, brought by the
morning post — uncomfortable-looking epistles;
they might account for the wearied, harassed
expression on the baronet's face.

He was interrupted by Lenore coming into the
room, prepared for going out.

My dear, where are you going at this hour of
the morning ? I thought you intended to ride today?"


Not until twelve o'clock. Papa. I shall be
home in plenty of time. Miss Griffiths and I are

going to the water-colour exhibition, the morning
hours are so much the quietest."

Very well ; take care you are not late. Lord
Meredith is so extremely kind. I would not have
you appear to treat it all as a matter of course."

"When are we going to leave Prince's Gates*"
Leonora ventured to ask. " We are surely paying
a very long visit to a comparative stranger .?"

My dear, what nonsense. He is one of my
oldest friends, or rather I have known him since
he was a boy, as he is, of course, much younger
than I am."

** Don't make yourself out such an octogenarian,
Papa ; but still, don't you think we have had nearly
enough of this ? I don't get half the good of you
I used to do."

Her voice was very coaxing, but it only irritated
Sir James.

It is impossible, Lenore, to give way always to
one's private likes and dislikes. I would not hurt
Meredith's feelings for anything ; and he is most
anxious we should stay here as long as we find it
convenient. I propose going down to Brighton
the week after next."

Still a fortnight of it," thought Lenore, as she
closed the door, and went in search of Miss
Griffiths, who shrewdly suspected there was more
in the visit to the water-colours than met the eye.

After his daughter left, Sir James relapsed into
his gloomy meditations, but they were not of long
duration. A card was brought in with the name
of Mr. Harvey on it.

Show Mr. Harvey upstairs." Here was the
man who was to solve the difficulties.

The man who entered was not an uncommon
specimen of a class who have spent their lives in
the study of human nature, more especially the
business side of it. He took the measure of Sir
James at a glance — that he was a gentleman there
was no doubt. How far life had fitted him for a
business man had yet to be proved.

I have sent for you, Mr. Harvey," Sir James
began, after the usual formula of seating themselves,
and a few meaningless remarks had been
gone through, " to ask your advice. I met with a
severe accident some time ago which has prevented
my going about as I should like. I must
plead it as my excuse for troubling you to come
here instead of calling on you at your place of
business."

Pray do not mention it. We, as a class, are
but made to wait on our distressed brethren ; it is
to our advantage." Mr. Harvey gently inclined
his head as he made the above remark. He was
graciously pleased to put Sir James completely at
his ease.

But the latter fidgeted with a paper-cutter lying
on the table, laid his hand once or twice on a copy
of the Times near him, and at last gained resolution
enough to proceed.

It is the old story, Mr. Harvey ; I want money.
I do not mean to say I am a pauper, or that ruin
stares me in the face. Nothing so bad as that ;
and had it not been for that confounded investment,
it would be all right."

Forgive me for the interruption. Sir James. I
am an absolute stranger to you, save as friend of
my client, Lord Meredith. It would be as well if
you would go back to the beginning at once. Lay
as much of your circumstances as you can before
me, that I may the better be able to judge of your
position. First, what of your patrimony ? Are
you an eldest son 1 Am I wrong in supposing
your father was Mr. Fenton, the Q.C., who
bought a pretty place down in Oxfordshire somewhere
.'* "

You are right in what you state. My father
was the Q.C. He made a deal of money, and
bought Reesdale Manor, a fine property some
hours' journey from town. But you wish me to be
clear in my statements. I begin, then, at the time
when I left Eton. I was the eldest son. My
mother — peace to her ashes ! — was a weak woman,
and had instilled into me, from her exalted opinion

of my capabilities, a very large idea of my own
importance. My father, engrossed in business, did
not see the mischief going on. He was as hard in
character as my mother was soft, though always a
perfectly just man in his dealings towards me. My
other brother was his favourite. I was destined
for the army ; my brother followed my father to
the Bar. From Eton I went to Christ Church. 1
had been brought up with big expectations ;
Oxford was not the place to reduce them. On all
hands I heard my father was coining thousands.
I was much made of, I would be a wealthy man
some day. I bestowed my favours right and left,
ran up bills to a very large amount, and before
going into the army they must be cleared off. My
mother acted mediator. My father was justly
furious ; he had given me a large allowance, I had
trebled it in my yearly expenditure. We had
some stormy scenes. It ended in my father paying
my bills, getting me my commission, and turning
me loose with threats to stop my allowance
altogether if it were again overstepped. I then
found myself the youngest man in a fast regiment.
I was popular," continued Sir James, with a little
bit of the old love of popularity rising in his
tone — " very popular and easily led. I again ran
into debt. My father heard of it, wrote me an
angry letter, absolutely refused to pay up another

penny, and threatened to disinherit me. I believed
it was only a threat ; I traded on my expectations.
I was very hard pressed ; it seemed my only way
of escape. I did it then under strong pressure ; it
has been my curse ever since."

Sir James stopped a moment ; he was evidently
a good deal upset with the narrative.

A very common occurrence, I fear, Sir James,"
Mr. Harvey remarked. " The folly — or shall we
call it the sanguineness ? — of youth."

The folly of youth is a mild name for it, Mr.
Harvey — absolute villainy. It was ungentleman-like
; but the folly came to an end sooner than
might have been expected. One fine morning I
awoke to find a telegram stating that my father
had a paralytic shock. The case was not hopeless,
that was all that could be said. A letter from my
mother followed by next post, begging me at once
to go to her ; from something my father had said,
she feared things were ■ not all right for me. I
started at once, but arrived too late ; my brother
had closed my father's eyes. A second stroke had
succeeded the first ; the end had been awfully
sudden. The week preceding the funeral was one
of discomfort to us all. My mother and I awaited
the reading of the will with much anxiety. The
day came ; it was as we feared. I had been absolutely
passed over in my father's will save a very

small yearly allowance. Reesdale was left to my
brother and his heirs unconditionally. There 's not
much to tell after that. I was a good deal
knocked down at first, but as long as my mother
lived I did not feel it so much ; she stayed with
my brother at Reesdale, and expended most of her
spare money on me, her favourite son. I fell in
love soon after that, and married — the mother of
my only child. It may have been foolish, improvident,
but to her I owe any good that is in me.
I laboured all my life under the debt I had contracted,
but my creditors were merciful. They
considered I had been hardly used, so did not press
me for payment. The rest the world knows pretty
well. Through my wife's influence over me I
became ambitious in my profession. I had a run
of good luck, saw some active service, rose steadily
in the army, got several staff appointments ; in
fact, were it not for that miserable debt, I should
have been well off now."

But," interrupted Mr. Harvey, " I don't exactly
see how the case has become complicated, at least
more than it ever was."

Ah ! there lies the whole thing. I have always
been my own man of business, Mr. Harvey. I
have always said, and perhaps foolishly, that if a
man cannot look after his own interests, no one
will do it for him. I know what you will say —

that a man cannot be master of all trades, and if I
had stuck to my soldiering and let you do the
money matters, it might have been different.
Well, the long and the short of it is that, on leaving
the army, I invested my spare capital — not much,
after all — in an American investment which I see
by the papers has so far collapsed. To add to
this," Sir James continued, hotly, " my brother,
after leading a bachelor's life for fifty years,
married some eighteen months ago, and a son and
heir has been born to him ; otherwise I was my
brother's natural successor. We have always
been good friends. If not to me, Reesdale would
probably have gone to my daughter."

Then if nothing can be done with this invested
money, I suppose your only income is the allowance
settled on you in your father's will. What
may it be ?"

One thousand pounds a-year for my lifetime,
and a provision made, in the case of my leaving
children, of one hundred a-year to be paid from
the Reesdale estates on my death to daughters
until their marriage, or, failing that, for life, and a
thousand pounds down to any sons there might
be."

"And you have but one daughter .?"

But one daughter, brought up, though not
luxuriously, still with all her comforts. I have

been a fool !" exclaimed the Baronet, rising from
his chair and restlessly "pacing the quarter-deck"
up and down the study — "an arrant fool! And
here!" he exclaimed, tossing one of the business
papers to Mr. Harvey. " The worst has not yet
been told. You see the substance of it. The man
who writes is my principal creditor. He, too, it
seems, has invested to a considerable extent in
that American swindle."

If I understand aright," said Mr. Harvey,
putting on his spectacles and scanning carefully
the document in front of him, "your creditor takes
a more hopeful view of things than you do. He
considers it merely the effect of panic, this sudden
fall in your American shares. He demands higher
interest in the meanwhile, and the payment in full
of the debt as soon as things have righted themselves."


But the interest, where is it to come from }
Good God, how that cursed debt ties me hand and
foot!"

Sir James paused in his impatient stride across
the room ; the perspiration stood on his forehead.
He took out his handkerchief and wearily wiped
it off.

Mr. Harvey slowly folded the unpleasant document,
laid it carefully on the table, took off his
spectacles ; he had made as much out of it as he

could. So the two men remained for some
moments.

The money — where 's the money to come
from ?" exclaimed Sir James, impatiently.

Have you not some friend who would do you
a neighbourly turn, and get you free of the old
debt ? It might be but a renewal of debt in
another quarter, still you might get what you want
at a rate of interest considerably lower than the
one now demanded. Some man with spare cash
might do it, and be contented with a return such
as the Three-percent would yield."

But, confound it all, where 's this generous
go-between to be found .'*"

Mr. Harvey dropped his voice.

Would not Lord Meredith do it for a friend —
he has some loose capital at present ?"

"Not for worlds would I ask him. Impossible,
perfectly impossible," Sir James added, the last ina
slightly doubtful tone. Mr. Harvey at once
noticed the hesitation.

Oh ! I did not know it was impossible. From
something his lordship let drop in casual conversation
the other day, it struck me he might do it fora
friend, such as you are, Sir James."

Nothing would induce me to receive such a
favour, absolutely nothing !"

"Nothing?" interrogated Mr. Harvey.

There was a step In the passage outside ; a hand
laid on the door ; it opened ; Lord Meredith was
standing without.

I beg your pardon !" he exclaimed. " I understood
Mr. Harvey was gone. I am In no hurry ;
my business can wait. When you are disengaged,
let me know, Sir James. I want a few minutes'
talk with you."

"Where's Lenore .?" asked her father. "I
thought you were to ride at twelve o'clock."

I met Miss Fen ton on her way out, and we
arranged to ride tomorrow Instead."

Lord Meredith was about to absent himself.
Mr. Harvey, come to my room before you go. I
wish five minutes' conversation on that piece of
business we discussed the other day."

The door closed. Sir James and Mr. Harvey
were again alone.

If you will let me arrange it, Sir James, I think
it could be managed without much fuss."

"Not for worlds ; utterly Impossible. You must
think of some other way of escape for me, Mr.
Harvey. I have detained you too long already.
Turn It over quietly in your own mind, and call
back again the day after tomorrow about the
same hour. Something may have struck us by
that time — surely something will turn up.

The old singleness. Sir James. However,

to-day we can do no more. We meet then on
Friday, at eleven o'clock."

"At eleven o'clock," said Sir James, holding out
his hand. " You know the way to Lord Meredith's
business room."

"Well; good morning."

Sir James collapsed into a comfortable chair and
drew a deep sigh, as if a disagreeable duty were
more than half over. Mr. Harvey was soon with
Lord Meredith, but his visit did not last long.

The door again opened.

Then you will see that the money is ready forme
to take up at a day's notice ? I depend on you."

Such were the words Lord Meredith was saying
as they came out into the passage.

You may count on all being done as you wish.
Good morning." The two shook hands pleasantly
as they parted.

A one-horse brougham drove up as Mr. Harvey
emerged on the steps. Miss Griffiths and Lenore
alighted, and passed into the house.

She will make a splendid countess," thought
the man of business. " I was sure things were
setting in that direction. Sir James may consider
a fortunate star has risen on his horizon. There
will be no more bother about the debt, and these
American stocks will all come right, only give
them time."

EASILY SOLVED.

After Mr. Harvey left, Sir James continued
^ ^ where he was; the momentary clearing of
expression when the door closed behind the
lawyer had passed away, and a settled gloom
came over him. He saw from the window Lenore
return from her expedition ; he waited for a few
moments expecting she would come to the study,
but when, shortly after, the door opened, it was
Lord Meredith who entered.

Have you seen Lenore ?" asked her father ; " I
expected she would have come here at once."

I met her, and she gave an excuse of having
some important things to do before lunch, and has
retired to her own rooms."

I suppose a woman's idea of importance, to sew
a button on her glove, or some trumpery thing of
that sort. Lenore 's a good girl, but she 's like the

rest of them in their ideas of the relative value of
things."

Hush ! no treason against Miss Fenton, Sir
James. I came to speak of her ; you will be
surprised at what I am going to say."

** She and you have not quarrelled on the subject
of this ride ? Some girlish freak made her
go out at such an hour. I trust sincerely her
thoughtlessness has not inconvenienced you."

Lord Meredith was leaning against the mantelpiece.
He had not heard the last remark. He
was gazing at a miniature of Lady Fenton, taken
just before her marriage, with a strange, haunting
resemblance to Lenore in the beautifully-cut
features and the high-bred pose of the head.

Sir James, receiving no answer to his remark,
looked to see what was engrossing his friend's
attention. He did not break in on his reverie.
He, too, fell into a moment's dream of long ago.
The picture of his wife raised many memories.
His old chum, Fred Barton, stood before him, the
man whose one useless love had spoilt his life, and
yet there was no trace of the spoiler's hand. At
fifty. Lord Meredith looked a younger man than
many another at forty. Over six feet in height, a
slight spare figure, not a trace of grey in either his
hair or his heavy moustache, erect as an arrow,
with peculiarly careful attention to his severely

quiet dress, he gave one the idea of a man with
whom the world had dealt kindly. His hands, so
deeply marked and veined, playing restlessly with
the bronzes on the mantelpiece, were the only thing
indicative of any intense strength of feeling.

The silence was becoming oppressive, and Lord
Meredith turned from the miniature and faced his
old rival.

Sir James broke the silence.

You see the likeness to her mother ? It is
very striking ; but she is not so handsome, and has
not got the same wonderful charm of manner."

Has not she ? I have not felt the want of it,
Sir James. I suppose the truth will out, sooner or
later ; there is no fool like an old fool, they say.
I love Lenore as I never thought to love again.
I am here now to ask her from you, to obtain your
consent to win her, if I can. My age is against
me. Give me but your sanction to do what I
can.

Sir James was silent ; he had half expected this
avowal, and yet when it came it took him by
surprise ; he hardly knew what to answer.

You are surprised at the gross absurdity of the
idea. You think that I must have lost my reason
to propose marriage with such a child ; that in the
years long passed I loved the mother of this very
child that I now would have as wife, and that I

have forgotten the seasons that have come and
gone since then."

No, no, Fred ; it is not that. You were
younger than my wife, and it has always grieved
me that you did not marry."

What is it, then } Is my age such an insuperable
objection ?"

There is nothing against yourself, my dear
fellow, but "

What would you say ? Is it," he exclaimed, a
light breaking in on him, " that Miss Fenton's
affections are already engaged, or is it only that
you fear I could not make her happy as a man
more her own age would do ?"

Sir James ignored the latter half of the question.

No ; utterly impossible. Lenore has never
seen any man that she cares for more than her
father — she is perfectly heart-whole."

I fancied yesterday, but I may have been
mistaken, that she liked that young Mr. Hunt who
was here at tea. He is such a fine fellow, I could
easily believe in her doing so."

Hunt ! The idea is preposterous. She hardly
knows — saw him once for a fortnight ; and besides,
he has nothing, he cannot afford to marry.
Put that idea out of your head. Lenore is heart-whole."


Lord Meredith gave a sigh of satisfaction. He
I

turned once more to the miniature, and happiness
shone in every part of his face. It was of Lenore
he was thinking, not of the original of the
miniature.

Neither spoke. Sir James was summoning
courage to tell that his daughter was a powerless
maiden, and he himself uncomfortably pressed for
money; but he could not do it, it gave him the
feeling of a money transaction into which his
daughter was " thrown in," her personal worth being
set against the sum borrowed. He wished that
Lord Meredith had deferred his disclosure until a
later date. He had cherished a lingering hope
that, despite his protestations, Mr. Harvey might
say something which, without drawing him in,
would put the case before his friend.

Presently Lord Meredith broke the silence. He
stood facing the mantelpiece, with his back towards
Sir James.

There is one thing I wish to say to you, to
account to you for what may appear my extreme
eagerness in pressing my suit. I gave you no
warning of what was in my mind. I had not
intended speaking for some days, until I had
assured myself that I was in no way disagreeable
to your daughter, or that I was only second in the
field. On the latter point you have set my mind
at rest. My request was hurried from something

Mr. Harvey said a few moments ago. You will
understand the feeling that made me speak at
once. I could not bear you should be under any
obligation to me when I asked your permission to
win your daughter."

But let me understand what you would say.

Are you aware "

I am aware of everything ; or, at least, as much
as I care to know. After all, it is not much. An
old friend is pressed for money. I have some
uninvested capital at the present moment. You
receive it as a loan, pay a moderate interest on it,
such as I would realise by any of your good old-fashioned
securities. I am satisfied with your word
that it will be paid up some day. I need no more
security."

My dear fellow, it is really too much goodness.
It is impossible to let you fetter yourself so for my
sake."

It is not all for your sake. Surely there need
be no obligation on your part when I am taking
from you what you most value."

She 's a very good girl, and will make a goodwife,
Fred, if she follows in her mother's footsteps.
By-the-bye, have you said anything of this to
herself?"

No, nothing ; but having obtained your sanction,
I will not longer keep my hopes to myself"

A sudden feeling that the answer might not be
propitious made Sir James speak.

You say you have not spoken yet. Then wait.
We go down to Brighton next week. Come with
us there, and then, when Lenore is out of the bustle
of this town life, you will have more opportunity tolet
her see your real feelings. Do not startle her,
Fred ; she is very young yet. If she were taken
by surprise, she might give an answer that she
would afterwards repent."

It shall be as you say. I shall not trespass
more on your time to-day. Sir James. Wish me
good speed before I go," and Lord Meredith held
out his hand.

With all my heart, old fellow ; only I wish
things had been different. It's all my accursed
folly."

The two men wrung each other's hands, the one
in assured happiness, the other with a skeleton
forcing its way out of the cupboard — that things
would not go so smoothly. More than once
previously had Sir James found himself face to
face with his daughter's will, and had been
routed.

He sat some time alone, thinking it all over, and
wishing the next fortnight were past, and that
Lenore had given her word. It was impossible
she could refuse such an alliance. Quite impossible,

he argued against himself. Why, the
coronet must be a temptation to such a girl !

And Lenore herself, what did she say ? After
parting from Jack Hunt the previous afternoon she
went to her own room, and there, with no other
voice to raise misguiding tones, the truth rose
clearly before her. She was far too true a woman
to shrink from acknowledging that she loved this
man — loved him as only women of her calibre can
love, with a depth and intensity which would glory
in nothing so much as in the utter sacrifice of self,
so long as it would in any way bring happiness to
the object loved.

She would not hesitate to incur temporary
coldness and displeasure, so long as she felt it
was only caprice or prejudice ; but if the voice of
duty once asserted itself, even though it were
death to her love, it must make itself heard. In a
nature such as hers the lower must succumb to the
higher.

The dinner-bell roused her from a delicious
dream, a fond lingering over every look and tone
of that afternoon's meeting, a thrill through her as
once again she felt the electric touch of their hands
meeting, and that subtle something had passed
from one to the other telling how much they loved.
She rose from her seat, slowly at first ; she must
complete her dream ; then suddenly her footsteps

hurried. The meeting of the following morning
came to her mind, and with it the rush of possible
consequences. A shudder passed over her ; she
turned suddenly, as if conscious of some other
ill-boding presence. Was it the staircase window
that was open, and through which the evening air
was straying, that made her tremble and turn cold,
or was it the voice of fate ?

There was no apparent sign of any disturbing
influence as their host offered her his arm to
conduct her to the dinner-table. Never had she
been more perfectly charming. The morrow stood
before her holding up a warning finger — this might
be her last night of peace.

Lenore awoke next morning with the misgivings
of the evening before dispersed. Daylight gave a
more healthy tone to her mind; she was no heroine
of ideal history, only a woman subject to all the
unaccountable and nonsensical ups and downs of a
woman's existence.

So when the sun shone brilliantly in at her
window, it was sufficient to make the well of
healthy life bubble over. Miss Griffiths, in the
adjoining apartment, heard her singing as she
moved about her room. A pleased smile flitted
across her face even in the agonies of arranging
her scanty tresses — once such a pretty brown, she
often thought, and now so difficult to make the

dark hairs do their double share of duty in covering
the grey ones — the light ones, she called them to
herself. Poor old lady ! It was only Lenore's
song which made her foolish about the colour of
her hair ; and Lenore sang on unconsciously, " I

love my love, I love my love because I know "

but she did not finish the line, but opened the
door with a smile on her face, and ran down to
delight Lord Meredith's eyes with her summer
morning freshness.

Breakfast was over. Sir James retired for the
before-recorded interview with Mr. Harvey, and
Lenore and Miss Griffiths went to write letters
before going out. Lord Meredith interrupted the
former in the middle of her correspondence.

'would you prefer to ride tomorrow instead
of to-day. Miss Fenton ? It is all the same to me,
and would give you more time to see the watercolours
r*

How good you are. Lord Meredith ! You are
always thinking of others. If it is just the same
to you," she continued with some slight hesitation,
I would rather ride tomorrow ; but are you sure
it is quite the same }'*

Do not hurry home," he said, as he saw her
safely off with his cousin, " and will you look at a
picture that struck mee the last time I was there.
You will easily find it. Tell me, when you return,

if you see a likeness that I see in it. It is called
'Yes or No'"

I shall look for it ; but I am so stupid about
such things, that there is but little chance of my
being able to discover any resemblance to anyone
in it"

But Lenore was mistaken. The rooms were
tolerably crowded when they arrived even at that
early hour, and Lenore had some little difficulty
in finding the picture ; but she wished to see it at
once, in case she went home having forgotten all
about it. At last she stood before it.

"My dear!" exclaimed Miss Griffiths, "don't
you see the likeness ? It is your image, only
older looking ; and I hope never to see you so
sad."

I suppose it has a look of me," Lenore answered.
I wonder what it all means."

The corner of a quaint old room with a lattice
window, through which the evening sun was
streaming and falling on the figure of a girl
sitting at a curiously-carved table writing a letter.
The dress of the girl and the colouring of all the
surroundings were kept in a subdued undertone,
only a stream of light from the just setting sun
fell on her face and hair, and lighted up a picture
beside her on the wall. The letter was half written,
the unanswered one open beside it ; but the girl's

thoughts had flown from the letter to the picture
in the sunlight ; her face turned towards it with
such a depth of passionate feeling written on it,
such a pleading for forgiveness in the eyes ! The
subject of the picture beside her could hardly be
more than guessed at. A figure of a man was all
that could be said for certain, the light was too
strong to distinguish more.

Lenore was fascinated with it ; she hardly heard
the ripple of Miss Griffiths' talk discussing the
probabilities of the subject, but a voice roused herat
last.

Dear me, Mr. Hunt ! You here at this hour of
the morning ! I thought you were a man of so
much business."

I am only here for a short time, Miss Griffiths,"
he said, shaking hands with the two ladies.
Water-colours are very tempting, are not they .?"

Are you an artist ? Perhaps you can tell us
about this picture } Lord Meredith asked Miss
Fenton to let him know what she thought about
it. Oh, there is my old friend Mrs. Hargreaves
and her daughters. I must go and speak to them.
Will you excuse me for a few minutes, Lenore?"
Miss Griffiths waited for no answer; she was gone,
and Jack and Lenore were left facing the picture.

I wished to show you this myself," he said.
What do you think of it .'' What is your idea of

the story ? Is she writing to the original of the
picture beside her ?"

Oh no ; the sunshine would only have made
her write faster. The light has taken her thoughts
with it, and surely she is asking forgiveness for
something she has done."

You are right. I know the artist. The idea
he wished to suggest was of a girl loving one man
and accepting another. I am not sure if he has
been successful. It is an intensely difficult subject.
Do you see the likeness to yourself .'*" he continued.
I noticed it at once."

So did Miss Griffiths. I did not know I was
like that." Lenore turned away as if she would
move from the place. Jack followed her.

It is very like you," he replied ; " only you
would not do as she is doing. You would not love
one and marry another .?"

Do not ask me. I cannot tell. The girl's face
has told me so much, that I feel sure she was right
in what she was doing."

It couldn't be right," he exclaimed. " Do not
say so, do not think so for a moment."

Duty might demand the sacrifice of self," she
answered. Her voice trembled, and Jack could
hardly hear what she said.

Why do you say this, Lenore .^ What has put
such thoughts into your head } Do you not know

that I love you — that my only hope in this world is
your love ? Tell me quickly that you will give me
yours in return. I will keep it very safely," he
added, with wonderful tenderness, " in life, in death,
and in eternity."

As once before he had let her voice speak
unheeding of an answer, so now she let him tell
his story as though she did not hear.

Cannot you trust it to my keeping ? I know
I am asking a great deal — know that I am utterly
unworthy of such a woman's love ; and yet, Lenore,
I tell you the truth when I say I have never loved
before, and it is not often you will receive the first
and entire love of a man's life given as unreservedly
as I offer you mine. Will you accept it, or let it
go?"

He put the question decidedly. There was less
of pleading than of demand, more of master than
of suppliant, in the form of his speech. Lenore
raised her eyes to his ; her face was expressive of
intense happiness and rest ; her eyes glistened from
more than their usual moisture.

If it is in my power to accept it, I will," she
said simply, " for I love you."

Miss Griffiths was utterly forgotten. The half-hour
together was very short, when Lenore,
remembering to look at her watch, saw how time
was fleeting.

I must go," she said, " but let me have one
more look at my picture."

Silently she stood before it ; the expression on
her face growing very sad and wistful as she
imprinted it on her mind.

Promise me," she said at last, turning to him
and holding out her hand ; " promise me this, that
whatever I do you will always trust me. Remember
that I have told you that I love you."

After that, they joined Miss Griffiths, and Jack
saw them to their brougham, which was waiting
for them.

I shall be with your father tomorrow morning,
early."

I ride with Lord Meredith at twelve. Shall I
see you before then } "

"Yes, certainly. Good-bye, Miss Griffiths. I
have told Miss Fenton all about the picture ; you
must ask her for a minute description."

THE PRICE.

AS has been before related, Lenore and Miss
Griffiths arrived at Prince's Gate just as Mr.
Harvey left. Lord Meredith met them in the
lobby, and it was then that Lenore offered the
excuse that she had letters to write, and retired
to her own room. She sank into a chair, too
utterly weary with happiness to do anything.

She sat in a dream until she was summoned to
lunch, and then the truth broke in on her that
before dinner she had promised to say something
to her father of Jack's visit the following day. He
had begged hard that she would let him take the
burden on his own shoulders, for both knew only
too well how much opposition might be expected
from her father. But she was determined on that
one point. She felt she owed it to him, for until
now they had been much to each other. Lenore
had never really known Sir James ; he was idealised

in her mind, and very little of the ideal existed
in the original.

She still continued to hold the doctrines instilled
by her dead mother, lessons repeated so often that
they had become articles of her faith — of the father
in India, whose image the mother ever painted in
more glowing colouring — leaving the world only
when her twelve-year-old daughter had grown to
hold her unknown parent as half-god, half-man.
The creed of her childhood still clung to her ; it
was in this faith she could bear no other to tell
him of the happiness which had come to her.

She knew Lord Meredith had an appointment
for the afternoon ; she would then find her father
alone. She awaited the interview with a beating
heart, and almost regretted the resolution she had
made of herself breaking the news to him.

She found him, as she expected, alone. He
turned and greeted her with more than ordinary
warmth of manner.

I wished particularly to see you, Lenore. I
have been arranging with Meredith about our visit
to Brighton. He was so unwilling to part company,
that I have asked him to join us there as
soon as convenient for him."

I should think he would find it very dull.
What is there for a man to do ^ However, Father,
if you like it, I am very glad."

Are not you glad for your own sake also ? I
thought it would be a change for you, instead of
always having no other company than that of your
father."

I will try and be glad to please you ; but, personally,
it makes little difference whether he goes
or stays. You know he is your friend, not mine."

Lenore, are you blind .-* Don't you see that he
wishes it to be of consequence to you whether he
comes with us or not ^ He never thinks of me ;
it is entirely "

Stop, Father ! I know now what you would
say. But if I am right, what you wish is utterly
impossible. I came here just now to speak to
you, to tell you of something. You must hear me
before you finish your sentence."

If Sir James had only known it, he could not
have used a better spur to Lenore's faltering spirit
than the mention of Lord Meredith, especially in
connection with herself. Sir James sat in his easy
chair, his spectacles resting on his forehead.
Lenore stood beside him ; she had the advantage
of position. Her father was taken by surprise at
her sudden outbreak ; he felt by no means easy in
his mind as to what was to follow. Lenore hesitated
a moment to steady her voice. When she
did speak, there was no hesitancy in what she said.

I was at the water-colour exhibition this morning.

I met Mr. Hunt there. He is coming to see
you tomorrow."

What do you mean, Lenore } You cannot fora
moment suppose that I should understand that
Mr. Hunt's visit has any connection with my
daughter."

"Yes; his visit is in connection with me. He
asked me this morning to be his wife. I told him
that with your consent I would be so."

"My consent you shall never have. If you
marry him, it is without it."

Sir James was startled into momentary passion.
He recovered himself almost immediately, took the
spectacles from their dangerous position, and waited
for Lenore to speak.

"I suppose you know quite well that I would
not marry without my father's consent, but I shall
leave no stone unturned to obtain it. You cannot
possibly withhold it," she continued, more passionately.
"You can say nothing against him.
You know as well as I do that you could not trust
your daughter to safer keeping."

I know as well as you do that Jack Hunt has
not a penny to bless himself with, much less to
keep a wife."

He would never have asked me to marry him
unless he could afford to do so ; and, besides, I
have money."

"From where did you gain your information ?"
said Sir James, with provoking coolness.

I am your only child. I know what you have
yearly allowed me. I do not suppose you would
shorten my allowance when I would require it
more than ever."

You seem to take it all very much for granted.
Perhaps you will be astonished when I tell you
that I cannot allow you anything, and that it is
absolutely essential that you marry money !"

That I will never do. I would not sell myself.
However," she continued, more quietly, " mercifully
there is no question of that just now. If you at
present withhold your consent, I can wait till you
change your mind."

"You seem very certain of your constancy. But
you forget that Mr. Hunt does not yet know the
prize he has drawn is dowerless. He may not be
so willing to wait as you suppose."

Lenore's eyes flashed, and hot tears came into
them. She turned angrily away, and was about to
speak. She controlled herself, however, and only
said, "He shall answer that question for himself
when you see him tomorrow."

Lenore, this is absurd. You must hear reason.
You need not speak of constancy and waiting and
all that. My answer is given once for all. You
must make up your mind ; it will be far less painful

for you to do so at once. Resistance is absolutely
useless."

"But why?"

Because, as I told you before, you must marry
money. Only yesterday. Lord Meredith asked me
for your hand. I heard him favourably. You see
it is impossible to refuse such an alliance."

It is not impossible. I will not marry Lord
Meredith. I will not be sold for a coronet.
Nothing will ever induce me to change. I love
Jack Hunt. I declare I will marry no other."

"Not so fast, Lenore. You will be sorry you
have said this some day. There are circumstances
which require you should marry Lord Meredith,"

Circumstances is an ambiguous term," she
answered. " What circumstances can ever affect
me in such a case ? You must be more definite in
your expressions if you wish me to hear reason."

Will you not take my reasons on trust .'' It is
far better you should do so ; any explanations
would only make it more painful for everyone."

And you expect me to be satisfied with this
half knowledge," she answered, slowly bringing out
word by word. " You expect me to quietly give
up the man I love, and marry the man I don't care
whether I ever see again. You expect me to do
this without a reason. Remember, I am a woman,
and in love."

Remember, you are little more than a child,
and will soon grow out of it"

Lenore did not answer. She had not herself
under control ; she was trembling all over from
suppressed feeling. He father saw it, and pushed
a chair towards her.

You had better sit down," he said. " When
you can listen, I will speak."

Lenore took the proffered chair ; her knees
would no longer support her. " I am waiting," she
said.

Do you mean to say that you still hold to this
ridiculous fancy, or are you willing to give up your
will to mine ?"

Unless you can prove the fancy is ridiculous, I
will never change. If you can give me what I
consider a sufficient reason I will not marry without
your consent, but I will also not marry anyone
else."

Lenore, if I were to tell you that in days long
gone by circumstances had arisen by which I
became deeply involved in debt, that payment of
the debt is now demanded, and that the money
must be found somewhere or your father's name
will become blackened, what would you say?"

But this cannot be ! What do you mean ? To
whom is this debt due, and how was it contracted ?
If honourably, what disgrace, then, to speak of it ?

And you could never have contracted dishonourable
debt?"

Lenore, do not ask. What Is the use of it all ?
Do not you see how you pain me by dragging up
the past?"

But I must know all, must understand all."
She rested her elbows on the table, and buried her
face in her hands. She could not look on at the
overthrow of her idol.

The rest is short. The debt was contracted —
no matter how. It is now due. A friend has
offered to advance the money."
"And that friend?"
Is Lord Meredith."

Lenore's breath came quick and short. Her
face was terribly changed in expression as, after
the lapse of a few minutes' silence, she looked up.

I understand it now. I am to be sold for the
payment of my father's dishonourable debts. I,
your only child!" Her voice sounded hard and
metallic. There was no life left to burst forth.

Have mercy, Lenore. Do not you see you are
killing me !"

I suppose women are not so easily killed. They
are made of something which will stand more pain
than men."

Have you no pity for your father, Lenore ?"
Is the pity, then, to be all on my side ? And

Lord Meredith," she went on, a ring of scorn
coming into her hitherto lifeless tones, " how much
does he know of this transaction ? I suppose he
also is quite willing to be a party to this bargain.
He wishes a wife. He is not over young now.
He thinks I would do well in that capacity, and is
willing to offer a few thousands. If I am to be
knocked down to the highest bidder, justice doubtless
will give me to him."

You misunderstand. Meredith knows nothing
of this. He asked me for leave to win you before
anything of this took place. It was only afterwards,
hearing of my position from Mr. Harvey,
that he offered to stand my friend."

In what capacity — as your accepted son-in-law?"


As my friend — hoping also the last might be
true."

Then you wish him to believe that I accept
him willingly ? I am to act a lie throughout ?"

He loves you, Lenore. There are few more
worthy of your love."

Providence has kindly interposed," she said,
bitterly. " It is a mercy to be grateful for, considering
I had no voice in the matter. It would
have made but little difference who the purchaser
was, if the money were duly forthcoming."

You forget your lady-like feeling, Lenore."

Do I ? It is not unlikely. The school I am
now in is not one to increase its growth." She
rose to her feet. " I suppose I need stay no longer
to-day. You will not expect me to appear at
dinner this evening."

She swept past her father's chair.

I shall see Mr. Hunt myself tomorrow morning,
and let him know that you, not I, have
dismissed him."

It is impossible for you to see him. You would
tell all. You would bring dishonour on me. And
why is a folly of my youth to rise up against me
now, when I have already paid so dearly for it,-*"

Do you mean I am never to see him again .'*"

"Not till you are Lady Meredith. I will tell
him tomorrow all that is necessary. I forbid you
seeing him."

I must see him once again. Oh, father, let
me ; I cannot part with him so !"

Judge for yourself, Lenore. You can give mean
answer tomorrow. I am willing you shall tell
him all my disgrace, if it will bring any satisfaction
either to yourself or him."

So they parted — Lenore to her own room.
There is no use to follow her there ; no eye ought
to witness the struggle from which she rose
victorious.

Her woman's love and her filial duty — one

against another. Such fights are passed through
by all who have ever really lived — when the will
must bend to the all-powerful will above.

Lord Meredith was full of anxious concern
about the indisposition to which Sir James attributed
Lenore's non-appearance at dinner. He
recurred again and again to it during the evening.
But it was not until they separated for the night
that he gained any light on the subject.

You see, I consider I have a right to inquire
about her," he said, " since our talk of this
morning."

To tell the truth, Meredith, our talk of this
morning has somewhat to do with it. We got
upon the subject of marriage this afternoon, and I
sounded her upon how your suit would be
received."

"And is this the cause .^ I am disagreeable to
her?"

No, no. She was startled, surprised. She does
not wish for marriage yet. She is very young, you
know, and has always been so much her own
mistress. Of course she gets a little restive at the
thought of regular harness."

The harness would be very light," he answered,
gently ; " but I am grieved, distressed, that she
should have taken it so. What shall I do } Must
I at once give up my dream ^"

No, no ; only wait. It will all come right ; but
let her get used to the idea. Do not let your
feelings be too apparent. I will take her away as
soon as we can. We go to Mrs. Vivien Hill's
dance the end of next week. We must stay for
that, and will go down next day to Brighton."

If you are sure this is what she would like
best, let it be so ; of course you know better than
I do. But, Sir James, it is her happiness, not
mine, I seek."

"And you will find it if you only have patience.
She is so young she does not yet know what she
wishes."

I hope she will be all right tomorrow. I shall
feel terribly to blame if she is not."

Never fear. A good night's rest always goes
far to put a woman to rights and soothe her little
tempers."

FINISHED.

TEN days had passed since Lenore's interview
with her father — days each longer and more
wearisome than the last. She kept up her spirits
bravely before the world, but alone her eyes looked
dull and heavy, and her step lost its spring and
elasticity.

Her father saw nothing of this, however, and he
put aside the uneasiness that had grown up within
him. She had taken the whole business much
better than he expected. After their stormy
parting he anticipated rebellion, or, if not that, at
least that he would have to put up with much
irritability of temper and to give way to numberless
caprices.

But no ; such would have been no relief to
Lenore ; she was far too deeply hurt to show it.
Putting aside all her love for Jack Hunt, all that
she had to endure in giving up her life's happiness,

her pride brought her acute suffering, though at
the same time it stood her in good stead. To hide
everything from outsiders was her one endeavour ;
to shield her father from blame was something to
live for.

Her feelings towards him had undergone a complete
change ; all her blind love for him, and belief
in him, had left her for ever, and at first had been
replaced by hardly - fought - against scorn. She
despised a nature that could let another suffer for
it ; she turned with loathing from the caresses he
showered upon her ; compensation offered, of such
a kind, only made her feel it the more.

Such feelings had sway but at first. Gradually
the woman's love of self-sacrifice made itself felt.
To suffer for something weaker, poorer, less able to
bear it, this was what she had to do. Her first
duty was towards her father ; all else must be given
up for this. Pity took the place of stronger feeling;
dislike turned to compassion : as woman condoned
ever the offences of those she loves, if the nature is
smaller than her own.

She saw nothing of her lover in those first days
of acute suffering — refusing all engagements previously
contracted. She shunned every house in
which there was a likelihood of their meeting.
Her father used all his persuasions, but of no avail.
It was not till the close of the following week that

she at last consented to be present at a dance
given by Mrs. Vivien Hill some few miles out of
town. She knew Jack Hunt did not know them ;
she thought she was safe.

It was the day before their intended departure
from town ; the miserable life she was leading was
nearly at an end.

Lenore stood waiting for the carriage, attired in
her opera cloak. Lord Meredith was to accompany
them. He had not yet made his appearance.
She was alone. Presently, Sir James entered the
room.

He approached Lenore, and made some flattering
remarks as to her toilette. She paid but little
heed to what he said, and remarked that their host
was late.

He was speaking to me, which detained him,
Lenore. Out of consideration for your feelings,
I have withheld him from expressing his wishes to
you. He knows nothing of the reason. I cannot
longer make false excuses. You will make up
your mind to hear him kindly, and I shall now
give him permission to speak."

Very well," she answered, quietly, " waiting can
make no difference. I am ready to give my
answer."

** I am thankful you take so reasonable a view of
it, my dear."

Lord Meredith made his appearance, and they
started for the drive of some miles.

As Lenore entered the ball-room, leaning on
Lord Meredith's arm, there were many who whispered
the gossip of their engagement as tm fait
accompli. She passed amongst the crowd. Which
of them could have told that the smiles which
lingered round her lips were occasioned by bitter
satire of the hollow part she was acting }

Suddenly her gaze was arrested, a pair of eyes
were bent on her across the sea of heads. The
owner of the eyes was making his way steadily
across the room. She trembled, and Lord Meredith
turned to see the cause of her agitation.

Jack Hunt paid no attention to the noble lord ;
he hardly realised on whose arm she was leaning.

"You will dance the first waltz with me .-*" he
said, very quietly.

I cannot — forgive me."

Her answer was almost inaudible, and as he bent
to catch the words, his eyes sought hers, reading in
them the story of her love.

He turned from her without an answer. She
thought he had left the ball. Some one of her
usual partners claimed her hand ; dance after dance
she passed from one to another. Lord Meredith
begged very hard for one. " Not to-night," she
said. " I have so many to dance with, you must

forgive me." He did not renew his request, he
knew his day was coming ; he went and joined her
father in the card-room.

So the weary hours dragged heavily on, and
Lenore's acting was almost past. The once densely-crowded
rooms were beginning to look empty,
dancing was at last possible, and to the enchanting
strains of Strauss's waltzes some dozen or two of
couples were floating round, forgetting everything
but the delight of the moment, the thrilling music,
the dreamy, gliding motion, the last dregs of the
cup of pleasure.

The weary chaperones were, most of them, at
supper, trying to pass the last half-hour of duty.
Surely these poor, long-suffering mothers are
worthy of more sympathy and appreciation
than the verdict so often given of "scheming,
manoeuvring women."

They had not long to wait now ; daylight was
forcing its way through the shutters ; the outside
world was waking to a new day.

Softly rose and fell the strains of enticing,
bewitching music, the air was laden with the
scent of flowers, the hundreds of alights were
burning low, but still the dancing continued.
Lenore, worn out at last, had found a quiet corner
behind some gauzy drapery. She anxiously awaited
the moment of her release, when Sir James should

come and claim her. In the meanwhile, she was
under the protection of Mrs. Vivien Hill, who,
engrossed with her duties as hostess, had not
observed Lenore's escape from observation.

Lenore, in a dream, watched the couples as they
passed her. She could see and not be seen. She
was wondering why Jack Hunt had taken his
dismissal so quietly, wondering why he had come
there at all, if not to meet her ; her tired brain
tried to untie the knot, but her mind was too
weary to do more than fumble with the strings.
She was conscious of some one entering the room,
and then her screen was drawn aside, and her lover
stood beside her.

I have been looking for you everywhere.
Come."

She rose at once and put her hand within his
arm, and he led her away, out of the room, bright
with flickering tapers, into the cool corridor, and soon
through the conservatory to the terrace of the
garden, and there he stopped.

So few miles out of town, and yet how perfectly
lovely and country-like it was ! At that early hour
of the morning no sound of the harsh, hard-working
world broke on the stillness of nature ; too far
from the house even to hear the sound of revelry
within.

There was a seat some few yards away. Jack

led Lenore towards it. She was thankful to sit
down. A strange, faint feeling was creeping over
her ; it was all so unreal. He did not seat himself
beside her, but stood gazing down on her, intense
love and admiration expressed in his face. No
wonder ; she looked very beautiful in the soft
morning light. Her white dress fell in soft folds
round her ; her neck and arms were jewellers save
for the string of pearls which encircled her throat ;
her rich brown hair was coiled simply round her
head ; her hands toyed nervously with the fan
lying on her knee. Surely if there is power in
magnetism she would have raised her eyes to his.
But no ; only an almost imperceptible tinge of
crimson stole over the marble-like whiteness of her
face.

Have you nothing to say to me, Lenore ? I
brought you here hoping you would tell me something
which would explain your conduct of tonight.
Why in a few short hours have you so
utterly changed .'' why did you refuse to dance with
me } why, after all that has passed, have you
acted so }"

Still she did not speak, but the crimson deepened
on her cheek. Once more he impetuously broke
out —

Do you think I am made of marble, Lenore ?
Do you think I am without feeling } Do you

think I can stand calmly here and measure my
tones to society's words and phrases, when she who
only one week ago promised to be my wife sits as
though she heard not, refuses one word of explanation
even to the man who was fool enough to
believe that she loved him ? I did not think you
would have done this, Lenore — you, whom I
thought above all other women — have turned out
to be heartless, a flirt, ready to sell yourself for a
coronet!" His voice rang with scorn, and he
turned from her.

How dare you speak so to me ?" she exclaimed,
rising from her seat. " How dare you attribute
motives such as these to me, Mr. Hunt ? Do you
think if it had been as you say I would have come
with you hereof I were the promised wife of
another, if I were absolutely heartless, I would
have shunned all opportunity of explanation."

"And what explanation can you give, Lenore.-*
I could bear with so much from you."

You will have to bear much," she answered
wearily, sinking into the seat from which she had
risen in the first burst of her anger. " You have a
right to think ill of me, for I cannot explain. Oh !
will you not trust me ? will you not believe that
my love for you is now as it ever was ? and yet our
marriage can never be, for I must live and strive
to forget this love that at present is part of my

very life. I cannot keep it longer, for it would be
sin."

Her voice had sunk almost to a whisper. In the
silence a blackbird poured out a gush of melody —
the world of nature glowing with thanksgiving and
happiness ; only two human hearts, torn with love,
at discord with it all.

You mean you are about to marry Lord
Meredith, and that you, in your integrity and icy
calmness, will then uproot all your now avowed
love, because such things are not according to your
religion. I care not for these things ; the religion
that would separate us will never number me
amongst its votaries. I am not the stuff they
made martyrs of Why must this be ? I swear
that unless it is your own wish, nothing shall ever
come between us. God forgive you if you are
playing with me, Lenore ; but you are driving me
mad."

"And do you think it costs me nothing.? Do
you imagine that the suffering is all one-sided ?"

If you also suffer, why must this be ? I have a
right to an explanation. Is it your own wish or
your father's that all should be over between
us ? If your own, I will say no more ; if your
father's "

It is I myself that wish it, Jack. It is I who
say and know that it can never be ; but oh ! promise

me that you will not let this wreck your life,
that you will remember that there is something
higher, better, truer to live for than human love."

You told me once," he answered her, " that you
could not be the rope that would save a man.
Fool that I was not to believe you !"

But believe me now!" she exclaimed. " I told
you that though I had no saving power there was
One who had. You must live your life nobly, live
down this pain, and when you have succeeded in
this, look around for the nearest duty and do it.
But why do I tell you all this, save that I love you
so — why, when my own heart is breaking ?"

She buried her face in her hands and gave way
to a passion of grief Jack, who at her first words
had turned from her, now, as her sobs struck on his
ear, once more came close to her. Her slender
form was shaken with the torrent of her sorrow,
and into his face, so stern and unforgiving a
moment since, swept a smile of deepest love. Yes ;
though he believed that she was behaving cruelly
to him, he could not resist the impulse, and, taking
her in his arms, he pressed passionate kisses on her
lips. For a few moments she gave herself up to
his love ; but there was a sound of approaching
footsteps in the shrubbery, and, throwing her arms
round him, she gave him one long, unasked for, first
and last kiss, and fled.

Terror lent her wings, through the conservatory,
the corridor, and into the cloak-room. There she
paused, considering what to do next. A servant
appeared in the doorway. " Will you find Sir
James Fenton for me .?" she said. " Tell him his
daughter is waiting for him here."

Sir James was in the card-room, but rose at once
at his daughter's summons, and met her in the
hall. As she advanced to meet him, he was struck
by her extreme beauty, the glowing colour of her
lip and cheek, the almost dangerous sparkle of her
eyes.

My daughter keeps me in wonderful order," he
said to Lord Meredith, who accompanied him.

Miss Fenton's slaves cannot complain of their
task-master," he answered, as bowing low he offered
Lenore his arm to conduct her to her carriage.
She drew back haughtily, but at a glance from her
father, more of entreaty than command, she placed
her hand on his arm.

I hope you have enjoyed to-night the last
dance of the season, and that you will leave town
tomorrow with pleasant remembrances of it all }"

Lord Meredith turned to Lenore for an answer.
She must say something.

Mrs. Vivien Hill deserves warm thanks for all
the trouble she has taken. It has been a brilliant
ball."

You have really enjoyed it ? I am glad."

She gave no answer, but looked up, to meet the
gaze of Jack Hunt riveted on her. He was standing
in the doorway waiting for her to pass. His
expression was not pleasant. He had overheard
Lord Meredith's last words.

Her eyes pleaded for forgiveness as she held out
her hand.

Good-bye," she whispered.

Good-bye, Miss Fenton. Allow me to congratulate
you on the pleasant ending to your stay
in town."

She almost called out from pain as her hand
was for one moment held in his ; it was only her
diamond ring had cut her finger.

In another moment she was in the carriage,
hardly conscious of anything.

Lord Meredith had returned to the house for
something he had forgotten.

In a dream she heard her father's voice, "It's
all right, my darling Lenore ; you have saved me.
Lord Meredith is coming down to Brighton next
week."

BEGUN IN BITTERNESS.

JACK returned to his rooms, but not to rest. A
pile of books, ready for review, lay on his table ;
they must be reported on within the next few
days. He sat himself down at once to write.
Slashing criticisms they were which came from his
pen in those first hours after his parting with
Lenore ; but the work suited him better than any
other would have done ; it occupied his mind, and
prevented him from dwelling so much on his own
loss of happiness. Of Lenore he did not think at
all at first, save as of a woman in whom he had
been woefully mistaken, who had gone to fulfil her
destiny by marrying birth and wealth. Of course,
she would be happy ; she had got all the world
could give. So days passed on, and his feelings did
not change.

The strength of her influence over him for good

acted only more strongly in the opposite direction ;
his faith in her had been such, that now, when he
thought she had failed, he was inclined to throw
all her lessons to the winds. The world was a
sham ; what seemed good and fair was even more
dangerous than that which was outwardly unsightly.
He had believed in her, and had been
deceived. He certainly would not commit the
same fault twice.

And yet with an unaccountable and ever-increasing
desire his steps carried him once more
to the Picture Gallery. How vividly his meeting
with Lenore was in his mind as he stood before
her duplicate in the picture of " Yes or No }"

I did not know I was like that," she had said ;
and he answered her, " You are very like it, only
you would not have acted so;" and contrary
to all his expectations she had done it. How
intensely the girl's face in the water-colour reminded
him of Lenore, as when, that night, she had
wished him good-bye at the Vivien Hills'! The
same pleading for forgiveness in the eyes, the same
wistful sadness of expression. He returned to his
lodgings none the better for his hours spent in
useless retrospect. His landlady met him at the
door. A gentleman had been calling while he
was away, and finding that he was not at home,
had gone up to his rooms and written a note.

Jack recognised Phil Jerningham's writing as he
raised the missive from the table.

"Dear Hunt,

Sorry to find you out ; called to
know if you will go down with me next week to

B shire. There is a dance at Sir Roger and

Lady Mainwaring's. All the houses round are
making up parties, and I am going to stay with
the Romneys, at Romneys Manor. The son is at
Oxford with me ; they wanted another man, and I
asked for an invitation for you. You had better
get rid of your writing for a couple of days.
Household not at all formidable — father, three
girls, and Tom, the son. I '11 meet you in town,
and we can go down together. You had better
say * Yes.' — Yours,

Phil Jerningham."

' Household not at all formidable,' so Philip
thinks. Well, I '11 see about it when the time
comes."

Jack tossed the note into the unanswered letter-basket,
and sat down to work. His room felt
stifling; the sunshine which forced its way round
the edges of the window-blind served only to
illumine a dust-laden atmosphere. He rose impatiently
from his seat and threw up the window.

The dust was displaced, and the air blew in hot
and refreshing. A vision of trees and grass,
even for a couple of days, was refreshing to his
weary spirit.

I think I '11 go," he said, and then he wrote to
Philip Jerningham accepting the invitation.

So it was Jack Hunt first came to know Grisel
Romney.

She had only arrived from school the preceding
day, and was still in all the whirl and pleasure of
home-coming — the delight of being with them
all again, the picking up the broken threads of last
year's existence, feeling still a child in the keen
enjoyment of her old amusements, and ever and
again remembering she was grown up now, and
that this very evening she was going to her first
ball. AH day long her flow of spirits had continued,
first chattering to Sybil in her studio, and
then invading her father's sanctum, and carrying
him off to the stables and kennels ; and at last,
returning about five o'clock to the house, she
caught sight of a well-known figure standing at
the glass door which led from the girls' sitting-room
into the garden.

It was in this room that, every afternoon, the
tea-table was set, and Mr. Romney came in regularly
for his cup of tea, and brought with him
whoever might be within reach. Sometimes Sir

Roger Mainwaring, when the two had been farm-inspecting
together ; sometimes the Rector, who
enjoyed nothing better than a half-hour's chat with
Mr. Romney's pretty daughters among the flowerbeds.


But neither the Rector nor Sir Roger was there
to-day, and Grisel was alone with her father when
they entered the garden.

"There is Tom," she exclaimed, as she caught
sight of the before-mentioned figure.

Tom turned at the sound of her voice, and in a
moment she was beside him.

Well, my old boy, I am glad to see you. Tom,
there is something odd about you," she added,
gazing at him contemplatively. " I see now what
it is ! Allow me to congratulate you."

On what. La Grise .''"

Why, your moustache, of course."

"Do you approve of the acquisition?" he
answered, laughing. " You must come and be
introduced to Mr. Hunt, and to an old friend of
mine also — Philip Jerningham."

Bryde was pouring out tea as Tom and Grisel
entered. The roses on her cheeks vied in colour
with the roses in her waist belt, as she laughingly
fought a battle on the merits of sugar and no sugar
with Philip, and they were engrossed with each
other. Only Jack, standing in the background,

overheard the brother and sister's meeting, and
watched with a passing curiosity for the figure
from which had proceeded those low, mirthful
tones.

The introductions were over ; Mr. Romney had
cordially welcomed the two men to the Manor, and
they had seated themselves round the tea-table.
That Bryde was very handsome and Grisel insignificant
beside her was Jack's first opinion, arrived
at with a feeling of amusement that he should care
to form an opinion at all ; that there was an indescribable
something about Grisel which made him
watch her — that he had been mistaken, and she
really was nice-looking — was his conviction after
his first hour's acquaintance.

Yet she had not addressed three words to him —
in fact her conversational powers seemed to have
vanished with her entry into the house. Bryde
kept the ball going ; she had enough to do
between Mr. Jerningham and her brother, both
intent upon drawing out her lively sallies. Sybil
had disappeared ; some flowers had to be gathered,
and, engaged all day at her easel, she had forgotten
them. Grisel made a show of following her, and
there was a general move in the direction of the
garden.

Jack felt he must rouse himself A desire to be
unsociable was creeping over him, a feeling of want

of harmony with everything — it was stale, flat, and
unprofitable.

He turned to Grisel, who, with her arm linked
through Tom's, was next to him.

Is this to be your first ball this evening, Miss
Romney .?"

Yes ; I have never been anywhere before,
except once to the opera."

Then you are going to taste a completely new
experience. You must tell me tomorrow your
impressions."

Oh, I can tell you now. I know I shall enjoy
it all, because, you know, I am so fond of dancing !"

Then it is to the dancing that you are looking
forward. You are sure in that case to enjoy yourself"


But isn't dancing the principal thing ? If I
dance everything, I cannot help enjoying it."
Grisel paused a moment. A puzzled expression
came into her face. "What do you go for?" she
asked.

Simply for the dancing. What other reason
can there be .'*"

She looked straight into his eyes as he spoke,
trying to read in them some contradiction to his
words.

I do not think you mean what you say. You
seemed surprised when I said the same word a

minute ago. Perhaps you go to see your friends.
Is that it r

I have no friends, Miss Romney."

Neither have I. I shall know no one there this
evening. Oh yes, I forgot ; I have one great
friend, but one isn't very many."

I cannot even aspire to one. You should consider
yourself fortunate to be able to reckon on
one true friend."

I am sorry for you, Mr. Hunt, for then I fear
you will not enjoy yourself, as you do not care for
dancing."

I shall watch you," he said, " and perhaps,
when this very true friend has had all the dances
he wishes, you will let me have one, and we shall
see if we can waltz together."

My great friend is only Reggie Mainwaring,"
she said. " He is my make-believe brother, and if
you would like it, I should like very much to dance
with you."

Tom, until now, had been absorbed in tossing
his cane for his dog to go after, and had taken no
part in the conversation ; at Reggie's name he
stopped his amusement for a moment.

Have you seen Le Gris to-day. La Grise ?"

Not yet. We are to meet to-night and dance
the very first dance together. Do you know, Mr.
Hunt, I have been engaged for the first dance fora

whole year now ! Do you think you could have
remembered, had you been me ?"

At your age, yes ! When you grow older, you
will find constancy an exploded idea. It does not
coincide with our nineteenth-century notions. A
week is generally too long for such a thing to last."

I hope I shall never grow old," exclaimed
Grisel, warmly.

I hope you never will ; but I fear a year after
this you will echo my sentiments."

But a promise ! I never could break a promise.
Could you, Tom .?"

Cela depends. I wouldn't answer for myself"

I would," she said. " I would never break my
word willingly."

I have heard such things before," Jack said ;
and yet, Miss Romney, a week is a long test for
our humanity to stand."

Are you a cynic, Mr. Hunt } If so, and we are
to be friends, you must forget about it for the next
two days. Remember, I am holding Eve's apple
only in my hand. Do not make me taste it yet.
I do not wish to find out the ashes. I will not doit,
in fact ; so you need not try to open my eyes."

The knowledge must come sooner or later ; it
is not such a sharp awakening if you get over it
early. It 's like teething, the sooner you are done
with it the better."

Much you know about teething," said Grisel,
laughing.

Oh, don't I, when I have suffered agonies with
my wisdom teeth !"

You do not mean to tell me seriously, Mr.
Hunt, that you really have got your wisdom
teeth ? I should not have thought it."

Tom gave a low whistle of amusement.

Jack regarded the girl between them with an
increase of curiosity.

Don't cut your wisdom teeth too soon. Miss
Romney ; you are happier without them."

Four hours later the party were assembling in the
drawing-room. Jack was ready early, and expected
to be the first on the scene ; but Grisel was already
there, fluttering about in a fever of excitement.

I do wish they would be quick ; I am so afraid
we shall be late."

The omnibus is not here yet, so you need not
make yourself unhappy. Miss Romney. Are these
real or artificial ?" he asked, touching the white
heath and fern which nestled amongst the clouds
of airy tulle."

Real," she answered, " they were sent to me an
hour ago, with this. Isn't it lovely ? "

She held up the perfectly pure Covent Garden
bouquet, almost heavy from the smell of Cape
jasmine and rare exotics.

It is beautiful. What happiness to have a
great friend, Miss Romney !"

It was very good of Reggie sending it to me ;
but why do you speak so oddly about him, as if
you hardly believed he were my friend V

Because I think friendship a snare and a delusion.
Your nearest and dearest are often foes in
disguise."

Some one must have used you very ill once
upon a time. I am very sorry for you, Mr. Hunt."

Oh dear, no. Miss Grisel ! In a few years you
will know it is the creed of half the world, and it is
an evil easily rectified — have plenty of friends ; so
when the time-being beloved one fails, select the
next best to supply his place. These fair-weather
friends are easily got ; the thing becomes nearly
impossible when clouds are about."

If I were to judge you by your description of
yourself, I should dislike you very much, and still
somehow I don't."

"Don't you?" he said, smiling at her candid
opinion. " I hope you will keep your favourable
impressions'*

And prove there is such a thing as friendship,"
she answered. " I am ready to fulfil my half; but,
remember, if you are going to take me up as a
friend, I will not stand being put aside in ten days
or a fortnight."

All right ; then I submit to your conditions,
and I, on my part, promise not to be the first to
tire of the bargain. My experience tells me that
you will give in first."

Now, Mr. Hunt, I will not allow one of my
friends to speak so. I will have no sarcastic
remarks made, at any rate this evening."

"What are you two about?" asked Tom,
sauntering into the room at the moment.

Swearing an eternal friendship, Tom," said
Grisel. " Look what I have got for my boy. Let
me put it in for you ?"

Grisel stood on tiptoe and pinned it in the
button-hole for Tom.

Thanks, Grisette. A sister is even better thana
friend. Hunt. I have fared better than you."

Mr. Hunt shall have one also, if he cares for it.
I did not think he would."

What made you think that, Miss Romney ?
It would give me pleasure to wear one if you will
put it in for me."

I thought you were not in humour for flowers,"
she answered ; " but I am glad you like them."

ORANGE BLOSSOMS.

LADY Mainspring stood at the door
^ receiving her guests. Not at all a beautiful
woman, and yet her son watched her proudly ; he
thought she held her own amongst the matrons
present. He had told her to wear her black velvet
and diamonds, and she did it, because he always
got his own way, she said.

A perfect type of a high-bred woman, she never
showed to more advantage than in her own home
putting everyone at their ease. " Lady Mainwaring
is a charming hostess," was an often-repeated
verdict.

"Has she come yet, Mother?" Reggie asked.
He had been obliged to abandon his watch-post at
the door, and feared, in the interval, he had missed
the Romneys.

Not yet, Reggie ; but they cannot be long now.
I asked Sybil to come early."

M

Meanwhile, Grisel was beginning to look very
shy as she passed through the brightly-lighted
passages on her way to the ball-room. Suddenly,
her hand was clasped in a very warm pressure.

Here you are at last. The first dance is ours,
you know. The music is just beginning, and you
must come to open the ball."

He led her up to his mother with an air of
possession. " Here she is, Mother."

How do you do, Grisel ? I am very glad to see
you again. Where are the rest of your party ?"

Reggie met us in the passage, and hurried me
away from them. Have I done wrong in leaving
them?"

No, dear child ; you are quite safe with Reggie.
Now go and enjoy yourself; you know this is all
in your honour."

Round and round flew Grisel ; dancing came to
her almost by inspiration. She uttered an exclamation
of intense enjoyment as they stopped.

Let us go into the conservatory. La Grise ; we
can rest there for a few minutes. You must not
tire yourself at first ; and besides, I have not seen
you yet."

I am not a bit tired, Le Gris ; but, if you like,
we may sit down for a minute or two. Only, do
not go to the conservatory, as I do so like watching
everyone."

They found a seat in one of the windows, and
Grisel pushed aside the muslin curtains that fell
between her and the dancers.

Reggie, I did not think it could be half as nice
as this. If every ball is like it, how much I shall
enjoy them !"

Are you pleased, La Grise .'* What dances will
you give me to-night ?" he said, raising the ball
card from her knee. Several where already promised
to the home party, and Reggie took possession of
the remaining round ones. Grisel's satin slippers
tapped restlessly on the floor.

We are wasting our time, Le Gris," she said.

He smiled at her impatience, but did not stop
again until the waltz was over. It was pretty
generally known that the dance was in honour of
Mr. Romney's youngest daughter ; so when, at last,
the music ceased, Grisel found herself surrounded
by many claimants for dances.

"Are you enjoying yourself, Grisel.^" asked
Sybil, passing at the moment.

Very much. I am engaged for every dance
Where is Bryde ? — have you seen her ?"

She is with Mr. Jerningham somewhere. Do
you wish to find her .?"

Oh no ; only curiosity !"

The hours ran on. Grisel had never ceased
dancing, and the evening was nearly over. Mr.

Romney was getting restless, and spoke of going
home, but the Mainwarings would not hear of it.
Jack Hunt came up to claim a dance with Grisel,
and she escaped, laughing, from her father's expostulations.


"Has it come up to your expectations?" he
asked.

"Far surpassed them. I have had a perfect
evening."

I wonder how many years it will take before
you become blase. Do you think if we meet ten
years after this you will have grown weary ?"

"Ten years is such a long time off, I cannot tell.
I shall be twenty-seven by that time, nearly too
old to care for any fun ; and besides, you know, in

ten years I may be "

"Married!"

I was going to say dead."

"My word is best," he answered. "Though, if
truth be spoken, I am not sure if yours is not the
happier ending."

I shall not come to you, Mr. Hunt, for congratulations
when I am engaged. Only, that is in
all probability at such a remote period that even
our eternal friendship may have worn out."

Why do you put your happiness at such a
distance.? You are still in the first wonder!"
"What do you mean V she asked.

Do not you know a young lady's three wonders ?
From fifteen to twenty she wonders who she '11
marry ; from twenty to twenty-five, who will marry
her ; and from twenty-five to thirty, will she ever
be married at all."

Grisel broke into a laugh.

You are very rude," she said. " Never mind, I
shall forgive you, provided you do not let anymore
of this delicious waltz slip away."

I beg your pardon ; I forgot you came entirely
for the dancing, Miss Romney."

I have found out that dancing is not the only
nice part of a ball," she said ; " but I like a judicious
mixture."

You look as if you had had enough of it for
one evening," Jack said, as shortly afterwards heled
her to a seat.

Yes, I am very tired now. It is nice to rest."

I see your father in the distance with your
sisters ; I fear he is coming for you," Jack remarked.

I vast wait for one more dance ; I promised
to do so. Please, make Papa stay, Mr. Hunt."

Mr. Hunt went with the request, and in a
moment Reggie was at her side.

Come, Grisette," he said, " this last is mine, you
know."

I am so tired, Le Oris. Will you take me to
the conservatory now V*

Reggie looked at her anxiously.

You have been doing too much. Come and
have some champagne, and then I will find a comfortable
place where you may rest."

She laid her hand obediently on his arm — she
was too tired to remonstrate — and soon she found
herself in the corner of a sofa amongst the
flowers.

Do you remember the last afternoon we were
together, La Grise ?" Reggie asked.

Yes, of course I do ! When you rowed me up
the river. How lovely it was ! How I enjoyed
it!"

If I come tomorrow to the manor, will you
come out on the river again, and renew old days .''"

He asked the question eagerly, and Grisel turned
upon him a pair of laughing eyes.

I do not think I will," she said.

"Why?"

You wish it too much."

"And suppose I do confess that I wish it very
much, is that a good reason for your saying no .''"

Extremely. What people wish they ought
not to get. I am growing wise, Le Oris, with
advancing years."

You must promise you will come ; you are not
going to refuse my only request to-night, La
Grise?"

For shame ! Is that generous ? And somehow
I think you have been making requests all
this evening which you have had gratified ; so I
will not promise. What is that delicious scents'"
she added, starting up from her seat and going in
search of the plant whose fragrance had attracted
her. Reggie followed her.

It must be somewhere near. How sweet the
air is all around !"

"You are under it, La Grise," he said, smiling.

She looked up at the plant growing beside her ;
the blossoms were above her reach.

What is it, Le Gris ? Do gather me a spray."

He mounted on the chair beside her, and broke
two of the creamy bunches of blossoms.

Let me put it in your hair," he said, nestling
one of the sprays lightly amongst her coils. He
stood back a moment admiring his work. " Now
your dress is perfected, my queen."

What have you done, Le Gris } How can you
be so foolish ! What is it ? Give me the other
spray."

She held up her hands to try and snatch it from
him, but he held it far out of her reach.

I cannot give you this ; I am going to keep it.
Perhaps I will let you have it some day. Your
piece is in your hair."

"Oh, Reggie, you should not have done it!" she

exclaimed, as, disentangling the flower from her
hair, she discovered what it was. " Orange blossom
is only meant for a bride. I have no right to
wear it."

Never mind, La Grise. I could not help it ; it
was all your dress wanted. Let it stay there for
to-night."

"How silly you are, Le Gris!" but she did not
stop him, as once more he arranged the blossoms
in her hair.

We must go back to Papa," she said. " It is
time for us to go home."

Wait a little longer ; they will come for
you when they wish to go. I wish to hear
all about yourself What have you been doing
lately r

"At school, nothing but improving my mind;
since I came home, nothing interesting, except
that Mr. Hunt and I are going to be friends."

What happiness for him, La Grise ! And how
long is the friendship to last ? To eternity, I
suppose ?"

Oh, yes ! I made him understand I was not to
be dropped whenever he was tired of me, and he
says I shall probably tire first. But really, Le
Gris, we must go now."

You have not yet given me a promise that you
will come on the river tomorrow."

'' How can I ? My time Is not my own. Remember,
we have visitors staying with us. I must
consult their wishes."

"And make them your own, I suppose. It is
quite natural, La Grise, that your new friends
should take up your time."

Reggie, listen to me, and do not be so foolish.
You speak as if you thought my new friends were
going to push the old ones aside ; but you are
absolutely mistaken ; nothing can ever make me
different to you. Remember, we have been like
brother and sister for years. I will come with you
on the river tomorrow ; but you must not speak
like that again, for you hurt me."

Do I, child } I did not mean to do so. Come
away, little sister, then. Your father is making
signs for you."

Good night, Reggie," said Grisel, as he put her
safely in the carriage. " I have had such a happy
evening. Thank you for it."

They were all very tired and sleepy, and
the drive home was a silent one. They had
not far to go, and the two miles were quickly
passed.

Grisel was the last to leave the carriage, and
Jack stood at the door to help her to alight.

You have enjoyed yourself very much, have
you not y

Yes, intensely," she answered, and passed him
into the house. She turned before leaving the
entrance hall ; his voice attracted her.

Here are some of your flowers, Miss Romney,"
he said.

Thank you so much. It must have dropped
out of my hair. Reggie put it in this evening.
He cannot have fastened it very firmly."

It is orange blossom," he said, as he gave it
into her hand and met her laughing eyes.

Is it ? Thank you for telling me." Her eyes
met his quite frankly. " Good night — or rather
good morning," she said, and ran upstairs.

Jack turned from the doorway and lit his cigar.
The morning was delicious ; the sun had risen and
flooded everything in light. He strolled along the
pathway. He was alone — the rest of the party
had gone to their rooms.

A scene of the past rose to his mind ; not so
very far distant either. A garden terrace. A girl
dressed in white, with neck and arms snowy as
Grisel's. The time early morning, the sun just
risen, the birds awaking. She, too, had passed
from him, leaving him alone outside. Grisel he
would meet fresh and bright at breakfast next
morning. What of that other.? His brow contracted
for a moment ; he kicked a pebble sharply
from his path.

I am a fool ! Why cannot I forget her ?" he
exclaimed.

Because you never will," answered a voice from
somewhere. He started. Was it only his own
conviction making itself thus loudly heard ?

I am determined to forget. I will take her
own way of doing so. Surely there is more than
one woman in the world, though coronets may not
be plentiful as blackberries."

You will make no other woman love you, you
have given yourself so completely away. You will
find it impossible." His thoughts argued on,
utterly regardless of their disturbing influences.
Wait with patience ; things may yet come right.
Marry in haste, repent at leisure,' says an old
axiom."

I will not wait," he muttered. " If I find out
sooner or later that I have made a mistake, so will
she. I may not make another woman love me —
so much the better. Another woman might
deceive me. A child is different — she would not
demand the same kind of devotion. Some wiseman
or woman once wrote, ' What chains so
unworthy to hold you as those of a vain regret.'
I endorse the sentiment, and will begin in earnest
tomorrow. They are sweet, laughing eyes," he
mused, " and might shine very brightly for someone.
I have a rival in the shape of the great friend

who, with wonderful boldness, decks his lady with
orange blossom. But she cares for no one yet —
quite unbroken soil, something not often found."
Jack laughed unpleasantly. " I did not think I
would be reduced to poaching, but it is the only
cure I can think of, and forget her I will."

Promise me that you will always trust me
whatever I do. Remember I have told you that I
love you." The words echoed through and through
him. Lenore's tones of entreaty rang in his ears.

It was easy enough to say forget, but he could
not.

Of what use was it in Lenore to have told him
that she loved him ; her often-repeated assurances
only made the course she had taken more utterly
inexplicable. He went over it again — how, the
morning after his meeting with her in the watercolour
exhibition, he had presented himself at
Prince's Gate, not without qualms as to his reception
by Sir James, but sure of Lenore herself; and
how, on asking for an interview, the man-servant,
commanding and gracious, had given him a note —
Sir James was particularly engaged with Lord
Meredith, and had explained all to Mr. Hunt in the
note." Jack turned from the door, and hurriedly
broke open the letter. There, in terms of extreme
civility. Sir James informed Mr. Hunt that he had
regretted being unable to favour him with an

interview. Circumstances had arisen which made
it utterly impossible that the subject on which
Mr. Hunt had spoken to his daughter the previous
day could ever go any farther. His daughter
knew and approved of the steps he was taking.
Mr. Hunt would see at once that it would be
extremely painful for Miss Fenton that they should
again meet.

So this was the stone he received on asking for
bread. He made up his mind that he and Lenore
should meet again, and they had done so. The
result is already known. Sir James had never told
his daughter that Jack Hunt's dismissal had been
conveyed to him in the way it was.

Jack's cigar was finished. He went into the
house. A housemaid met him in the lobby
unbarring the shutters, and letting in daylight.
He must have smoked more than one cigar, he
thought. The clock struck six, and they had
reached home soon after four.

ETERNAL FRIENDSHIP.

YT was the afternoon of the following day. A
A general disinclination to exertion was making
itself felt.

The men were lounging about in chairs with the
newspapers. Nobody exactly knew what the three
girls were doing.

It was a brilliant summer. July had just come
in, bringing with it heat not often experienced in
Britain. Everything was gasping in the sunshine ;
not a breath of air abroad.

Reggie Main waring was just starting for the
manor; he was to find Grisel at the old meeting-place.
Grisel was there already. She was sitting
in the swing, lazily rocking herself to and fro by
the aid of one small foot which just touched the
ground. Her holland dress and shady hat made
her look even more of a child than usual. Her
thoughts were far away ; she was going over again

last night's experiences. Certainly she had enjoyed
herself, far, far more than she could have believed
possible.

Jack had come down in the morning determined
to amuse himself with Grisel, yet somehow he had
done nothing yet. It was too hot, or he was too
lazy, he could not tell which.

He put down his newspaper at last, and dragged
himself out of his easy chair.

What is everybody going to do .?" he asked.

Fish," Tom answered ; " but not for another
hour or two yet. Will you come with me .''"

No, I don't think so. What does your mind
give you to, Phil r'

Exertion of no kind," yawned Phil. " I should
think that a stroll and a cigar will about exhaust
my powers. Where are your sisters, Tom .^"

Somewhere about. I dare say you will easily
find them. Mainwaring usually turns up in the
afternoon. I suppose he will be with them now."

This will never do," Jack thought. " If I don't
look sharp, I shall not have the ghost of a
chance."

He sauntered into the garden and looked round.
In the distance he saw the flutter of a lady's dress
among the beech trees. He turned his steps in
the direction. It was Grisel in the swing, and she
was alone.

She did not hear his footstep on the turf, and
turned with a start when she heard his voice.

You have found a very shady retreat, Miss
Romney. May I enjoy the cool also, and invade
your solitude?"

Certainly, if you like ; but you will have it all
to yourself soon. I am waiting for some one who
will be here immediately."

What a romantic trysting-place for any faithful
swain ! Who is the Corydon .?"

Think of calling Reggie a Corydon ! And
certainly I am no Thyrsus."

*' You are waiting for Reggie, then. Very wrong
of Reggie being unpunctual. Punish him by not
waiting. Do come and show me some of your
beauties."

I wish I could," said Grisel, " but I promised."

Very well ; it would be bad policy in me to try
and make you break your promise, for you would
do the same to me another day. I will sit here
and keep you company till the faithless Reggie
appears."

'soh, do! I shall like that!" Jack found a
comfortable tree stump ; he had made up his mind
to begin his acquaintance at once.

Do you remember your promise of last
night?"

That we were to be friends .?" she asked.

Yes. Do you still feel inclined to keep to it,
Miss Romney ? Has daylight made no difference,
or will you really take me in hand .''"

Why should daylight make a difference ? I am
just as anxious now as I was last night. I want a
real friend so much."

You forget the faithless one."

Reggie is different. We aren't like that. I say
anything that comes uppermost to him."

I wish you would say anything that comes
uppermost to me. Do you know, Miss Romney, I
wish you would treat me like Reggie ? Scold meas
you do him, that is what I want you to do."

You would not like it," she said. " He doesn't
at all. In fact, if anyone else said the same things
to him, he would not stand it."

Well, you have proved I am right. If he keeps
his temper, so can I — in fact, far better ; for a man
is much more likely to keep his temper with a girl
he has seen very little, and really likes, than with
a girl whom he has treated as a sister all his
life."

Now you are growing sensible, Mr. Hunt. I
thought I was never going to make you understand
about Reggie and me, for he is so exactly
like my brother that it makes things quite
different."

There was silence for a few minutes, broken at

N

last by Grisel. " I wonder why it was you took
me up, Mr. Hunt, and not either Sybil or Bryde,
because I am afraid when you get to know me a
little better you will be sorry,"

I think that I am best judge of that ; but
why?"

Because you will find there is very little to
know. Of course I may improve after I have gone
out a little, but in the meanwhile I am a perfect
ignoramus."

"And are Sybil and Bryde deep in this world's
lore ? They might give you hints. It is hardly
fair, is it, that they should keep all their knowledge
to themselves .?"

They do their best. But Aunt Griselda says
that I will gain sense as I grow older ; that such
things must always be taught by experience."

Aunt Griselda is a wise woman. And so you
are going to keep your eyes open, and learn the
lessons of experience. They are not always
pleasant."

I am very anxious to know all I ought to
know, because everyone says I am such a child.
Of course I am very sorry that I must give up all
the fun. But I suppose I shall soon get into the
way of being a woman, though it is odd at first.
Do you think if I try very hard, and pick up all
the scraps of information I can, and really am

quiet and self-possessed, that in a year after this I
will pass tolerably well for grown up — not only
come out, but grown up enough for people to care
to speak to me ? What do you think about it, Mr.
Hunt, looking at it seriously, for I am so anxious
about it?"

Seriously, then, I think even now some people
might care to speak to you."

To chatter, yes ; but to converse, no. Aunt
Griselda says that it is a great thing for a woman
to be able to converse agreeably."

Your Aunt Griselda is your oracle. Are you
named after her V

Oh no ! she and I are both called after the
same person — Griselda de Grey. It 's a long story,
and a very sad one." Grisel stopped short. " I
wonder when the others are coming?"

Are you getting tired. Miss Romney .? Won't
you tell me about Griselda de Grey, and how you
bear her name?"

Have you been in what we call the four aunts
gallery yet .?"

No ; but if you like I will go at once, and
having seen it, come back and hear its history."

Oh, it doesn't signify. I will show it to you
when we go in. There is an oak gallery at one
end of the hall, and the panels are divided into
four spaces so as to form frames for four large

pictures. They are filled with life-sized portraits
of Dorothy, Sybil, Bridget, and Grisel, the
daughters of my great-great-grandfather. I do
not know what became of Sybil and Bryde, but
Dorothy died, and that is why none of us are
called Dorothy. Then Griselda, or Grisel, as she
was called, had a strange story. She had her
fortune told her once by a spaewife, and it was
that she would never be married unless it were to
change her name to that of Grey, and that for all
generations of the Romneys everyone named
Grisel must do the same. Poor Grisel was in love
with some one else, but when Lord de Grey asked
her father for her hand he said 'yes,' and so she
married Lord de Grey and was very unhappy. I
think it would have been better if she had
remained unmarried, for the spaewife gave her
that alternative ; so you see Aunt Griselda has
never married, because no one of the name of Grey
ever turned up."

But you don't believe in a spaewife's fable, do
you ?"

Not exactly ; still it would be odd if it happened
to me."

I don't think it will happen again ; the third
generation usually breaks the spell. And you
know no one of the name of Grey }"

Not yet," she answered, laughing ; " but I have

not had much time. The nearest approach to it is
Reggie. I always call him Le Gris."

"And Reggie is quite agreeable, I have no
doubt. You are going to be released from your
tête-à-tête at last ; I am afraid I hear voices."

I am almost sorry. I have enjoyed our talk.
It was very good of you to come and cheer my
solitude. Reggie's mother must have detained
him. His father suffers from gout, and late hours
do not agree with him ; so after last night very
likely he is ill, and Reggie must do all the business
and letter-writing."

What an exemplary son ! Yes, I was right ;
we are to be disturbed."

Through the wood came Bryde, followed by Mr.
Jerningham and Tom.

So you are here, Grisel. I have been looking
for you. Here are letters."

Bryde tossed the post-bag on the turf, and began
dispensing its contents.

What it is to be a man of business, Mr. Hunt.
They are all for you. No, there is a newspaper
for you, Mr. Jerningham, and a letter for Miss
Griselda. It 's from Aunt Sybil. What does she
say .?"

Jack was buried in his various communications.
Grisel's was a closely written sheet ; she did not at
once answer her sister's question.

I am left quite out in the cold," Bryde said,
"for even Tom has received some kind of a
missive."

"You shall have mine. Miss Romney," said
Philip, as, unfolding his paper, he handed it to
Bryde.

"Thank you. Now I will read you some
extracts. I do so like to be usefully employed."

It was one of the well-known vehicles of information
of which there are so many in the present
day, dealing largely in the on dits of the upper ten
thousand.

' We hear that a well-known prelate of our
church,' " read Bryde, " ' has at last taken the fatal
step. There must be rejoicing in Rome over
another sinner that hath repented.' "

That 's not very interesting," said Tom. " Try
again, Bryde."

' It 's commonly reported in racing circles that
the winner of the Oaks

"Yes, that is better. Go ahead, Bryde!" Tom
interrupted.

I don't approve of horse-racing ; so, if you
wish for the information, you must read it for yourself
afterwards."

No other gossip, Miss Romney, that will not
shock your principles 1 Give it to me, and I will
look."

No, no, Mr. Jerningham ; patience a moment.
I may find something universally interesting.
Yes, here is a conundrum for you all to solve ;
some of you may be able to throw light on
it.

"*A noble earl of our acquaintance, who has
travelled much, and is more especially known to
our readers through his far-famed collection of arts,
has at last determined to take unto himself a wife.
His future father-in-law has catered well for his
daughter. Money is scarce in these days, we
know ; it will be a relief to his feelings that his
son-in-law has plenty. A mail phaeton may be
seen any day, with its pair of splendid romans,
drawing up at a pleasant villa in Brighton, and
the noble earl is seen, soon after, either taking
his future countess or papa-inlaw for a seaside
airing.' "

Philip instinctively glanced at Jack Hunt. He
might never have heard what was read, or perhaps
his ideas did not jump to the conclusion Philip's
had done.

I will solve it for you soon," Grisel said.
"Aunt Sybil wishes two of us to go down to
Brighton next week to stay with them, and I shall
look out for the romans and let you know the
result."

"An idea has struck me," Bryde remarked.

Do you remember the beautiful Miss Fenton we
saw at the opera, Grisette ? Mr. Jerningham told
us then that she might marry the man beside her
if she chose ; and he was an earl, I think."

I hope it is not true, I took such a fancy to
her ; she is the most beautiful woman I ever
saw."

"When you are as old as I am, Grisette, my
dear," said Tom, " you will have learnt one of this
world's sad lessons, that appearances are often
deceitful."

Mr. Jerningham, what do you think } You
know Miss Fenton ; she is a friend of yours. Is
not she too nice to marry a man old enough for
her grandfather ?"

Yes, I know her, Miss Romney ; and if she
does marry Lord Meredith, I feel certain that it
will be for some good reason."

Jack looked up from the letter he was reading ;
they thought he was not listening to what passed.

Miss Fenton is going to marry Lord Meredith.
I have it on the best authority. She told me so
herself ten days ago."

Phil gave a low whistle of astonishment.

There, Grisette, you see I am right," exclaimed
Bryde, triumphantly ; but Grisel had turned to
Jack, and quick tears had come into her eyes.

Oh ! Mr. Hunt, why did you tell me ? I did

admire her so, and she did not look as if she cared
for Lord Meredith."

"You are a warm partisan, Miss Romney ; a
friend such as you are is worth having."

He was seated very near her, and no one heard
the remark. Through the wood came the sound
of whistling, followed soon after by Reggie and
his two dogs.

"How comfortable you all look!" he said.
What are you talking about .?"

He was going to seat himself among them, but
Grisel interposed.

Le Gris, if you are to row me up to the island,
we must go. It is late already."

Doesn't it bore you, La Grise ? Don't come
unless you wish it."

Of course I wish it. I have been waiting for
you here for an hour."

I will verify Miss Romney 's statement," Jack
said, " and very dull she would have been if I had
not been here to wile away the time."

Come away, then. La Grise." The two passed
out of the group.

May I go on the river with you tomorrow,
Miss Romney, as you would not show me its
beauties to-days" Jack made the above remark
to Grisel just as she was leaving.

Yes, willingly. I will not forget."

GRISEL ROMNEY.

Are you sure, La Grise, that you do not mind
coming ?" Reggie asked, as soon as they were out
of earshot.

I have been looking forward to it ever since
last night ; it is like old days. It is so jolly being
at home again. I am happier than I can tell you."

Because, child, I quite understand that you
must have many more demands on your time now.
You must always say 'no' if you do not wish to
come."

I promise," she said ; " but 'yes' is what I want
to say this afternoon."

THE NEW LOVE AND THE OLD.

Sybil, do you know how long Mr. Hunt is

^-> going to remain here ?"

Mr. Romney and his daughter were alone together
in his study. Ten days had passed since
the dance; Jack had only come for two. Mr.
Romney made the two men very welcome, and
time passed almost unconsciously.

I cannot tell at all. Has it struck you that he
has a reason in staying?"

That was what I wanted to know about, Sybil.
I thought perhaps I was fanciful, and yet "

She is very young, father, and it would be
dreadfully hard to part with her so soon."

All the same, Syb, we must think of her
happiness ; you know I cannot last for ever. I
am getting on now, and would like to see you all
happily settled before I go. It is a lone thing fora
woman, Sybil, to be in the world without some

good fellow to look after her ; and though I wish it
had been the other end of the string that he had
begun at, still your mother was no older than
Grisel is now when I married her."

Sybil left the room in search of her sisters.
There had been some talk of a riding party to
visit some distant ruins, but nothing was definitely
settled.

She found them together discussing plans, but
unable to settle anything till she heard from their
father.

Mr. Hunt wishes so much to go to the old
Abbey. I promised him we should do it if we
could. You think we may go ? Do say yes, Sybil,
to please me."

Will it please you very much, Grisette, if I do
say yes .? Will it be a great disappointment to
Mr. Hunt to give up the plan .?"

Sybil could not help glancing at Grisel, and saw
the tell-tale colour come up into her face.

We should all be disappointed, Sybil. Should
not we, Bryde.'*"

I shall answer for two of the party, Mr.
Jerningham and myself, as we have laid a plan of
coming home across the fields. He wants to see
Ladybird take that water-leap. I told him what a
capital huntress she would make."

Now, Sybil, you see we must go. Remember,

our days are numbered. I heard Mr. Hunt saying
something about a letter he received yesterday
which takes him back to town immediately, so we
had better make hay while the sun shines."

"Is Reggie to be one of the party?" asked
Sybil.

Not to-day," answered Grisel, " he said he
might have an engagement. Did you hear his
regiment was under orders for India ? He only
got warning ten days ago, but he forgot to tell me
till yesterday. Lady Mainwaring is in despair, for,
now Sir Roger is so often ill, Reggie does everything
for her. He has not heard yet when they
sail ; but he says that his leave will probably be
cut short, and he may have to join at a day's
notice, and perhaps not be able to be here again."

Poor Lady Mainwaring ! How she will miss
him !" Bryde said.

More than anyone," answered Grisel. Tom's
voice was heard outside. " I will let them know
about this afternoon," she continued, and went
into the garden. Bryde and Sybil looked at each
other.

Does it not seem strange that a day should
pass without Le Oris being here !" said the former.

Poor Le Oris' said Sybil. " He knows things
are changed. I am glad his regiment is ordered
to India."

So Jack's intentions were pretty well guessed at
by all the family but Grisel herself, and it never
entered her head. She was intensely happy,
because everything around conduced to make her
so. Mr. Hunt's constant attentions were not
unnoticed by her; on the contrary, they added
greatly to her enjoyment. It was such a perfectly
new sensation to find her will law to some one so
much wiser, cleverer, older than herself; and Jack
had made good use of his time in his ten days'
acquaintanceship.

Lenore's marriage with Lord Meredith had been
formally announced several times among fashionable
alliances ; it was to take place early in autumn.
She seems to take a delight in the fact that
everyone should know what a desirable thing she
has done for herself" was Jack's unreasoning conclusion.
How much he had built his hopes on
something happening to put things right he did
not even guess until the announcement came to his
ears, and then the amount of hope which it forever
crushed added greatly to his soreness in being
such a fool as to care.

Grisel's irresistible loveableness was perfect
balsam to his wounded feelings.

He thought her very charming that afternoon
when, mounted on her " thoroughbred," she rode
through the woods at his side. It was no humbug.

He had worked himself thoroughly into the conviction
for the time being.

The ruins had been visited, and they were
returning slowly homewards. They had formed
into groups of three at first ; Jack, Grisel, and
Tom leading the way down the grassy bridle path,
the other three following at some little distance ;
but Tom soon dropped behind — he was finding his
position of third party not to his mind.

Grisel and Jack talked on ; she was asking what
he did in London — trying to pick up scraps of
information, she laughingly remarked.

It is all for the same great purpose of becoming
a really well-informed woman. I think I am a
promising pupil, Mr. Hunt. I have made copious
notes of your words of wisdom ; perhaps by the
next time we meet, I may be able to impart information
to you."

"You may do that already," he answered. "Where
does this path lead to ? Shall we explore .?"

Nowhere particular, only the dropping well ;
and if we go, the others will pass on without
knowing."

Never mind the others ; I dare say we might
overtake them, and the path looks tempting."

It was very narrow, only room for one at a time.
They rode on in silence, Grisel leading. The well
was not far from the road, they were soon beside

it ; a great grey rock, over which the water dripped
incessantly into a deep, green pool, turning everything
to fossil around.

"Now, Mr. Hunt, wish your wish quickly,"
Grisel exclaimed, "and do not tell me what it is,
or you will not get it."

I have wished," he said ; " have you .'' "

No ; for I have no wish unfulfilled. Let us go."

They turned their horses down the path again,
and joined the bridle path once more.

Firefly has picked a stone, Mr. Hunt ; he is
going quite lame." But there was no stone, the
horse had evidently strained himself in their bit of
rough riding.

They rode on slowly for a couple of miles ;
presently Grisel halted.

"We are only a mile from home now. I am
going to lead Firefly, riding makes me miserable."

"Let us change saddles," Jack said, "and I will
lead your horse beside you."

Yours will not carry a lady, and I do not mind
walking."

We shall walk together then," he said, and so
they did. Through the trellis-work of boughs the
sun streamed with long evening shadows. It
lighted up Grisel's golden hair, and relieved the
otherwise sombre colouring of the dainty figure in
her faultless habit.

She walked along lightly, switching the heads
of the flowers in the grass with her riding-whip.

"You are very silent to-day, Mr. Hunt," she said
at last.

I was thinking," he answered.

"Thinking of getting back to your work .?"

No ; of leaving my pleasure behind me. I
wonder if you have any idea how sorry I am
to go."

"I should be broken-hearted leaving the country,"
she answered, " for a dingy town atmosphere."

Town even is bearable if one has all one values
there ; but when I go, I shall leave what I most
value behind."

Not your diamond studs, surely ; if so, leave
them to me."

The gravity of his voice had startled her into
flippancy. He looked at her and smiled, and then
he stopped his horse. Grisel, involuntarily, also
came to a standstill.

"Not my diamond studs. Miss Romney; they
are not my most valuable possession. You shall
have them if you like. What I most value is not
mine yet. Cannot you guess what I mean ?"

How could I possibly ! Tell me ; and if it is
anything we can give you, you shall have it."

*' Grisel, have you no idea ? It is yourself I
want. Will you give t/iat to me }"

"What do you mean, Mr. Hunt ?"

That 1 want you to be my wife, Grisette."

"But I should be such a child-wife, Mr. Hunt;
and besides, I do not think I am in love with you."

But that will come ; and you don't dislike me,
Grisel."

Oh no, I like you very much indeed ; better
almost than anybody ; but you would not wish me
to marry you yet ? I couldn't do it ; no, certainly
not yet. And besides, I think I had really better
say no at once."

But I will not take no. Look here, Grisette,"
he continued, taking her hands in his, "you said
you would be my friend ; and if I tell you I wish
you to be something much more than friend, and
that I shall be very miserable if you say no, will
not you say yes ? You need not marry me yet ;
and if you are sure you don't dislike me, but, on
the contrary, like me a little, I am content."

Would you be miserable ? I should be sorry
for you then. Well, if Papa and Sybil think I
ought, I will say yes ! "

"Thank you, Grisette. Now, just say after me,
Jack, I will be your wife,' and that is all."

She hesitated a moment ; but he held both of
her hands very firm in his, and the determination
of his manner awed her. Then she said the words
he had dictated —

"Jack, I will be your wife !" and he stooped down
and kissed her lightly on the lips.

About an hour afterwards, a gentle knock came
at Sybil's door, and Grisel entered, still attired in
her riding habit. " Are you busy, Sybil dear ; or
may I talk to you a little .^"

Not at all busy, La Grise. What is it you are
going to tell me ? May I guess ?"

Sybil was sitting in a low chair reading, and
Grisel sat down on a stool beside her.

Don't guess," she exclaimed, turning away her
face from Sybil's questioning gaze. " Do you
think I have done right .^"

If I may not guess, how am I to tell, Grisette ?
Some one who is going away tomorrow has asked
you a question, and you have said yes !"

Not exactly ; I told him that I must ask you
and Papa first. Do you think I ought to say yes ?
He says — I mean Mr. Hunt — that he will be very
miserable if I say no ; and so I almost promised ;
in fact, I think I did quite promise ; but I could
unsay it if you think I am too young, or that he
would be disappointed in me afterwards ; only he
said he would be very unhappy, so I could hardly
help it."

Would you be very unhappy ? That is what
you must think, Grisette dear."

I like him very much, and if I had drawn lots,

I think I should have been sorry if it had come
no!"

I think you were right, then, darling ; but what
a baby you are to run away from us all."

I am not going to run away — for ages. I told
Mr. Hunt so. I would much rather never see him
again than that."

Very well, Grisette ; but you must run away
now, it is close to dinner-time."

Grisel held up her mouth for a kiss before rising to
her feet. " Sybil dear, will you tell Papa V she said.

So, Miss Griselda, you have had a nice afternoon's
work," said her father when she came into
the room at dinner-time. " God bless you, child !
May you be as happy as your mother and I were !"

That was all that passed between father and
daughter.

Sybil was alone that evening, or, at least, nearly
so ; her father was in the room, but he had dropped
fast asleep. The rest of the party were in the
garden. Jack had claimed Grisel, and the other
three were sitting on the terrace, and their laughter
reached Sybil, where she sat in the broad window-seat
with her head resting against the shutter.
She was sad that night. Grisel's happiness had
stirred old memories — had taken her back to the
time when she was Grisel's age, and a bright future
was hers ; but the future never came, for death

stepped in, and Sybil took to her easel, and was
not at all unhappy. Her sisters knew nothing of
it, they had been in the schoolroom then ; it was
far easier for her to live her life with her secret safe
than if the household had known it. There was a
sound of a footstep on the gravel ; it was getting
too dusk to distinguish faces, but the voice was
Reggie Mainwaring's.

Sybil, are you alone ? May I come in ^ I
have come to say good-bye."

You are not really going for good ? It is very
sudden. How we shall miss sou !"

Will you, Sybil ? Thank you so much for
saying it. I only got my orders this morning, and
have been so busy all day that I could not come
earlier ; but it was impossible to leave without
wishing you all good-bye. I start tomorrow
morning."

Reggie, I must tell you something."
You needn't, Sybil. I saw them in the garden."
Dear old Le Gris, may I say how sorry I am .''"
Is she happy, Sybil } Is he worthy of her ? If
so, the rest is of no consequence."

What I know of him I like," she answered ;
but I can hardly understand it yet ; it has been
all so sudden."

There was silence for a few minutes. Reggie
roused himself at last.

I must say good-bye to them all, Sybil. I
hardly expect to be back before I sail."

They were soon gathered round, all except
Grisel and Jack. Mr. Romney woke with a start,
and wrung Reggie's hand warmly. Everyone
asked questions at the same time, and got no
answers. The noise was better far than a quiet
good-bye. Sybil's was the last hand-shake.

I am going to the garden," Reggie said. " I
must see her before I go."

So he left the merry family party, and went to
face the ghost of his happiness.

He had no difficulty in finding them — they were
slowly wending their way home. Grisel was laughing
and chattering. They, somehow, did not look
like lovers who had just arrived at a knowledge of
their own minds. Jack saw Reggie first ; Grisel
was engrossed with her argument.

Here is your dear Le Gris, Grisette. What
has brought him at this hour ?"

Grisel started. " Oh, Reggie," she said, springing
forward; "you have never come to say good-bye?"

"Yes, La Grise. I start tomorrow morning.
My departure is sudden, is it not .?"

Something in Reggie's face and the tone of his
voice made Jack Hunt turn away. He was sorry
for him, now that it was too late. He left them,
and went into the house.

How shall I ever get on without you, Le Gris ?
What a shame it is to give you such short notice."

Will you miss me, La Grise ? I thought I was
to congratulate you. Your time will be fully
employed."

You mean that I am engaged to Mr. Hunt ^
But I shall miss you just as much. I shall hardly
know myself without you." The tears were in
her eyes, and her voice trembled, but she recovered
herself. " How long shall you be away, Reggie }
I shall keep my notch-stick, as in the old days."

Three or four years, probably. You will be an
old married woman when I come back."

Don't. I have not quite given my promise yet,
and, at any rate, it will not be for years. Will you
write to me, Reggie, and I will write to you ? You
will like to hear about us now and then."

Yes, child, your letters will be very welcome.
But I must go now ; I promised my mother to be
home again soon."

Good-bye, dear Le Gris. Remember to write
to me."

God bless you, my queen ! May you be very
happy!"

Grisel slipped away to her own room and cried
like a child. Her dear old playmate was gone.
What would she do ?

FREE.

A CHARMING villa in a fashionable part of
^ ^ Brighton, with stables and coach-house
attached. Such was the two elderly Miss Romneyss'
summer quarters.

It was evening. The sisters had just finished
their six o'clock dinner, and Miss Sybil felt much
inclined to have a nap before tea. She was a
delicate-looking old lady of seventy-five, and had
long ago made over the reins of government completely
to Miss Griselda, twenty years her junior.
The latter was well preserved for her age, and
prided herself much on the fact. She was not at
all juvenile ; on the contrary, she usually dressed
herself in a much more elderly fashion than her
years warranted. She often told her nieces that
she had found it to her advantage. It makes one
look younger, not older, she said. As before said,
Miss Romney wanted to sleep, but unfortunately

Miss Griselda wanted to talk, and as she usually
got her own way, Miss Romney opened her elderly
eyes and prepared to listen.

I am not sure that Thomas has done right in
letting such a child as Grisel engage herself to Mr.
Hunt."

I suppose he knows best, my dear. She is
very young, certainly, but it is a fault which will
improve."

Of course ; common sense tells one that. But
if she had been my child I should have said, ' Wait
a little, Grisel, till you know your own mind
better, and are quite certain that Mr. Hunt is the
right man.' She knows nothing of him. Ten
days' acquaintance ! I think the haste with which
it has been arranged is shocking."

From all one hears, he must be a very desirable
young man — so quiet and steady. It is a great
thing in these days, when the usual accounts are
so very different."

Well, we shall be able to judge for ourselves
soon, I suppose," Miss Griselda said. " Grisel will
be here tomorrow, and Mr. Hunt will have to
come down in a few days and be introduced
to us."

Dear me ! it never struck me in that light. A
young man in the house ! How very disagreeable !
How shall we manage, Griselda, with no one but

the maids to do anything ? I fear he would find it
very uncomfortable."

Nonsense, Sybil ; it will be perfectly easy.
Leave all arrangements to me. And it is certainly
the thing which ought to be done."

Miss Griselda paused. Her sister thought she was
done. She folded her small, soft hands with the
lace frills which fell over them, and closed her eyes.

You needn't go to sleep yet, for there is
another subject I wish to discuss with you, my
dear Sybil. Not that there need be any discussion.
Still it is as well you should hear what I
was thinking of doing."

You always do right Just act on your own
responsibility. I shall be quite satisfied."

How do you know that, when you have not
heard what I wish to do ? I am going to call on
that old Sir James Fenton, who has taken the villa
next ours. They are strangers here. He has one
nice-looking daughter. I think, being old residences,
we ought to do it. It would be kind ;
and, besides, she will be a companion for the girls
when they come."

I thought you told me yesterday that ]\Iiss
Fenton was going to be married. Will she care
for new acquaintances, when she has probably
much to attend to ?"

My dear Sybil, I consider we ought certainly

to call. It will make it much pleasant for her to
know some ladies in Brighton. I shall go tomorrow."


Very well, my dear, you know best."

Miss Romney was at liberty to sleep now ; her
regular breathing soon told that she had taken
advantage of her opportunities.

So next afternoon the call was made. The mail
phaeton and romans had taken Sir James for a
drive, and Lenore was alone at home.

Such an extremely good-looking girl I found,"
Miss Griselda said, in recounting her experiences
to her sister. " Very much above the average, I
should say — so quiet and self-possessed. I congratulated
her on her marriage, and asked her if
she had known Lord Meredith for long. She took
the congratulations very quietly, and said he was
an old friend of her father's. Really, I am so glad
I called. Such a particularly good companion for
Grisel."

Lenore did not connect the name of Romney
with the family that Mr. Jerningham had pointed
out to her at the opera. That they could be any
possible interest to her never entered her head.
She was glad the old lady had called ; she felt
very dull and lonely. To become acquainted with
anyone and to mix in their society, would always
be an escape from her own thoughts.

She had been engaged to Lord Meredith for
more than a fortnight. She had gone through the
whole thing with but a dim consciousness of what
she was doing. That it was the only path open to
her had so impressed itself on her mind, that all
interest in her future was dead. When Lord
Meredith pressed for a speedy union she was
willing, anything better than this fatal inaction.
As Lady Meredith, she would have her round of
duties to fulfil.

So the marriage was fixed for the first week in
August, and they were going abroad immediately
afterwards. Sir James was going up to London
after parting with his daughter. He had secured
rooms near his club, and looked forward to his
bachelor existence with no small amount of
pleasure.

Besides this, his more pressing money matters
being off his mind, he relapsed into his easy-going
selfishness. He considered he had done well, both
for himself and Lenore. He did not trouble to
look below the surface of his daughter's happiness,
and assured himself comfortably that all was
right.

Lord Meredith, too, was content. Lenore respected
him ; was intensely sorry for him ; knew
that she could only give him gilding for fine gold ;
and he, having until the time of his engagement

lived a loveless life, was thankful for the baser
metal — it looked as well. As yet he knew no
difference. Sir James had dwelt so much on the
fact that he must not expect too much at first, that
the slightest consideration on Lenore's part, wrung
from her out of pity for the man, was hailed by
him with delight. He had taken rooms in a
neighbouring hotel, that he might be near to the
Fentonss.

So Lenore went through her daily acting, and
tried to rouse herself from the apathy which was
steadily taking possession of her.

She and her father were sitting at dinner together
the evening after Miss Griselda's visit. She
was doing her best to make conversation, but it
flagged at times. Her father was overtired with
his drive.

Should I return Miss Romney's visit at once.
Papa ? I think I had better go tomorrow, after
her kindness in coming."

Sir James looked up sharply.

No, not tomorrow," he said ; " you will be
required at home. Lord Meredith has appointed
Mr. Harvey to meet him here to draw up the
settlements, and you had better not be out of the
way, in case you are wanted,"

Lenore made no answer, but played with her
knife and fork. It was a habit she had acquired

of late; her appetite was gone. Sir James's, with
the weight off his mind, had steadily increased.

You seem to take no interest in the settlements ;
they might be for anyone else but yourself.
Meredith has been most liberal ; he has "

Shall I ring and have the things cleared away,
Papa?" Lenore had risen from the table in the
middle of her father's remark. " You are ready,
are you not }"

''No, I am not ready. Cannot tell you all the
arrangements with a man-servant pottering about
the room. You seem to be in a desperate hurry."

I did not mean to hurry you, Papa ; but you
surely must know that any arrangements, as you
call them, must be extremely painful for me to
hear. Cannot you understand this, and so leave
me in ignorance about it all ? So long as you are
comfortably provided for, the rest matters little tome."


"You are very ridiculous, Lenore. You have
such high-flown sentiments about money matters ;
but, believe me, you will find that humanity cannot
exist on air, and a large establishment is not fed
for nothing."

Sir James was working himself up into one of
his tempers. Lenore rose from the table, and
went to the window. The sea lay blue and
smiling before her ; its calmness fretted her.

Everything around seemed indifferent to her
misery. Would nothing come and break the
weary monotony of the hours, and rouse her from
her lethargy ?

Mechanically she noted what was going on
outside — a carriage stop at the Romneys' villa —
two girls and a maid jump out — luggage united
and taken after them into the house. " Dear me,
what a noise they make ; they must have let a box
fall ! " Then a groan. She was roused at last ;
the monotony was broken. Her father lay on the
floor before her, as she thought, dead.

In a moment she was beside him, trying to raise
him from the ground, but her strength was not
sufficient. Sir James, at all times a heavily-made
man, was doubly so now in his state of unconsciousness.
After the first moment of uncertainty,
Lenore saw he was not dead. He breathed ; he
might still live.

The servants came in answer to her pull at the
bell — no want of willing hands to do what could
be done. Sir James was removed to his room.
The physicians arrived. Lenore waited in stony
calmness for the result.

Is there any hope .?" she asked, as the doctor
entered the room, having just left Sir James.
Tell me exactly the state of the case."

My dear young lady, while there is life there is

hope, we know. You must keep yourself calm.
You will need all your strength. Your father has
had a very severe paralytic shock ; his recovery,
even at the best, must be a long and tedious one."

My grandfather died of paralysis. The second
shock followed the first within twenty-four hours."

It is sometimes the case, but by no means
invariably. We must trust that your father has
strength of constitution to rally. I will send a
nurse at once. But what friends have you ? You
must not be alone. Forgive me for asking, but do
I speak to the young lady to whom Lord Meredith
is engaged ? If so, ought not he to be informed of
what has occurred ?"

Oh no — not to-night. Let me have one night
alone with my father. I can see no one — not even
Lord Meredith."

Very well, very well ; you are quite right.
Only you must take care of yourself, or I shall
have to interfere. I shall give all directions to the
nurse, but I will come again myself this evening
when I have completed my rounds."

Lenore took up her station at her father's bed,
and the hours of the night wore on. The nurse
came, and fell at once naturally into her place.
Then Dr. G. paid his second visit. There was no
change in the patient's condition. He was hardly
conscious ; they did not think he knew anyone.

After that, some one gave Lenore a cup of tea, and
stood by while she drank it. A little later, she
consented to lie down on a sofa in her father's
room, but no sleep came to her weary, burning
eyes. Her head was in a whirl. She tried to
arrange her ideas, to go over to herself the events
of the evening. By degrees her thoughts arranged
themselves into a circle, and with weary monotony
went round and round ; and then she slept.

She must have been asleep for more than an
hour. She awoke with a start. The nurse had, in
administering nourishment to her patient, made
some slight sound sufficient to rouse such light
sleep. She rose at once to her feet and went
towards the bed. The grey of early dawn was
forcing its way through the shutters, and fell in a
streak of ghostly white across the sheets and figure
of her father.

The nurse went forward and partly opened the
shutter. Sir James turned his head. He was
conscious, and a smile came over his features ashe
recognised Lenore. He tried to raise one poor
paralysed hand as it lay helpless, but could not.
Lenore bent and kissed it tenderly, and the bright
smile again flitted across his face. His mouth
tried to frame some word, but the power of speech
was gone. Lenore bent her ear to listen. She
thought she heard her own name whispered ; but

consciousness departed again. He moved uneasily,
and Lenore drew back to let the nurse take her
place. It was well ; a moment after, a second stroke
had succeeded the first, and Sir James was dead.

Lenore sank on her knees beside the bed.
"Why was not I taken and he left.''" she exclaimed
in the bitterness of her spirit. " Oh 1 to
be lying at rest also, and all this weary daily life
done with !"

After that, she was silent. She remained with
her face buried in her hands for some little while.
When she rose from her knees she was perfectly
calm.

She gave all orders herself, and telegraphed for
her uncle, her only near relative ; besides sending
word to Lord Meredith of what had occurred.
Then she went to her own room, and the servants
heard the key turn in the lock.

The news reached Lord Meredith just as he was
sitting down to breakfast ; he left it untasted and
hurried off to Lenore. " We must be married
immediately after the funeral," he thought. " I
am her natural protector now." When he arrived
at the house, Lenore's maid met him. Her mistress
was sorry she could not see him. She would be
very much obliged if Lord Meredith would make
all necessary arrangements for the funeral, and
write to Mr. Harvey, the only lawyer her father

had ever employed. Lord Meredith turned away
disappointed. He had hoped to see her, to be the
only one with her in her sorrow ; but he told
himself it was natural, and was thankful he was
there to take all trouble off her shoulders.

The news reached another breakfast table. Miss
Griselda and her two nieces were just sitting down,
when the maid came in and told the piece of
Brighton gossip.

Sir James Fenton, who lived in the next villa,
was dead. It had been very sudden, and everyone
was talking about it.

My dears, what an awful warning, and it might
have been any of us ! And his poor daughter, too,
with no one to do anything for her. Lord
Meredith will make all the funeral arrangements,
but who is to help her with her mourning? I
really think I shall offer to make myself useful."

Perhaps it would be kind," said Bryde. " Only,
if I were Miss Fenton, I would rather you didn't."

Grisel said nothing. She could not trust herself
to speak ; her eyes were full of tears, so she did
not raise them. " It might just as easily have
been Papa," she thought. " How I wish I knew
Miss Fenton, and could go to her ! I almost hope
Mr. Hunt won't come till tomorrow. I don't
feel inclined to be happy when only next door
she is so sad."

Miss Griselda fulfilled her intention of offering
her services, but a message came back that Miss
Fenton was much obliged for the kindness, but her
maid was doing everything for her.

The news was of interest in one more direction,
but it only reached its destination the following
day.

Jack Hunt was just preparing to go down to
Brighton, to be introduced to his two future aunts-inlaw.
He was busy, and it was inconvenient.
However, something must be sacrificed for his
lady, and it would not be unpleasant to look again
into her laughing eyes, though at times he wished
the eyes would speak of something else besides
mischief and love of life. He had seen them
thoughtful also. They were for ever changing ; it
was one of her greatest charms. But Jack knew
he had no more power to bring the love-light into
them than any one of her many friends.

He had his preparations for departure completed,
and took up the Times for the few spare moments
before starting. The questions of the day engrossed
his attention. Stirring events were filling
the newspaper columns. Just on laying down the
paper, he glanced at the obituary :— ^

At Brighton, very suddenly. Sir James Fenton,
Bart, K.C.B."

He dropped the paper from his hand. A
thousand ideas crowded to his brain. To go to
Lenore at once was his first impulse. That Lord
Meredith was there already, and he would only be
in the way, came close upon the thought — followed
by the remembrance that he was no more his own
master ; there was Grisel. Too late now to undo
all the past fortnight. He was in honour bound to
another woman. He had been a fool, he had
wrecked his own happiness, and it was too late.
The past could not be undone.

What presented itself to him only as a vague
idea at first was fast settling into conviction — that
had he now been free to go to her, Lenore would
have come to him at once ; it was only her father
that, until this moment, had come between them.
He had been absolutely blind not to see all this
before. The confusion of ideas was getting oppressive.
If only

But there is always an if. If he did not start at
once, he would miss the express for Brighton, and
Grisel would be disappointed. Besides, he hardly
owned to himself there was another besides Grisel
at Brighton.

FOR THE BEST.

Y?CIVE days had passed. It was the morning
^ after the funeral, and Lenore was alone. She
was looking thin and worn, and pressed her hand
wearily to her head, as if it pained her.

She sat at the table writing. Her uncle, who
had arrived the day after her father's death, was
still with her. He had appointed Mr. Harvey to
meet him that morning. He wished to settle
everything before returning home, and Lenore
was waiting for the business interview. Sir
James's desk stood open on the table ; its contents
were scattered about ; piles of old letters, a
daguerreotype of Lady Fenton, india rubber bands,
broken ends of sealing wax, wafers, and several
pen-wipers lying in motley confusion around.

Mr. John Fenton was out ; he had gone in
answer to a summons from Lord Meredith. Before
the interview was over, he had been made fully

aware of his Lordship's wishes. The marriage
must be without any delay. The Reesdale estates
would not long be burdened.

So Mr. John Fenton returned to Lenore, delighted
with the man she was about to marry.

"You must be married from our house, Lenore,"
he said, after some conversation. " Your aunt will
be charmed to make your acquaintance. Whenever
you can make up your mind to leave this
place, you must come direct to us, and stay with
us till you have got all you need. A countess
must go well provided to her future home," he
added, with a laugh. He was rather afraid of
Lenore's continued reserve.

Mr. Harvey was announced. The interview was
a painful one. Sir James's affairs were in a most
involved state ; quite setting aside the debt to
Lord Meredith, there were liabilities of a minor
character, which, when added together, made a
tolerably formidable whole.

When everything was cleared off, there would be
nothing left for Lenore. " Mercifully, she will not
need it," was her uncle's comment.

"There is £100 a-year to be paid from Reesdale,
as I understand," Mr. Harvey asked, "as long as
Miss Fenton remains unmarried?"

"You are right, Mr. Harvey. That will keep
you in pin-money, my dear ; but you must consider

your home with your aunt and myself for the next
few weeks."

Do I understand right," asked Lenore, " that I
really am entitled to loo a-year, to be paid until
my marriage?"

Quite right. It is a provision of a limited
nature, made in your grandfather's will. I always
thought that your father was hardly used, but such
the old gentleman arranged, and his sudden death
made alteration of the will an impossibility."

I am not absolutely dependent then .?" she said,
with a sigh of relief

"Not absolutely; yet I doubt whether ;^ioo
will go far in a trousseau, such as you young ladies
of the present day think proper."

Mr. Harvey gave a low bow of assent ; he was
inclined to take Mr. Fenton's pleasantry in
earnest. Ladies' ideas were certainly getting
beyond all bounds. Lenore paid no heed to her
uncle's attempt at humour.

It was not of how far it would go in furnishing
me with a suitable trousseau that I was thinking —
my marriage with Lord Meredith must be postponed
in the meanwhile — but of how far it would
go towards keeping me independent. My plans
are as yet completely unformed ; when I have
given them some thought, I will consult with
you."

My dear niece, any plans that you propose
making are, of course, subject to Lord Meredith's
wishes. He will be a better advocate of his own
cause than I possibly can be. I will leave him to
talk over your future with you. Mr. Harvey, we
may go now. I do not think we need trouble Miss
Fenton with all the minor details and settlements."


The two men left the room. Lenore returned
the miscellaneous collection to her father's desk ;
it must all be destroyed sooner or later, but she
had not time that day. She longed to breathe the
air, and to get away by herself. She hurriedly
prepared for walking, and left the house. She
walked fast, and soon left fashionable Brighton
behind her ; houses were becoming more scattered
— there was not so much chance of recognition.
She threw back her heavy crepe veil with a
sigh of relief. She felt stifled.

She had much to think over and arrange within
the next few hours. Lord Meredith was coming
in the evening. She knew that the purport of his
visit was to try and induce her to settle an early
date for their marriage.

Her mind was in a chaos. Would it not be
better to tell Lord Meredith the truth at once >
Would it not be dealing more fairly and honestly
with him t It would be a present pain, instead of

future disappointment ; yet she shrank from inflicting
the wound which must come from herself.
The last week had shown much of the higher side
of Lord Meredith's character ; his quiet, unobtrusive
watchfulness, his constant thought for her,
that she might in every way be spared pain and
trouble ; his absolute unselfishness — a virtue so
rarely seen in man.

Her arguments to herself might or might not
be valid, they all came from one passionate
longing to be free.

Till her talk with her uncle she had believed
herself entirely dependent. Now she knew she
was not. ^100 a year would keep her from starvation
; how short a way it would go she had no
idea ; she was absolutely ignorant of pounds,
shillings, and pence.

And if free, what then ?

Would the old days come back ? or would her
lover turn from her, judging of her love by her
outward actions ? He must by this time have
heard of her father's death. Was he thinking of
her — longing to be with her ?

She had certainly no right to expect it, when,
without explanation, she had parted from him, and
immediately afterwards he must have heard of her

formal engagement. And yet She relapsed

into a train of thought, leading from past events

into a possible bright future. She had not determined
on what she would do ; she dismissed it
from her mind, and her step grew more buoyant
as she walked — a spark of hope had been
lighted — the slightest breath would fan it into
flame or extinguish it.

The sunshine and the beauty of the summer
afternoon had tempted others besides Lenore from
the house. Along the hedge-lined path a man and
girl were coming ; she had her arm linked in his,
and was talking gaily. It was such a glorious day,
Grisel was enjoying her walk ; she did not notice
Jack's abstracted manner.

He was thinking of Lenore, dreading and yet
longing to see her. He had been at Brighton for
nearly a week, and all that time they had never
met, although he had watched closely the adjoining
villa. To what good purpose would it
tend if they did meet he could not tell ; he was
ready to do almost anything ; the constant
watching and disappointment of the previous days
had increased the longing to meet her, to speak to
her once again, tenfold.

And so the meeting so ardently longed for on
both sides took place.

It was but a country cart-track they were
following, not room almost for more than two at
once. Suddenly, on rounding a corner, they meta

figure dressed in deep mourning. Lenore was
walking with her eyes bent on the ground, and did
not notice them until she was close to them.
Then she raised her head, and for a moment
thought she had lost her reason. Could it possibly
be Jack Hunt, or was it some horrible delusion }
Her face must have expressed the misery of the
moment.

Lenore !" broke from Jack's lips before he was
aware that he spoke.

The sound of his voice proving it was in truth
her lover, recalled Lenore to herself She gave
one glance of intense scorn and surprise, bowed
haughtily, and passed on. Grisel looked from
the one to the other — she could not understand
it.

You never told me before that you knew Miss
Fenton so well, Mr. Hunt. You must have been
very great friends before you would call her by
her name."

Did I call her by her name, Grisette .? We
were once great friends ; it must have slipped out
accidentally, as you see for yourself we are friends
no longer. Miss Fenton would have withered me
with her glance if she could."

Grisel was satisfied ; she supposed Jack had had
many friendships before he met her, and this was
one of them. They walked on in silence for some

little time ; Jack's ideas did not tend to conversation.


I wonder where Reggie is now, Mr. Hunt .?
They were to sail two days ago."

Do you remember what I told you yesterday,
Grisette, that I would never answer any of your
questions until you learnt to call me something
else than Mr. Hunt .?"

I always forget. I am so sorry ; but it feels so
odd to call you Jack. But I '11 try very hard ; so.
Jack, please answer me now."

"What was it you asked about, Grisette ?"

About Le Gris. Nothing of much consequence,
only I wish you to speak, and not to be so very
silent. How am I ever to glean words of wisdom
from lips that say nothing }"

He was betrayed into a smile ; she was such a
child. 'what shall I talk about, Grisette .?"

Whatever you think I know least about. I am
willing to try and improve myself in any direction."

Small talk occupied the end of their walk. It
was useless to brood over the inevitable, Jack felt ;
besides, he was not going to be such a fool as to
care for Lenore, when it was a patent fact that all
her interest in him was dead.

Meanwhile, Lenore went home, wounded love
and pride striving for mastery. It had been a
grievously cruel awakening, but she told herself

she was thankful that she had faced the worse,
She bathed her burning face, and stood at the
window, that the breeze might fan her throbbing
temples ; then she went downstairs to her solitary
dinner.

It was about eight o'clock when Lord Meredith
was announced. She had not seen him at all that
day. She rose to greet him, and her manner was
a shade more cordial than usual.

"I am to tell you from your uncle," he said,
*' that he will be here later in the evening. We
have been busy with Mr. Harvey until the last
moment, hence my delay in being here. Your
uncle had to put up his things, as he leaves by the
early train."

How can I ever thank you for all the trouble
you have taken with my dear father's affairs >
Believe me, I am grateful."

I was going to say that thanks should not be
mentioned between us, Lenore. But you can
thank me, child. By this time you must know
what my most anxious wish is. I do not want to
hurry you ; but surely it would be far better if you
could consent to our speedy marriage."

It seems so terribly soon, after all that has
happened. Don't you think it would be better to
wait just for a little .?"

I sympathise most sincerely with your hesitation

; still, until you are my wife, I cannot care for
your interests, in fact have not the right to do soin
the same way."

She was very hard pressed on all points. What
could she do ? She was homeless, friendless, loveless
— how entirely so, she had only learnt that
afternoon. Here was a home, love, position, everything
lying at her feet. Would she refuse them all
because she could not give back equal weight ?
Was not this a quixotic mistake ? and if it must in
the end come to this, would waiting make any
difference .'*

Lord Meredith waited patiently for his answer.
He noted the pallor of her cheeks — the blue veins
showing so plainly in delicate tracery on her
temples ; he longed to strew her path with every
happiness and comfort. She was so young to have
to be left alone.

"Cannot you consents" he asked at length,
doubtfully. " If so, I must wait."

Lenore was sitting at a low table, her face
buried in her hands. Lord Meredith was standing
in the oriel window, watching her anxiously. She
raised her head at length, and rose from her seat ;
she went up to where he was standing.

I think you are right, Fred. I am willing that
our marriage should be when you think best."

God bless you, Lenore ! May you never repent

this decision!" He took her in his arms and
kissed her fondly ; it was the first time she had
called him by his name. How seldom he had ever
kissed her struck her now with compunction. She
had certainly never allowed him to treat her as her
future husband.

Mr. Fenton came in soon after, and was much
relieved that his niece had been brought to hear
reason. He sat up till late. When he took his
departure, it was with the understanding that the
marriage should take place with as little delay as
possible. Lenore was to follow her uncle home
the following week.

It was a proud day for Mr. Fenton when, as
nearest male relative, he gave her away for " better
and worse," and all the other pros and co^is of the
wedding service.

A very quiet marriage with no one present, and
the Meredithss went abroad immediately afterwards.
No fuss, no ceremony for watching reporters.

It was the simple announcement that met the
eye of Jack Hunt, as one morning he read the
daily paper, about a month after Sir James
Fenton's death.

Marcus Ward & Co., Printers, Royal Ulster Works, Belfast.

3 0112 056516922

OF Thun

Diversity

or ILLINOIS

T9a9g

in 2010 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/griselromneynove02fras

% i^o&el

BY

M. E. FRASER-tatler

IN TWO VOLUMES
Vol. II.

So young and so intended?"
"So young, my lord, and true."

King Lear, Act I.

Lotion:

MARCUS WARD & CO., 67, 68, Hands STREET

And royal ULSTER WORKS, BELFAST


-U.S ^

CONTENTS

I.— Picking up the Threads, .
II.— Simply a Matter of Business
III. — Grisette,
IV.— After Four Years,
v.— In Time for the Wedding,
VI. — Edged Tools,
VII.— A Hard Truth,
VIII.— Only an "Old Friend,"
IX. — Not as a Woman,
X.— The Truth at Last,
XL— A Trying Day,
XII.— For the Second Time, .
XI I L— Two Elderly Ladies,
XIV.— For the sake of Long Ago,
XV.— The River once more,
XVI.— Conclusion,

Page









IS











CHAPTER I.

PICKING UP THE THREADS.

II HE house in Prince's Gate had been
unoccupied four years. Time after time
the false alarm had been given that
the Meredithss were coming home, and still they
lingered. Lady Meredith had been so delicate
ever since her marriage, and my lord had been
warned by physicians that if he would enjoy his
newly-found happiness, he must not brave the
inclemency of British climate.

A son had been born to them some two years
after their marriage, so Lord Meredith wandered
from place to place with his wife and child,
seeking for health for the former. As years went
by, she was growing more precious to him ; his

heart stopped with a sudden spasm when, at times,
the idea presented itself to him that he might
be left alone before long. How could he ever
live without her? How could he bring up the
child as she would wish ? He so ignorant and
useless in all such things.

But Lenore did not die ; gradually she rallied
from the shock occasioned by her father's death ;
such was the physicians' report, and she did not
contradict them. Mercifully for her, the reason
seemed a likely one, and she was allowed to goon
her way unquestioned.

Now, at last, they were at home again. How
strange it all seemed ! The first time she had
been in Prince's Gate since those old days when
another was there also ! She dare not for a
moment look into the past ; she had never visited
it even in thought since her marriage, and it
was this ceaseless strain which had done the
mischief — the constant watchfulness lest she should
prove untrue to the man whom she had promised
to love, honour, and obey above all others.

It was the day after their arrival in London.
Lenore was sitting alone. She had not been
out ; she was recovering from the effects of her
journey.

Lord Meredith had gone to his club. It was
about five o'clock in the afternoon, the time of
year February. London was empty, Easter was
early, and everyone was still out of town. Lent
was going on. What need to be there when
there were no amusements to tempt the public.
So hunting boxes were crowded all over England,
and in the metropolis the unworldly kept their
fast.

Lenore's busy fingers were embroidering some
article of clothing for her boy. She used to hate
work, but she had grown to love it — it stopped
thought. Overhead, in the nursery, she heard his
merry feet pattering, a smile came into her face,
she rose from her chair, and was about to send
a message that he should be brought to her.

She hesitated a moment ; a ring at the doorbell,
then the servant entered with a card, asking
if she were too tired to see the gentleman.

Not at all ; show Mr. Jerningham upstairs."

Philip must have already been there, for he
entered immediately.

** I could not resist coming," he said. " I
chanced upon Lord Meredith on the way to his
club, and he gave me leave to visit you. You
must send me away if I am too much for you."

B

Indeed it was kind of you to come to see us
so soon. No, you will not tire me in the least.
Sit down and tell me all about yourself since I
last saw you, and your sister also ; it is such a
time since I have heard anything of her. Is she
still Miss Jerningham, or has she changed her
name for another?"

Oh, Augusta is still Augusta Jerningham.
That 's the harm in being an heiress, Lady
Meredith. When Augusta's aunt left her all her
money, and passed your humble servant over,
she did her incalculable mischief. She might
have been married, with all the joys of a large
family and poverty, had it not been for her
money, which makes her look on the most innocent
as fortune-hunting."

And where is she at present — in town ? "

Well, she was never famous at letter-writing ;
but, as far as I know, she is with our old friend
Mrs. Wyld just now; after that she is going to
the Romneys, and I join her there."

Romney ! Surely that was the name of two
elderly ladies I knew at Brighton. Are they new
acquaintances, Mr. Jerningham ? We have lived
so utterly out of the way, that I feel an absolute
ignoramus on all questions relating to may friends."

Not exactly new friends, Lady Meredith.
There are three daughters, and you see — I suppose
I may as well tell you — I am going to be married
to one of them."

Are you ? I am very glad ; but tell me more.
The name seems familiar to me ; where can I have
heard it?"

Perhaps in connection with the youngest,
Grisel. She is engaged to a mutual old friend
of ours, Jack Hunt."

Philip looked past Lenore ; he wished to give
the information ; he almost felt the start she gave,
though he did not see it.

She did not answer at first, but leant forward
and poked the fire. The tremble of her voice
was imperceptible as she asked —

How long has Mr. Hunt been engaged ? You
must wish him happiness from me when you see
him."

Will you not wish it him yourself, Lady
Meredith ? He is in town, and will doubtless
come and see you whenever he hears of your
arrival, but congratulations are no new thing to
him. They have been engaged four years."

"And why have they never married?"

First one thing and then another. Miss Grisel

Romney was too young, and would not give her
consent ; she put it off from month to month, and
latterly Jack has not pressed it. He is frightfully
busy ; within the last two years he seems only
to live for work. He has much changed since
the old days, Lady Meredith ; does not go into
society at all, and never takes a holiday, save
for a hurried run down to the Manor to see his
fiancee r

"What is Miss Romney liker'" Lenore asked.
Could it have been she whom she met with
him the last time she ever saw Jack }

Small, and neither fair nor dark, with eyes
and mouth usually smiling. I do not wonder
at his falling into her toils."

The description answered perfectly ; of course
it was easily explained — she must have been
staying with her aunts at Brighton.

And your Miss Romney, what of her 1 Tell
me of your lady-love."

She 's one in a thousand in every way ; but
I will not describe her to you. She and Grisel
are in town just now, staying in Cavendish
Square. I may bring them to see you?"

I should like to make their acquaintance,"
Lenore answered very quietly, " if they will not

think it too formidable, coming without further
introduction ; but I fear I am not strong enough
to pay ceremonious visits."

"What a duffer I am, to be sure. Here have
I been sitting all this time, and not asked after
your health. I was awfully sorry to hear you
had been so far from strong. Are you really
better now .'*"

Yes, much better, thank you. But my health
is an uninteresting topic ; I would much rather
hear all about your future."

Oh, our future is all cut and dry. Mr.
Wyld's land-stewardship has fallen vacant, and
he has offered it to me. Just suits me to a
nicety, and Bryde is quite satisfied."

Bryde ! Is that your fiancee ? What a quaint
name. How do she and her sister come to have
such nice old names V

Some legend in the annals of the Romneys ;
but I cannot tell you just now. I hear Lord
Meredith's voice, and I fear he will give me
notice to quit."

No, no ; our chat has done me good. Here
you are.^" she said, looking round as Lord
Meredith entered the room.

"Well, are you pleased with the visitor I

found for you ? I thought you would like to
talk over old days when I was out of the way.
Now, don't move, Jerningham ; we have not
been at home long enough yet for me to have
made a particular chair my own. You are not
over-tired, Lenore, are you ?''

No ; on the contrary, I am wonderfully fresh
to-night. Mr. Jerningham has been telling me a
piece of news, Fred. He is going to be married !"

"Following our good example — eh, Lenore?
My best wishes for your happiness. And who
may the happy lady be ?"

Rather, I am the happy man ! Is not that
a good amendment. Lady Meredith .? Bryde
Romney is her name ; I hope you will soon
make her acquaintance."

Philip sat for some little while longer. Lenore
enjoyed talking with him, he was so exactly
the Philip of old days, with the same fresh
vehemence in all he did and said. He would
not rest satisfied till Lenore appointed an hour
for him the following day to bring Bryde and
her sister to make her acquaintance.

At last the clock striking warned him of the
flight of time, and he rose to take his departure.

I shall meet Jack Hunt this evening. May I

tell him you would like to see him — that you are
once more settled in town?"

If Mr. Hunt cares to renew an old friendship,
I shall be very glad to see him. Tell him I shall
be at home any afternoon after four o'clock ; but
do not make him feel obliged to come ; if he is so
occupied, he may not care to give any of his
valuable spare time away."

Perhaps you are right," Philip answered, wondering
if he had been wrong in making the
suggestion. That Jack and Lenore had made a
mistake in their lives he was sure ; the subject had
often puzzled him ; it occupied his mind now ashe
hurried to his rooms to dress for the early
dinner in Cavendish Square.

Lord Meredith having dismissed Philip returned
to the drawing-room. He sank into his chair with
a sigh of satisfaction. Lenore looked up and
smiled.

There 's no place like home," he said ; " not
but that I have enjoyed my years of Continental
wandering," he added, dreading to leave an
impression that he had wearied of his forced life
abroad.

Lenore read the motive which prompted his
remark, she had learnt to know him so

thoroughly ; and he, reserved to others, delighted
all the more in the fact that she read him through
and through.

If you are glad to have a settled home," she
answered, " what must I be ? Remember, this is
my first home since I was twelve years old ; half
my life wandering about — such a time ago it
seems."

You are getting such an old woman, Lenore."
He was smiling at her earnestness. " To think of
having lived twenty-four years. It is a lifetime.
Add twenty-four to that, and we have forty-eight.
Still two years too few. Your boy's age must be
added also, child ; and then do you see what an
old man you have for "

"Hush!" she said, rising from her chair and
laying her delicately-veined hand upon his mouth.
He drew her gently down to him and kissed
her.

So you do not like arithmetic, child," he said.

I am not going to be teased ; you are driving
me away," she said.

To your boy, I suppose. I shall grow
jealous."

I am not the least afraid," she answered,
laughing, as she left the room.

Lord Meredith raised a book from the table.
He did not read much. Gradually the shadows
deepened in the room. It was intensely comfortable
after the damp, cold fog of the February
afternoon. There certainly was no place like
home. In about five minutes he was sound
asleep.

Lenore, returning shortly afterwards, opened
the door softly and stole away again to her room.
Philip Jerningham's information was constantly
before her. She longed and yet dreaded to see
Jack. Why should I care so much ? she wondered.
I, an old married woman, and he engaged
to a girl for four years. Surely by this time
we can meet without being haunted by the
past.

Philip had told Lenore that he would meet Jack
that evening.

On arriving at Cavendish Square he found he
was the only addition to the three ladies. Miss
Romney's health was failing ; she went early to
her room. Miss Griselda and her two nieces made
up the quartette.

No one was in the room when Philip arrived,
but Bryde made her appearance before long.

Grisel has had a disappointment to-night," she

said. " Jack is too busy to dine with us. I cannot
understand what occupies him so constantly."

His writing, I believe. He is doing too much.
I must look in and give him a word on the subject
on my way home to-night."

It is of no use ; we have all done our best.
Fortunately, Grisette does not mind as some
people would. She is of such a sunny nature, that
it takes a great deal to damp her spirits."

When are they going to be married, Bryde ?
Lady Meredith asked me the question this afternoon."


Some time in autumn, Grisel says. But tell
me about the Meredithss. I did not know you
were going to see them."

Neither did I. I accidentally met Lord
Meredith, and thought I could not do better than
use up my unemployed afternoon in paying my
respects to his wife. If you will go and make
engagements in which I have no part, so
must I."

It was not my fault, Philip. I was the victim
of circumstances, for which read dressmaker.
However, I have something to ask you about.
Did you ever hear before that Grisel's Jack was
an old admirer of Lady Meredith ?"

"What put that into your head, Bryde?"
Something Augusta said to me one day."
Augusta should learn to be silent."
But why ? Lady Meredith was engaged to be
married long before Grisel knew Jack, only I
wondered that he never spoke of the Fentonss.
Was there anything really in it?"

Look here, Bryde, I may as well tell you, but
I wish Augusta would learn to hold her tongue.
Jack Hunt and Lenore Fenton were great allies
in the old days. At one time I never doubted
that it would all come right. Then something
came between them, I have never found out what ;
but Miss Fenton's marriage was announced immediately
after, and Jack came to you, and in ten
days was engaged to Grisel."

And didn't care a bit about her. How could
he do such a thing, Phil.? Poor Grisette!"

I am sure he liked Grisette also ; but I cannot
make it out. There was a mystery somewhere.
Sir James Fenton could have solved it, I think, or
Lady Meredith ; and she never will."

And Grisette is to be the victim of their
mysteries!" exclaimed Bryde, indignantly.

What a fiery creature you are. Miss Bridget.
Remember, you and I would never have had the

extreme felicity of seeing so much of each other
had it not been for Jack's little mistake. But
hush ! here 's Grisette. Keep all the surmises I
have told you under lock and key."

Grisel's voice was heard singing as she
descended the staircase ; a rich, soft contralto,
everyone must be struck with its freshness and
beauty. A moment afterwards she entered the
room dressed in something white ; she could
hardly ever be induced to wear anything else.
She looked very little older than she did four
years ago, and had the same unconventional way
in all she did and said.

Well, Grisette, I hear you are in low spirits
to-night at Jack playing truant."

Isn't it stupid of him ? I see so little of him
now!"

You will have to consent to his wishes. Miss
Griselda, and then you will see more of him."

But I do so hate housekeeping, Phil. Sybil
says I must learn, and I have never even begun
yet. It seems so ridiculous to think of me being
a married woman. I am not nearly tired of fun
yet!"

"And what does Jack say to all these excuses ?
Do you know, Grisette, I am sorry for him ?"

Sorry for Jack ! Surely not. It must be much
better for him that I should gain some experience,
and not try experiments upon him. Do you really
mean, Philip, that you are sorry for him .?"

"Yes, I am sorry for him, for I think he is
working too hard, and if he had you to look after
him it would be different. Do you not notice that
he is growing quite grey ? It is simply from so
much thought, and no one to cheer him between
times."

"And bald, also," said Grisel, meditatively.
I never thought of it in that light before. I will
speak seriously to him about it tomorrow, and
then, if I can do any good, I will make up my
mind to the housekeeping."

CHAPTER II.

SIMPLY A MATTER OF BUSINESS.

T was the same evening as Philip dined in
Cavendish Square ; Jack Hunt had just finished
dinner, and was sitting ruminating in a comfortable
chair before the fire. Not a very inviting
room, somehow ; the walls covered with a dun-coloured
flock paper, and the carpet brilliant in
scarlet and green in gigantic designs. The
mantelpiece had the usual gilt clock, which pointed
to the hour of nine, flanked by match-boxes and
vases, splendid specimens of provincial potteries.
A side-table and several chairs groaned under the
weight of books and periodicals. The maid was
clearing away the dinner things, and Jack fidgeted
impatiently — the clatter of dishes was overpowering.


Certainly the years past had left their stamp
pretty plainly on him. His face had grown sterner,

harder ; he was also, as Grisel remarked, growing
bald, and streaks of grey were visible.

To say that his unfortunate love of four years
ago had occasioned this change would not be true ;
it certainly, however, originated it ; but " man's
love is of man's life a thing apart," and it had taken
hours of work and study before such outward
traces were visible.

He had made some money by his work ; he was
no longer straitened in his means ; he had made a
name for himself in the literary world ; he had
succeeded in everything he undertook but one —
he had never made Grisel love him. At first he
thought it would be easy, she was such a child ;
but he had grown almost hopeless now, and as the
months ran on, her love was becoming more and
more necessary to him — he had grown to long for
it. His business life was eating the freshness out
of his existence ; he craved for some strong
counteracting influence.

At first he had taken to work to drown thought ;
he continued it now from habit, and from a
certain satisfaction in gratifying his ambition.

This evening his mind was occupied ; he had
written a much-talked-of article in a leading
journal. The name of the author had leaked out.

and he had been congratulated on all hands that
day.

Grisel knew nothing of it ; at first, she read his
articles from a sense of duty, but he rarely told
her of them now. Why should she read that
which was so irksome to her ? She had never
said such was the case ; on the contrary, she read
everything she knew he had written with patient
care, till one day Tom exclaimed, in Jack's presence,
"Is your task finished yet. La Grise .'^"
Very nearly now," she answered, and shortly after
flung down the magazine with a sigh of relief.
After she left the room, Jack found it was his last
article she had been reading.

He had kept his writings since then more to
himself, but this particular evening he was overpowered
with a longing for sympathy in his work.
The praise of the world was nothing to the praise
of one. His thoughts were leading him into the
what-might-have-beens" — always a most dangerous
and unprofitable region — when a knock
came at the door. Could Mr. Hunt see a gentleman
who had called on business ? Of course he
could ; it would be about some of his editorial
work.

He was right, for the next hour he was fully

occupied ; at last the work was done, and Mr.
Strange and he dropped into ordinary conversation
— of the events of the day, of the money
market, &c. A good deal of uneasiness had been
experienced by the collapse of two large firms ;
there was grave subject for conjecture.

Jack had been making some fresh investments.
He took the opportunity to riddle Mr. Strange's
brains, as he was more up in such things than
Hunt himself.

Did you ever meet a man I saw in the street
to-day — Lord Meredith .-*" asked Mr. Strange.

Some years ago I was in the same room with
him once or twice. I understood he was abroad."

So did I, till to-day. What makes me ask is
his connection with this panic. He suffered pretty
severely some four years ago at the time railways
were in such a bad way."

"That was ?"

Just before his marriage. I happen to know
all about it ; rather a strange story ; but it oozed
out to me through my father-in-law, who was
Meredith's man of business."

And so the story has become public property,"

Jack answered sharply.

No harm in repetition now ; the principal
c

actor is dead. From all one hears of Sir James
Fenton, he cannot have had much of a character."

"You had better tell me the whole thing, now
you have begun." Jack spoke impatiently; a
conviction was rising in his mind that he was
going to hear something of personal interest.

"Are you interested in the actors?" he asked.

Mr. Strange looked questioningly at his listener.

I knew Sir James Fenton some years ago, and
his daughter."

"Then you knew some one worth knowing.
Lady Meredith must be, from all one hears, no
ordinary woman."

But this has nothing to do with Lord Meredith's
loss. Lady Meredith was only a girl when
I knew her."

It has to do with it in a way. My father-in-law
saw a good deal of her at the time of her
father's death, and it is his conviction that she
married the wrong man."

Idle conjecture ! People are so ready to
attribute motives where none existed. A coronet
and wealth, added to unexceptionable personal
worth, is rarely the wrong man."

Well, judge for yourself In the spring of
four years ago, my father-in-law, Mr. Harvey, was

sent for one day to see Sir James, at the time
staying under Lord Meredith's roof. Sir James
had got into difficulties. He had contracted large
debts as a young man, and they had fallen due.
There was no money to meet them. I don't
know all the ins and outs, but it resulted in Lord
Meredith advancing the money — in fact, he set
Sir James straight, and then married his daughter."

And did Miss Fenton know anything of this .?"

At the time Mr. Harvey understood she did
not. From an allusion she made after her father's
death, asking about the possibility of the liquidation
of debt to Lord Meredith, she must have been
in the secret."

You believe, then, she married Lord Meredith,
being under such obligation to him. Pleasant for
her husband ! The world was kind enough to
impute other motives to her."

The world has usually got some theory. After
all, it is simply conjecture what I have now told
you. Sir James died at Brighton. His daughter
at once sent for Mr. Harvey. It was not till after
the funeral she even saw Lord Meredith, though
he also was in Brighton. When my father-in-law
saw her first, she was full of some project of living
on a hundred pounds a-year, allowed to her from

her uncle's estates, and indefinitely postponing her
marriage. However, she soon changed her mind.
I suppose it did not sound so tempting on consideration
; so she did wisely, and made up her
mind to the marriage."

Jack remained absolutely silent. Mr. Strange
rose to go.

I have given you a long, gossiping history.
Hunt, all brought on by this crisis in connection
with Lord Meredith. It was depression in
American stocks which brought Sir James Fenton
to grief."

And you say the Meredithss are back in
town?"

Yes ; I saw him to-day. You had better renew
your acquaintance with them ; only, remember
that you are no wiser than the rest of the world."
Such were Mr. Strange's parting words, and Jack
was alone.

He had suffered keenly during the last half-hour.
He had certainly never counted on gaining
the explanation of Lenore's marriage in the way
he had done. And instead of satisfaction and
justification of his own line of conduct, he saw
how madly he had acted. The last time he had
spoken with her came back to his mind ; and

even in the water-colour gallery some foreshadowing
of what was coming wrung from her the words,
Duty might demand the sacrifice of self"
Words and actions passed over at the time were
now pregnant with meaning. How had he been
so blinded by his wounded self-love ? Then his
subsequent conduct — the unseemly haste with
which he had* wooed and won Grisel, when at
the time he had absolutely no heart to bestow.
Fate had used him a thousand times better than
he deserved. The thought of Grisel always
brought sunshine with it ; he certainly, for the
second time, had drawn a prize in life's lottery.

He was not destined to be long alone that
evening, his meditations were again interrupted.
Philip, without warning, invaded his room. He
was on his way home from Cavendish Square, and
was the bearer of a message from Grisel.

"Really this is too bad!' he exclaimed. "I
thought you could not dine with us to-night
because of work, and I find you absolutely
idle, without a trace of occupation of any kind
about."

The excuse was a valid one, all the same.
]\Iy evening has been interrupted once already ;
•I had not been alone five minutes when you came

in. The work must be done some time to-night,
however."

Which means that my absence would be better
than my presence."

No ; not at all. Sit down, and give me news
of Grisel, as I fear I shall not see her till late
tomorrow."

That will suit admirably. She was afraid you
might want her in the afternoon, and I have
promised she should go with me to see Lady
Meredith."

I heard they had come to town. Does Lady
Meredith know in what relation I stand to Grisel ?"

Jack spoke gravely.

Philip answered, " Yes, I told her everything.
She sent you her kindest congratulations, and
hopes you will go and see her."

'* I do not see the use of it. We have not met
for so long, it is better to let our acquaintance bea
thing of the past."

"But such cannot be. She wishes to know
Bryde and Grisel. She was most minute in her
inquiries about the latter. I have promised to
take them both to Prince's Gate tomorrow."

Is Lady Meredith much changed .?"

'* Changed ! Not the least in the world. In one

way she 's changed — looks delicate and moves
languidly ; and you remember in the old days
what an elastic spring she had when she walked.
Otherwise, just like Lenore Fenton. You must go
and see her, Jack ; she would be hurt if you didn't"'

I am not sure. I hate making new acquaintances."


Look here,' Hunt," said Philip. " Once on a
time I thought things would have been very
different. You made a mess of it somehow. But
whether I am right or wrong in my conjectures, it
can never do a man anything but good to know
Lenore Meredith."

Philip spoke very earnestly. He did not expect
an answer. There was silence for some minutes.
Jack sat gazing moodily into the fire ; Philip was
watching the smoke curl lazily from their cigars.
At last he broke the silence.

"There was a letter from Sybil to-night. Old
Sir Roger Mainwaring is far from well."

Seriously ill, or only one of his usual fits of
gout?"

It must be something serious, I imagine, for
their son is coming home from India for a year."

Le Gris coming home ! What does Grisel
say?"

The words broke from Jack's lips before he
was aware. " They were old playfellows, you
know, as children," he added, by way of explanation.


Yes, I know. But Grisette's feelings seemed
to be of a mixed character — her sympathies were
divided between sorrow for Lady Mainwaring and
the pleasure of seeing Reggie again. He was, at
any rate, to have come next year. It is only that
he has hurried his movements."

"Then do you suppose that there is cause for
uneasiness more than usual — that Sir Roger is in
immediate danger ? One result of his death would
be Reggie's succession to the baronetage and
estates. There is no other son, is there?"

No ; he is an only child. I suppose he would
leave the army and settle at the Hall. Probably
marry in time. It would be a great thing for
the Romneys if the future Lady Mainwaring were
the right sort. With such near neighbours it is
of consequence."

Conversation flagged again. Philip would not
have prolonged his stay, had it not been for a hope
that he might rouse Jack from his evident fit of
depression. The clock, with various previous
warnings, slowly struck twelve. Jack glanced at

it somewhat vacantly, and compared it with his
own watch.

It is right for once," he said. " You must go,
I fear, Phil. I must settle to work."

You are working too hard, Jack. When
are you and Grisel going to be married ? You
require a wife to keep you from overtaxing your
brains."

"Nonsense!" laughed Jack. "I am all right.
It would be dull work for poor Grisette looking
after the health of my brains."

In my opinion, you are quite wrong. Grisette
is not liable to low spirits ; and besides, certainly
I think you ought to be married soon — at any
rate, before autumn."

Jack looked questioningly at Philip. Did he
mean anything by what he said .'*

You are of opinion that our marriage should
take place before autumn — before young Main-waring
comes home ?"

"This is really too much of a joke! I meant
nothing of the kind. Fortunately, Grisel is not
here, or she might have some ground for supposing
that you were tired of the whole business. However,
I am not going to quarrel with you, and as
there seems no chance of making you hear reason

GRISEL ROMNEY.

to-night, I am going. Remember, Grisel expects
you between five and six tomorrow, and if you
take my advice, you will settle something definitely."


So Philip left, and Jack wrote on into the early
hours of the morning.

GRISETTE.

Y Entre was at home. It was the hour Philip
^-^ Jerningham had promised to bring the
Romneys to make her acquaintance ; she was
almost repenting of her resolution now, but it was
too late to draw back.

Presently the door opened, and she was face
to face with Grisel Romney. She knew at once
which was which of the sisters, though Philip's
introduction would not have left her long in doubt.

I think this is not the first time I have seen
you," she said, as, having shaken hands with
Bryde, she turned to meet Grisel. " You and your
sister were at the opera one night some four years
ago, and Mr. Jerningham then pointed you out
to me."

"And also once at Brighton," exclaimed Grisel,
"we met you." Suddenly she came to a pause;

a recollection of Lenore's deep mourning, and the
apparent marks of agitation at the time of meeting,
reminded her she was treading on dangerous
ground, but Lenore finished the sentence for her.

Yes ; I met you in the lanes at Brighton,
when I was taking a solitary walk soon after my
father's death ; but you were not solitary," she
added, smiling. "You must let me congratulate
you, Miss Romney. Mr. Hunt is a very old
friend of mine."

Jack told me so at the time. He had so
many friends before I knew him ; but he is so
busy, he has rarely time to tell me any of his past
life."

Lenore turned away suddenly ; she had the
excuse of saying something to Bryde about her
marriage, so they relapsed into general talk.

Lenore made herself very charming. Both girls
fell in love with her at once. They thought the
visit had been far too short when Philip, glancing
at the clock, reminded Grisel she had promised to
be at home at five. The girls rose to their feet.
Bryde held out her hand with her usual frankness.
Grisel and I may come and see you again some
day, may not we ?"

You must come often. Considering how long

I have known Mr. Jerningham, there is nothing
I should Hke better than also to be friends with his
future wife."

Then Lenore turned to Grisel and took both her
hands a moment in hers.

"Will you tell Mr. Hunt he must come and seeme
.?" she said, " or I will think that he has forgotten
me."

Grisel's eyes looked frankly into Lenore's,
betraying such undisguised admiration of the
beautiful Lady Meredith. Her golden hair strayed
over her forehead from underneath her fur-trimmed
hat, and the excitement of the moment had
brought the colour into her face. A very charming
face, Lenore thought, and she involuntarily
stooped and kissed her.

A moment after, she held out her hand to
Philip. " Good-bye," she said. Another minute,
and she was alone.

When Lord Meredith shortly after entered the
room, he was struck by Lenore's looking more
than ordinarily weary. She complained of headache,
but said nothing more was amiss. He would
not let her go down to the dining-room, and
several times during the evening she caught him
glancing furtively at her over his book. He told

her she had been doing too much, and that he
would have to limit the number of people she saw.

Lenore laughed, and then she repeated to him
most of what had passed that afternoon while the
Romneys were with her.

Do you remember meeting Mr. Hunt once
here, long ago, at tea?" she at last asked her
husband.

Yes ; very well. I took a great fancy to him
at the time. Has he also been with you to-days?"

Oh no ; only he is engaged to be married to
the youngest of the Miss Romneys — Grisel. I
sent him a message by her to come and renew his
acquaintance."

Will be very glad to see him, Lenore. Make
him more welcome perhaps even than in the old
days," he added, with a light-hearted laugh. " It
shows how much one is mistaken at times, but I
then had a fancy that you and he cared for each
other, but your father undeceived me on that
score, and his assurance to the contrary made me
the happy man I now am."

Tied to a sick wife," said Lenore, summoning
a smile to her quivering lips. It was hard to lie
still on the sofa with her husband's eyes watching
her with so much concern and anxiety in them,

and to smile over the story of the part her dead
father played in her life's history.

My conviction that I was right had at one
time almost reached certainty," Lord Meredith
continued, happy in the thought that he had been
mistaken. " When I tried to buy that picture, do
you remember, in the water-colour exhibition,
which had such a strong resemblance to you, and
I found that a Mr. Hunt had been before me,
immediately I put two and two together, and,
man-Hke, came to a wrong conclusion. But you
should go to your room, Lenore ; I am over-tiring
you," he said, as he saw a slight contraction in his
wife's forehead.

Perhaps I had better do so, Fred ; my head is
very bad to-night. I am but a sorry companion
for you."

She rose languidly from the sofa, and he
followed her to her room, carrying her shawl and
pillows.

Give me a kiss," she said, as he prepared to
leave her. " Don't fret about me, Fred ; I shall
be all right again tomorrow."

So he left her to fight a battle alone that he,
unsuspectingly, had made so much harder. It is
difficult at times to annihilate the past.

Meanwhile, Grisel had gone home with her head
full of Lady Meredith.

Jack found her in the firelight some half-hour
afterwards. She was sitting on the rug, but
sprang to her feet as he entered.

Here you are at last," she exclaimed.

"Did you think I was latest" he asked, with a
hope rising within him that at last she was going
to care for him — that he was becoming necessary
to her.

"I have been longing for you to come," she
answered, " I have so much to tell you about.
Where do you think we have been ? You need
not try to guess, but it was to see some one who
sent a message to you."

Tell me, Grisette, and put me out of pain."

Have you no idea ? Did not Philip tell you
where he was going to take us to-day ? We made
acquaintance with ' a very old friend of yours,'
that was what Lady Meredith called you. How
beautiful she is. Jack ! I wonder so much that
you, who once knew her well, do not often speak
of her. I do not think if I had ever known her
I could have forgotten her."

I have not forgotten her, Grisette ; it would be
impossible to do that ; but when Lenore Fenton

became Lady Meredith her Hfe turned into a
different channel, and so we have not met for
years."

Perhaps it is as well for me," said Grisel,
meditatively ; " I might have grown jealous. Do
you know, Jack, I believe if I had been a man I
should have fallen - in love with her. I wonder
you didn't."

Jack made no answer ; Grisel thought he did
not hear what she said. He was sitting on a low
chair before the fire, and she knelt beside him, her
elbows resting on his knee. She put up one of
her hands and stroked his forehead.

You are looking tired to-night, Jack. What
have you been doing to-day?"

Nothing more than usual ; but the firelight
and this comfortable chair make one lazy."

You are working too hard just now ; you will
be ill if you do not take care. I know I am
right."

Grisel spoke with an air of grave authority ; she
felt she had Philip's opinion to fall back upon if
her own arguments failed.

What has made you such an anxious little
woman all of a sudden } Who put such ideas
into your head .''"

D

Suppose they came of themselves, Jack. Do
you think I am so very childish and foolish
that I can think no careful thoughts about
your health without some one having put them
there?"

I think you are a prodigy of wisdom," he
answered, trying to treat her earnestness lightly.
What does your ladyship recommend that I
should do to regain my shattered energies ?"

Don't laugh at me," she said, shyly holding
down her head and playing with one of the
buttons on his coat. " I really am trying to grow
wise."

You are wise enough for me, Grisette ; and if I
am content, what does it signify about the rest of
the world?"

"But are you really content?" she asked,
raising her eyes joyfully to his ; " for if you think
I would do just as I am, wouldn't it be better that
we should be married soon, and then you would
have me to take care of you .?"

Are you in earnest, child .?" Jack exclaimed.
Would you not mind it very much .? Do you
really mean what you say?"

Grisel's eyes were very pleading as she
answered, " I am in sober earnest. I do not look

as if I were joking, do I ? I was thinking of it
seriously last night when you didn't come to
dinner and spent a long evening alone at work,
so I determined to tell you to-day that I think
it ought to be soon."

What do you call soon — some time in
autumn ?"

Oh, before autumn. In summer, don't you
think — perhaps about the end of June ? I am
going home, you know, in a few days, and I shall
begin to learn housekeeping at once. I think I
ought to know enough by summer."

Your establishment Vv^ill not be a very large
one," he said, laughing, and stroking her hair,
and I will not be a very exacting critic if you
do make mistakes at first."

I promise to do my very best, and you will
be there to tell me when I do wrong. It will not
be as if I had to do it all alone. How very odd
it will feel having you always there. Will you not
be inclined to laugh at the idea of me being a
married woman .'*"

Grisel pronounced the last words with a
solemnity which was irresistible.

Jack put his arms round her and drew her closer
to him. She nestled her head on his shoulder,

she felt so pleased she had found courage to
suggest their speedy marriage to him.

"Are you glad, Jack?" she asked, glancing up
at him from under her long dark eyelashes.

Very glad, Grisette," and then there was
silence for some time.

But it was not in Grisel's nature to remain very
long without talking. She raised her head from
its resting-place, and sat down on the stool at
Jack's feet.

Have you heard that Le Oris is coming
homes she asked.

Yes ; Philip told me so. Are you very glad,
La Grise?"

Happier than I can tell you. It has seemed
such a long time since he went away. We were
always together ; it was natural I should miss
him!"

And natural also that you should be glad to
see him again. Have you heard how Sir
Roger is ?"

Not to-day. Poor old Sir Roger ! I hope
there is no immediate danger. I do not know
what Lady Mainwaring would do if Sir Roger
died before Reggie came home. It would be
different if she had a daughter, but even I am

away, and I used to be a kind of daughter to her.
She and Sir Roger always called me their adopted
daughter. I was more at the Hall than at home
when we were children."

Lady Mainwaring must make the most of
you, Grisette, for the next few months. I fear
she will not approve of your new arrangements ;
she will miss your constant visits."

'' She will get accustomed to it soon ; and,
besides, by that time she will have Reggie, and
you need me a great deal more than she does.
There is no chance of Lady Mainwaring overworking
her brains."

"You have quite made up your mind, I see,
to be head keeper of my brains. Remember,
Griselda, the post is no sinecure."

Now for propriety," exclaimed Grisel, starting
to her feet, and seating herself demurely in a
large arm-chair. " I hear Aunt Griselda's voice,
and she cannot bear to see me sitting on the floor."

Not a very grievous offence, surely, after all,"
replied Jack.

It is only a posture for tailors, my dear,"
whispered Grisel, mimicking her aunt's tone and
manner.

But there was time for no more, as Miss

Romney entered the room, resplendent in black
silk and sable.

My dear Grisel," she exclaimed, " why did
you not ring for tea ? I was obliged to go out,
Mr. Hunt, and never doubted but that I had
left you in good hands!"

I am very sorry, Aunt Griselda. I quite
forgot about tea."

Never mind. Miss Romney," said Jack in the
same breath. " I must take the blame on my
own shoulders, by occupying your niece's attention
so completely."

I am most distressed. You will have to
improve your memory, Grisel, or you will never
make a good housekeeper."

Miss Romney's hospitality was her tenderest
point. Her urbanity was rarely so discomposed ;
but Jack's protestations, that he rarely took tea,
and Grisel's evident distress, at last tranquillised
her. She gave them a minute history of all she
had seen and done, and then retired to see if
Miss Romney proper wanted anything.

I must go also, Grisette ; I have some work
to do this evening. Unless I get through my
writing now, I shall be unable to take a holiday
a few weeks later."

"You will remember to go and see Lady-meredith
? She will think I have forgotten to
deliver her message if you do not," answered
Grisel.

Well, to save your reputation I may go,
some day ; but I cannot promise for certain."

Oh, that 's equal to a promise, I consider ;
and, besides, you must go to please me."

AFTER FOUR YEARS.

goshen Grisel proposed to Jack that their
^ ^ marriage should be within the next few
months, it was the end of February. It was
now the beginning of April, and Easter was
over. The gay world was resuming its festivities,
and with the commencement of the season the
Romneys had returned to the Manor. Philip
Jerningham was in Yorkshire with the Wylds,
making arrangements for the future. Augusta
was also there. She and Philip were to be at
the Manor some weeks later, and Jack was to
take a week's holiday at the same time. Soin
the meanwhile, Grisel was devoting her
energies to learning housekeeping, that she
might be quite free to enjoy herself when they
were all together. Reggie Mainwaring was expected

home about May, and Grisel was delighted
that he would arrive in time for her wedding.

To return to London. Jack was, as usual,
working hard. The gay doings in the metropolis
had no enticements to offer him ; he had never
even fulfilled his half promise to Grisel, to renew
his acquaintance with Lenore Meredith. He
had by no means forgotten it, but he put off
the visit from day to day.

He had seen Lenore twice. Once, as he passed
her house, he caught sight of her at the window,
and another time, as her carriage waited at the
door of her husband's club. He was close to
her the second time, but she did not see him,
as she was engaged in conversation with some
lady friend.

At last one day he met Lord Meredith, who
accosted him warmly, and congratulated him on
his marriage. " Lady Meredith has been expecting
to see you for some weeks."

Jack pleaded business as his excuse, but had
to promise to go and see Lady Meredith the
following day.

He did not call till late in the afternoon. He
half hoped that he would find Lenore was not
alone ; the awkwardness of the first meeting

would be considerably lessened if it were not
tete-tete.

Lord Meredith had forgotten to tell his wife
of his meeting with Jack Hunt. She was lying
on the sofa when he entered the room ; her
solitary afternoons were so rarely disturbed that
she had not expected visitors.

The Meredithss had kept their return home
a secret from the general world ; they did not
wish it known, at any rate until Lenore was
more able for society.

And certainly the weather was not such as to
tempt the public out of doors. Steady rain
had fallen all day, and none but those compelled
by business were abroad.

Lenore's sofa was near the window, and she
was lying watching the rain, as it splashed
unceasingly into the puddles. There was a
fascination in it ; and, besides, it had grown too
dark for reading. The lamplighter was going
his rounds, and a barrel organ was grinding
under the window "The Last Rose of Summer"
at twice its ordinary pace. The yellow light
from, the lamps served only to illumine the
dripping umbrellas of hurrying foot passengers.

Within the room the fire blazed cheerily, and

Lenore, turning from the glistening picture outside
to the rich comfort of the room, was conscious
of the pleasure she felt in a settled home. She
was expecting the young lord for his half-hour
before dinner ; she looked round with a smile
as a hand was laid on the door, but it was not
the child, and she hurriedly rose as Mr. Hunt's
name was announced.

It was a painful moment for both of them,
though, outwardly, Lenore was the more composed
of the two.

Four years ago they parted as lovers, with all
the passionate pain of disappointed hope within
them ; now they must meet as mere acquaintance
a cold touch of the hand, and that was
all.

Lenore had risen to her feet as Jack entered
the room. "You have come at last," she said.

At last, Lady Meredith, and I am grieved to
find you in such delicate health. I hoped, as you
had ventured to return to this perfect climate of
ours, you had in some measure recovered your
strength."

I am ashamed that you should find me on
the sofa, but, believe me, it is not my custom.
I am rather more tired than usual to-day, having

UNIVERSITY OF li-i.ii>iUl59
LIBRARY

been out in the rain this afternoon doing some
necessary shopping. That's all."

"When did you return from the Continent ?" he
asked. "Have you been long in town?"

"No, not long, not quite two months yet, and
we are only to be here a little longer. We are

going to our place in shire early in summer.

From Lord Meredith's wanderings, the house
required some amount of repair ; but we kept our
return here a secret. We did not wish to be
inundated with strangers."

"You must blame Lord Meredith for my visit.
It was he who sent me here to-day," Jack answered.

He knew what my wishes were, and acted
accordingly," said Lenore. " But enough about
self. I must congratulate you, Mr. Hunt, very
much indeed, on your approaching marriage.
Mr. Jerningham introduced Miss Romney to me,
and she was good enough to come and see me
several times before she left town. I have quite
lost my heart to her ; she is very charming."

She is a great deal more so than I deserve,"
said Jack, and then came an awkward pause ; it
seemed so impossible to ignore the past.

Lenore made an effort to break the uncomfortable
silence.

"What are you doing now ?" she asked. " Miss
Romney said you were working too hard ; she was
distressed about it."

Oh, I am all right. I have long ago come to
the conclusion that the only safeguard for man is
work."

Safeguard from what ?"

Safeguard from self, and from the tormenting
powers of one's own thoughts."

"Have you still the old dread of selfe" Lenore
asked very earnestly. She had for the moment quite
forgotten the events which had passed since the
days at The Hurst. There was something in Jack
which had always elicited her strongest sympathies.
He was in one of his cynical moods, she felt.
Had she still the power to dispel it .'' Surely she
need not forego her friendship, because it could
never be anything more.

Do you remember, years ago," she continued,
"when I first knew you at Hurst, you asked me
how I could love my solitary walks ? Then there
was nothing you dreaded more than facing your
own identity. Is it still the same .''"

Something like it," he answered. " I remember
every word you said that night. You spoke
of religion being a saving power ; you spoke of

faith as the rope between heaven and earth.
What you said influenced me at the time. Since
then, I have grown to think that, though it may be
very well for some mortals, still, after all, it is an
unsatisfying creed. Faith is a plant difficult of
culture in this nineteenth century. In theory it
is well enough, but there is a great deal of sentiment
about the whole thing."

If such are your feelings, no wonder you take
refuge in work. All the best years of your life it
will be one perpetual cry of work, for you are
not a man to drown self in any other way ; and
then, when the end comes, what will the work
avail i You will have to face yourself at last."

Before the end comes, I shall have a sweet
saint between me and the Judge. Grisel will keep
my conscience for me."

Lenore's words moved him more than he cared
to own. His only escape was in apparent heartlessness.


Do you think you will ever rest contented with
that ?" exclaimed Lenore, her voice quivering from
suppressed feeling. " Do you ever imagine for a
moment that such a division of work will bring
you satisfaction ?"

Why not ? Women do the religion for the

world ; or, at least, they take the larger share.
Men must work, and women must do the religion !"

You divide the motto wrong. Man, as well
as woman, must both work and pray. Believe
me, there is no other way — no middle course."

"Why do you take the trouble to speak so tome,
Lenore .''" Jack had risen to his feet and
paced the room. *you stir up all the old longings
for something higher and better than one's
daily life."

Her name had escaped his lips unconsciously ;
it thrilled her through and through, but she said
nothing. It could not be wrong to let it pass
that once ; it was not her fault, and so she
remained silent.

He came up to where she was sitting, and leant
against the mantelpiece.

You do not answer me," he said. " Do you
still take interest enough in me to care whether I
go to the dogs or not?"

Yes," she answered ; " if you will have it so,
we may be friends as long as we live."

If such then may be the case, tell me why it is
that you so condemn work ; without it, one would
go utterly wrong."

But I do not condemn it. No, a thousand

times no. Thank God for work. How could weever
live without it ? Only it is not everything.
It is simply what you called it at first, ' a
safeguard.' It mush not be all-engrossing!"

In fact, the state of the case is," he said, " that
where you have missed earthly happiness, you may
stop up the gap with work."

Some one has written," said Lenore, " that
there is a higher than happiness for the children
of men. They may miss happiness and find
blessedness ; but work will never bring the latter.
It may stop the aching void, it may distract
thought for the time ; but when at last decay
comes on, and mind and body refuse to work,
what then ? "

Religion comes so much more naturally to you
than to us," he said impatiently ; " you seem to
imbibe it from your cradles. My mother died
when I was born, and those things are usually
taught by mothers ; my father never spoke on
such subjects. I thought I was a credit to myself
until I first met you. I had kept free from most
of the temptations that surround a young man
who is his own master. I was proud of my own
strength of purpose. My motive was nothing
higher than that to act otherwise would be

o

derogatory to me, Jack Hunt ; and then came the
time when I first knew you, and your life was
a new experience to me. You lived in a higher
atmosphere than other women I had met, your
life and conduct were framed on a different
principle. You attracted me from the first
moment I saw you. You awakened in me the
knowledge of the want of religion in myself It
was my first cry after better things."

"And thence" exclaimed Lenore, breathlessly.

And then," he continued, " I thought by
incorporating this new life I had found with my
own I should gradually grow to her standard.
She would be there to point the way. And so
I followed up the friendship I had begun, and
then "

Don't," cried Lenore ; " I cannot bear it."

And then I was going to say you failed me.

Now I know, and Silence a moment, you

must let me speak. Now I know all the story
of your marriage, of your father's debt, of the
money paid down, of the obligation you were
under, only to be repaid in one way, of "

I cannot be silent!" exclaimed Lenore. '' Remember
you speak of my husband. And for all
the years of his care and love for me I owe him

untold gratitude ; and, besides, one could not bethe
wife of such a man without loving him."

You couldn't be the woman you are," said Jack,
very gently, " without loving him. Do not fear,
Lady Meredith ; you may listen gladly to all I
would say of your husband."

Go on, please ; tell me the rest of your story."

I pass over the time which gave us all our joy
and pain. It left me," he said, " without much
caring what I did in the world. Instead of
trusting you, I engaged myself to Grisel Romney.
If you would marry, so should I. I did her
incalculable wrong in offering love which was not
mine to give. I have suffered for it since, for as I
would have her love me, she loves me not You
know what she is. Lady Meredith. You know
all her sunny brightness. You must have felt it,
for she is the same to all. She loves me as a
child would love ; she has no influence over me asa
woman."

It will come," said Lenore, simply ; " you will
teach her to love you, and she in return will, as a
child only can, teach you true religion."

If such as I can learn," he answered gravely.

She rose to her feet and stood beside him at the
mantelpiece. He noticed how fragile-looking she

had become, though in the excitement of their
talk her face had gained an unwonted colour and
her eyes beamed brightly. She certainly was the
most perfectly beautiful woman he had ever seen.

Of course you can learn," she said. " You
must promise me that you will not return to your
work as your one absorbing interest. You have
true, pure, human happiness lying for you in the
future ; and then Grisel will teach you the higher
life."

I would promise you anything, Lady Meredith."

They were both standing with their back to the
door; they did not perceive that it had opened,
and that Lord Meredith was in the room. He
overheard Jack's last remark, and for a moment he
glanced from one to the other. He noticed the
sparkle in his wife's eyes ; he noted also the
intense earnestness with which Jack was speaking.
He had time for no more. Lenore had seen him
reflected in a mirror, and turned gladly to meet
him.

Here is Mr. Hunt, Fred," she said. " We have
been having a long firelight talk, and I have been
making him promise not to work so hard." Lenore,
as she turned, had caught the look of questioning
wonder on her husband's face. She would set

his mind at rest at once. " Miss Romney," she
continued, " was quite unhappy about it when I
saw her ; so, as an old friend, I was giving him
good advice."

She keeps everyone in order that she comes
near, Hunt. I hope you will profit by her
admonitions."

Lord Meredith was ashamed of even his
momentary wonder ; he was more cordial than
usual, if possible, in consequence.

Lenore, you are looking tired," he said at last,
after they had relapsed for some time into general
conversation. " You have not been doing too
much, have you, child ?"

I think I caught a little cold when I was out,"
she said. " I am shivering, and my head aches.
I am going to send Mr. Hunt away for to-day."

You will send him with me to the smoking
room. Hunt, we have time for a cigar before
dinner."

Thank you ; I shall be very glad. I hope I
have not tired you really," he said, turning to
Lenore.

Not at all. And you will come and see me
very soon again ? I shall be so anxious to hear
about you and your work."

So he and her husband left, and she went to her
own room to rest her aching head. The child
came to her there, but she could not bear his
laughing prattle long. He was dismissed again
to the nursery.

That night about eleven Lord Meredith sent
for the doctor, and next morning Lenore was
worse.

IN TIME FOR THE WEDDING.

"mere is no doubt about it that Gristle
Romney is the very last woman in the
world I should ever have guessed as likely to
have attracted Jack Hunt. It is simply unintelligible
to me."

The speaker was Miss Jerningham ; the person
addressed, Mrs. Wyld. They were together in
the library at The Hurst, Augusta equipped for
travelling. She was just starting for Romney
Manor, and was giving Mrs. Wyld a piece of her
mind before so doing.

I have never seen Miss Romney, but she
seems very charming from description," Mrs.
Wyld answered ; " and Mr. Hunt is such a
favourite of mine, I must believe that anyone he
cares for enough to marry must be nice."

Oh ! you are always so anxious to prove
everyone is nice. I suppose it is some fault in
my composition, but I find the reverse is much
easier to prove. I dare say you think me a well-developed
specimen of uncharitableness."

Augusta spoke with suppressed self-satisfaction.
If she had had the re-composition of herself, she
would certainly not have omitted the fault that
she confessed. It was to her a great blot in Mrs.
Wyld's character, a certain proneness to leniency
of judgment.

You see I go on my husband's principle," Mrs.
Wyld answered good-humouredly. " He always
says it is better to begin with a fair judgment of
everyone. You may be mistaken, but the mistake
is easily rectified, as the world is quite willing at
a moment's notice to forget everything good it has
heard ; but it is almost impossible to remove the
impression made by an unjust judgment."

It is a pity that I have not a husband also ; I
might have come more up to your standard of
charity. However, one thing is quite evident :
Mr. Hunt cannot be very far gone. Don't tell me
that a man really in love would wait four years
without any reason for doing so."

There may be a reason, though the public are

not made aware of the fact," suggested Mrs.
Wyld.

The public ? Yes. But I hardly consider
myself the public. Of course, Phil knows everything,
and it is not likely he would leave me in
ignorance. But I shall be able now to form my
own opinion, and I am usually right."

The marriage is to be immediately, is it not ?
You will come in for all the gay doings."

They say it is to be in June ; but I won't
believe it till I see the whole thing done. Jack
Hunt is not married yet, and ' there 's many a
slip' you know as well as I do."

Augusta gave a final tug to her dogskin gloves,
and surveyed her travelling costume complacently
in the opposite mirror.

Mrs. Wyld smiled.

Well, I lay on you as a parting injunction
not to be so candid in the expression of your
opinion at Romney Manor. Least said soonest
mended."

Your husband says, I suppose," laughed
Augusta. " I must be off, or I shall be late."

Mrs. Wyld accompanied her to the station.

Remember, I am going to write you a good,
gossiping letter very soon. If I am to be so very

Strait-laced at the Manor, I shall certainly require
a safety valve somewhere."

Such was Augusta's parting speech.

The Romneys had returned from town some
three weeks previously. They were enjoying all
the freshness of the glorious spring weather, and
Grisel was giving her whole attention to housekeeping.
She went about the house in the
morning with an anxious face and a large bunch
of keys, and Mr. Romney laughed and called her
Martha ; but she was too thoroughly in earnest to
be turned from her duty by any of the home
teasing ; Bryde and Tom certainly gave her little
peace, and her father was very nearly as bad.

Grisel had been busy all day. Sybil declared
she had never had so much time to herself before,
her sister did everything ; and as Bryde said she
would not deprive Grisette of the pleasure of
being useful for the world, the latter became an
important personage in the household. It was
late in the afternoon. Bryde and Philip had gone
to meet Augusta, and the home party were
expecting their return immediately.

Sybil and Grisel were together ; Lady Main-waring
had driven over after lunch, and had just
left.

I am thankful Sir Roger is better ; it would
have been such a sad home-coming for Reggie
had it been otherwise."

Sybil was the speaker, and Grisel, with her
back turned towards her sister, was watching the
road by which the party from the station would
return.

I wonder when he will arrive t Lady Main-waring
said to-night or tomorrow. Oh, I am
longing to see him !"

You will be quite overpowered, Grisette, with
happiness. Have you forgotten Jack is also
coming in a day or two.''"

"No, that I haven't — dear old Jack — but of
course I have seen him quite recently, and it is
four years since I said good-bye to Reggie. I
almost hope Jack will not come till after Le Oris
has arrived. I should like to have him all to
myself just at first."

The door opened to admit Bryde and the
Jerninghams.

"Why, Grisel," exclaimed Augusta, "you have
missed us by gazing from the wrong window.
I thought a young lady in your situation would
only have taken her seat at the window to watch
for one loved form."

Grisel jumped up to welcome her guest Her
face had flushed under Augusta's keen inspection.

Mr. Hunt is in town," she said, quietly. " No
amount of watching would have brought him ;
and, besides, I surely may watch for my sister
and friends."

Never mind, Grisette," said Philip ; " it is quite
evident Augusta has never been in your situation.
When she is booked for some one, she will understand
that it becomes ennuyant at times to fill
your mind with one idea. It is quite possible to
have too much of a good thing."

"We passed Lady Mainwaring," remarked
Bryde. "Has she been here?"

Yes ; she came to tell us that Reggie is
expected either to-night or tomorrow," Sybil said.
Sir Roger is better, so she was in good spirits."

As soon as that t I shall be very glad to see
Reggie again — very glad indeed."

I do not suppose you are singular in your
sentiments, Miss Bridget ; eh, Grisel V

Philip was in a teasing mood. Augusta followed
her brother's eyes, and saw the colour mount to
Grisel's face.

I certainly am glad to see him, Phil. I see no
harm in it."

'' Oh, no ; none in the least. Only, I say I am
sorry for poor Jack."

You live in a chronic state of sorrow for Jack.
May I tell him so .? I am going to write to him
before dinner, and tell him that Sir Roger is
better and Reggie coming home."

What order he has you in, Grisette ! Are you
obliged to confess to him in every letter } If so,
I advise you to write without fail this evening.
It would be better in every respect."

Grisel was leaving the room when Philip uttered
the last speech. She turned a laughing face to
him. "Why?" she asked; "it seems to me that
tomorrow would do just as well."

It might do as well, if there are no new
arrivals before then ; but you see there is a chance
of some one coming to-night, and if you write
to-night, then you need not do so again for a day
or two. By that time the joy of meeting will
have partially subsided, and your letter to the
absent will have acquired a healthier tone. Do
you comprehend, my dear Griselda .''"

Again Augusta noted the crimson deepen on
Grisel's cheek.

What nonsense you talk, Philip," she said, and
left the room. Silence fell on those left behind.

and then Sybil broke the awkward pause by
asking if Augusta would like to go to her
room ?

Augusta had made several notes during the
last half-hour. Her letter to Mrs. Wyld would
certainly be an entertaining one. She had come
to the Manor resolved to solve the mystery of
that four years' engagement. She thought she
was already on the right track.

The morning sun shone straight in at Grisel's
bedroom window. She woke with a start — was
it late ? She had to gather flowers before breakfast,
so there was no time to lose.

It was difficult to dress quickly on such a
morning. Through the trellis of branches and of
clustering roses that framed her window she
looked out over miles of rolling country. The
house stood on rising ground, and over the tops
of the beechwood she saw the river winding a
silver streak among the fields till it lost itself
in the woods of Bramleigh Hall. Grisel's thoughts
followed the river, and were lost in the woods
also. Pleasant thoughts they must have been,
for, instead of coiling up her golden hair, she
pushed the curls from her temples and stood at
the open window thinking. The smiles gathered

round her lips, and her eyes grew soft and wistful
as she gazed. Then slowly and sedately the clock
at the stables struck eight. She turned from the
window and finished her toilette. She slipped her
pearl hoop on her finger.

*' Dear old Jack," she said, " I hope he is
not working too hard ;" and then she gave
her canary some fresh seed and water, and
putting on her shady hat she ran down to the
garden.

Flitting from flower to flower, filling her basket
with choicest blossoms, singing gaily to herself
all the time, she seemed the fairest flower of all
to Reggie Mainwaring, as he stood and watched
her in silent admiration. He dare hardly break
the delight of the moment by announcing his
presence. Having arrived late the evening before,
he had come to see the Romneys. The breakfast
hour was a late one at Bramleigh Hall ;
he would have time for a glimpse of them
all, and yet be back before his mother missed
him.

So Grisel gathered her flowers unconscious of
his gaze.

But her basket was filled at last, and then,
before returning to the house, she turned to give

one final look at the perfect loveliness of the
May morning.

This time next year I shall be in London," she
thought, with a little sigh. *' How I shall miss
the country ! Dear me, the time is coming so
near now — only one more month to enjoy it all ;
but there is one comfort after all, that Jack won't
be so dull when I am there to look after him.
But oh ! I wish I could take them all with me —
Papa, and Sybil, and Bryde, and Tom ; then I
shouldn't mind half so much."

It seemed to Reggie that there had come into
her face a trace of some vague, undefined yearning
after something she had not. Perhaps it was buta
shadow of a summer cloud. Perhaps it was
mere fancy, a reading of his own thoughts reflected
in her face. It did not last a moment — had it
ever been there, he could hardly tell ; but as her
eyes wandered over the landscape, she espied him,
and then came such a look of glad surprise. He
stepped from his hiding-place, and clasped her
hands.

La Grise, my queen !" he exclaimed.

Le Gris, you have come at last. I have missed
you so." She raised her eyes to his as frankly
as in the old days, but suddenly her eyelids

dropped, and an entirely new sensation of shyness
came over her.

Let us go into the house, Reggie ; the others
will wish to see you also."

"There is no hurry, La Grise. Wait a few
minutes, and tell me all about yourself and the
others."

"There is not much to tell," she said. "You
know all about Philip and Bryde. Phil's sister is
here just now. I am a little bit afraid of her.
Then Papa and Tom and Sybil are just the
same as usual. That is all, I think, except
myself."

"And yourselves"

I am to be married this day month, Le Gris.
I don't quite understand it yet, but I dare say I
shall in time. And Jack has been working too
hard ; so you see it must be soon, so that I can
take care of him."

"Is he here also, La Grise?"

No ; he is coming in a day or two, and then
you must get very good friends with him, so that
after we are married you can come and stay with
us. Then you will see how much I have improved
since you left. I have tried so hard to learn alla
woman ought to know."

Why, La Grise," Reggie interrupted, " you
told me once that girls did not become women
until they were thirty, and you are a long way
from that yet."

So I thought in the old days, Le Gris ; but
then, you know, it never entered my head that I
should be married so soon, and that of course
alters things entirely."

Yes, entirely," thought Reggie to himself, but
he only said, " So I have come home in time to
dance at your wedding, Grisette !"

We '11 not talk of that just now," she answered.
Let us go into the dining-room. They will
be so surprised to see you here."

So the two went together up the pathway, and
disappeared from Miss Jerningham's sight

She had had an interesting half-hour. Early
rising was one of the points she prided herself on.
She preached it also to her brother, but Philip
did not see it, usually coming into the room as
everyone had finished breakfast. This morning
Augusta had been amply rewarded for her self-denial.
Her window overlooked the garden, and
immediately Grisel appeared, she said within
herself it was for some reason.

So now, having seen the meeting, she felt

F

GRISEL ROMNEY.

certain she was right. She knew Reggie Main-waring
perfectly by description.

She closed her book of morning meditations
that lay open before her, as the gong for breakfast
sounded. She had but a dim idea of what she
had read.

When she entered the dining-room, she was
taken utterly aback to find a stranger added to
the family party.

^^k^

EDGED TOOLS.

YT was after breakfast the following day. Gristle
and Augusta were alone together ; the post
had just come in, and the former retired into the
window-seat to enjoy a letter she had just received
from Jack. Augusta's correspondence was of a
more voluminous character ; it was some time
before she could turn her attention to her companion.


Jack's letter did not contain much ; he told
Grisel of his daily life, and of how much he looked
forward to seeing her the following day ; a few
words at the end were given to saying how bright
his future looked now in comparison to what it
did a few weeks ago. " You will have your hands
full, little Grisel," he wrote ; '* you will have to
teach me many things which none but your own

sweet self can teach. Are you afraid of the
bargain you have made, Grisette ? Shall I say
you may go free ? No, child, I am too selfish for
that. I have not long to wait now, and as the
time draws near," &c., &c.

Such effusions are only readable by lovers ; for
the general public there is apt to be monotony
in the subject

Grisel read it twice all through, folded it, and
put it in her pocket. She clasped her hands on
her knees and looked out of the window. She
was trying to understand it all. Instead of pleasure,
her lover's assurances seemed to fill her with
lurking fears. What had she done that he should
love her so } What did he expect of her that
made him count the hours of the next few weeks t
And, after all, if he should find himself mistaken,
if he should be disappointed in her !

Augusta had finished the perusal of her letters.
She let them lie on her knee. She was silently
watching Grisel, trying to read the thoughts that
were passing through her mind.

"Not bad news, I hope, Grisel.^" she said, at
last.

No ; not at all bad news. Was I looking
grave } I was only dreaming."

"And they were not pleasant dreams, I fear.
Mr. Hunt, I hope, is not going to prove false .^"

Oh, no ; he is coming tomorrow. How long
is it since you have seen him. Miss Jerningham?"
she asked.

More than four years. The last time we met
we were in the same house together, or rather
he spent most of the day with us. We were a
more attractive party there than that at the house
where he was really staying. We were all at
The Hurst. I'll tell you who was there — a handsome
Miss Fenton and her father. By-the-bye, I
hear, in one of my letters to-day, that she is very
ill. She married Lord Meredith, you know."

So that was where Jack met Lady Meredith,"
exclaimed Grisel, brightening into interest. " I
knew that they were old friends, but I never
knew how they first came to know each other."

Mr. Hunt told you that they were old friends,
did he V laughed Augusta. "Well, I suppose he
spoke the truth."

"What do you mean .!*" asked Grisel. "Why
should it not be true, and why should he not
have told me V

Oh, I mean nothing ; only I wondered that
you had never heard that in the old days Lenore

Fenton and Mr. Hunt were more than ordinarily
good friends !"

I do not wonder at it," said Grisel, simply.
I told Mr. Hunt one day that I wondered he
had not fallen in love with Lady Meredith.
I certainly should have done so had I been he."

And Mr. Hunt answered, of course, that you
were the first and only woman he had ever
loved V

I see no ' of course' about the matter, Miss
Jerningham. If Mr. Hunt had said so, I should
not have believed him. You know a man never
marries his first love."

Nor a woman either, Grisel ; j/ou know that,
of course." Augusta's eyes watched closely for
the tell-tale blush which she felt sure must come,
but she was disappointed.

There are exceptions to every rule, Miss
Jerningham," said Grisel, haughtily, as she left
the room.

Grisel believed Augusta spoke in a general way.
She never for a moment entertained the idea that
it could be anyone in particular to whom she
alluded ; so her manner was as unconstrained as
usual when Reggie came in the afternoon.

She had promised to go on the river with him.

Unless she went that day she would not go at all,
he thought ; she would have a prior claim on her
time tomorrow.

He never paused to consider the wisdom of his
actions. It could do Grisel no harm. Was she
not to be married within the month .'' and for
himself the temptation was too strong to be
resisted.

So, after a lapse of years, they found themselves
once more on the river. Nothing around changed
since the day that Reggie had rowed Grisel up to
the island the night before she went to school.
The woods and ferns were then, as now, in all the
freshness of early summer ; the weather was as
gloriously bright. Grisel was not seventeen then,
and wore short dresses ; now, she was twenty-one,
and wore lone:; ones — that was about all the
change in her. He was also five years older, and
all those five years his love for Grisel had undergone
no change, save strengthened with his
strength. He believed it was an utterly hopeless
love ; he would have knocked anyone down who
dared to suggest the possibility of its being otherwise.
With such feelings it was perfectly safe to
renew old days. He was the only one who would
suffer for it ; and if he were willing to take this

extra burden on himself, who was there in the
wide world who had any right to stop him ?
Certainly there was no one, and humanity has not
yet learnt to refrain from these self-imposed
burdens.

Yet, somehow, that afternoon it was very hard
not to speak of his love. Floating idly down the
stream, with the lulling sound of the water lapping
on the sides of the boat, everything glowing with
sunshine ; Nature herself was giving him an
intoxicating cup ; and then, added to all, Grisel
was in a dreamy mood, lolling in the stern of the
boat, enjoying to the full the dolce far nieiite
existence.

She looked up at last after some time of silence.
"Isn't it perfect, Reggie.'*" she said. "I do not
know how I shall ever live without our river.
Ever since we were quite little, you and I have
always been together boating, and I know I shall
miss it terribly."

I do not think you will, Grisette. Your happiness
lies in the future. Very soon you will have
forgotten all about these afternoons, or remember
them only as an incident in your childhood."

My happiness will have to be very overwhelming
before it will make me forget the past. Does

marriage really necessitate the forgetting of all
the old pleasures and friends ?"

It is not an unlikely case," he answered. " By
degrees other interests will creep into your life.
You will come to the Manor now and then.
Perhaps we may meet, perhaps not, who knows ?
And there may even come a time when you will
hear my name mentioned, and you will remember
that we once knew each other."

I wonder," she answered, dreamily, " if you are
saying all this because you feel that such a time is
coming for you. You will marry some day."

That I never shall do," he interrupted,
earnestly.

She went on as if she had not heard his
words.

You will marry, and then interests will creep
into your life, and yoic will forget all about us ; or,
perhaps, you may see by the newspapers that one
of us — that, perhaps, I am dead — and then yoii. will
remember that we once knew each other!"

I shall have nothing to make me forget," he
said.

Neither shall I. I must ever look back to
these days all my life through ; and Reggie, do
you know, I shall grow to be sorry that you came

back from India if we are both to forget all about
it. I never knew how much I had missed it all
till you came home, till I saw you in the garden
yesterday. Whether you do or not, I shall always
remember how happy we have been."

If Grisel had betrayed the slightest consciousness
or shyness in what she said, Reggie would
have told her then and there how unlikely he was
ever to forget ; but she spoke so simply about it
all, that he remained silent. What use was therein
telling her of a hopeless love ?

It is very unfortunate that you are not my
brother," she said at length, 'rand then all those
gloomy forebodings of forgetting each other would
be impossible. It never enters my head to tell
Tom that soon we shall have other interests,
&c., &c., and so we may as well make up our
minds to the inevitable ; and yet, Le Gris, until
now I have seen as much, in fact, almost more
of you than of Tom. It is such an odd world, I
cannot understand it at all. Now, don't you
agree with me in wishing that you were my
brother'"

If it would give you any satisfaction, Grisette,
yes ; but, somehow, I hardly think it would have
been "

He stopped short suddenly. " Second thoughts
are best," he said, and turned the conversation.

Then they talked of many things — reminiscences
of long ago, of many a day spent together,
many a scrape in which they had shielded each
other. Grisel's laughter rang over the water at
the quaint recollections of their childhood.

The rest of the party heard it as they wandered
through the woods at the river-side.

Grisette is as much a child as ever," said
Sybil ; " she and Reggie had always some private
joke going on."

And Grisel delights in fun," interposed Bryde.

That is unfortunate," said Augusta, drily, " as
I hear that Mr. Hunt is rarely seen to laugh or
smile. She is wise to make the most of her
opportunities."

'* It 's on the old principle that ' extremes
meet,' " said Philip, who was one of the party.
But Jack's gravity is a new phase in his
existence. He used to be as merry as possible ;
Grisel will soon teach him to laugh again."

I don't remember that he was so easily
amused," Augusta answered her brother. " I am
sure at Hurst, when he did laugh, it was usually
at one, not with one."

I suppose you fell a victim, or your memory
would not be so good," said Philip, and the party
disappeared in the woods.

Meanwhile, Reggie and Grisel, never dreaming
that their merriment was subject for animadversion,
continued unheeding.

Reggie finished some anecdote ; it served to
remind Grisel of another.

Oh, do you remember that dreadful day, Le
Gris, when we dropped your mother's watch down
the grating in the old cellar?"

"Yes," said Reggie, laughing, "and we tried
to hook it up again with a crooked pin at the
end of a string."

How was it that you dropped it, Reggie ?
I wasn't there, you know. Bryde was with you,
and when you failed you came to me."

Because your hands were so small, and neither
Bryde nor I could get ours through the grating.
My mother had let me have her watch whilst
I learnt my lessons, and Bryde came in suddenly
with the news that the rabbits had escaped into
the old cellar. Of course, I never thought about
the watch, for my father had only let me have
the rabbits on condition that they were never
to be allowed to go loose."

Dear me," said Grisel, " what a time ago
it seems, and yet how well I remember how
thoroughly miserable you and Bryde looked when
you came for me."

We should have been in a bad way, La
Grise, had it not been for you. I never saw
such small hands ; but even for them it was
wonderful how they ever got through the grating."

It was rather painful work, certainly," said
Grisel, rubbing her hand at the remembrance.

I don't think they have grown at all since
then," he said.

She laughed, and pulled off one of her rings,
tossing it to him.

Try if you can get it on, Le Gris ; it is far
too large for me."

But the ring would not go on, and he returned
it to its owner.

Mine, I believe, would nearly fit your wrist,"
he said, and drew it off."

Do take care, Reggie, and do not drop it ;
it is such a perfect beauty, far too good for a
man. I have been watching it flash in the sunlight,
and admiring it so."

Grisel slipped the ring on every finger in turn.

I believe it would fit this finger best. Look

now, and admire it, please. Does it not look
well ?"

She had taken off her engagement ring, and
put it on her third finger, and held out her
hand for his inspection.

Don't you admire it, Reggie } I think it is
perfect."

She looked into his face to read his thoughts,
and he already was looking at her.

Why don't you admire it, Le Gris .?" she said,
hurriedly. Her eyes had dropped before his gaze.
She had read something in his look which she
had never understood before — a something which
made her pulses throb, and a strange tightening
came in her throat.

Reggie turned suddenly away ; for a moment
only had he forgotten himself. When he looked
again, she had taken his ring from her finger.
He spoke then in his usual way.

I wish you to keep the ring, Grisel. It is
my wedding present to you. It is, as you say,
too good for a man, so you must accept it to
please me."

Oh, Le Gris, I couldn't think of taking it.
It is far too good for me, and, besides, it is too
large."

That is a fault easily rectified ; and I would
rather see it on your hands than anywhere else,
my queen."

So, after a little more argument, she accepted
her wedding present, and sat admiring it with
childish delight — a single diamond in a band of
gold.

It is my first diamond ring, and, Reggie,
I am so glad you gave it to me."

She had forgotten all about her momentary
confusion in the pleasure of the gift

The afternoon was wearing on, and the sun
was casting long shadows as once more they
neared home. Reluctantly Reggie steered the
boat to the shore, and, alighting, turned to assist
Grisel. Suddenly there came to Grisel's mind
a remembrance of the past ; she had forgotten
it all through those years. Something in the
surroundings brought the scene back to her
now. Reggie had then taken her bundle of ferns
from her, and, in doing so, had kissed her hand.
Her heart gave a throb ; for a moment she
dreaded he might be guilty of the same offence.
Before he could stop her, she had leaped ashore.

"You have no ferns in your hands to-night,
La Grise," he said.

She was right ; he had remembered it also,
and she turned her head away.

She was thankful that at that moment the
rest of the party emerged from the wood. They
had been following the course of the river also,
though they had lost sight of those in the boat ;
but as they neared the pier, Augusta exclaimed —

There are Mr. Mainwaring and Grisel. Let
us join them."

They all walked up to the house together.
Mr. Romney met them as they entered the
garden.

"Papa," exclaimed Grisel, running forward,
look at what Le Oris has given me. Is it
not beautiful "i It is my wedding present"

Mr. Romney was not the only one to admire.

It is not new," was all Reggie said.

And Augusta made another mental note.

A HARD TRUTH.

MND all those bright weeks of spring, ever
^ ^ since the day she had seen Jack Hunt,
Lenore Meredith had been ill. Nothing very
dangerous at first — a low, lingering typhoid fever,
one day better, the next worse.

Many and constant were the inquiries made by
anxious friends, but the answer was always the
same. There was nothing new to tell ; the physicians
were not alarmed, but anxious, at the steady
persistence of the fever. Her illness could not be
traced to any very definite cause ; it began with
the chill caught the day she was out in the rain.
That was four weeks ago, and she had so little
strength at the beginning that it was now reduced
in a very great degree.

She was not the least anxious about herself,

but full of concern for all those around her. She
would not rest until Lord Meredith consented to
be some hours a-day away from her sick-room,
nor would she let him be disturbed by night-watching
; and even after he had agreed to her
terms, her mind was constantly on the alert,
planning and thinking of things for his comfort,
that he might the less feel her absence.

Then her boy usurped her attention. Towards
night she would get restless and excited, thinking
that everything was not going on as usual.
Perhaps she heard the child cry, and would fret
herself that he was missing her ; or at other times,
with the unreasoning fancies of fever, his very
silence would create cause of alarm. On several
occasions she had been delirious, but these times
had never as yet lasted long, and they fondly
hoped that the worst of the fever was past.

For a few days there were certainly symptoms
to justify such hopes, but the weather suddenly
grew very mild for the time of the year — hot,
steamy days towards the end of May. Farmers
in the country were rejoicing in it for their crops,
but in the metropolis one longed for even the

freshness of the March winds. It was enervating,
exhausting even to those in health, and the nurse
saw with anxiety how her patient suffered from it.

It was towards evening. The day had been
even warmer than the preceding ones, and inconsequence
Lenore was much excited, and
rambling a good deal in her talk. When the
doctor came for his afternoon visit she did not
know him, though her light-headdress passed
off soon, and on her husband entering the room
shortly afterwards, she was quite herself again.

She asked him what he had been doing, and
instead of dismissing him at once, she begged
him to stay beside her. He took his book and
remained in the room, sending the nurse out to
walk. Lenore was less restless, and when he went
down to his eight o'clock dinner, he thought she
seemed rather better.

Later in the evening he was with her again ;
he was going to watch the first half of the night,
and the nurse had gone to bed. Lady Meredith's
maid was in the adjoining room, but he preferred
being alone with Lenore. She had fallen asleep,
and in the quiet he had time to note the ravages

fever had committed. All her long hair had been
cut short, and the small clustering curls which
were left made her look singularly young and
girlish. Her hands had grown so thin, that her
wedding-ring was in danger of slipping off. A
cold chill ran through him as he noted it all.
What if he were about to lose her ? Their
happiness had been so complete, so ideal, it
might be that it was too bright to last. Nothing
had ever come between them, not a word had
disturbed their peace. He felt that she understood
him so entirely, he had hardly a thought
which he did not share with her. He had told her
of his past life, his love for her mother, and she
knev/ well his love for herself; and of her past
life he knew nothing. It had occurred to him
once or twice how seldom Lenore spoke of her
father. . He had known Sir James well. He
supposed that she had found it hard at times to
deal with her father's temper ; this perhaps was
sufficient reason to bury the past under her
present happiness. When he knew her first, she
was only a girl ; nothing had come to break the
sunny brightness of her existence.

Lenore moved restlessly in her sleep, the heat
oppressed her so. She suddenly awoke with a
start, begging to have the window opened. He
did what she asked. She appeared satisfied, and
lay down again.

So passed an hour. It was nearly midnight,
and the air was becoming more close and stifling.
Then, in the silence, a low growl of thunder was
heard. Soon after, a flash of lightning glanced
on the mirror, followed by a nearer peal of
thunder.

Lenore moaned, and her husband rose and
drew the curtains more closely across the window.
There was a pause in the storm, he almost hoped
it was passing over, when suddenly the heavens
were torn directly above them with one of those
sharp, rattling peals as of musketry.

Lenore started up in bed, looking wildly round.

What was that noise .?" she cried. " It wasn't
my father's fall ? Oh, what was it, Fred ? You
know I mistook my father's fall for the noise
made by the Romneys' boxes ; they arrived at
the same time. But of course you do not understand;
you think I am talking nonsense; you know

nothing of my past life !" With that she broke
into a jarring laugh.

Lord Meredith was beside her in a moment ;
he pacified her by degrees, and got her to lie
down again. She continued murmuring to herself,
but he did not catch her words. Presently, however,
the thunder again alarmed her. She clung
wildly to her husband's arm, exclaiming —

Oh, Father, you cannot mean what you say;
you cannot mean that I am to give up the man
I love, and marry the man that I do not care
whether I ever see again } Remember I am a
woman, and in love !"

Be still, my darling, you are at home ;
no one will make you do what you do not
wish!"

She seemed to comprehend the purport of his
words.

But you said I must marry him ; you said I
would bring dishonour on you if I did not accept
Lord Meredith. Did you say that I was to be
sold to pay your debts — I, your only child.? Father,
I cannot do it. I told Jack I would marry him.
I love him so, I cannot give him up ; I will not

do it !" She almost screamed, trying to break
away from her husband's hold.

His face had grown very white and still, and
his voice was hard and forced as he said, " My
darling, you must be quiet ; you will make yourself
worse !"

I don't care ! Cannot I die as well as my
father'' Did you say I was worse .'*" she continued,
muttering to herself, "Worse, am I .'' That
is well; I shall soon be dead also!"

The perspiration stood on Lord Meredith's brow
in cold, bead-like drops, wrung from him in this
hour of agony.

"Good God!" he exclaimed, under his breath,
does she hate me so ? What have I done to
deserve this .?"

She was quiet for a moment, but it did not last ;
each peal of echoing thunder seemed to arouse
her afresh to a renewed sense of her wrong.

She now broke out into a low and mirthful
laugh, and began singing, " I love my love, I love
my love, because I know my love loves me!"
Over and over again came the refrain, while peals
of low laughter broke from her.

And \vho is my love ? " she continued, in
hurried accents. " Would you like to know ? He
said he would keep my love so safe, even in
eternity. Jack said that. You know who I mean,
Fred } Jack Hunt, my lover, my only lover, he
told me that, and you knew nothing of it, but you
know now. Aren't you glad to know he loved
me.'*" she continued, triumphantly. "No one else
was, no one said they were glad ; I was all alone,
and then I was sold," she said, dropping her voice.
My father sold me. It was not my fault, I could
not help it. I would rather have died!"

Her last words sank into a whisper ; she had
exhausted herself, and fell back upon her pillows.
She was quite tranquil now, and appeared to befalling
asleep. Lord Meredith slipped his arm
from under her head and turned slowly away,
his face and whole bearing expressive of the most
abject misery. He dropped into a chair beside
the bed, and buried his face in his hands.

"She would rather have died!" he repeated
again and again. " Rather have died than become
my wife, and I — I only wished her happiness.
Bear witness to me, O God ! that it was her

happiness, not my own, I sought. I dreamt she
loved me. I was blind, a fool, to imagine for a
moment that one so young, so beautiful, so perfect,
could care for me in that way — I, double her age.
I acted for good, and nothing but harm has come,
nothing but misery for us both. Did I love her
too well ? Will she die now, leaving me as her
parting words that I brought nothing but misery
into her life ? I, who love her so. I am to goto
the grave with this burden on my soul. ' She
would rather have died,' she said."

Then came half-an-hour's silence. Lenore lay
exhausted, between waking and sleeping ; Lord
Meredith continued where he was, bowed down
with his sorrow.

From time to time she murmured broken
sentences, but he could distinguish little of what
she said. He heard his own name mentioned,
and then repeatedly she appealed to her father.

A hundred questions rose to his mind which
he could not answer. Scene after scene presented
itself before his mental vision, in which Lenore
was present, and when he fondly believed he was
all in all to her.

Was all her gentle care and thoughtfulness for
him only a part she was acting ? Could he have
been completely deceived all those years ? Must
he at once and for ever put away from himself
this beautiful dream, and take home the truth that
she must ever regard him as the man who had
spoilt her life ? In future years he must be content
to know the love she gave him was wrung
from her because of duty, and because the nobility
of her nature would never let him feel what she
had suffered through no fault of his. And all
must be endured in silence ; he must never let
her know what she herself in her delirium had
told him. This was to be his life henceforth. He,
too, would have his part to play. Their daily
existence must be lived through for the sake of
their child ; and for him also the sweetness would
be gone for ever.

He raised his head from his hands. He could
not tell how time had passed, but Lenore had
made some movement. She was awake, and
lying watching him with large, lustrous eyes.
She was quite herself, and smiled as he raised
his head.

Have I been talking in my sleep ? " she
whispered. " Somehow I think I have been
dreaming."

He turned off her question.

There has been a thunderstorm which made
you restless. It is over now, and you must goto
sleep again, darling, and awake better tomorrow."


She noticed how worn he looked ; the faint
light in the room even exaggerated the weary
lines on his face.

"Are you very tired, poor old Fred.-*" she
asked. " Were you asleep just now, and I disturbed
you ? I wonder what I should have done
without you all this weary illness. If I get better,
it will be entirely owing to your nursing and
care."

You must not speak so, dearest, you will
excite yourself. Another would have nursed you
even better, perhaps."

No one could," she whispered. She was so
weak she could hardly speak, but her eyes were
full of love and gratitude.

If it had only been yesterday, he said to himself,

how her words would have thrilled him. But now
all was changed. He turned sadly away, making
an excuse to get something for her. Could it all
be acting, he asked himself.?

But no one heard the mournful question, and
no answer came.

The nurse came in soon after and relieved Lord
Meredith from his watch. He was very unwilling
to leave the room. He dreaded a return of the
delirium, and that any ears besides his own should
hear of the gulf which lay between himself and
his wife.

But Lenore, knowing nothing of the cause of
his anxiety, insisted on his leaving her. She was
too weak to bear the slightest opposition ; the
nurse looked annoyed at even the momentary
hesitation in obeying her ladyship's orders. Lord
Meredith went to his room with his life's happiness
in ashes. ^

The rest of the night passed quietly, the storm
had spent itself, and the air blew in at the window
cool and fresh. Lenore slept at intervals. When
the doctors arrived in the morning, they were
satisfied with their patient ; the fever was entirely

gone. Nothing now remained but the alarming
weakness, but Lady Meredith had youth on her
side — her recovery might be tedious, but they
hoped now it was sure.

It seemed that Lenore steadily gained ground
after that one night. She slept a great deal, only
awaking to take the constant nourishment that
was necessary ; she was struggling back slowly to
life, and her husband asked himself the awful
question, would she rather it had been death ?

How ardently he longed to ask herself about it !
If he could only hear from her own lips that the
skeleton she had raised was but a phantasy of
fever ! He tried to reason himself into this belief,
but he did not succeed ; there was ever recurring
to his mind the scene which he interrupted the
night Lenore was taken ill.

He had been startled at the time, but had
forgotten all about it again, until Lenore's confession
brought it to his mind. He read it all by
a new light now ; would to God he had been left
in darkness !

All the strangeness of the scene, noted unconsciously
at the time, stood before him in unmistakable

outline. Coming into the room not more
quietly than usual, and yet his wife and Mr. Hunt
had been so absorbed in talk they had not noticed
him. He had heard the thrill in Lenore's tones
as he opened the door, and he was present at
Jack's earnest avowal — " I would promise yoii
anything. Lady Meredith." Oh ! if he could only
ask her for an explanation ; but even had it been
possible, he dreaded the answer he would receive.

His wife's hearty pleasure at his entrance was
hardly consistent with fear ; she had turned to him
so naturally, and made him aware of their talk.

He was ashamed of his suspicions, and yet, if
she were steadily acting a part, it was only her
role for the time being. His mind was filled
with a thousand conflicting ideas ; it was pain
of the acutest kind having to doubt the woman
he loved, even though he imputed nothing to
her but purely unselfish motives. That she still
wrongfully loved Jack Hunt never crossed his
mind ; it would have been in his eyes a blemish
on her unsullied purity that such a thought
should even occur to him.

How he had loved her, how he loved her

Still, even more alive to the intensity of his
passion now than in the days gone by ; and
how this love had received the cruellest blow
that can be given, inflicted by the object beloved,
no one would ever know.

Such a wound can hardly be received without
some scar being visible. Lenore must have
noticed the change in him, had she not been
in such a state of weakness that outward objects
held but little place in her thoughts. He was
there beside her ; that was enough for her. She
did not observe that her recovery, which would
otherwise have been a season of such rejoicing
to him, had come, and he still wore the anxious,
harassed look that he had carried with him all
the time when her danger had been most
imminent.

So two or three days passed by. Lenore was
gradually gaining ground, and as her strength
returned, she was so full of the old love and
thoughtfulness about him, that he almost persuaded
himself at times that the awful night of
the storm must have been some horrid dream —
a spectre sent to show that earthly happiness

must not be too confident in itself, too sure of
duration.

He was sitting beside her one afternoon
recounting how he had spent the day, amusing
her with tittle and tattle and gossip, when they
were interrupted by a servant with the announcement
that Mr. Hunt was down stairs, and was
most anxious to see his lordship.

Lord Meredith involuntarily glanced at Lenore,
but she betrayed not the slightest trace of unusual
feeling.

Do go and see him, Fred ; he will be anxious
to know how I am. Tell him I am recovering
rapidly, and, if he is going to the Manor, send
my love to Grisel Romney."

ONLY AN "OLD FRIEND."

Y F I were Mr. Hunt, I should not rest quietly
and let my fiancee be so continually with
another man ; it is as well he is coming to-day
for all concerned."

What nonsense you speak, Augusta. Grisel
and Reggie Mainwaring have been like brother
and sister for years. It would be positively
absurd that their acquaintance should cease!"

"Very like brother and sister, certainly. I
have not found brothers as a rule in
such anxiety to be for ever in their sister's
society."

The feeling may be reciprocal on the part of
the sister, Gus. You are not over well pleased

to see much of your brother," and Philip proceeded
to leave the room.

Where are you going to now ?" exclaimed
Augusta. " Can't you stand my society for five
minutes ?''

I thought it was all the other way," Philip
answered, nonchalantly. " However, I don't mind
listening for a few minutes if you have anything
to say."

He had jumped from the window on to the
grass terrace, and stood leaning on the windowsill,
calmly filling his pipe. He drew his watch
from his pocket. " You can claim my attention
for five minutes ; make the most of your time!"
he said.

Seriously, then, Philip, I think it is quite your
place to say something. Tom is away from home ;
you are to be her brother shortly ; you can surely
say how unwise you think it — this constant
intimacy. People will not let it pass unnoticed."

"I suppose you pass for 'people;' there are
none others that I am aware of"

If you will not look on it in that light, surely

you have some interest in Grisel herself. It would
be very unpleasant for you if Bryde's sister got
into mischief"

Now we are beginning to see daylight, Gus.
Your anxiety is roused by sisterly feelings ; but if
I tell you that I am not the least alarmed, you
can set your mind at rest."

Really, Philip, you are too provoking. Well,
you cannot say you have not been warned if
anything disagreeable does occur. If some fine
morning Mr. Mainwaring and Grisel are missing,
you will not be able to say that you were utterly
unprepared for such an esclandrey

Rubbish ! What did you eat for supper last
night } It has evidently disagreed with you
horribly."

How atrociously rude you are, Philip. There
is nothing more to be said, then ; as you refuse
to speak, I shall."

Really this is beyond a joke, Augusta. To
begin with, you have no business to interfere ; and
secondly, the whole thing is a creation of your
own imagination. Unless you are silent on the

subject, I shall be seriously angry. However, I
cannot wait any longer now."

"Where are you going, that you are in such a
desperate hurry .?"

Bryde, Grisel, Reggie, and I are going on an
expedition into the woods. Will you come?"

No, thank you. Under the circumstances, my
company would not be appreciated ; besides, I
do not approve of the whole thing."

Oh ! if you are going to take the highly
injured and moral tone, I dare say you are better
at home. There is no necessity to put any force
on your inclinations."

Philip turned from the window, and soon
Augusta had the satisfaction of seeing the quartette
wander down the grass avenue. Their
laughter reached her ears ; she put down her
book impatiently and went to the writing-table.
It was a good opportunity for getting over a long
letter to Mrs. Wyld.

The above conversation had taken place immediately
after lunch. Jack Hunt was to arrive
before dinner, and the walking party were to

return by the station and escort him to the house.
Reggie was spending the day at the Manor ; he
also was to return for dinner.

Augusta was not left long alone. Presently
Sybil entered the room.

I am going to Langford, our market town.
Do you feel inclined for the drive ? It is some
six miles from here, and the country is very
pretty, if you care to see it."

Thanks ; I should like to come. Are you
going at once .?"

Yes, if you are ready. The phaeton is to beat
the door immediately."

Shortly afterwards the ladies were starting.
Mr. Romney stood on the steps giving some
final directions to his eldest daughter.

I thought of returning the other way, Papa,
and picking up Jack's portmanteau. It will save
us sending for it in the evening."

"Yes, you are right. Only, how do you think
that young horse will stand the railway } Remember,
you have not tried him yet."

Oh, he 's all right, sir," said the groom.

The other one is extra quiet, and Miss Romney
need 'ave no fear."

They waved an adieu as they disappeared
from sight. Sybil's chestnuts were not long in
clearing the ground ; besides, it would take them
all their time to do their commissions and be at
the station at the proper hour.

Meanwhile, in the woods the quartette were
enjoying themselves immensely. They kept
together at first, but after a time they became
separated. Philip and Bryde had naturally fallen
behind, and Reggie was rejoicing in one more
tete-tete with Grisel.

Gradually the afternoon wore away. The last
two mentioned had found a seat among the ferns
and moss at the foot of an old tree. They were
neither of them in a talkative mood — Reggie
because he aren't, and Grisel because she was
too perfectly happy to speak. From time to time
some commonplace remark passed between them,
and then came long, unbroken silences, in which
the insects hummed, and the birds sang, and the
wind rustled softly amongst the grasses. Away in

the distance the river's voice formed a gentle
under-current of sound.

Grisel's eyes were bent upon her knee. She
was arranging in bunches the wild flowers which
she had gathered in her walk, trying the various
combinations which they made ; and Reggie lay
at her feet and saw the soft colour come and goon
her cheek, saw the smile which lingered round
her delicately-cut lips, envied the wind which
ruffled her golden hair — noted all this with a
strange, weary pain, trying to teach himself the
lesson that this was the last of the brightness for
him. In the long years to come he would have
to rest content with these two stolen pleasures — a
row on the river, an afternoon ramble in the woods.

He watched the small white hands as they
deftly put the flowers together ; but it was Grisel
who broke the long silence at last.

There," she said. " I hope you admire my
handiwork. I have made one for myself and one
for some one else."

She held up taro dainty bouquets of delicate
anemones for his inspection and admiration.

Thank you, La Grise. I shall keep it."

But you are not the ' some one' I meant. It
was Jack. I thought it would please him."

"And do you not think it would please me
also, La Grise ? Do give it to me as a remembrance
of our last walk together."

Rather a fading remembrance, after all," she
said. " I hope it will not be as transient induration
as the flowers."

How long is it since your first ball,
Grisette.^"

She looked astonished at the irrelevance of
the question. " Four years," she answered.

And I have a spray of faded orange blossom,
and the perfume still lingers round it, and brings
back a bright picture to my mind. I would not
part with it for worlds," he continued, and his
voice had grown dangerously low and thrilling.
His eyes rested on her face, and he saw the colour
rising to her temples as she turned away her head.

Keepsakes are an absolute mistake," she said,
springing to her feet, and tossing the two bunches
of anemones far out of reach among the grass.

I burnt my spray of orange blossom only last
night. I advise you to do the same."

Reggie had risen also to his feet, surprised by
her sudden vehemence, and reminded also of how
far he had gone by the faint scorn which curled
Grisel's lip.

You are right," he said. " Does that satisfy
you?"

He had taken his orange blossom from an old
letter-case he carried with him, and strewed it in
fragments at his feet.

Grisel was standing with her face averted. She
turned suddenly round at the sound of his hurt
voice, and held out her hand.

Oh, Le Gris, forgive me ! I did not mean to
be cross ! "

You are forgiven, my queen," he said, and
raised the hand she had held out to him to his
lips.

After that, they discovered that they were
already late of starting for the station, and before
Philip and Bryde had been found more time was
lost.

They only arrived on the platform as the train
steamed in and set down its one first-class
passenger in the shape of Jack and his luggage.
He was looking in better spirits than usual, and
joined heartily in the general chatter, wien,
having confided Mr. Hunt's luggage to the care
of the station-master, they turned their backs on
the station for their two miles' walk — a long, flat,
dusty road, with hedges at either side. So it was
for a mile and a-half ; then as it neared the Manor
it took a sudden turn, and all at once one found
oneself away from the glare of the dusty road, and
in the cool shade of the Bramleigh woods. Rather
under the road was heard the continuous roar of
the river as it fell over the lasher near the home
farm.

They had nearly got over the first mile and
a-half of their dusty walk without almost noticing
the disagreeable of the way, so eager and
animated were they in the interchange of home
news ; and Jack was anxious to hear of Reggie's
home-coming and arrival.

Suddenly they became conscious of the sound

of wheels approaching at an unusually rapid pace.
At first nothing was to be seen but a cloud of
dust some half-mile away ; then, as it approached,
they distinguished a single figure sitting in the
vehicle, whatever it was.

"It is a runaway!" exclaimed Philip; and
certainly there was no doubt of the fact. The
tremendous pace at which it was coming, and
the wild way the carriage was thrown from
side to side of the road, left but little hope of
either carriage or occupant being saved.

There were a few minutes of horrible suspense.
The road in some parts was so narrow that, as
it advanced nearer, it seemed hardly possible
that the walking party could escape unhurt.

It was near enough now to distinguish more
clearly. " Good God, it is Sybil !" exclaimed
Reggie.

It must be stopped before the turn of the
road, or "

Jack's voice did not finish the sentence. All
knew only too well that if no help came before
the turn, the carriage and all must go over the

bank into the river. They saw that Sybil
had hold of the reins, and to a certain extent
was able to guide the horses. Philip had
placed Bryde behind him under shelter of the
hedge, but Grisel unconsciously clung to Reggie's
hand as he stood beside her. Jack had crossed
the road, and stood a few yards further down,
nearer the dreaded corner. On came the phaeton
at terrific speed. They could hear the hard
breathing of the chestnuts, they could see the
still, white terror on Sybil's face, as she exerted
all her strength to guide the horses in safety
past her sisters. She evinced no personal fear,
though she must have known as well as they
did what lay before her.

A few seconds more of breathless suspense,
and then Grisel felt herself suddenly drawn
back by a strong arm, and held in safety by
her sister.

A whirlwind of dust, a clatter of horses' feet,
a half-stoppage, and the carriage passed on ;
another second, and then a pause.

Grisel had covered her face with her hands

to shut out what she feared was coming. She
looked up now, and with a wild cry of " Le
Gris!" fell fainting on the road.

He had sprung forward first, had almost
succeeded, when he was hit by the shaft. The
carriage passed on, leaving him senseless where
he had been knocked down. A few yards
further on, a few moments before certain destruction.
Jack had succeeded in stopping the
horses ; their first check had broken the pace
at which they were going. They stood now,
flecked with foam, but quiet, evidently relieved
that their temporary madness was over.

Sybil leaped from the phaeton, and hurried
back to where Grisel was lying. Reggie had
already risen. He had been but partially stunned,
and, save for a severe bruise on the shoulder, did
not seem much hurt. So the accident, which
might have had such serious consequences, was
but a trivial one after all, if Grisel would but
awaken from her long death-like faint.

Jack, in anxiety, raised Grisel from where she
had fallen. Philip was holding the horses, while

Reggie hurried to a neighbouring cottage for
water.

She lay on the bank, with her head resting
on Sybil's knee, white and still. At last came
a sigh, a trembling of her eyelids, and she
opened her eyes. She looked round questioningly,
as she tried to rise from her recumbent
position ; then suddenly the pallor returned to
her cheek, as her memory came back to her.

Oh ! where is Le Gris ? What has happened
?" she asked, feebly.

He is quite safe, Grisette, and has gone in
search of water for you." It was Jack who
spoke, but she still looked puzzled. " He was
knocked over, but not hurt. If you had not
been such a foolish child you would have seen
it for yourself," he added, gently.

I am sorry I was so foolish," she said ; and
Reggie returning at the moment, she took the
water he had brought with tremulous thanks,
and then declared she was better, and able to
go home.

You should feel flattered, Mainwaring, at a

young lady going off into a genuine faint, no
humbug about it, because she had the misfortune
to be eyewitness of your overthrow," said Philip,
thoughtlessly, intent only on bringing a smile
to Grisel's white face.

There was a moment's pause before Reggie
answered.

I am sorry I should have been the cause of
it," was all he said, carefully avoiding Grisel's
eye as he answered.

The crimson had risen in a flood and dyed
Grisel's throat and cheek. In her confusion she
tried to rise to her feet ; she was still unable
to do so, and nearly fainted again in the attempt.

Jack looked from one to the other. A spasm
of pain shot across his face, but no trace of
unusual feeling was discernible in his voice ashe
said —

Grisette, will you let me drive you homes"

"Oh yes, please do!" she answered, gratefully.

NOT AS A WOMAN.

JTXHE day after, Reggie came early to the
Manor to inquire if Grisel were better. She
had not left her room when he arrived, and it
was Sybil who answered his inquiries. He was
much distressed to hear that she was still far
from well. Sybil had always known of his love
for her sister ; before her he never attempted
to disguise his real feelings.

Sybil had resolved to give him a word of
warning, if she had but an opportunity ; she
summoned her courage to speak as he was
leaving that morning.

"Reggie, I have been thinking that it would
be better for you if you did not come here so
often during the next three weeks."

Never mind me. I know I am laying up
more pain for myself in the future ; but I have
counted the cost, Sybil, and the pleasure outweighs
the pain."

But it is not only for you," she said,
hesitatingly ; " it is for everyone concerned ;
better, in fact, for Grisel," she added, in
desperation.

Reggie was silent a moment, then :

"Thank you for telling me this; I shall come
as seldom as possible," he said.

You are sure you are not angry with me,
Le Gris ? Long ago you know what we all
hoped for ; but, as things now are, it is better
that you should keep away ; and you are sure
you do not think me unkind .'*"

Unkind I No. You and I have always been
friends. It was good of you to speak. I thought
I was only bringing danger on myself, and I
took the risk of that."

I do not think it is exactly danger for
her. Perhaps it is only my stupidity which

makes mountains of mole-hills ; only it cannot

I

do any harm to stay away just for three
weeks."

So Reggie was dismissed from the Manor for
three weeks only. He supposed he would be therewith
danger to no one on Grisel's wedding day.

Fortunately, or unfortunately, his father was
not so well again, and he had not much time
for self-grievance.

Grisel was much surprised and perplexed at
Reggie's continued absence. She did not say
much about it. She knew his father was ill,
and yet she grudged losing him for the last few
weeks. She had never dared to question herself
closely regarding the revelation which had almost
come to her when she saw Reggie thrown down,
and, as she thought, killed. She was hardly
conscious of how jealously she watched against
any reference to it in her own mind ; and, for
the few days immediately following the accident,
she was able for so little exertion, and went
about so listless and weary, so unlike her usual
self, that Jack, whose holiday was drawing to
a close, gave up all other engagements to be

constantly with her, giving her but little time
to read her feelings aright.

It was well perhaps ; who can answer such
things ? Never, in all the four years that Jack
had been engaged to her, had she been half as
lovable in his eyes as now, when suddenly she
had become so much more dependent upon him.
She was entwining herself more and more round
his heart, and since his talk with Lenore a
desperate longing had seized on him for their
speedy marriage. Grisel, she had said, would
teach him the higher life ; her child-like faith
would lead him onwards in paths which he had
not yet trod.

He ventured to say something of this to Grisel
herself. It was the evening before he returned
to town, and she had slipped away from the
general chatter and noise going on in the
drawing-room, where Philip, having found an
old cornet, was trying to coax music out of it,
and was soothing her aching head and restlessness
as her hands wandered listlessly over the
keys of the schoolroom piano.

Has Romney Manor ever yet been described ?
A large two-storied house, with quaint Elizabethan
oak front, and all the principal rooms
on the ground floor, oak lined and floored, in
keeping with the facade.

A very long, straight avenue was the usual
approach ; but winding among the woods and
rolling park came another and smaller entrance,
the shortest cut to Bramleigh, and used only, asa
rule, by the Mainwarings ; this latter passed
close beside the schoolroom window, which, like
the rest of the rooms, opened directly on the
lawn.

And it was to the schoolroom that Grisel had
fled, with the strange, unaccountable sadness
hanging over her. It was late, very nearly
eleven o'clock ; daylight had gone, and was
replaced by a soft, green light, which made the
spruce firs stand out black and feathery against
the sky — like hearse plumes, thought Grisel ;
and then she smiled at her own morbid thoughts,
and played on softly to herself, forgetting her
weariness and vexation as the exquisite chords

and harmonies of the old Latin hymns thrilled
through her.

Then in the stillness she began to sing. The
room was far from the others ; no one would
be disturbed. Her voice rose and fell full of
richness and purity, filling the otherwise empty
room. She was singing as no one had ever
heard her sing, with a passionate feeling that
surprised herself. What were the words ? Only
one of her favourite hymns, which she had
begun unconsciously :

"E'en though it be a cross that raised me,
Still all my song shall be, nearer, my God, to Thee !

Nearer to Thee !"

Jack had left the drawing-room soon after her
disappearance ; he had guessed where she had
flown, and followed her. Now he stood spellbound,
listening to her voice — Grisel's voice ashe
had never heard it before, when over andover
again she had sung to him from her
quaint collection of brightly-coloured scraps ;
but her rendering of sacred music was something
new to him. He and she had rarely spoken on

graver subjects ; she, because she thought him
so much better and older and above her in
everything that she was shy of introducing the
topic, and Jack had not thought of doing so
himself. He had looked on her as a child
whose life was so pure and bright that religion
came to her as unconsciously as the air she
breathed ; he was startled at finding in her the
soul-thrilling power which prayed for pain even,
if so she could reach to higher things.

Of the two women he had known and loved
during his life, both he discovered were actuated
by the same ruling principle. Yes, Lenore was
right ! Grisel was mortal enough to understand
and sympathise with his hitherto loveless life.

Grisel sang on unconscious of her audience, and
he stood listening and waiting until she should
cease ; but he must have made some sound at
last, for Grisel stopped suddenly and turned
round.

I thought I was alone," she said. " Have you
been here longs"

No, not long. You are not going to stop

because I have come ? I will go again, Grisettc,
if you wish it."

She had risen from the piano and crossed the
room to the open door. .

I am not going to sing again, Jack, but do not
go away. Come out on the terrace ; it is such a
perfect evening, and it is cooler than in-doors."

He followed her out into the starlight, and
stood beside her as she found a seat in an old
oak niche under the window. She sat with her
hands clasped across her knee — a small white
figure, and her profile stood out clearly against
the background of the evening sky.

"Are you better to-night, Grisette?" he asked
at last.

I suppose so ; there is really nothing the
matter with me!"

You may say that, child, but you are not like
yourself just now. I never before heard you sing
as you were doing when 1 caught you without
your knowledge. What have you got to do with
such earth-weary feelings — you - whose life ought
to be continual sunshine'"

The sunshine has gone out of my life lately ;
but do not mind, Jack dear, it will all come back
again soon. Perhaps I have too little to do ; ina
few weeks my hands will be very full of
business !"

She looked up at him as she spoke, and smiled ;
but he was gazing away past her, and did not
seem to have heard the latter half of her speech.
He turned suddenly at last, and in the dim light
she could see how eager and anxious he was for
the reply to his question.

Grisel, why did you sing those words as I
entered ?"

"What words?" she asked.

"e'en though it be a cross that raised me.'
What do you know of crosses or pain?"

Did I sing them .? Ah yes, I remember.
They are favourite words of mine," she said,
dreamily.

I might make them mine, Grisette dearest ;
but you, such thoughts are not for your pure
life!"

Jack, you who are so good, so far above mein

everything, I always feel so small beside you,
and try continually to improve a little to be fit
for you."

"To be fit for you!" Her words startled him.
Why would she look up to him so, putting him
on a pedestal, when he longed to learn from her ?
Was their life to be god and worshipper, and
not " Come, fellow-being, love and work with
me" ? He knew he was no demi-god even. If
she could look back over the history of the past
ten years, how she would cover her eyes and
shudder! Others might not have called it a
much-stained page, but he, standing there beside
her girlish innocence, felt the smallest sins rise in
judgment against him.

She wondered at his long silence ; she continued
her last sentence as if there had been no
pause.

However, Jack, surely in a few years, being
constantly with you, you will be able to make
something of me."

She spoke more lightly, trying to dispel the
cloud which rested on his brow.

You must not speak so, Grisette ; you do not
know what you say." He spoke with passionate
eagerness. " It is not I who must teach, but
must learn. You know nothing of my real self;
you would be shocked, stunned, if you could look
into my past. You say you are trying to mould
your life to be fit for me, when in reality you
should draw closer round you the garments of
your spotless womanhood that they might not
be soiled as I went by!" He stopped, and she
in her wonderment had risen to her feet.

What do you mean .?" she asked. " I can
never believe anything bad of you. You are
dreaming. Jack ; you are trying to startle me.
But, if in truth you are as bad as you say, weare
all wicked, you know." Then she added,
reverently, " I need not tell you where we ought
to take all our badness and blackness and lay
it at His feet. There is God!"

"But if I do not believe in Him, Grisel .? If
religion is but an empty shell to me, the shell
forming the covering to hang my morality and
respectability upon, but inside no life, all void.

desolate, and the moan sounding in the emptiness
as the voice of the sea, a continual unrest?"

She had started back when he first began
to speak, and looked at him with wondering
eyes.

"Do I frighten you, my darling?" he said,
putting his arm round her and drawing her close
to his side. " I am no worse than many others,
Grisette. Don't you pity me ? My mother died
when I was born, and there was no one to teach
me the religion you love. How can I believe,
unless 7(92/ will teach me?"

Oh, that will never do ! Sybil must tell you
all about it. Jack. I am so stupid, I never could
make it all clear to you. She is so good ; better
than anyone I know. I could not teach you.
I dare not do it !"

She had disengaged herself from his arms in
her earnest pleading, and he let her go — despair
chilling him through and through.

If you cannot make me believe, Grisette, I
must give it up. I suppose I shall get through
what is left of this life fairly well, as until now

I have succeeded in doing ; and for the next
world, let that wait. Who knows if there is
one?"

He saw the tears trembling on her eyelashes,
and her white, sorrowful face looked wistful and
pleading as she drew a step nearer to him and
laid her hand on his arm.

Have I hurt you, Jack ? I did not mean todo
so ; but if you are content with what I can
tell you I will do my best, and you must promise
never, never to speak again as you did just now,
as you know you do not believe what you said.
Will this satisfy you ?"

Oh, Grisette, my darling, if you knew what a
woman's love can do, you would not despair.
Such love can save a soul !"

He had taken her in his arms, and held her as
if he would never let her go.

What is such love ? have I ever felt it .''" she
exclaimed, feebly ; but he stopped her words
with kisses, and she stood passive and unresisting,
overwhelmed by the strength of his feeling.

So they remained both silent, and in the silence

a sound broke on the air. Both heard it, and
forgot themselves in listening.

It is coming nearer," said Grisel ; " who can
it be at this hour ? it is nearly twelve o'clock."

Some one from Bramleigh," Jack said, with a
presentiment of coming sorrow rising in him.

Distinctly could be heard the sharp, rapid trot
of a horse, and the roll of wheels.

It must be Reggie ; no one drives at such a
pace as he does. What can be the matters"

They stood listening ; they were within the
doorway ; and a moment after, something drove
quickly past. Grisel's heart stood still, for she
had recognised the dogcart as Reggie's.

A moment after, the loud peal of the hall-door
bell echoed through the house, startling the
inmates, and bringing them from different parts
to see what had happened.

The drawing-room party were already collected
when Grisel and Jack joined them, and this was
what they saw : Mr. Romney had retired to his
room, and now from the unexpected summons
had re-emerged in dressing gown and slippers.

Around him were gathered the quintette who
had been cornet-practising, and from various
unnamed doors heads were appearing to satisfy
their curiosity.

The door was being unbarred, having been
closed for the night, and as the rattling chain fell
from the lock, Reggie Mainwaring sprang into
the hall, impatient at even the momentary
delay.

"Where is La Grise?" he said, looking round.
My father is worse, and calls continually for
her. Will you spare her to us, Mr. Romney ?
I will bring her safely back tomorrow, and
nothing else will satisfy him."

Of course, of course. Grisel, get ready
directly ; and, Reggie, come and have some wine
and water while she wraps herself up. Tell me
of your father. When did this change comes"

Some few hours ago. I was most unwilling
to disturb you all, but nothing else will satisfy
him, and my mother thought you would understand
our anxiety."

A few minutes elapsed before Grisel reappeared.

She was very quiet, and looked a strange little
figure in the all-enveloping cloak in which Sybil
had wrapped her.

I am quite ready now, Le Gris. We had
better go at once."

She kissed her father and sisters, and Jack
carefully wrapped the rug round her as Reggie
took the driver's seat. She bent down as they
were starting, and held out her hand.

Jack," she said, " you will not go tomorrow ;
you must wait till I come back."

I will wait, Grisette. Do not hurry back forme
; you are in good hands."

I will look well after her, Hunt ; and you
will have her returned to you tomorrow."

That was all. A crack of the whip, and they
were off as rapidly as the dogcart had come.

The home party dispersed to their rooms with
a strange sense of unreality about it all.

CHAPTER X.

THE TRUTH AT LAST.
Y T was a strange drive for both Reggie and
Grisel — neither spoke for some time. She
supposed he was silent from anxiety about his
father ; she did not Hke to disturb him with
useless questions, so she relapsed into thought.
The scene of the evening occupied her mind.
She was overwhelmed with what her lover had
told her ; she felt weak, childish, helpless before
such unbelief. And he had said, " Such love
can save a soul." Her love ! It was impossible !
She began to examine into the strength of
her love, to test it with imaginary trials. She
shivered as she found how little it would stand.
I would do almost anything for him because
he loves me so, but I wish "

The wish was never expressed in thought
even ; they had turned in at the Bramleigh
Hall gates, and the gravel crunched under the
wheels. At the sound of their return, hurrying
lights were seen in the passages ; the inmates
were on the alert.

You will find my father much changed, La
Grise." They were the first words either had
spoken. " His memory has failed completely,
and we had hoped that his wish to see you
would have passed away like similar fancies ;
but, as his mind became clearer, this evening he
recurred again and again to his desire that you
should be sent for."

Dear Sir Roger ! I have not seen him for
so many months, and at one time I was continually
with him. I am glad you came for me,
Le Gris. I would do anything for your father
and mother."

Yes, La Grise, he always looked on you asa
daughter. I suppose he wished to see you
once more ; he has not said anything to lead
us to any other conclusion."

K

Is he so ill as that ?" Grisel's voice was
awe-struck. " Oh ! he must get well again !"

I fear not, Grisette. My father is eighty
years of age. He is five-and-twenty years older
than my mother."

Poor Lady Mainwaring ! I am sorry for
her."

You must comfort her, La Grise. She is
dreadfully distressed. The doctors told her this
evening that there was no hope of my father's
recovery ; it is a question only of hours."

They had drawn up at the side door, that
their arrival might not disturb the sufferer.
Reggie lifted Grisel carefully down, and led her
into the hall, where the housekeeper was waiting
to see that she was properly cared for,

How is Sir Roger now ?" Reggie asked.

Much the same, sir. Her ladyship is with
him. She said Miss Romney was to have some
tea after her drive."

Oh ! I do not wish any tea, thank you. I
would rather go to Sir Roger."

La Grise, you must go with Mrs. Newton and

have something to eat. You know I promised
to take care of you."

Reggie spoke authoritatively, and Grisel obeyed
at once. She was taken into Lady Mainwaring's
private sitting-room, and Mrs. Newton stood by
while she ate a biscuit and drank the tea, telling
her all the time how thankful everyone was that
she had come ; that they had been saying
perhaps, since she was engaged to another
gentleman, she might not care so much about
it at all ; but somehow she had been sure all
the time they were speaking that Miss Grisel
was certain to come, especially when Mr.
Reginald had gone for her himself. As she
stopped speaking, Reggie himself appeared.

Can you come now. La Grise ? My father
has been asleep, and is awake again. He sleeps
so much, it is better that you should come to
him at once."

She rose and followed him, without a word,
up the dimly-lighted staircase, with a strange
hush pervading the air. Reggie gently turned
the handle of a door, and she found herself

in Sir Roger's dressing-room. The door of the
adjoining room stood open, and, at the sound
of their entrance, Lady Mainwaring came out
from the inner apartment. She was very pale
and worn-looking from long watching ; dark
shadows were under her eyes, which were bright
and shining with excitement.

This is good of you, little Grisel," she said,
taking the girl's face between her hands and
kissing her on the forehead. " Dear Sir Roger
has been asking for you continually ; he will be
satisfied now you are here. He is very weak,
and will perhaps hardly know you at first,"
she added, as she led the way into the sickroom.


Grisel had never seen great sickness before ;
she had never been in a room with one even
near to his last journey. She drew back, half
in awe, as Lady Mainwaring pushed aside the
curtains of the bed.

But there was nothing there to fear ; all so
peaceful, a gentle sleeping away.

The old man was propped up with pillows to

alleviate his oppressed breathing ; his eyes were
closed, and, save for the anxiety printed on the
faces of those watching, there was nothing to
tell that his course was nearly run.

Grisel turned involuntarily to Reggie, begging
him with her eyes to keep beside her ; all was
strange and solemn to her, and this, coming after
the exciting scene she had previously passed
through, was almost too much for her composure.


There was silence in the room, save for the
heavy breathing of the sufferer ; waiting was
written on the faces and in the attitudes of
those beside the bed. Lady Mainwaring, with
eyes bent only on her husband, and Reggie,
watching Grisel, thinking that if things had
been as he once dreamed, she would have been
standing there, as now. Sir Roger's daughter,
and his wife. Sir Roger opened his eyes. They
wandered sightlessly round the room ; a gleam
of recognition lighted up his face as they rested
a moment on his wife.

"Grisel, little Grisel; has she come yet.''"

The tones were feeble, the accent full of
questioning anxiety. "Has little Grisel come?"

I am here, dear Sir Roger. Do not you
see me, close beside you ?"

At the sound of her voice he slowly turned
his head, and she took one of the weary, inclined
hands in her own. She bent low over the
bed till her face came near to him.

Do you know me now, dear Sir Roger ?
Here I am, standing beside Reggie."

A smile hovered round his lips.

That is right, beside Reggie, where you ought
to be, my child. God bless you both. Yes, I
am going very soon — eighty years of a happy
life — and now it is but right that the old —
should — make — way — for — the — young."

His eyes closed ; he had dozed off again.
Reggie glanced at Grisel. She stood silent ;
she had not been conscious of how Sir Roger's
words might be construed.

Half-an-hour passed away without any change,
save the gradual sinking of strength. They
thought he would probably not speak again ;

but, unexpectedly, came a rally. He took some
nourishment, and seemed anxious to say something.


They had to bend low to hear his words.

Reggie, Grisel, come close to me," he whispered.


Then, suddenly, there was an accession of
strength, and his words were heard clearly by all.

I wanted to bless you both. Grisel, you
will make him a good wife ; remember, he is
my only child."

Grisel turned deadly white, but did not move
from where she stood. Reggie came closer to
her, and whispered low and eagerly —

Forgive us, La Grise. We knew nothing of
this."

She held out her hand in recognition of what
he had said, but dared not turn and meet his
pleading eyes. He took the hand she held out
to him, and so, hand in hand, they stood. Sir
Roger raised his and laid it on theirs. Reggie
felt Grisel suddenly try to withdraw hers from
his grasp. She dreaded what was coming.

Do not disturb his last moments," pleadingly
whispered Reggie. " It can make no difference
to us, La Grise, and it will satisfy him."

She made no further opposition, and Lady
Mainwaring thanked her silently. Then slowly
and solemnly in the chamber of death came the
old man's blessing, pronounced upon them as
man and wife ; and, as the words fell on her
ear, Grisel at last knew the truth — knew that
she loved Reggie as she had never loved before,
and that day fortnight was her wedding-day.

The words of blessing were scarcely ended,
when a change came over Sir Roger's face. He
turned to his wife, his hand still resting on the
clasped hands of Le Oris and La Grise ; but
for her who had been his everything for nearly
thirty years was reserved the last look, the last
smile.

He is going," said the nurse.

Oh ! take me away ; I cannot bear it, Le
Gris." It was Grisel who spoke ; she could
hold up no longer.

Reggie led her away to the room which had

been prepared for her ; and there, white and
trembling, she sank into a chair.

Can you ever forgive us, La Grise, for all
this pain we have brought upon you ?"

She looked up at him through her tear-filled
eyes, and tried to smile forgiveness. Her voice
was steadied with difficulty as she answered —

You must go back to your father, Le Gris.
Never mind me."

Will my sister say she forgives me ? I cannot
leave her without."

I forgive," she said faintly, and raised her
eyes to his, so full of love, so brimming over
with their own sad secret, that he might have
read aright ; but he was so sure that he had
never been more to her than companion and
friend, that he only read in them sorrow and
sympathy for them all. He could not bear to
leave her when he longed to take her in his
arms and comfort her, and tell her that his
father's words were but his own soul's desire ;
and yet his place was at his mother's side, by
his father's deathbed.

He must go. He yielded to temptation and
kissed her on the brow — no lover's kiss ; it rested
there but a moment, and with it Reggie had
gone.

Grisel never moved from where he had left
her, alone in the dawn-lighted room to face the
truth at last. His kiss had brought the crimson
to her neck and brow. The knowledge of what
he had become to her overwhelmed her with its
power ; it broke from her at last in a low wail
of bitterness.

What have I done, what have I done ? Why-did
I ever come here to-night ? Why did you
let me come. Jack ? I would never have known,
never have found out this dreadful thing that I
have done. How could I love him when he does
not care for me ? Oh ! Jack, why did you not
make me love you more ? Now I know what
you meant. * Such love could save a soul.' This
burning, bitter pain that might have been so
sweet, must be stamped out at once. No one
must ever find out how wrong I have been, and
I meant no harm. I think I must have loved

him always, and it was so much part of me that
I never found it out. Oh ! Jack, my poor Jack,
you shall never drag this from me. I will be
such a good wife to you, and in time you will
teach me to forget."

She ceased her complaint, and sat silent and
weary. The summer morn was forcing its way
through the curtains, the air was broken by the
song of birds. She did not know how time had
passed. There was a sound in the house ; all
must be over. No one would come to her now.
She took off her things and slipped sadly to
bed.

A TRYING DAY.
W DULL, grey morning had succeeded the
perfect evening, leaden clouds covered the
sky, and a soft rain was steadily falling.

Sybil had risen early, the events of the
previous day had made her sleepless, and now
she was ready long before the rest of the household
were awake.

She threw up her window, and the smell of
the damp, thirsty earth filled her room. Things
were bending under their weight of moisture.
When does this world seem so thoroughly to
rejoice as when the windows of heaven open
after a long run of dry weather }

Sybil looked across the woods at the chimneys
of Bramleigh just shown above the trees. The

smoke curled blue and lazily into the still air,
unable to dispel itself. It set her musing and
moralising. The time slipped past, sounds were
beginning to stir in the house, and a gentle
knock came to the door. She thought it was
the servant coming to awaken her, and did not
turn her head.

Sybil, it 's me," and the weary, dripping figure
of Grisel had entered the room.

Sybil started to her feet.

Grisette, child, what has brought you?"

Don't be angry with me, Syb dear. I was
so lonely, so unhappy, I could not help it."

And then the pent-up floods broke out, and
Grisel cried as if her heart were breaking.

Sybil did not speak. She took off Grisel's
hat and cloak, she soothed her like a child, and
then, leaving her for a few minutes, she returned
with something for her to eat and drink. She
watched while Grisel forced herself to swallow
a few mouthfuls. Gradually her sobs were at
longer intervals, and at last she looked up
through her tears and smiled. When she had

finished, Sybil took the plate and cup from her

hand, and, drawing her chair beside her at the

window, waited. Grisel spoke at last

"He is dead, Sybil. I almost saw him die!"
How glad you must be you went, Grisette."
Am I ? I hardly think so. I did no good."
Then came a pause. It was Grisel who again

broke the silence.

I have not seen Lady Mainwaring since ; I

came away before anyone was up ; nobody knew

I was going."

Except Le Gris."

Le Gris did not know either ; no one knew,

Sybil. I walked here, it is only two miles ; and

I could not stay, it was so dreadful."

But, darling, it was over. It would have

been better if you had waited till Le Gris drove

you here."

"I couldn't, Sybil. They will not mind!"

I am afraid they will think it strange you

left without their knowledge." Sybil spoke very

gently.

Oh no, they will understand ; I think they

would expect it. If you had been me, you would
have done the same, Sybil ; but I cannot tell
you why."

Very well, darling ; I am sure it is all right."
Then they talked on in low voices about the
old man who was dead. Grisel had always been
to him as a daughter, his death was a personal
sorrow to her, and Sybil encouraged her to
speak, but she did not revert to the cause of
her sudden flight from Bramleigh. Sybil was
puzzled, but wisely refrained from alluding again
to the subject ; she knew that in all probability
she would receive a solution in some way soon.
She persuaded Grisel to lie down, and Grisel
was only too glad to defer the evil day, if only
by a few hours ; she dreaded meeting them all,
and much repented now having asked Jack to
wait till she returned. How could she face him
with her guilty secret ? In a fortnight she would
have grown more used to it.

Much surprise was evinced at the breakfast
table when Sybil broke the news that Grisel
had returned and Sir Roger was dead.

How did she come ? Did she walk, or did
Reggie drive her ?" asked a chorus of voices.

She walked," Sybil answered from her place
behind the tea-urn. " The child was lonely, and
could bear it no longer ; I have persuaded her
to rest for a few hours. Jack, you will not
leave till tomorrow, I hope?"

It depends on the post-bag," he said ; " but
I hope not."

"After all, not a very long separation,"
remarked Philip. " Cheer up, old boy. Remember
yesterday fortnight."

I fear Sir Roger's death will be a great
grief to Grisette," Jack answered, gravely.

Lovers are a queer set," Philip went on. " I
suggested a pleasant anticipation, and he can
think of nothing but gloomy fears for Grisette."

I suppose it is a natural thought under the
circumstances," said Augusta.

"Ah yes, I forgot the circumstances. He is
not to be judged by ordinary rules of
humanity."

As far as I am aware, Jack is not the only

one at table to be treated leniently because of
circumstances," Mr. Romney remarked, drily,
rising from the table and taking with him his
spectacles and bundle of newspapers. While the
laugh turned against Philip, Mr. Romney paused
on his way to the study.

I suppose the funeral will be within the
week," he said. " Will you see that I have a
crepe hat-band, Sybil," and then he disappeared
for his daily interview with his head man on
the home farm.

A calm came over those left behind. The
mention of the funeral had recalled the sad
events of the night, and they felt that their
mirth had been ill-timed.

They talked of probabilities resulting from Sir
Roger's death, and discussed the subject of the
will, as to what he had to leave, and where and
to whom he would have left it.

They were in the middle of the discussion when
a servant entered with a note for Sybil.

Sir Reginald's groom is waiting for an answer,"
he said.

L

How strange it sounds ! I shall never remember
to call Le Gris Sir Reginald," Bryde
remarked, and Sybil left the room to answer
the note. The rest of the party dispersed to
their various duties, Augusta linking her arm into
Bryde's and carrying her off for a long gossip.

"Aren't you coming to help me to smoke,
Bridget .?"

Bryde looked round wistfully.

Not yet, Philip," answered Augusta ; " I require
her advice about various things."

Never mind, Bryde ; go and discuss. I shall
be smoking in the garden for several hours."

I wish you did not give way so much to that
abominable habit. You men are fit for nothing
unless you are smoking."

Gently, gently, Gus ; don't teach Bryde to
exaggerate. Besides, I dare say you have some
pet luxury which you would not give up."

Bryde marched Augusta away from farther
discussion.

Reggie's note had been one of inquiry about
Grisel ; he was unable to be the bearer of it.

owing to having to make all arrangements. His
mother and he had been much distressed at
Grisel's return to the Manor. At the end of
it, he said he would in all probability be at the
Manor in the afternoon ; would Sybil grant him
a private interview ?

The rain continued steadily all day, and none
of the ladies left the house. Grisel had fallen
asleep, and orders were given that she was not
to be disturbed. The men had to content themselves
with cigars in the hothouses, and a rat-hunt
at the courtyard. Towards afternoon, they
took to knocking about the balls in the billiard
room. The Jerninghams, Bryde, and Jack were
all collected there. Sybil was in the drawing-room
expecting Reggie. She had several letters
to write, and was not sorry for the excuse of
being alone. It was nearly five o'clock before
she was interrupted ; she was so intent on her
writing, that she did not hear Reggie's step on
the gravel, and he had entered the room by
the glass door before she was aware of his
presence.

She rose from the table, going forward to meet
him with words of sympathy on her lips for the
loss he had sustained, but he hardly listened to
what she said at first.

"You did not blame us, Sybil?" he exclaimed,
as soon as she had ceased speaking. " It was
not our fault ; she left the house without our
knowledge."

She told me so ; she took all blame on herself.
I think she was overwrought, poor child.
She fell asleep soon after she came home, and
has not yet awakened. Of course, we did not
blame you ; but will not you sit down ? I wish
to hear all about Lady Mainwaring and your
dear father's death. Do not fear interruption ;
the others are all in the billiard room, and will
not disturb us."

He seated himself as desired ; he seemed preoccupied,
and only spoke when Sybil addressed
him.

Was it sudden at the end ? I hope he did
not suffer ?"

No ; no suffering. Yes, comparatively speaking,

it was sudden. There had been no decided
change for the worse until the afternoon."

"How terrible for poor Lady Mainwaring!"

Yes, indeed. After eight-and-twenty years of
a happy married life, the separation must be a
terrible wrench."

"What a comfort it is that you are at home,
Le Gris!"

I am very thankful," he said. " She has
quite broken down to-day. Her health has been
much tried with the long watching and anxiety ;
as soon as she can be moved, I will take her
away for change."

I suppose it is too soon to have formed any
plans .''" Sybil said, interrogatively.

Nothing definite yet. I spoke to her this
morning of shutting up Bramleigh and going
abroad for a year. I shall have, at any rate,
to leave the army."

You will dislike that very much, I fear."

"I shall miss regular occupation at first, but
I could not go out to India again and leave
my mother when there is no necessity for it ina

money point of view ; besides, Bramleigh is an
estate which requires a great deal of time bestowed
upon it. My father, up to the last few years
of his life, saw into everything himself; latterly
we had to get a steward, but he is not altogether
satisfactory, and so I propose setting to work
myself. One will feel one is at least trying todo
some little good in the world by looking
after one's tenantry."

Then, also, think of your mother."

Yes ; I do not forget my poor mother ; but
Sybil," he added, half-eagerly, half-sorrowfully,
"is it a heartless thi.ig to say it is hard
for a man to make his mother his chief
interest ?"

I understand you, Reggie ; but never mind
the hardness. Remember it is always something
given you to do."

I suppose so," he answered, " yet one longs
at times that things might be otherwise. However,
in the meanwhile, we shall not return to
Bramleigh for a year. I think the foreign plan
is decidedly the best in every way. I do not

think I could meet La Grise again after last
night."

I think it is as well, perhaps, that you
should not meet till after her marriage."

Yes," he answered, thoughtfully ; then, after
a pause, "I suppose she told you all?"

I hardly think she did, Le Gris ; she did
not seem inclined to speak, and I did not ask
her."

Do you remember, Sybil, about ten days ago,
begging me to keep away from you all, not only
on my own account, but because there might
also be danger for her?"

Yes, I remember ; I have no reason since
for supposing I was right in what I did ; but,
Reggie, it could do no possible harm."

It was in kindness you did it, Sybil, and
you have probably saved me some pain ; but
now I know that I might have been here everyday
without danger to her. If you had seen
her as I saw her last night, you would think
as I do. She will not mind me telling you ;
but just before my dear father died, he became

conscious for some little while, and almost the
first words he uttered were, *' Grisel, you will
make him a good wife."

'poor Grisette! What did she do?"

Nothing ; she showed no apparent feeling.
Only for a moment, as my father laid his hand
on ours, she offered some slight resistance ; and
then he gave us his blessing as he would have
done had she been my wife. Do not judge
hardly," he said, imploringly ; " I could not bear
to disturb his last moments, and it could make
no difference to her. I felt to the bottom of
my soul what it might have been, but she has
forgiven me."

"Have you seen her alone since*" Sybil
asked.

Yes ; I took her from the room before my
father died, but she did not seem to understand
all that had passed ; her whole thoughts were
centred on my mother and myself, her one
desire that I should go back to my father and
not mind her ; so I left her, and in the morning
we found she had gone."

They both sat silent for some little time.
Sybil was beginning to read her sister's flight
aright, and her whole being was filled with
dismay at the turn things were taking.

There were sounds in the passage, the rain
had cleared off, and the billiard party were
going for a walk. Some time after, the Jennings
and Bryde passed the window ; Jack was
not with them.

The voices of the trio broke upon the silence
which had fallen on Reggie and Sybil ; he rose
to his feet and held out his hand.

Well," he said, '' I suppose I must say goodbye.
We shall start immediately after the
funeral, so I shall not be here again. Give all
kind messages from me to your sisters ; I shall
see Mr. Romney again at the funeral."

Good-bye, Reggie, I cannot tell how I feel
for you, but you must try and forget all about
us ; we have not brought you much brightness."


Do not say that ; by far the happiest days
of my life I have spent here ; they will ever

bring back to me thoughts of all the kindness
I have met with from you all."

Perhaps," he continued, " it is but a foolish
surmise, but I have often wondered if I had
never gone to India whether I could have made
her love me. In the old days I was not
wholly indifferent to her, at least I thought so ;
but she heard my father's words unmoved last
night. If I had ever been more to her than
now, surely she must have given some sign ;
and, Sybil, I am mad enough, fool enough, to
love Grisette still. Thank God, she will never
know it !"

And with that he was gone.

FOR THE SECOND TIME.
(some half-hour previously Jack had left the
billiard room. He thought he heard steps
in Grisel's room, which was immediately above
them. She would in all likelihood go at once
to the drawing - room. Some unexplained
instinct suggested to him that she ought to be
warned that Sybil was not alone.

He waited for some minutes in the hall.
There was no further sound ; he must have
been mistaken. But no ; there was the cautious
opening and shutting of a door, and then a
quick, noiseless step was heard. It approached,
and Grisel appeared with her hat on. She
started as she saw Jack.

I thought you were all gone out," she said.

I waited for you, Grisette. Do you wish
to go alone, or may I come with you ?"

I am only going as far as the garden. If
you would like a walk, do not wait for me,
Jack."

*' I would rather come with you. Besides, you
are far too white-faced a little mortal to go
out alone. I must come and take care of
you."

They passed silently out of the house and
along the yew-hedged walks side by side. But
neither spoke. Grisel walked wearily. Jack
noticed it, and drew her hand within his arm.
An almost imperceptible tremor passed through
her. He felt it, and turned anxiously to her.

You are utterly knocked up, my darling.
I wish I had never let you go last night."

Oh, Jack, if you had only said no ! I should
have been so thankful !"

He looked surprised at her vehemence.

If I had had any idea that you were acting
contrary to your wishes, I should have interfered.

But, darling, I thought you would wish to go.
Reggie ought to have been more considerate."

*' It was not his fault. Oh no ! It was no
one's fault. But, Jack, do not speak of it again.
I cannot even bear to think of it."

Gradually, he tried to draw her thoughts away
from the events of the past night, wishing to
interest her in their wedding tour. Grisel had
never been abroad. They had spent many happy
hours in planning their tour, what to see and
what to miss ; but now all the plans failed to
interest her. It evidently required an effort
to concentrate her thoughts at all on what Jack
was saying.

He was perplexed and distressed, he did not
know how to deal with her. All his attempts
were fruitless ; he desisted at last, and left her
in silence.

So they paced up and down the garden walks.
Everything was dripping from the rain, and heavy,
silver-lined clouds were hanging about. Grisel
felt the day in keeping with her own sad
thoughts. She wondered at the sun making

such efforts to come out. Why did it not leave
her surrounded with darkness and gloom ? The
rain was only now clearing off the low-lying
country, and across the heavy masses of vapour
a rainbow appeared — a brilliant bow of colour
on the sky. Grisel noted it, and tears filled her
eyes. She read in it only cruel irony, which
bid her hope ; and Jack noted it also, and from
out the stories of his childhood rose the Bible
narrative of the sign.

They come to all, those back-goings into the
first years, when everything was so easily believed
in perfect simplicity. They come with a softening
influence, suggesting what the man was and
what he has become.

Even the most hardened have these times of
retrospect ; much more Jack, who was so utterly
dissatisfied with his present existence. Poor
fellow ! His life had been one long tossing on
a very restless sea ; and for the moment, as he
saw the message of hope spanning the sky, ashe
felt the home influence of his surroundings,
as he dreamt of the love and sympathy which

were so soon to be his, who shall wonder at his
mind being filled with the sense that his happiness
had come at last ? He turned to Grisel with
the longing that she could read his thoughts
aright.

It is going to rain again," she said ; " sunshine
only comes in gleams."

She spoke truth. The clouds were closing in,
and the momentary brightness was passing away.
Heavy drops of rain began to fall, and they
turned their steps in the direction of the house.

Both were occupied with their own thoughts.
Neither noticed that the drawing-room window
was open, nor did they heed the murmur of voices
which came to them from the room.

Jack had not told Grisel that Reggie was with
Sybil. All memory of it had passed from his
mind, or he would not so willingly have guided
her by the path he did. And those within were
unconscious how, in the earnest and heat of
their talk, their voices had risen above the level
of their usual tones.

Slowly along the path came Jack and Grisel ;

they were nearly at the open window now.
Grisel started as Reggie's voice caught her ear ;
involuntarily they advanced another yard, and
then came the fatal words, which at once and
for ever dispelled Jack's dream.

Both heard Le Gris's wild tones ; both stood
rooted to the spot, as they rang distinct and
clear across the air.

And, Sybil, I am fool enough, mad enough,
to love Grisette still. Thank God, she will
never know it !"

A moment's awful silence, in which their hearts
stood still ; then came the slam of the door as
Reggie left the room. It woke them from their
trance ; it told Grisel that he whom she loved
loved her, and was gone. She forgot Jack, who
stood at her side ; forgot all but the glad words
she had heard, bringing to her such a wonderful
vista of happiness.

Le Gris, I am here!" she cried.

But no voice answered. Reggie was beyond
reach of her call ; he had left the house, and
for a year.

And in the silence which followed, Grisel knew
what she had done ; knew that she had betrayed
her secret. Before Jack could stop her, she had
fled ; fled and hidden herself away in the Four
Aunts Gallery, and there, seated under the shadow
of her unhappy ancestress, she tried to understand
what had happened.

Was it joy or sorrow which broke from her
in those heartrending sobs ? She could not tell.
But this she knew, her whole being was glowing
with thankfulness that Reggie loved her. She
felt that she could act out her part now, content
with the knowledge she had gained. It seemed
such happiness, after the last twenty-four hours'
misery ; it did not at the first strike her how
much sweeter it might have been.

Then, disentangling itself from out her thoughts,
came the remembrance of the scene she had
just passed through. Would it be so easy to
hide all from her future husband, or had she
already let him know ? She trembled ; he would
be so angry with her ; in fact, they all would
be angry at what she had done. She looked

round in fear as she heard a step ascending
the staircase ; she could not be mistaken in
the quick, firm tread. She buried her face in
her hands, and waited for what must follow.

He came up to where she sat, and stood therein
silence. He heard her stifled sobs, and no
softening came into the hard, grave lines around
his mouth ; he folded his arms, and gazed down
on her. She was not his to touch and comfort.
The wish even to make her his own had passed
from him as he heard the half confession fall
from her lips, and now nought remained but to
part.

Grisette, I have come to say good-bye, and to
set you free."

Are you very angry with me," she whispered.

Not angry, child ; only sad."

And it is my fault ! Oh, Jack, do try and
forget this — forget what Reggie said. I am so
fond of you, Jack dear ; if you will only forget,
I will still make you a good wife. Try me ;
do!"

You do not know what you are saying, Grisel.

You do not understand the weight of the burden
that you are proposing to take upon your
shoulders."

I think I do," she murmured so low that he
hardly heard the quiet determination of her tones.

Remember," he continued, " it would be no
sharp short struggle, no pain to be passed through
and then lived down, but a daily, nay hourly,
knowledge that you had made a mistake in your
life, not only known to yourself, but aware also
that I knew it too ; and, hardest of all to bear
perhaps, there would ever be recurring a contrasting
of your happiness attained and unattainable."


Grisel sat perfectly still while he spoke. She
did not raise her head to meet his eyes ; she
dreaded to see the pain written in them. When
at last he was silent, she said —

In time, I should forget. Time works
wonders, you know ; and it would be even harder
to live with the knowledge that I had spoilt
your life."

"That you would not do, child. I have my

work to live for ; I will make it my mistress ;
it shall absorb my powers of mind and body.
The monotony of the daily round and advancing
years will bring at least contentment, and the
consciousness that my sad-coloured existence
has not marred your life will be recompense
sufficient,"

He ceased speaking, in wonder at his own
calmness. What had come to him ? Was
it only in word, or that he really did not
care ?

There was none of the maddening pain with
which he had parted from Lenore, none of the
wild longing to defy fate at any price. He had
held Grisel's love in his hand for years, and ashe
was about to taste the cup he had waited for
so long, he had to set it down again untasted,
hardly lingeringly even. He stood before the girl
who was in a fortnight's time to have been his
wife, and went over again in memory their strange
introduction and acquaintance.

Do you remember the spaewife's fable. La
Grise ? It will come true after all. Why did

we not take her warning ? We should have been
saved some pain."

Yes," she answered, and raised her head from
her hands, looking up sadly at the face on the
canvas above her, in its quaint, white satin robe,
the snowy arms and neck gleaming in the darkly-lighted
corridor. " You told me you did not
believe her ; you laughed at my ever repeating
such nonsense ; you said the third generation
broke the spell, and I was so glad to believe
you."

But fate has proved too hard for us, Grisette.
I defied it, and it has come back upon me.
Enough of this. One thing, Grisel, you will find,
not lose, your happiness, as Griselda de Grey
did hers."

"Oh! Jack," she cried, piteously, "do not make
out that I am utterly heartless. You seem to
think that I do not care for the pain you are
suffering ; I am thinking only of you, not of
myself, for now I know what pain love is."

She stood beside him, looking so worn and
thin, so unlike her girlish brightness ; she laid

her hand on his arm, and looked wistfully away
into vacancy.

If you would only trust me!" she said. "I
am sure I could make you happy."

"The thing is absurd, child," he answered,
almost impatiently. " Do you think for a moment
that either of us could so find our happiness ?
No, such can never be. In the future, we may
some day meet as friends. Good-bye, child ;
forget me, and be happy."

He took both her small, quivering hands in
his, and gave her one last kiss of farewell, and
turned away. She hardly realised what had
happened ; she roused herself as his footsteps
echoed in the passage.

"Oh! Jack, is this all?" she cried. "Are you
really leaving me ? Are you not going to trust
me?"

He turned at the sound of her voice, and came
once more to her side.

It is best for all, little Grisel — best that I
should leave you at once. Will you say goodbye,
and let us part as friends .?"

Only friends, Jack ? It seems so commonplace,
so little, after all we have been to each
other."

Grisette, do you not yet know your own
heart, child ? Some one is already much more
to you than I can ever be. Think for a moment
of Le Gris!"

As he saw the colour deepen on her cheek,
and her eyes drop in consciousness of the secret
they would tell, he felt how utterly incapable
he had ever been to rouse in her the love he
craved for. He saw it now, as she stood before
him in all her beauty, with the knowledge of
her love showing itself in every line of her
speaking face. Yes, another had gained what he
desired.

Oh, Grisette," he exclaimed, " if I could only
have made you love me so." He seized both her
hands in a long, close pressure, and in a moment
he was gone.

Sybil was alone in the drawing-room. She
was so engrossed with Reggie's sorrow that she
had hardly heard Grisel's cry ; and now, when

suddenly the door was opened and Jack entered,
looking utterly unlike his usual self, she did not
connect the two in thought.

"What has happened?" she asked, anxiously.
Nothing," he said, " at least nothing that can
signify to anyone but me. Sybil, all is at an
end between us. Grisel and I have come to an
understanding, and I have set her free."
"Free.? What do you mean?"
Had you no idea, Sybil, that I was not first
in your sister's thoughts?"

Sybil did not answer ; her suspicions aroused
only that morning kept her silent.

Then you did know ! Oh, Sybil, was it fair
to me not to have spoken .? Think how close
our marriage had come."

"Do you really mean that all is at an end?"
"All. I leave within an hour. You will probably
never see me again."

He gave her some account of what had passed,
but did not seem to wish to enter on details.
He must see Mr. Romney, he said, and explain
it to him.

You can put all blame on me, Sybil ; say
what you like. I have jilted her perhaps would
sound best, and give the neighbours somewhat
to talk about. They are all to be pitied that
they will miss the excitement of the wedding-day
; it is but fair that they should have some
gossip as amends."

Oh ! Jack, is that fair ? You know how we
must feel this. You have acted generously, nobly.
We must bear the blame."

My shoulders are broad enough. It matters
little to me, either here or there. I care not
for the world's kind judgment. Besides, it will
be but a nine days' talk. Grisel will marry soon,
and then who will trouble their heads about a
simple Jack Hunts

ELDERLY LADIES.

YACK left the room. It wanted but an hour
from the starting of the evening train for
London. He must collect his things if possible
before then. He did not wish to be present at
the family dinner ; he would rather see none of
them again.

But fate decreed otherwise. In the passage he
met Bryde and the Jerninghams just returned
from walking.

Goodness ! Jack, you look as if you had seen
a ghost. What's the matter with you.''"

I am rather in a hurry, Phil ; I am going
up by the night train to town."

*' To town ? " exclaimed all three.

Yes," he said ; " an alteration in my plans
obliges me to leave to-night. I suppose I had
better wish you all good-bye."

His manner was nervous and hurried ; they
shook the proffered hand in silence, and he passed
to his room.

All three looked at one another.

Something 's up," said Philip.

Sybil will probably know," said Bryde. " I
will go and ask her."

She left them, and brother and sister were
alone.

'* Do you remember my warning, Philip ? "

About Reggie Mainwaring ? "

"Yes. I am sure this has something to do
with it."

Augusta slipped away to her room. A knock
came to her door shortly afterwards ; Philip had
followed her.

You are right, Gus ; everything is at an end
between Grisel and Jack."

She was not worthy of him ! I have always
thought it," broke from Augusta impatiently.

Philip looked at her a moment attentively, and
then said, just as he closed the door —

You ought to know, I suppose. You and
he were friends years ago."

Yes, it was truth. Years ago, they had been
friends. Before the days of the Christmas-time
at Hurst, when Augusta first grew up she met
him, and he never knew the impression he had
then made on the high-spirited girl. No other
man had ever stirred the even tenor of her
pulses. When Lenore first came on the scene,
there had been a sharp struggle between pride
and wounded love ; but such womanish folly had
long ago been cured, she thought. She affected
rather to dislike men than otherwise, and still
how strangely the news she had just heard upset
her.

She acted simply on impulse when, shortly
afterwards, on hearing Jack's door open at the
other end of the passage, she met him on his
way downstairs. He started when he saw her,
and seemed surprised at her evident distress.

I wanted to tell you how sorry I am for

■i

you, Mr. Hunt. I couldn't bear to let you go
and say nothing."

Thank you, Miss Jerningham. Can I do
anything for you in town ?''

How can you be so quiet about it all ? If
I were you I should have been miserable, and
oh ! so angry."

Of what use were it ? Such casualties all
come in one's life's work."

You were not always such a stoic, Mr. Hunt.
When I first knew you, years ago, you felt like
other mortals."

Years ago that was. You are right. But
the time since then has taught me philosophy
as the only true good for humanity."

"Was that Miss Fenton's teaching .?" She had
uttered the words by what impulse she knew not.

No," he answered, very quietly. " Lady
Meredith's rule of life is a higher one than
that. Fortunate are they who fall within the
limits of her influence."

I can see nothing different in her from other
women. Give me the secret of her influence."

I hardly know in what it lies ; simply that
she is herself, I think."

Lord Meredith is a man to be envied."

He is worthy of her, Miss Jerningham. But
I must go, the dogcart will be at the door
immediately."

Good-bye, then. Will you take advice from
me.-* Give yourself up to work. Make a name
for yourself, and think no more of Grisel. A
child could never have made you happy. She
would only have held you back from fame."

The philosopher cares not for fame ; it is
too ephemeral to satisfy him!"

"Why do you so carefully hide yourself Do
you think that / can ever believe you ? Do
you imagine that you can completely hide your
feelings ?"

I do not pretend to do so ; for this reason
I tell you, when we meet next in the world of
London, you will see that such things are good
for me. I shall have laughed and grown fat on
my diet of bitter herbs."

"And the Phyllis which serves them is a

child like Grisel ! How do women have such
influence ? A baby with fair hair and laughing
eyes can mar the life of a man!"

It is still to be proved," he answered. " In
the meanwhile, I must go."

She returned to her room. Philip was waiting
in the hall, and drove Jack to the station.

Mistake No. 2 in my life done with," he
said, just as the train was starting. " I wonder
what the next will be V

The household at the Manor was an uncomfortable
one that evening. Grisel did not leave
her room, and there was an awkward silence
amongst the others at the dinner-table. Mr.
Romney was far from pleased at what had
occurred, and blamed Sybil for not having
spoken sooner. He could not endure to feel
that one of his daughters had behaved ill to
any man ; and, besides, what excuse was to be
given to the world at large t

Conversation came in spasmodic bursts, and
all were thankful when the uncomfortable meal
was at an end.

Two days after, Miss Griselda Romney received
a letter by post. They were, as usual, at their
summer quarters at Brighton. The letter was
in her brother's handwriting ; within, there was
one also from Sybil.

Miss Griselda was alone at breakfast. The
letters arrived before family prayers. She laid
them on one side, much as she wished to know
the subject on which he was writing.

The four trim maids left the room, and then
she was at liberty to satisfy her curiosity.

Well ! I never in all my life heard of such
a thing. It all comes of such unseemly haste."

She hurriedly left the room, and proceeded
upstairs ; she swept into her sister's room, in
answer to the gentle invitation to come in.

There have been nice doings at the Manor,
Sybil. Grisel has refused to marry Mr. Hunt."

My dear Griselda, there must be some mistake,
some misunderstanding. A child like Grisel
would never refuse. Do read it over carefully
once more."

Well, perhaps I am wrong in saying that she

refused to marry him, but it seems there is some
absurd idea that she likes Reginald Mainwaring
better, and Mr. Hunt heard it, and naturally he
gave her up. I can hardly imagine any daughter
of Thomas's, in fact any niece of ours, being in
love with two men at once. After such a careful
education, it seems to be so inexplicable and so
very unlike what any of our family would have
done."

But surely it is better, Griselda, that the
poor child discovered her mistake in times'"

I am astonished, Sybil, at your leniency. A
woman can never be excused any mistake she
may make on such a grave subject. I am sure
that we elder generation would never have
done it."

But remember, my dear, we were so different.
We never were tried. We never even saw one
man to like. Shut up as Ave were with our dear
old father at the Manor, what temptations had
we ? I never remember even either of us having
the slightest liking for anyone — flirtation they
call it now-a-days."

N

You may speak for yourself, Sybil. Of course
in those days I was much younger than you.
However, it is needless to revive old memories."

Quite, my dear ; fortunately I have none to
revive. But what do they propose doing ? Have
she and Reginald come to an understanding?"

I imagine the next thing you will ask is
whether Reginald is to take Mr. Hunt's place at
the altar — on the day previously settled. Really,
Sybil, for the credit of the family, I trust she
may not see him for years. I shall never be
able to look any of our friends in the face again."

Oh ! my dear sister, if you only knew how
thankful I am that she discovered it in time.
Fancy how dreadful if it had happened, and
she had found out afterwards that Reginald was
first in her thoughts. I have seen so many
loveless alliances. We must be thankful that
our dearest Grisel has been spared. I think
she should come at once to us, and we shall do
our best to comfort her. She ought to leave
home for a little. Thomas seems to be very
much displeased."

For once you have said a sensible thing,
Sybil. Of course the child is but a child.
Thomas is sure to be too harsh. Sybil will spoil
her, besides being too young to act in such
matters. She had much better come at once
to us, and then a little judicious kindness and
firmness will be best in every way for her. Of
course you and I, Sybil, stand in the place of
dear Thomas's wife to his daughters."

Poor dears, I fear that two maiden aunts
make but one inefficient mother."

Better, at any rate, that they should have us
than be left to the guidance of an over-indulgent
father. It has always been dear Thomas's
stumbling-block that he cannot see daylight for
those three girls."

Poor fellow, so young he was, too, to be
left ; and they are such good, sensible girls, they
show how well he has brought them up."

If such pleases you, by all means think it ;
but the present case is certainly one for a
woman's management. How can an elderly
man, entirely given up to his farm stock, have

delicacy and sensibility enough to act on an
occasion like the present ? But I really must
go and have some breakfast."

"Have you not had it yet, dear? And you
will be sure to suffer from one of your nervous
headaches, fasting so long."

By-the-bye, there is another thing to be discussed,
as I must write at once to Miss Tomlinson.
You know my dress and bonnet were
to be here the end of the week for the wedding.
I cannot counter-order them, but I thought of
sending her that black Chantilly of yours to
substitute for my white lace ; it will make the
dress more useful, and you never use it."

Welcome to it all, as you know. So long as
it goes to the girls after my death, you may
take what good you like out of it in the meanwhile."


I believe you would give yourself away, if
that were possible," said the younger Miss
Romney, forgetting that she appropriated the
possessions without any alarming amount of
unwillingness.

So poor Grisel went down to Brighton. She
rather alarmed her aunts at first from her
excessive quietness, and willingness to do as
she was told. A young lady who had had
strength of mind to refuse to marry a man, and
yet who took all the soup and "Allsopp"
ordered for her, however much it went against
her inclinations, was an anomaly to them.
There was none of that firmness needed of
which Miss Griselda had hoped such great
things. Before a few days were over, they were
both vying with each other as to spoiling her.
Small tea parties were accepted, to which Grisel
was led an unwilling victim ; and novels, an
unheard-of indulgence for youth, were ordered
from the library to try and rouse the child, she
moped so.

For if truth be told, Grisel was longing to
be at home again. She missed her sisters, and
even though she had the comforting assurance
in her own mind that Reggie cared for her,
yet it was hard to know that he knew nothing
of her feelings towards himself Her father

positively refused to make any allusion to the
subject on the day of old Sir Roger's funeral.
So mother and son went abroad without hearing
of what happened ; and Reggie daily studied
the Times, morbidly anxious to see for himself
the announcement of Grisel's marriage. They
were wandering from one place to another ; and
though Reggie had promised to send their
address to the Manor when at last they should
come to a standstill, nothing had as yet been
heard of them.

So Grisel vegetated at Brighton during the
summer months, and thought much and often
of Jack. She wished so much that she could
hear of what he was doing. But no news came.
He had disappeared entirely out of her life ; not
even keeping up a connecting medium through
Philip, his friend of many years' standing. He
felt it was better completely to give up all
communication with anyone who would either
be with the Romneys or be in such constant
correspondence with them.

So Grisel was not likely to have her wish for

news of him satisfied. After some months
spent with her aunts, she returned home towards
autumn, and fell once more into all her old
ways. Constantly in attendance on her father,
he at last forgave her, and as time went on, he
let an occasional remark drop concerning the
Mainwarings, or made some mild pleasantry
which brought the colour to his daughter's face.
So she came out of her moral corner, and
counted the months till the year should have
flown. Perhaps when Bramleigh was once more
occupied her happiness would come.

But the girl could not forget Jack, though forever
lost to her. She felt she had left a scar
on a man's life ; and she had meant no harm.

FOR THE SAKE OF LONG AGO.

lose must return a few months. It was evening,
the day after Jack left the Manor. The
sun was streaming in at the windows of the
Meredithss' house in Prince's Gate, gay with its
flower-boxes ; a soft breeze was blowing, and
the interiors of the rooms were cool and pleasant.

Lying on a sofa, so as to feel the influence
of the air, was Lenore ; she was gradually picking
up her strength, and looked forward with unfeigned
pleasure to the morrow, for she and her
husband were leaving town for his seat in
B shire.

She was happier and brighter than she had
been all the days of her married life ; health

was returning, and her spirits rose in consequence,
and, added to all, duty was bringing its own
reward; a very real love was growing up in her
towards her husband, perhaps one that would
stand the rubs and jars of daily existence better
than even the early love of her girlhood.

She was thinking of days gone by, thinking
also of Jack's wedding the following week, wishing
it were over, and wondering much if Grisel would
gain the influence over him that he so longed
for ; and even while she was so dreaming, the
door opened, and Jack himself was announced.

I thought you were at the Manor, Mr. Hunt.
You are none the less welcome, however, from
being an unexpected guest."

I left the Manor last night very unexpectedly ;
but. Lady Meredith, before speaking of myself,
let me hear how you are. I hardly thought I
should have been admitted to-day. I hope my
being so is a real indication that you are feeling
better."

Yes, I am gradually gaining strength, and look
forward much to our flight from town tomorrow."

What shall I do when you are gone ? "

Jack spoke hopelessly, impatiently. Lenore
could not understand his mood.

You are the only woman that cares whether
I go to the dogs or not. I feel as if I could
throw it all up. I cannot grind on here alone ;
want of sympathy, want of all that makes life
bearable, is driving me desperate."

"But what of Gristle?"

Miss Romney is no longer anything to me.
I have released her from her engagement — have
set her free!"

"Free?"

Lenore could hardly believe that she heard
aright. Was it freedom to Grisel that she had
been released ?

Thoughts crowded into her mind of what such
freedom would have been for her. Silence was
becoming dangerous ; she dare not think of
herself.

Jack was silent also ; he had given no answer
to her interrogation. He was sitting buried in
thought, and moodily turning over the reels in

her workbox. He was not aware of how close
it was to the edge of the table, neither knew
how it happened, but the box capsized, scattering
its contents far and wide.

Jack uttered many apologies for his carelessness,
and carefully collected the miscellaneous articles
together.

Lenore had the box on her knee, and was
rearranging the disturbed elements. Suddenly
she seemed to miss something from its place,
and stopped to look for it.

What is missing ? Do let me find it."

*' Oh, it is nothing of any consequence ; do not
trouble yourself any further."

But Jack, only too anxious to repair the mischief,
was bent on search. His hand came on
something ; he raised it carefully, wondering what
it meant — a bow of some white ribbon, all charred
and burnt, and a fragment of some airy dress
material in the same condition.

Lenore had coloured painfully, trusting he
would connect nothing with her foolish relic.
When all else had been destroyed, it alone was

spared ; she pleaded to herself that there was
no harm in keeping a remembrance of her
deliverer.

But Lenore's blushes were not needed to tell
the tale. Jack rose to his feet with the charred
fragment in his hand.

That was a long time ago," he said, and
replaced it in its hiding-place.

You have never seen my boy," Lenore said,
hurriedly, feeling anything would be better than
being alone; "shall I send for him?"

No ; you must let me speak to you, Lady
Meredith, and then I will see your boy. Can
you listen while I speak ? Can you bear with
me while I tell you my story ? You cannot say
no, you must hear me, for the sake of that I
found only a few moments ago, for the sake of
the friendship you have promised is to be between
us until death."

Tell me, then, what has happened ? How is
it that you are once more anchorless in the
world .? "

•• Lady Meredith, I learnt yesterday that though

I had never awakened in Grisel the love I craved
for, another had done so. I was with her when
she found out her mistake ; nothing remained
but that I should set her free."

I suppose," said Lenore, thoughtfully, " such
things happen to lead one onwards, upwards."

Rather say to drag one downwards. How
can a man rise morally if every help is denied to
him ? How can he believe in a Supreme Good
when a Supreme Bad seems to be the stronger
power in the world, and frustrates every struggle
he makes in the right direction ? I thought at
last I was to find what I sought, and fate is
absolutely relentless. Must one suffer all one's
life through a false step made at the beginning
of the day .'*"

The false step 7;iajf in the end lead one to
higher things," said Lenore, earnestly. ** Our
desires are not gratified, not only because we
desire them, but because if we had them we
should rest content ; and one dare not, one
must not. Think of a human being such as you
are, endowed with faculties above the average

of mind and body, craving for ever after something
you have not, and at last finding that
'something' in human love, settling down and
gradually deteriorating, because your satisfaction
had been found in things of this world. No ;
such can never be your life. I know you better
than you know yourself I know that the future
still is yours, and you must not give in.

But it is hard to fight on alone," he said,
wearily. " It is not good for man that such
should be ; one is apt to grow selfish, self-absorbed.
Does not the world, do not women
raise the cry that man rarely lives exempt from
the sin ? And yet you preach a lonely struggle
to me ; and you, it is easy for you so to speak,
you are not alone in the world, half your burdens
are carried for you ; you cannot understand what
I feel."

Perhaps I cannot ; perhaps I might myself
have failed in such a contest ; but, Mr. Hunt —
oh, Jack, you must not give in. Forget these
mistakes ; think only of your destiny as a man ;
determine to live down this pain ; turn to work,

if you will, in the meantime ; but remember, it
too will fail you, though I should be so proud
to feel you were making a name among your
fellow-men ; and remember, though a worthy
way of spending life, there must ever run through
the stream a current tending to perfection not
to be found here. Take as your motto, ' Excelsior.'
"

Oh, Lenore, if you had been beside me, I
must have risen, and not fallen. I could not
have breathed the air you breathed, I could not
have shared your life, without the motive power
extending itself even to me."

I fear not ; it must be best as it is, or it
would not be. I might have been a clog on
you ; now, you have no earth-ties to draw you
down, and I have found my happiness. My
husband could not live without me ; I have grown
to feel it is best."

"You have done the growing, and feel it is
best ; I am at the other side, and still feel it is
worst ; but as you say you have got over it, so
can I, and so I will."

"Did I say it?" Lenore's voice was so low
he did not hear, and then she continued aloud —

I do not mean that you are to consider that
this world can offer you no more of what is good,
of what is worth struggling for ; far from it.
Man's life here may be noble, good, and humanly
happy, but the flatter he lays the paving stones
here, the more easily he will walk, the less will
he bear the marks of the journey when he reaches
the land that is very far off."

How easy it sounds, and yet how hard in
reality," was all that Jack said. He would like
to have remained where he was for hours. Lenore
might speak, and he would listen. He felt often
as if he had nothing to say when she was there.
How she had come to know him as she did he
often wondered when he had told her so little of
his real self; and yet he felt, when beside her,
it was absolutely useless to hide behind a screen
of indifference. That which had deceived others
had never deceived her.

A man's horror of showing that he ever felt at
all was stronger in him than in most. If he had

married Lenore in the old days, he could not
long have hidden his true self. Now it was
doubtful whether anyone would ever break the
barrier down. Probably not ; probably, even if
he did marry in the future, his wife would know
as little of his inner life as the world outside.
One woman only could have unlocked the door.

"Well," he said at last, "I fear I must go,
Lady Meredith, or my visit will have done you
harm."

Lenore roused herself from the reverie into
which she had fallen.

Do not go yet ; I want to hear what your
plans are. You were going to have had some
holiday. You will not give up the idea ?"

I half think of going a walking tour on the
Continent somewhere — do some Alpine climbing
perhaps, and then come home and settle down
to work."

Perhaps, when you return, you will pay usa

visit. Lord Meredith will be so glad if you

could arrange to be with us in autumn, and get

some shooting."
o

I should like it above all things. May I let
you know when I return from my Continental
wanderings ?"

I was going to ask you to do so, and, if you
have time, let us hear how you get on. You
must remember that you are not altogether
solitary, and that at any rate there is one house
at which news of your doings will be always
welcome."

Jack rose to go, and held out his hand.

Will you be glad to hear that if I ever come
to any good I have to thank you for it ? The
knowledge that she has guided a man towards
good, even though he never attains it, must bea
continual happiness to a woman. You said
once you would throw the rope that would save
a man, and you have kept your word. May the
rope be strong enough to draw such a drowning
man to shore."

It must," she said.

So they parted — Jack to his Alpine wanderings,
Lenore to her daily life.

When he left her that afternoon, she fell into

a dream about him. How she longed that in
some way his life might be brightened, even
though the happiness came to him in a way
that would cut her friendship off! She had not
wished it at first ; now she could say truly that
she did not care if she had aught to do with
it, so long as he was truly happy.

And in the days and weeks which followed,
as she wandered among the woods and fields,
and enjoyed to the full her country life, and
felt health steadily returning, her thoughts often
turned to Jack, tracing his way in his travels,
trying to unravel the tangled web of his story,
wondering what the future held in store for
him.

CHAPTER XV.

THE RIVER ONCE MORE.

LARGE coffee-room in a well-known hotel

at a small town on the shores of the Ago
di Maggiore.

The hour is that of breakfast, and hurried
waiters flutter from table to table trying to
supply the wants of exigeant travellers.

The persiennes are closed, the room feels cool
and refreshing ; the butter lying in ice, the
plates of tempting fruit and cool, green leaves,
invite one to refresh oneself. Outside various
vehicles are standing, horses stamping and fretting
from the flies, luggage is being piled on ; some
are going farther south, others are retracing
their footsteps across the Alps.

By degrees the wants of all are supplied.
One table alone remains unoccupied. Two places
are set, and a waiter still hovers round, attending
to the preparations for breakfast.

The large glass swing doors open, heads turn
from the various tables and scan with curiosity
the young Englishman who enters, calmly
reading Malignant, as if no eyes were bent
upon him. The waiter rushes forward and conducts
him to the table in reserve, and, ashe
seats himself, he orders the coffee to be
brought.

Reggie Mainwaring — for he it is — sits down
calmly and waits. Lady Mainwaring presently
enters, looking more charming than ever in her
widow's dress.

How well both are looking, how perfectly happy
they seem to be together ! He is reading to
her scraps of home letters.

It is so strange that we have had no letter
from Sybil. I almost thought we should have
heard something of Grisel and Jack, even if we
had not met."

It was Lady Mainwaring who spoke.

I have looked in all the visitors' books, and
can find their names nowhere. It seems odd
we never saw the announcement of the marriage,"
Reggie answered.

Yes, very strange. They must have been
abroad for more than a month now, and I am
sure there was some talk of their coming as
far south as this."

We may meet still," said Reggie ; but his
voice hardly sounded full of anticipation.

His mother looked at him, and drew a long
breath. She wondered when he would forget
Grisel, and the night which had been so full of
sadness beside his father's deathbed.

But, as often happens in this world, the words
were scarcely out of Reggie's mouth when the
doors once more opened to admit a single
figure.

The Mainwarings looked at each other, but
neither spoke. They had not been recognised
by Jack Hunt when he entered. He was giving
some directions about his luggage and a guide.

He was just starting for some Alpine expedition.
Then he turned round and coolly
surveyed the occupants of the different tables.
A start, a half inclination to leave the room ;
and stepping forward, he held out his
hand.

This is an unexpected meeting," he said.

A few words passed between them. Jack
asked of their movements, carefully avoiding his
own.

Then Lady Mainwaring put the question that
her son dare not.

Where is La Grise ? I hope she will be
here soon, as we are just starting on our travels,
and we should like to see her."

Have you not heard ? But you must have
done so. Have you had no letters from the
Manor?"

None. We have been wondering at their
silence ; but we expect to hear from Sybil
to-day or tomorrow. We gave her Stress as
an address to write to."

She will explain all to you. Good-bye."

"You are alone here?" asked Reggie, suppressing
the eagerness of his tones.

Alone ! Grisel is at the Manor ;" and without
more explanation he was gone.

Half-an-hour afterwards they saw him pass
the window in a carriage en route for Switzerland,
and then a note was brought to
Reggie.

He read it slowly through, and handed it to
his mother.

It is from Jack. Poor fellow ! "

Lady Mainwaring read as follows : —

I could not give the explanation which,
though a sad one to me, must be full of happiness
to you. Go home and win Grisel Romney ; she
loves you, and I have set her free.

"J. H."

Nothing more but the bare fact stated.

Long they talked over the strange announcement,
and eagerly they watched for Sybil's
letter, which, when it came, only brought the

news of the engagement between her sister and
Mr. Hunt being at an end, but giving no reason
how such had come to pass.

Reggie wished to start for home at once ; but
such could not be. His mother's health had to
be considered, and then he could not return and
take up the happiness that had just been wrenched
from another man, and that man, rival though
he had been, he had always liked. So he put
aside his impatience, and wrote a long letter
to Sybil — told her of their meeting with Jack,
and asked for an explanation.

So the weeks ran on, and at last Sybil's answer
came ; but it begged Reggie not to hurry home.
It was of no use, she said ; she did not think
her father would let any engagement take place
for some months to come, and Grisel knew
nothing of his letter.

But in autumn Bramleigh was once more
occupied. The Romneys had no warning of the
Mainwarings' return ; Reggie wished it kept
secret, and mother and son were fully established
before their nearest neighbours knew anything

of it. They arrived at the end of the week,
but the family pew was not filled at morning
service next day.

The day passed as all other Sundays at the
Manor did. The family, in full force, had
inspected the live stock in every direction ; afternoon
tea was over, and they had dispersed to
spend the time according to their several inclinations.


Grisel slipped away alone. She had received
a letter that day from Augusta Jerningham which
made her think. Augusta's letters were always
amusing and full of gossip, but a different tone
ran through this one. She seemed to be having
a pleasant summer, and she was going to pay
the Meredithss a visit. Her letter was full of
anticipations, and Grisel wondered ; she had not
known that Lady Meredith was such a favourite
with Augusta.

"We are to have a houseful," Augusta wrote,
and you will be glad to hear that Mr. Hunt
is to be of the party. He has just returned
from the Continent. I met him in town the

other day. He is looking very well ; he has
evidently thriven on your treatment. He told
me he had met the Mainwarings abroad. So
let me give you a piece of advice, Grisel.
Don't fret about the past. You and he were
wise in what you did, and I am sure he knows
it."

What a problem Jack had always been to
Grisel ! She had not attempted the solution
thereof in the years that were past, but somehow
now she longed to read the riddle.

She felt sure it was for the best that they
had parted. She understood now how little she
had really known of him. He came suddenly
into her life ; she knew nothing of him before
then ; in a fortnight's time she was engaged to
him, and for four years so it had been, and
then as suddenly she had lost sight of him,
and his whole existence must ever be to her an
unsolved riddle.

When next she heard of him, he was amusing
himself as if she had never been. Had he ever
really cared for her.?

Grisel had wandered some way from home,
and was slowly wending her way towards Raleigh
along the river's side.

It was towards the middle of October, and
woods and ferns were clothed in russet and gold.
The leaves were beginning to fall, and formed
a many-coloured carpet, while the only life to
be seen was in the pheasants as they fled across
the path at her approach, and took refuge in
the neighbouring cover.

Grisel came to a pause at length. She felt
tired ; she had walked farther than she had
intended to do on first setting out. She looked
at her watch — it was still early ; she could not
make up her mind to return home, it was such
a perfect afternoon ; so, scrambling down the
bank, she found a nook by the water's side where
she could rest.

A perfect hiding-place from any chance passer-by
— seen only from the river — Grisel was quite
happy in her corner. The river was full of
association to her, and she went over again the
many strange adventures she had had on it,

always accompanied by the same companion.
She read many things now that had happened
by a different light, and wondered how before
she had been so blind.

A willow stretched its feathery drapery into
the water beyond her, and a tangle of grasses
and sedges completed her leafy screen. The
water-hens dived and swam about, enjoying to
the full their feast of insects with which the
air teemed, and Grisel sat, as she thought, in
solitary possession of the scene ; but the water-hens
had quicker ears than she had, for they
darted into their hiding-places along the banks,
and then, wondering at their discomposure, she
listened, and nearer and nearer came the sound
of oars in the water ; some one was coming
quickly down the stream.

Grisel could not see what intruder approached,
but the flutter of her dress must have been
visible through the willow boughs, for in another
minute a boat shot round the corner,
guided directly to her hiding-place. It was
Reggie.

I thought I should find you here. I came
in search of you. Will you come with me a
little way, La Grise?"

Grisel had sprung to her feet, in her first glad
surprise, and held out her hands.

When did you come back, Le Gris ? No one
is expecting you!"

So no one is glad to see me. Never mind,
Grisette ; you must forgive my return. Someone
said something once about a bad penny, and
I suppose I am to be thought of in the same
way."

Reggie drew to shore, and Grisel stepped into
the boat. It all seemed so natural, she could
hardly believe how long the time had been
since last they met.

Reggie spoke of many things, trying to
distract her mind from the pain of their last
meeting. He had much to tell her of their
travels, and much to hear of the Romneys'
doings.

Tom is salmon-fishing in Scotland, or rather
has been, and is now travelling about."

"And when does he return home?"

Oh ! he must be here within the next six
weeks. Bryde's marriage is to be then."

"Where is Philip just nowe*" asked Reggie,
paying no attention to Grisel's last statement.


Hard at work in Yorkshire ; he likes the
life immensely, and Bryde has screens of description
in consequence. She is looking forward
to the kind of life she will lead very much ;
but, Reggie, I shall miss her dreadfully ; we
have always been together."

"And what will Sybil do?"

I don't know. She has her painting, and I
have nothing, you know."

The oars ceased their rapid stroke, and the
boat went lazily along with the stream.

I wonder. La Grise, if Sybil would miss you
as much as you will miss Bryde .'' "

"Me! Why?"

I was wondering what the Manor would belike
without you, that was all."

A very foolish wonder indeed, Le Oris. You

had much better employ your time in thinking
of realities."

Speculating of the future, Grisette. Do you
never do it?"

Reggie watched to see the effect his words
would have, but she turned away her head.

Take care," she exclaimed, " you will run us
aground;" and, in truth, they were very near
the landing pier at the Manor.

You will come up to the house and see
them all, Le Gris ? They would be disappointed
if you did not do so, and you have
plenty of time."

Yes ; I am coming. Take care, now ; I am
going to help you out to-day, Grisette, even
though your hands are free."

Don't, Le Gris," she exclaimed, for he had
taken both her hands in his, and he had the
advantage, for she still stood in the boat and
he on terra firman

Now, Grisette, listen a moment ! May I
ask Sybil if she would miss you very
much?"



Of course she would miss me," said Grisel.

She will have to make up her mind to it,
my queen. I need you more than Sybil. Will
you come to me. La Grise.^"

Yes, Le Oris, if you wish it ; and Sybil will
not mind very much, I think."

CONCLUSION.

JHTXHIS story is nearly told ; one more scene
yet remains, and after that the history of
the actors that figure in these pages can be traced
no further, for their future lies still before them
as well as our own, and though there is such a
thing as surmise as to how they will fulfil their
destinies, no certain facts can be told of that
which has not yet come to pass.

Some four or five years have passed since the
events related in the last chapter, and we are
back at The Hurst once more.

Mr. and Mrs. Wyld have, as in the old days,
a houseful, and the Meredithss are among the
guests, otherwise the gathering is composed of

Strangers, Mrs. Wyld being afraid of recalling
painful associations to Lenore regarding her
first visit when her father was alive and with
her.

Lenore and her husband have been out walking,
and she has been showing him her old haunts.
They are returning homewards now; it is late in
the day, and Mrs. Wyld is coming to Lenore's
room for a chat before dinner.

Lenore looks well and happy as she walks
lightly along, with her hand within her husband's
arm, though she does not now need it
for support.

It is winter-time, and the cold, frosty air has
brought colour to her face. She is speaking
eagerly to him as they approach, and he is all
attention to what she is saying. The years have
left but little trace on either of them. Time
sometimes deals kindly.

So now you know all about it, Fred, and
you must put all thought of it out of your
foolish old head."

And be very thankful that the present is

mine, Lenore. Child, what you have told me
this afternoon is like yourself; you have raked
up the ashes of the past to relieve my mind. I
shall ever thank you for it."

If I had known years ago that you were
fretting about an unexplained something, I should
have spoken ; but I thought you knew nothing,
and that it was best to leave you in ignorance,
when I could prove to you from hour to hour
what goodness you had brought into my life.
You understand what I mean, Fred ? And now
are you content to let the Past be buried, for
the Present is ours.^"

And the Future ! Lenore, what can I
say to convince you of my happiness, save
that the wish rises at times that this life were
eternal .^"

Life is eternal," she answered, very low, " and
so is love."

Neither spoke again till, as they passed the
house, they heard a burst of childish laughter
and a patter of childish feet at play in the oak
corridor.

I must go to him, Fred, for a little before
Mrs. Wyld takes possession of me. Will you
spare me }"

I suppose I must, Lenore. When do you
think he will be old enough to send to
school }"

Lord Meredith was always teazing his wife
about such a change.

But she gave no reply.

It was half an-hour later when Mrs. Wyld
invaded Lenore's room, bright with the ruddy
glow of firelight.

Now this is comfortable, Lenore. Do not
move, and I shall draw in this chair to the fire.
The post has just arrived, and brings me a
varied correspondence, and also a letter for
you."

Lenore glanced at the writing by the firelight.


It is from Mr. Hunt," she said ; " he promised
to write to me soon."

How strange ! and I was just going to tell
you he has been winning laurels in the literary

world. He was always such a favourite of mine,
I feel quite sunning myself in his reflected
glory."

Yes ; before we left town, people were
beginning to talk. He throws himself so much
into his work that he deserves to succeed."

But he hates any allusion to the subject, I
find," said Mrs. Wyld. " He has grown so
reserved within the last few years ; he requires
a wife to smooth out the creases, and
I have a deep-laid plan in my head to turn
matchmaker."

Take care," said Lenore, smiling, " it rarely
succeeds."

Oh, but this must do so. I shall have them
both here together, and you know they were old
loves before Miss Romney, now Lady Mainwaring,
came on the scene ; besides, the girl has softened
down immensely within the last few years. I
really think Augusta Jerningham would make
him a very good wife."

I do not think Mr. Hunt will ever marry,"
said Lenore, thoughtfully.



So Mr. Wyld says," answered that worthy's
wife, " but you know one can never count on
men, and that is the only subject on which my
husband and I differ."

Marcus Ward & Co., Printers, Royal Ulster Works, Belfast.



12 056516930
