wu.

WWS:.

OF THE

U N I Verity

Of ILLINOIS

v.\

^ Sfictc]^ in Rummer ^ime»

MISS GRANT,

AUTHOR OF "artiste," " THE SLN MAID," " PRINCE HUGO,
"my heart's in THE HIGHLANDS," ETC.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

LONDON:
CHAPMAN AND HALL, LIMITED,

HENRIETTA STREET, W.C.
1882.

i^All rights rcserz'ed.)

M. M. G.

PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND Eccles.

a

^

^

^

QrlLlic
Malcontents

OF VOL. I

PAGE

\- CHAPTER

^"^ I. Elle et Lui . . ••• I

11. 'Member for Arch Aubrey' . 21

III. The Spring of Heliotrope . 44

IV. Sir Harry's 'Pal' . . 65

V. Lady Blanche in Repose . 76

VL Who may she be? . . loi

A Crimson Fichu . . 121

A Fair Fiction of Love . 136

Sweet Cicely Browne . . 144

What he had to do with it 154

For Garth and Browne . . 172

XII. A Sunny Morning . . 196

XIII. Luncheon at Prince's Gate . 210

XIV. Is there Nothing but Gold? 231
XV. The Meeting of the Streams . 252

XVI. Presentations . . 265

Evil 'How easily Things go Wrong' . 273

^ ^fietcj) in Rummer time.

CHAPTER I.

ELLE ET LUI.

'' Well ! This was certainly not my idea
of London ! "

Vistas of bright flowering chestnuts —
glades of soft velvet turf — a sunset — a May
evening — glistening waters far away to
the left — an old Palace standing drowsily
against a crimson sky — fragrant cigar
smoke curling away upon the still sweet
air — and a frame of mind in harmony
with silent shades and whispering evening

VOL. I. B

breezes, and emphatically in discord with
that roar of the city half a mile away !

He had sat down on a stiff, straight
wooden bench, just where the star of green
avenues met in a central point.

He looked dreamily towards the bend
of the Serpentine, and his eye brightened
as a wherry shot across the water, and
disappeared like an arrow behind the
drooping trees.

Then he turned, and sat facing westward,
and a hundred quaint fancies skimmed
through his brain as he looked at the old
red-brick Palace looming against the darkening
sky.

And he puffed his cigar and meditated
not profoundly, for he was young, and
his meditations did not spring from a very
deep-sunk well as yet, — but In a vague,
speculative, and somewhat surprised vein.

For he had just spent almost his first
week in London, and on the whole It had
astonished him !

While the result — a fit of evening dreaming
at the very centre point of Kensington
Gardens — was perhaps the most amazing
fact of all.

But here he was — a handsome lithe
young fellow, about three and twenty —
throwing back a wave of light brown curling
hair, as he removed his hat to catch
the cool breeze blowing from among the
chestnuts ; and turning up towards the
changeful sky a young sunburnt face which
spoke of plenty of life, lived out with
ardour and activity somewhere, if not as
yet among the busy and crowded haunts of
metropolitan men.

Undoubtedly 'new to London' was Sir
Harry Wynn Aubrey Wynn, and a pitiful
novice surely to its multifarious haunts of
fashion and strong attraction, that here he
should be at seven o'clock on a fine May
evening, mooning among the Kensington
chestnuts, and enjoying himself with such

complete satisfaction that he felt decidedly,
for the moment, there was nothing else he
would like better to do.

It Is most tremendously jolly here," he
murmured. " But not In the least my Idea
of London, in any sort of way."

He looked down one long vista after
another.

From corner to corner of the whole
garden his eyes could reach from here, and
the view in each direction was different —
from the quaint and varied effects of light
and cloud.

The sunset was luminous and gorgeous
along one vista — the green walls of chestnut
losing themselves In vapours of crimson
and gold.

And the sky hung low and dark and
ominous above another, where a storm was
gathering, and where a smoky mist lay
sombre and heavy among the trees.

Sun-rays and shadows, light and darkness,

chased and eclipsed one another
along the avenue shades.

And on roared the city life in the distance,
while evening fell, and stillness ruled
quietly here.

What had brought Harry Wynn to this
spot that evening ?

The question is still unanswered, though
he has asked it of himself persistently everyday
of his existence ever since.

What had brought him — he had never
been here before, and no one — nothing,
save that curious low voice of instinct or
impulse we call fate — had brought or impelled
him here now !

But here he was. And it was silent
and sweet in this shady solitude. And he
puffed his cigar with a pleasure that had
not come to him from its drowsy fragrance
ever since he had been in town — while his
thoughts — his vagrant wandering thoughts
floated away from this scene towards

the different and departed life of a distant
home.

Thus he might have passed that evening
In a dreamy retrospect, which perhaps
would have temporarily saddened him,
yet not practically Influenced, any aspect
of his future career.

But suddenly she came !

He did not know it. He had not the
least Idea that It was she — as some one
drew nearer and nearer to him, along the
green avenue, coming forward between
the chestnuts from out the sunset, and
advancing quietly to where he was.

A slight figure, with a swift light tread,
with a lace parasol shading a well-poised
head, and with a pretty, cool-looking spring
costume, like a good many others he had
noticed within the last few days.

For It was ' the spring of heliotrope ; '
only last year's May day. In fact, and that
delicate tinted crepe de chine, of the faintest

of those many tender shades, had come
that very morning from Paris.

He did not know this, of course, nor did
he know anything at all about her.

And he could never account for it — nor,
indeed, can I — who can account for these
things ? And it is no matter — only, certain
and true is this, that as the heliotrope
dress swept along and passed him, he rose,
all unnoticed by two drooping eyes, whose
gaze never left the ground, and he looked
along the chestnut avenue, down which
she passed away.

And something riveted his youthful
wandering gaze and fancy, — which had
never been fast anchored before.

What was it ? Who can tell ? Something
only in the sweep of the soft crepe
skirt as it brushed over the bending grassy
blades, — something in the carriage of her
proud young head, in her firm light fearless
tread, in her complete abstraction,

in her undoubted dignity and grace, —
something that was most probably more
emphatically and more entirely herself,
than anything at which he might again
arrive, in many hours or days of the
common intercourse of our social life.

For something does spring up just
now and then, in our curious, human nature,
and in this mysterious world of ours, —
springs electrical and quite unexpected, in
the swift vivid lightning of a first glance.

At least so it was with Harry Wynn.
She ' came,' and she ' conquered,' although
for the moment — as it happened — she did
not ' see ' !

Sir Harry did very wrong then, for he
not only saw, but followed, tossing his
cigar away, and throwing his head up with
an eager gesture as he trod forward over
the grass.

At a distance, certainly, a respectful
distance, but still keeping her in view.

It was not difficult. The avenue was
long, the vista straight and narrow, and
the flowering branches of the chestnuts
bent close above her, as she passed
swiftly on her way.

Suddenly, he was annoyed and startled.
An object shot by him, so close and so
rapidly, that it narrowly escaped a cannon
of some violence against his legs.

It was a small grey object, a blackened,
blue-ribbon pug, who had been
marauding among the sheep towards the
Round pond, and was hastening back
now to his allegiance and to the fringe
of his mistress's skirt.

Hah ! She paused, turned a moment,
saw her favourite was safe, and then went
on quickly forward again.

And Sir Harry still followed — reprehensible
as it was of him, it must be confessed
— he followed.

Followed until she had reached the end

of the chestnut avenue and was out upon
the Broad Walk, just within the little
swinging gateway which leads from the
gardens to the foot of the Memorial's
white marble steps.

She paused here, and Sir Harry drew
back.

She had never noticed him, so after all
there had not been much to find fault
with, in his distant and very careful pursuit.

But it must be brought to an end now.

He drew back amonof the thick shelter
of the chestnuts and paused.

While she paused, he might wait and
look upon her — while she' stood still and
solitary there — her gaze turned upwards
now towards the golden summit of the
Memorial, which looked strangely and
weirdly beautiful at that moment standing
out clear against the background of the
deepening sky.

A few minutes, while the sweetness of

the summer evening fell over them both,
and the sun-rays lay softly on the sward
between them, and the whole world of
spring verdure and blue water and tall
white buildings away beyond the trees,
all glistened and gleamed beneath those
smiles of the evening, until our dusky
London seemed a City of the Sun.

A few minutes, while only the distant
roar of a ceaseless traffic broke the stillness
around — he waited.

She stood and gazed upward. He
paused behind a sheltering chestnut and
watched her unnoticed from afar.

Suddenly, he saw her start forward,
and there was one sharp cry of dismay.

At the same moment, shrill little yelps
of pain and terror rang through the sweet
summer air, mingled with loud angry
growls of appalling ferocity from a huge
liver-coloured, red-eyed retriever, who was
worrying the tiny black-nosed pug on the
grass, twenty yards away.

She Uttered that one sharp cry of horror,
and then sprang forward, light and eager
as a fawn.

She must rescue her darling, at all
hazard to herself.

She reached the struggling pair ! Her
poor little yelping hound was pinned fast
to earth, and his terrific adversary crouched
over him with ferocious and threatening
growls.

A moment, and there must have been an
end of it, — the little black-nosed victim
would have certainly succumbed. But she
flung from her her lace parasol, and with
ready and unfaltering courage she threw
herself upon the huge dog, and plunged
her hands into the ruff of bristling hair
about his collar.

There was a diversion — another fierce
angry growl, and what the consequence
might have been in another second It Is
quite horrible to conjecture — but there,

like a flash of lightning, was Sir Harry at
her side !

Luckily, he had a stout oak stick in his
hand ; luckily he was strong and agile,
and as brave as he was prompt and cool
and well acquainted, too, with the canine
race in most of its characteristics and forms.

'' Dog or man — a coward and bully are
synonymous," was one of his favourite
maxims, and ''a big man or a big dog who
can worry a little one, will leave go
generally under the smart persuasion of a
food oaken stick."

So he was down on one knee in a second,
beside her.

His strong young arm stretched between
her bending figure and the fierce upturned
visage of the angry beast.

Let go, please ! " he exclaimed, with
breathless eagerness. " Let go, and let
me only just get a good firm hold," and he
grasped the leather collar tight.

Then down came his straight strong
blows upon the liver-coloured haunches,
and the poor little black-nosed one was
left almost loose and free.

Not quite, however ; for one moment
the girl held her breath. She watched
the angry struggle, and an utterance of
fear and protest escaped her lips.

Then up sprung the big retriever with
one violent struggle, for which terror gave
him force.

He wrenched his collar from Sir Harry's
vigorous grasp, and away he went, skimming
over the turf In a straight line
for the nearest exit with unfaltering speed.

That was done !

It had been a prompt and effective
chastisement, reaching exactly Its Intended
point.

Then, quite sensible of some pleasant
elation, and with much eager excitement
flushing his fresh cheek, and causing his

heart to beat, Sir Harry Wynn picked up
the little frightened pug, who still crouched
beside him.

It is not hurt," he said, as he turned
towards her, " only scared nearly out of its
very life. Poor little thing — hush — do not
struggle, little silly, you are all safe and
right now. Eh ! that is it, poor little
beast. No; I am so glad," he added, ashe
looked brightly into her face, after feeling
the poor pug's grey wriggling body allover
with careful and accustomed touch.
I am so glad. No, he is not injured in
the very least. There, yes, Til release you;
you may go back to your mistress, sir."

She had drawn away towards the little
swinging gate.

Her eager eyes were raised to his, full of
tears, full of gratitude, full of eagerness to
recover her pet.

But — she had suddenly remembered the
position !

She was alone, and she did not know
him — and It was evening, with the tenderest
of spring sunsets falling over the drooping
trees.

And he had saved her Negro's Hfe, and
there was her ' beloved ' safely nestling in
the brave stranger's arms.

But still she drew back, and she slipped
Into the double wicket until Its low swinging
bars were stretched between Sir Harry
and herself by the time he reached her,
and stood extending the grey, shivering,
black-nosed, bright-eyed pug for her to
take.

I am so grateful to you."

He laughed a bright, ringing, youthful
laugh.

'' I am so glad," he said. " It was a real
pleasure to give that skulking coward a
good thrashing, I can assure you. I am
so very glad I just chanced to be here.
And your pug is all right. Will you take

him ? The poor Httle beast is very frightened
still."

She stretched out her arms across the
gate.

He laid the dog in their caressing clasp.

He watched and smiled, amused a
moment, while the black nose was rubbed
against her cheek, and Negro crept close
against her shoulder.

Then she looked up at Sir Harry, with
eyes clear and gentle and beautiful in
their tremulous gratitude, but now perfectly
grave. And with a distant courtesy,
which she recalled with some evident
effort into her manner, she tried to thank
him again, as a valiant but stranger
Paladin, for his heroic rescue of herself,
as it had been indeed, no less than of her
dog.

The manner reminded him that the
scene was in London, and the lady one
whom he had never seen before.

VOL. I. c

And he recalled his own scattered sense
of decorum and of the general fitness of
things.

He raised his hat, and endeavoured
with a demure gravity, rivalling her own
now, to make her a calm and quite distant
bow.

He picked up her parasol, and had to
close it before he could place it in one of
the hands which still encircled her trembling
pet.

And he did manage to do it all with a
serious and frigid demeanour which was
most creditable to him, and was doubtless
prompted by one of the quick instincts
and intuitions, which had made several of
his friends in Pall Mall and Belgravia
declare that he would be a ' success.'

Gravely they bowed their ceremonious
adieu.

Silently he swung the little wicket open
and shut for her, and without further acknowledgment

of his chivalry and valour,
she turned slowly away from him, carrying
Nepfro across the ofrass.

But he had had plenty of time.

It takes such a little short measured
minute to realize that there Is beauty unutterable
In the light of two violet-blue
eyes, and scarcely a second is often sufficient
to make their gaze sink deep into the
vivid reflection of a young ready heart.

One smile is enough to show the pearly
brightness that can flash from between
two curved and cherry-tinted lips, and one
sentence suffices to declare music, and a
thrill of soft meaning in the tones of a
fresh sweet voice.

A voice, murmuring too its unbidden
utterances of an eager gratitude, and of a
heart stirred deeply with admiration for a
prompt and chivalrous deed.

There had been plenty of time for
Harry Wynn to realize that the face he

had followed In obedience to his sudden
impulse along the chestnut shades was of
such unusual beauty as to command any
length of journeyings to reach and behold
it — or any crusade of chivalry to win her
notice and regard.

CHAPTER II.

MEMBER FOR ARCH AUBREY.'

Sir Harry Wynn Aubrey Wynn was in
truth very new to London.

They called him ' our own Sir 'Arry '
down in Stoneshire — at 'the old place' —
at Arch Aubrey, a grim old tower, standing
down there amid the square of very
barren acres, from which his scant revenues
came.

His mother had been Dorothy Aubrey,
the heiress of that old tower, and his
father had been originally a Mr. Frederick
Wynn.

Mr. Wynn had brought nothing to enrich
the old Aubrey coffers, and his wife's

inheritance, modest though it was, had
been his all.

Therefore, he had taken her name when
he had hung up his hat in the old hall at
the round tower, and their only boy had
been Harry Wynn Aubrey for all the early
years of his life.

Only during those early years however :
for when Harry was about nine years
old a curious stray piece of rather crooked
fortune had come tumbling their way.

An old time-honoured Baronetcy, that
had filtered through many generations of
Wynns of that county, arrived finally at
Frederick Wynn Aubrey, — as ever since
his marriage he had been called.

It was a title of honour from its sheer
antiquity, and he appropriated it, although
it was an empty honour, for he acquired
with it not one sovereign in addition to
his income, and not an acre of land.

The title came to him from a distant

cousin, and In the transit It unluckily shed
all Its worldly possessions by the way.

For there was no entail In that branch
of the family, and while the title came to
Frederick as the direct male heir of the
line, the estates and the whole fortune
with them, went to the daughters of the
last Baronet, who were three in number,
and all married and flourishing. It was
divided ultimately among their sons.

Much chagrin Frederick suffered from
this, as he once more adopted the old
Wynn name.

And many an angry moment too It cost
him, as he watched his own bright boy,
and realized, that he would leave him but
the empty honours of that fine old name,
with the difficult course before him of
supporting a prominent position on next to
nothing at all.

For the farms of the Arch Aubrey
estates did worse every year.

But little recked the sunny-faced lad In
these early days what might await him in
the future ; as he tossed the quoit, or
bowled down a wicket, or topped a vaulting
bar with the brave boys of Stoneshire
on the village green.

Little he recked as he grew tall and
active, and ranged the woods with his gun,
and fished the gurgling stream for trout in
the spring time, or followed a scratch pack
on his wiry pony on bright winter days.

Little he cared, and he seldom looked
forward, for life was all bright and joyous
for him there.

At twelve years old he was * Sir Harry.'
For his father brooded indeed so gloomily
over his heavy disappointments that it
certainly shortened his life.

And the young ' Sir 'Arry ' became
master of Arch Aubrey — the idol of his
rough, primitive people, the glory of the
village sports and Meet of fox-hounds or

harriers ; and the one solace and support of
the lonely loving heart of the very sweetest
mother it had ever been a young lad's fortune
and life-long blessing to possess.

Lady Aubrey Wynn was a brave, gentle,
proud-souled woman.

She made a bright, untroubled paradise
of Harry's home for eight more years of
life, and then, just as he stood most in need
of her, she too was taken away.

They had been poor at Arch Aubrey
during Sir Harry's young sunny years —
this small family circle of gentle-born
Stoneshire folk— poor beyond everything
for people who had position and estate
to support.

For the estate cost nearly all it ever
gave them ; and there were dependents
and tenants all more needy even than their
masters, surrounding them on every side.
And Lady Wynn spent lavishly on each
and all of them.

It was the highest claim she acknowledged,
and she bravely met It at the sacrifice
of much that, to her own heart, lay
close and near — such as her boy's education
! She could never achieve that,
quite In the manner she would have
wished. She never could send him to
Eton nor to Harrow, although year after
year she kept hoping for many a day that
better times might come round for them,
and that * next year perhaps ' she might
set him afloat.

Once, she made a great effort for him.
That effort failed. It cost her a good
deal to make It, and It seemed futile
when It was made. But — are a mother's
efforts ever made quite In vain ? At the
time It seemed so, but long afterwards, as
Sir Harry's story will show us, this e^07^^
Influenced powerfully the ultimate destinies
of his life. To his mother It had seemed
useless, and year after year slipped on, his
education being still limited by her means.

She could not press a needy tenant, or
restrict an expenditure on which the wellbeing
of many others might depend, not
even to win for her boy those glorious
years of Harrow or Eton life which she
knew were otherwise due to him, and
which she would have bought willingly
at any sacrifice affecting only herself.

She did her best for him, however, and
all she did was good.

And so it happened that in spite of
everything he grew up through boyhood
in a very satisfactory way.

Nothing could have made one so singleminded
and chivalrous, as he was, a clodhopper
or a snob.

As for literary acquirements, no one who
had had the Reverend Vere de Cameron
for his private tutor could have possibly
developed into an absolutely stupid man ;
while for training of character and demeanour,
it was a certain fact that no

boy could have lived out his young life by
Dorothy Wynn Aubrey's side and become
other than the gentleman of courtly
manners, pleasant voice, and frank, winning
smile, which, to her heart's delight and
deep-felt gratitude, she saw her boy
become.

He little recked of fortune, while she
was spared to him in those glad years.
And, so long as no one could beat the boys
of Arch Aubrey at quoits or cricket, or at
the vaulting-bar, in any village of Stoneshire
for miles and miles around — he had no
further cares nor ambitions.

Sir 'Arry's men ' were known for
prowess in many a village combat, where
their victories won him fame.

Then his mother died, and he was left
alone.

And very lonely did the lad feel himself
indeed.

For he was a young king in that small
distant realm of his — albeit a king whose
revenue was scant and poor.

And as a monarch he must needs rule
among them (living always in that ' strong
fierce light which beats upon a throne),
with some dignity and pride ; with a certain
reserve also, which, though blended with
much freedom of frank intercourse in
matters public and relative to the general
amusement and good, still left the 'royal
person ' for many a winter's evening very
solitary indeed.

Noblesse oblige was a maxim well endorsed
by young Sir Harry, however much
he might love a wrestling match or a game
of cricket on the village green.

There, in solitary state, the boy reigned
among them for three rather sad and
weary years.

Then — such an upturn came !

It was in spring, and only last year's

Spring, while the primroses were just peeping
into flower here and there among the
moss-crown stems and violet banks of the
Aubrey pine-woods.

Just as the hedges were bursting into
leaf, and the birds were building, and the
village boys were peering eagerly for nests
it came !

The busy news, from afar, that was
rousing enough even for them in that
rural nook.

There was to be a general election.
Parliament was dissolved, and, like a scattered
crow's nest of last year, must be now
rebuilt again.

And the steady old member, who for
three and thirty years had held the pocket
borough of Arch Aubrey, was not to stand
again.

They must choose another Liberal, and
send him up to Westminster to represent
the rural interests of Arch Aubrey in the
sight of men.

And who should they choose but their
own ' Sir 'Arry ' ? Who indeed ?

Just so it had happened and — here he
was !

Twenty-three last birthday. Which
birthday, having fallen upon a Sunday,
they had roasted the usual ox whole upon
the green before the Red Dragon, by the
flames of a roaring bonfire, on the Saturday
night before.

Twenty-three, and very ignorant at least
of ' life,' as that term is comprehended in
the common talk of men.

A fine wrestler, a good cricketer, with
no experience of rackets, but skilful at its
twin brother, played in the rural districts
with hard ball and bat against a high stonewall.


An excellent shot, a fair judge of a
horse, exceedingly chivalrous and romantic,
and decidedly given to quaint fancies and
day-dreams.

The bearer of an old name, and of a
baronetcy, honoured, at least, by time, with
a remarkably light purse, and yet lighter
heart.

And a boy still, in almost all respects,
although to his own extreme pride and
satisfaction, a moustache fair and downy
adorned his upper lip. ' Quite a boy ' —
or so people were apt to say of him. He
was frank and ready in confidence, believing,
trusting, and admiring almost everyone
he met.

Surely the most boyish representative
sent by a restless country to the great and
much diversified Parliament of that eventful
year !

Of course the seat in Parliament had
brought him up to London.

And equally, of course, it gave him a
point from which to start in his London
life.

Years ago, when he was still in belt and

tunic, not even yet arrived at the short
jacket stage, his father had put his name
down, here and there, at good old clubs of
his own date and era in style and fashion.

And to one of these Harry had himself
elected when he came up to town.

To Boodle's. Young men do not go so
much there as to the Raleigh or the Marlborough
in these days, perhaps ; but every
country gentleman of any status or pretensions,
in Harry's father's time, belonged
to Boodle's or White's.

So his father's old haunt did very well
for him, he said, and was quite fast enough,
at all events for his tastes and for his purse.

At Boodle's Sir Harry settled down
comfortably, after his first few visits, to a
daily dinner and a nightly cigar. And
soon feeling quite at home there, he began
to wonder a little vaguely what might bethe
next step onwards which it best behoved
him to take.

VOL. I. D

He had the ent^-dey by Introduction and
from acquaintances In neighbouring country
houses, to several drawing-rooms In London,
that were indeed more recherches than
he knew.

But he had not penetrated Into any one
of these. Nor yet, beyond a miserable
and cramped hotel room, had he made
himself a London home ; when, just ten
days after his arrival In town, he made a
chance acquaintance with a youth of his
own age, who played an effective part in
the little drama of his career.

This youth was a certain *Jack,' who
at this point became his friend. And his
Mentor also, for never again Indeed did Sir
Harry halt or stray In his social course for
want of wise and wary counsel, or because
he was without a guide. If he strayed it
was not Jack's fault. And what he left
undone in the nature of drawing-room
conventionality was not for lack of protests
from Jack.

For this new friend of Sir Harry's, was
a most remarkable young man. He was
young In years, but old in wisdom ; knowing
in every social intricacy of London
drawing-room life, and doubly knowing in
the lights and shadows of all life beyond.

A good fellow ! ' 'A capital fellow ! '
A lively, warm-hearted fellow ! ' so everybody
proclaimed him and knew him to be.
One whose cynicism was all talk and
surface — while his cheery kindliness was
his real self!

The two meeting by chance in their club
smoking-room, spoke without introduction,
as in that easy club-room life men sometimes
do ; and they were drawn towards
each other immediately by that curious instinctive
sympathy which alone can make
us 'friends.'

A strong interest in Harry Wynn had
sprung up quickly then and there In Jack
Fielding's really kindly heart. And a

6 ONE MAY DAY.

curious devotion, a sort of genuine enthusiasm,
soon took possession of him for the
rustic youth whose ignorance and naivete
inspired him with a desire to set him, ashe
expressed it, 'a going,' and to keep
him straight. These sentiments on Jack's
part were most prompt and effective, for
Sir Harry found himself taken possession
of forthwith ! * Jack ' became a sort of
Royal Red Book of society and of Hfe to
him — a helmsman, a pioneer, and a lighthouse
often for hidden rocks and shallows
as well.

In fact 'Jack' took him in hand, bore him
through in triumph, and landed him, received
and welcomed in the smooth current
of fashion, before he had even thought of
his maiden speech.

I say ' Jack ' in speaking of this youth,
because it was days before young Wynn
knew him by any other name — several
days before he realized that he was no

more 'Jack' by the will of parents or godfathers
or godmothers than he — Sir Harry
was ' Tom ' or ' Jim.'

Jack's ' name was Spencer Edwin
Fielding, when he came really to the legal
signing of it. But '^/ley' called him always
Jack ' — and ' t/iey ' in club and general
London a7^£-o^ form an intangible and
occult Power of decree, against which
there is no rebellion or appeal.

'' Oh yes, I am ' Jack,' — call me so, old
fellow, if you like. Call me 'Jack,' Wynn;
it is handiest. Yes, yes, it is all right ; all
the men do it, and, for the matter of that,
all the women too."

He said this about the third evening of
their acquaintance. It was about the sum
total of Harry's introduction to him, and to
that intimacy which had such quick results.

Where are you going to live, Wynn ? "
his friend asked him on that same third
evening over their last cigarette. *' Are

you going to have rooms in Duke Street
or Bury Street or in Mayfair, or where ?
I know a famous set of rooms in King
Street, St. James's, if that would suit you,
by-the-bye."

Jack always knew something that suits
everybody as a rule !

'' May I live where I like," said Sir
Harry, gravely. '* There is no rule about
it, is there ? I mean as regards parliamentary
work, and that kind of thing ? "

Well, no rule, — no, not exactly," said
his Mentor, hesitatingly ; for in less than
three days' acquaintance a despotic Mentor
he had already become. " There is no
rule actually, but it is a very important
point. But you may live where you like
yes — at least within certain limits."

And what may the limits be ? "

'' Well, it depends a good deal on the
sort of fellow you mean to go in for being,
Wynn. A man must affichei^ himself,"

continued Jack, who went a good deal to
Paris, and was fond of interlarding his language
with little phrases in French. " A
man must officier himself as a certain sort
of thing, and then stick to it, you see. It
does not do to waver much about ; and
nothing is more emphatic than the sort of
house you take just to begin with, you
know ; and where you take it is of course
an important point."

*' Well, I should like to live in Kensington,
if there is nothing against that."

"In Kensington ? What — eh — a little
menage ! — No ! "

A little house — yes — if that is what
you mean. I have found a bit of a nest
to my liking. I have taken a fancy to a
certain corner, — but perhaps it is beyond
civilization for all I know, — probably you
have never heard of it in your life."

Where ? "

Well, I think they call it Surrey Place."

What,— near the Cromwell Road ? "
'' Just exactly there. I found some trees
growing about, and I cannot live without
them ; and there is a yard for my old dog,
whom I must have up to town ; and a small
stable just across the road, where I can
house at least a riding horse ; and the little
place is fresh and cheery and clean. I
cannot stand the grubby, grimy holes in
Bury Street or up in Mayfair — which
they show me as appropriate residences
for unlucky and unsuspecting young
fellows like me. I should go off my head
in a week in Bury Street. But I should
like immensely to rent a house in Surrey
Place — and there are two to be had at
this moment. But I feel such a ' green '
at the sort of thing — I am quite sure they
will do me. I say. Jack, I tell you what it
is, you've an awfully good fellow ; just come
along down with me tomorrow, and have
a look at them. I would take anything
you thought would do."

"Well, I don't mind. I'll go with
pleasure, Wynn," said the other, with kind
condescension. " You see," he went on,
** I take an interest, a regular downright
interest in seeing you well set upon your
feet. And look here — a house is of es'eat
importance ; that is to say, what sort of
house it looks like, and whereabouts it is.
It is 'the thing' — quite 'the thing,' you
know, for fellows like you, who are their
own fathers, and with a certain position, —
it is 'the thing' for them to have houses,
no matter how small and unpretending, of
their own. But then it must be pretty,
you know, a neat thing, ckzc and well done,
with high art or china mania, or something
distinctive to give it tone. For a fellow
gets known for his house as much as for his
horse or dogs, or anything that gives cachet
in these crowded days. And it would not
be at all a bad line for you to take up,
Wynn, especially as you are not very rich'*

Especially as I am most particularly-poor,"
said Sir Harry.

"Well — as you like to put It so. But I
think you will do very well. What — eight
hundred clear to spend, and no encumbrances
? Come, I will make you out a
nice little chart of what you may do in
London for that. And I will go down with
you, — by Jove, I will, — to the little rural
district tomorrow ; and we shall see.
Leave it to me, and I shall not let you in
for much as regards expense. But I can
promise you this (if you leave it to me
really), that Sir Harry Aubrey Wynns
rooms will become speedily rdpandu for
cultivated taste and decoration, reflecting
glory upon their possessor, before the
season is many weeks upon its way ; and
then, you knoAv, we may g\v^ a. tea-party,
and have all the vt^orld to see."

Thus had this elderly-minded and knowing

young gentleman gained a good deal of
influence over Sir Harry in his first start.
Influence the lad soon learnt to resist and
smile at indeed, but which was not without
its benefit to him in those early metropolitan
days.

Jack deigned to approve Sir Harry's
choice of residence, and, indeed, on this
point, as it happened, it was well that he
did not endeavour to interfere — it would
have been useless.

For, from the first time that young Wynn,
in his restless explorations about the town,
had wandered down Surrey Place, and seen
the tiny neat white houses, with laburnums
and lilacs and sweet syringa trees just
coming into leaf, he had resolved that he
would have his town mansion in this locality,
however distant it might be from the
spheres of the fashionable or from the
haunts of St. James's Street men.

CHAPTER III.

THE SPRING OF HELIOTROPE.

It was thus that It came about, that during
that April — In the prime of the bright
heHotrope spring — the old maids of Surrey
Place were much amazed, and also a little
alarmed, be It added, by a smart-looking
masculine encampment which lighted suddenly
there.

Jack took the thing In hand, and did It
really well.

The prettiest little home was chosen,
with a small double sitting-room, and with
French windows opening on to a tiny balcony
— speedily filled with flowers.

Jack studied the matter deeply for a few
days, and then he chose his style.

Wynn's drawlnor-room was 'dated' and
curtained and decorated. A huo^e crate of
Nankin china was had up from Arch
Aubrey, much to the astonishment of Sir
Harry's retainers there.

A couple of Chippendale mirrors were
picked up by the astute Mentor one morning
in Hanway Yard, 'really very cheap,'
and these, with a few lounging chairs, and
a smoking divan set upon Indian matting,
nearly completed what Jack considered a
chaste and high-art style of furnishing,
suited to what he further designated Sir
Harry's pose.

Quiet — nothing flash — not opulent, but
antique and costly — that is your style, you
know, Wynn. Only two horses, but good
ones, — no drag, but a well done T, a
brougham for night work, and a groom and
a valet, and then — what more would you
have ? "

The valet — the gardener's son from

Arch Aubrey, who had been trained by the
old butler there in this second stage of his
career, — brushed Sir Harry's coat and
boots, brought up his hot water, and wore,
with much effect, a trim suit — a modification
of the imposing domestic uniform of
the Wynns. Generally he was to be seen
airing it at the open door ; and as he was
the only liveried footman in the locality, he
attracted a good deal of attention, provoking
many remarks, and exciting considerable
anxiety indeed.

Surrey Place was not accustomed to
this sort of thing! And the Miss Prims,
who lived just opposite to Sir Harry, looked
furtively across the street as they came in
from their morning walk, and shook their
heads over Reuben's striped waistcoat and
the glittering crested buttons on his chocolate
brown coat.

They peered also over their window
screen, as Sir Harry went in and out, and

as Jack dropped lightly from a hansom at
all hours of the day, — and as they sipped
their tea, they hoped devoutly that ' nothing
unpleasant might come of it, and that the
young men would not keep late hours.'

'* Not but what there's something lively
in having 'gentlemen' about" — and the
Miss Prims said so, thus daintily pronouncing
the alarming term.

There was something lively in a smart
young opposite neighbour. There was no
doubt about that, and so (hoping that
nothing disagreeable might come of it) the
Miss Prims became resigned.

An old Indian, going off fast with an
advanced liver complaint, had lived in No.
14 before Sir Harry came, and he had
lately been ordered off to the Buxton Spa.

He had not been a cheerful vis-a-vis,
for he kept no striped waistcoated Reuben,
and he never went out in anything faster
than a Bath-chair.

Sir Harry's fat bay cob, with sleek sides
and shiny coat, was a pleasant object to
watch daily as he went up and down just
at twelve o'clock, waiting for his master
to take his morning ride.

And in spite of all sense of decorum, the
Miss Prims never could dissuade themselves,
or at least each other, from peeping
from behind their neat muslin blinds, or
from watching the young fellow, with his
fair sunburnt face and light agile form,
come out from his little door between his
great pots of flowering geraniums, clad in
his cool-looking grey summer suit, with
rose-bud in his button-hole, and short whip
under his arm.

They would watch him spring on to the
cob, and ride slowly up the street, and then
wonder and chat about him for hours to
come.

Then his neat T-cart in the afternoon
excited doubly their admiration.

For Jack had helped him to find a
splendid chestnut who stepped up to his
very nose.

And there the T would stand for twenty
minutes sometimes, while Jack was with
Sir Harry, and as the two dilatory fellows
lit their cigars and chattered carelessly just
within the open French windows, behind
the festoons of green creepers coming into
leaf.

The Miss Prims would have much to
say in hurried whispers to one another
about the chestnut champing his bit and
tossing his nose so impatiently into the air,
and about the ensign of the griffin that
glittered in the sunlight on Harry's smart
but correctly unpretentious harness. They
had much to say on all this that was daily
paraded before them, and much also on the
history of all the Wynns and Aubreyss that
had been, in times of history long gone by.

For of course the neighbours soon found

VOL. I. E

out Sir Harry's name and rank and lineage,
and realized the distinction of the
young tenant who had taken old liverpool's
house for the parliamentary season,
and who shed the light of his splendour
upon quiet Surrey Place for all that year.

The Miss Prims were very genteel
people — came originally from the '' counties,"
as they were proud to say — no city
parvenus !

Antique, decorous, and genteel !

And they knew something about most
county families, and were able, when they
had learnt Sir Harry's name and standing,
to give to Mrs. Cock, the widow of a
medical man, who lived in independent
elegance a few doors away, and to Mrs.
Rickets, the wife of an ancient and retired
naval lieutenant, who rented No. 22, and
to others equally curious and inquiring —
were the Miss Prims affably able to impart
sundry veracious pieces of historical incident

concerning the Aubreyss and the
Wynns.

For the fact was, that from the early
days of their most elegant seclusion in the
county bordering upon Stoneshire, and in
the old county town of Winthrop Chase,
the Miss Prims, whose father had been a
land agent there, had preserved his copy
of the 'english County Families" for the
year '31.

And from this they now culled much
information, bearing chiefly upon the
Anglo-saxons and Crusaders — upon the
question of Harry's ancestral quarterings,
with details concerning the origin of the
rampant griffins (argent upon a shield of
cerulean blue) of the Aubreyss, and upon
the red hand and the cross spears of the
Wynns ; and on all other suggestive and
knightly insignias that appeared emblazoned,
in fact, upon such objects at Arch
Aubrey as bear the two family arms.

On all this, with the dates of birth and
demise of certain heads of the houses
down to Harry's grandfather, the Miss
Prims were able proudly to enlighten the
prevailing ignorance In the surrounding
minds.

At himself personally, they therefore
furtively gazed with an interest that was
perhaps as natural as it was unobtrusive.

Parliament was to meet on the 4th of
May.

And Sir Harry had come up a few
weeks beforehand to be well in time.

He had had no opposition for his part
in the old borough at Arch Aubrey. He
had had only to walk leisurely over the
ground, and after the election he had come
up Immediately.

By the list of May, therefore, by that
evening when he went to smoke by chance
or fate In the Kensington Gardens, he was

becoming accustomed to town and to his
new life ; accustomed, although not, in
several important aspects, reconciled.

Without Jack, in fact, as he exclaimed
often, he would still have been "nowhere at
all ; " and what he meant by this particular
form of speech, in which he frequently-expressed
his sense of gratitude, both he
and his new friend, no doubt, understood.

Indeed they thoroughly understood each
other from the very first.

Jack did very well by Sir Harry, and
under Jack's guidance he had already
seemed quite easily to float off on the
stream of this season — the first season he
had ever spent in London, and the only
one that I think he is ever likely to spend
in Surrey Place.

Alas, for the Miss Prims ! By last
May day, I fear undoubtedly they must
have had old Liverpool for their opposite
neighbour again.

But for that one summer, for all the
bright heliotrope year, Sir Harry flitted in
and out before them, and was their chief
amusement from April to July — during that
little span of weeks which encompassed all
that I am going to tell about his life.

A young fellow's life in London ! a
youth of the jeunesse lorde, as we used to
call them — of the ' crutch and toothpick,'
as they are designated now ! (not that Sir
Harry adopted either of these distinctions ;
for I certainly never saw him use a toothpick
or chew the top of a crutch !)

But," I hear the critic say, " how little
can I relate about such a life, or how little
of its labyrinthian mysteries can I pretend
to know ? "

Not much, perhaps, looking from the Miss
Prims' standpoint at their opposite window.

Not much that can do more than display
ignorance of the shadowy depths his young
life may have contained.

Perhaps so.

It may have been but the glittering
gilded rim of Harry's first experiences of.
good and evil, bitter and sweet, that the
Miss Prims saw from behind their sun-blinds
on those summer days.

And perhaps I know but little more
about him, and can dive but a few inches
beyond them, in a written scrutiny of this
scrap of his career.

Perhaps — and yet his is a bright transparent
nature.

The current of his heart, thoughts and
feelings flow limpid and clear, and I do
know one little tale about him the Miss
Prims have yet to hear one of these days,
and this little history I intend to tell.

It began on the pug-dog day —on that
1st of May.

That evening he went home restless and
distrait and meditative to Surrey Place.

And Jack, who had come down to dine
with him en famille, as Jack was pleased
to express it, found him unusually dull.

For not one word did Sir Harry say of
pug-dog or fair Incognita, and very few
words did he seem to care to say about
anything else.

But they had a nice little dinner.

Young Wynn, accustomed to solitary
evenings and many repasts eaten only in
the company, and enjoying only the local
talk, of old Grey the Arch Aubrey butler,
had grown already tired of club dining-rooms,
and neither of them had been tonight
invited to dine anywhere else.

For though Jack was much sought after
and much invited to every sort of meal,
and although Sir Harry, too, was filling
up engagements in a way that surprised
himself, the season was not in full swing
yet, and there came now and again a
gap.

Such a gap occurred on that very May
day, and Jack was Sir Harry's home guest
that night.

He had already arrived when Wynn
reached Surrey Place, in his hurried walk
from the Gardens. He had arrived, but
was not impatient, and quite capable of
making himself at home.

Reuben of the gay waistcoat had been
well drilled in his office by old Grey at
Arch Aubrey, before ever he had been embarked
in the responsible post of serving
Sir Harry in town.

And the little round dinner-table was
trimly arranged for the two young men,
and drawn up near the open window of
the back room, which gave out upon a bit
of garden, where the chestnuts and lilacs
were in full fresh bloom, and which had a
cool, pleasant look of the country to the
young tenant's eyes.

Jack Fielding was lounging easily on

the divan, and perusing the evening paper
when his friend dashed in.

Ronald, the huge brown-ruffed collie,
who had come up with Sir Harry's cob
from Stoneshire, lay asleep near Jack's
feet, curled on a Turkish rug before the
front window, as if he also had made up
his mind to circumstances, and was resolved
to feel at home.

Harry's toilet did not detain them long,
and the two sat down to as nice a little
dinner as the chef at the club could have
served them at his very best.

A dinner, perhaps like everything about
Harry Wynn and his possessions, a little
old fashioned and behind the date.

For there indeed, reigning downstairs
in state in the little suburban kitchen, and
feeling like a queen suffering voluntary
exile, was Mrs. Floy, a functionary from
Arch Aubrey, rivalling in power and sublime
position Mr. Grey, the old butler, himself.

Mrs. Floy had been reigning housekeeper
in the old quaint home for years
before Sir Harry's birth.

And she had taken care of him (especially
in all things material and domestic)
since his mother died.

And now, when no flight of boyish will,
but the stern call of his country, brought
her young charge and master to the perilous
wilderness of the great metropolis,
Mrs. Floy proved true and staunch to him,
and declared that she herself, attended by
one rough Stoneshire girl, would accompany
the fat cob and the brown collie, and
Reuben and the crate of china, to take
command in the young master s new house
in town.

"How else," she exclaimed, "could she
ever sleep easy, or feel sure that Sir 'Arry's
sheets was haired as became him, or that
the young baronet, God bless him, 'ad a
mouthful that was fit to eat ? "

Poor Mrs. Floy! What she went through
during that London season from the sins
of duster, sweeps, poulterer, costermongers
and potions, from purveyors
and family servitors of every kind — it
would take a volume quite by itself to tell !

But she did her part with heroism.

She guarded Sir 'Arry's interests with
quixotic zeal, and she served up such
pretty little breakfasts, such dainty little
luncheons, and such capital bachelor
dinners too, that her beloved young
baronet became famous throughout all
that summer, no less for his charming
house and well-groomed chestnut, beautiful
brown collie and fat sleek cob, than
for those decidedly recherches repasts, to
which men, young and old, were soon
pleased to be invited down in Surrey Place.

It was charming to sit by the open
window as the hot evenings came on, and
when the twilight fell.

To feel the air blowing so fresh and
cool from out the west, to scent the flowers
and the summer blossoms and sweet lime-trees
later on.

And to realize that even close within
hail of all the noise and roar and racket
of London, such quiet little flowery nooks
may still be found.

It was pleasant, — and Sir Harry
dinners became much repaid — as Jack
invariably expressed it — although limited
in size and number by the boy's narrow
purse.

Never would Mrs. Floy let him riiin
himself in this direction — whatever propensity
for self-ruin he might develop
along other roads.

On this first of May, with Jack only
for his guest, had come ofl" the first little
dinner.

There was no lime-scent, nor even rose-bloom
as yet, this May-day evening, only

the chestnut-trees were rich In verdure
and laden beautiful with graceful festoons
of feathery blossoms white as snow.

Everything was agreeable too, and most
conducive to the flow of speech between
two friends.

And yet Jack asserted often within the
following weeks that that was a dull
evening, and not what he would have
expected as the guest of Harry Wynn !
In fact it was quite the first dull evening
they had spent together since they had
made acquaintance, and Jack, as he eat his
dinner, was puzzled all the time.

He came to understand it afterwards !
And later, he was often bound to confess
that Harry Wynn, sitting at the head of
his little oval table, with that bright cordial
manner of his just touched with an old-fashioned
courtesy that was most attractive,
was as charming as a host as he was
commendable as a friend.

That his smile and his boyish merriment
were as sparkling as his champagne, and
that the fitness and grace with which he
filled his position generally, were as unquestionable
as the menus of his worthy
Floy, and as the wine fi-om the Arch
Aubrey cellars.

But to-night — this very first night — Jack
felt he somehow actually bored his friend.

Sir Harry's attention kept wandering,
and his interest appeared cool upon many
social or even equine subjects on which
yesterday he had been so keen and eager.

And Jack left him early to himself.
There seemed nothing else for it ; for
there was ' something up ' evidently with
Wynn to-night, and Jack could make
nothing of him at all.

What is the matter," Jack murmured
to himself, as he lit his cigar and strolled
down the street about ten o'clock, having
left Sir Harry lounging lazily upon his

own doorstep, and quite evidently disinclined
to do anything or go anywhere that
night.

'' There Is something up ! " And Jack,
going on to ruminate cynically and philosophically
within himself, came to the sage
conclusion that It took a long time to get
'all round a man,' and that there was
something quite beyond any point he had
reached as yet, in the thoughts and reflections
that, in such silent and moody
moments, possessed Harry Wynn.

I thought I had read him through,"
mused Jack, " from preface to the very
finis. I thought I had got him off by heart
like an easy book. And here, I am done !
I do not In the least see through him
to-night ! What In the world can be the
matter now with Harry Wynn !

CHAPTER IV.

SIR Harry's 'pal.'

Jack or Spencer Edwin Fielding, as this
young fellow ought properly to have been
called, was, in his own judgment, a very
special kind of man.

Rather a nondescript,' a biographer
would be apt to designate him, or at least
displaying so many contradictory and characteristic
points, that it was difficult to
consign him to any particular class in that
sort of social schedule which authors makeup
of humanity.

He did not seem to have any exact profession,
for one thing.

He had read for the Bar, but had not

VOL. I. F

followed It up ; now he went avowedly to
the city, but what he did there never precisely
transpired.

He had an interest — some sort of
vested, but certainly very passive, interest
in some not very well paying concern.

From this his modest income came. He
had inherited a minute share in returns and
profits, just enough — or more often not
enough — to enable him to float agreeably
on the smooth glittering surface of West
End life. No one ever knew what he did
exactly, and everybody wondered how he
managed to live. For distinctly a detrimental,
and an ineligible, was poor Jack !

If people hinted at work to him, and
remarked that city life must be most exhausting,
and that it, doubtless, absorbed
much of his time and energies, he said
lightly that he supposed he was sleeping
partner, for he never had anything to do.

And only this, at least, could be said for

him, that If he drowsed over business, it
was certainly the one post in Hfe on which
he slept.

For he was alert, wide awake, and active
In every other possible diversity of social
interest and pursuit.

Active in all, and exclusively wedded to
none.

He had managed to live a great deal
abroad, and he talked French easily, withall
the modern argot of the boulevards and
the Jockey Club dropping familiarly from
his quick tongue.

He had been In Germany, and had
learnt to strum agreeably upon the piano,
and to blow aggressively on a huge horn.

He could accompany any lady in a valse
of Strauss or Waldteufel in a country-house
; and Imparted immense verve and
spirit to an after-dinner dance on the
drawing-room carpet by those stirring
blasts of his.

And also he could troll out a Shidenden-
Lied or a refrain from Les Cloches de Bonneville
or Madame Ingot after a dinner such
as Harry Wynn's, or at a supper-party anywhere.


Moreover, he could play in softer and
tenderer strains than these at appropriate
twilight moments, and to such sympathetic
ears as might echo a song of Schumann's,
or a thrilling French love note, uttered
in the passionate accents of Alfred de
Musset or Alphonse Carr.

And being in this line he, of course, that
summer sang 'for Ever and For Ever"
on all such occasions as these !

He was a good man, too, for theatricals,
could take the post of stage-manager
with credit — if you gave him his own
way !

In fact, he was certainly a charming
guest in any country-house from November
to April ; and even the men were forced to

say of him " he was not half a bad fellow
to hounds."

He was at all times very welcome in all
drawing-rooms or cosy boudoirs in summer
twilights or amid the wintry fogs.

London, perhaps, was his natural element,
however, for he was versed in its social
intercourse, and in all its social intricacies
before he had well left school.

"What's up with Harry?" he said to
himself for the tenth time that evening ashe
reached the steps of his club.

'' Has he got into some bother, already.
Eh ? No, that is impossible ; I've known
everything he has been at. Has he had
bad news ? But there is no one to be ill,
or die, he cares twopence about in any
part of the world, according to what he
says. What is it ? He is not in love
with Lisette at the Gaiety, is he ? He
was very keen over the piece last week.
But no — he would go again if that were

the case ; and he said he was nearly tired
of play-going already. Or is it — hah ! is
it — can it be — Blanche Etherege ? He
said she was really awfully nice after that
quadrille she danced with him at the
Faiths' Ball. I could not let him step in
there, by Jove, — I could not, indeed. But
no — he would not go to her own mother's
ball to meet her again to-night, although I
said I was going, and had got permission,
as the Yankees have it, to 'take him
along.' No, I am out there again ; no,
there is no fear for my Lady Sunlight — not
yet. Well, if he is going to cut up close
and mysterious after all that has come and
gone these last three weeks between us, I
shall be disappointed in my cheery young
Stoneshire M.P. I fear, and I shall never
believe in the ingenuous rustic again. But
no, by Jove, it's only a fit of the blues,
I am quite sure of it. There never was
a franker, cheerier-hearted fellow came

up to the big metropolis than Harry
Wynn."

And Jack was pretty right.

And yet there was something in Sir
Harry's thoughts all through that evening
which he kept closely hidden from his
friend.

He could not exactly tell why either.

It would surely have been a most
natural thing, if he had chattered out every
detail of his adventure as they sat at
dinner.

Most natural that he should have described
the black-nosed pug and the pretty
crepe dress of soft heliotrope, and the whole
personal aspect of the fair heroine whom
he had rescued from her despair.

Jack would probably know all about her.
and would recognize his description at once.

But no — Sir Harry was silent.

And he only roused himself with a

futile effort to plunge with interest into
other topics again and again.

Effort in such a line was quite foreign
to him, and it had resulted inevitably In
positive constraint.

What had possessed him ?

Again and again indeed he strove to
explain it, — to chase the soft vision away.

But it was impossible.

Again and again — between him and
that chestnut, flowering away in the little
back garden — there came, as he turned
absently from the dinner-table and let his
gaze wander dreamily away, the memory
of those two soft lustrous tearful eyes
turned upwards to his with eager gratitude
as he laid the rescued " Negro '"' within
her outstretched arms.

Again and again there came back the
same quiver of new and bewildering feeling
which had thrilled him as he watched
her bend her flushed face over her

And away again and again Sir Harry's
thoughts had wandered along the pathway
across the green flat sward, beyond the
Albert Memorial towards Princes Gate.

For over this she had passed away
from him, and left him to his wonderment
and to his memories, standing there by the
swinging gateway alone.

And as Jack all that evening had
chattered on to him, making a stream of
conversation from his side and on his own
account, Sir Harry, (emitting short and
unsatisfactory answers,) was forming deep,
subtle, and strong-made resolves within
himself.

'* I will go right down there tomorrow,"
he was asserting inwardly, all heedless
of Jack's eloquence. *' I will go right down
there, and follow along the path she took,
and I will get as far as I can — as far as I

could see her, and then I will reconnoitre
and watch about till she turns up again.
Yes — that's just what I will do tomorrow
and now — oh, I wish to Heaven Jack
would stop talking and take himself off
for to-night ! Oh, dear me, he has not yet
got through his coffee, and it is only half-past
nine o'clock."

This being a fair specimen of the meditations
which reiterated with a monotonous
sameness through Wynn's head
that May evening, it is little wonder that
his converse with Jack, his trusted comrade,
was so unsympathetic and dull.

Little wonder that Jack stayed indeed
only for one little cigarette and had then
departed, while the moon was just rising
beyond the bit of garden, and while it was
scarcely yet ten o'clock.

He never knew, and history has not
recorded, how the rest of that evening was
spent at Surrey Place.

Probably Harry watched the moon rise,
smoked countless cigarettes, and sat on
till midnight, musing with pleasant and
dreamy vagueness that leaves little to remember
and nothing to describe.

As for Jack, he changed his smoke-scented
coat for his ballroom attire at
Boodle's, drank a seltzer, hailed a hansom
and went to Lady Ethridge's dance.

If Harry would not come and enjoy
himself — well, that could not be called his
fault.

CHAPTER V.

LADY BLANCHE IN REPOSE.

Lady Blanche Ethridge had kept a valse
for Jack.

A nice quiet after-supper valse, when
the room had cleared, a good many people
gone, and her hostess's duty-part in the
festivity nearly over. And after the valse
she went down with Jack to have her own
first share of supper — for she had kept this
favour for him against many rivals, and
had waited patiently till the moment when
she might disappear.

And she did disappear, leaving her
mother to conduct the ceremony of the
cones y and vanishing with Jack into the
sweet-scented, softly-lit conservatory, where

she sat down to repose from her night-long
labours, and where they had a good
long talk about Harry Wynn.

Lady Blanche was remarkably good-looking,
remarkably sensible, and remarkably
enlightened and wide awake.

She was quite young, but like Jack, her
fast friend, she was very wise !

From the earliest moment of her debut
from a schoolroom seclusion into the wide
varied scenes of her special sphere of social
life, she had opened her big brown intelligent
eyes, and swept them over the world
she was going to live in, and read it
through.

Lady Blanche thought the world a
humbug ' — so she was fond of saying, and
so she often said.

But she thought, moreover, that it presented
difficulties and intricacies in its
organism which it behoved all wise people
who meant to live in it to understand.

'Society' is not an easy thing to do with,
especially in these latter days. But with
society ' Lady Blanche had to do. She
did it well. She made a study of her
work, and she really knew ' society ' down
to the very springs of its action, and the
basis of its motives, a great deal better
than ' society ' knew her.

And she understood, too, pretty well,
what 'society' wanted of her, and the exact
position which she had to take up.

'' Se faire valoir " was one of her
maxims in dealing with a certain class,
although, in point of fact, she did not
'value herself at all.

And this was soon known of her by
another class.

By those of ' society ' who she felt could
understand and appreciate what she herself
really liked to be. A character frank, fearless
and self-reliant, — ready in intercourse ;
easy to get on with," as people said,—

only with a certain air about her springing
perhaps from her complete ease ; an air
which was apt to dominate the position
generally, and to make her associates feel
that Lady Blanche was likely to be all the
pleasant for having entirely her own way.

She was very warm-hearted and impulsive
with all her worldly wisdom, and she
was capable of being very fond of her
friends, and of such belongings as she considered
especially hers.

In the last category she classed Jack.

He belonged to her. They had begun
public life, as she often said, together.

They had studied their parts and compared
notes through the same ' first
season,' three years ago.

And Jack had declared himself as hers,
and hers only, before any one else had
thought at all about him.

They had been true to each other, too,
ever since. They looked at life with the

same kind of eyes. They indulged In the
same style of youthful cynicism. They
affected a similar vein of nil admwa}^
criticism, and they were equally ' good
fellows ' in reality in their respective ways.

If they were in love they said nothing
about it, — they were bons camarades.

They suited each other, and spent an
hour in cosy tHe-astute at every ball or
breakfast at which they met.

Lady Ethridge certainly did not approve
of Jack, but Lady Blanche would not be
interfered with.

'' Leave me my one little folly," she
would say loftily to her mother, when Lady
Ethridge remonstrated. "■ Let Jack and I
flirt quietly through a few pleasant seasons,
and I will promise to be a monument of
wisdom in all other points. Jack knows
his place, poor boy, and never looks beyond
tomorrow for either himself or me."

Meanwhile it was only their third season,

and the folly, not having yet yielded to
wisdom, was proceeding happily on Its
course among the ferns and geraniums at
Lady Blanche's own ball.

Lady Blanche took an Interest In Sir
Harry

"He Is so refreshingly young," she said.
** Jack, you must make him give up blushing.
I really do not think it Is good
form."

So she had said when he was first presented
to her. But she had been very
kind to him ever since.

And now he had not come to her ball,
and It rather piqued her.

'what has become of your young rustic
? " she said.

He Is at home."

At home ! Nonsense ! Where has he
gone to, I say ? What has he preferred
to my ball ? "

"Nothing — I vow — nothing. He Is at

VOL. I. G

home, probably in bed, sleeping the sleep
of the rustic at this moment. I have no
doubt he went off before ten o'clock,
having consumed one innocuous cigar."

'why, but it is quite eccentric to goto
bed in the season at ten o'clock, as if
it were November at my grandmother's
in Lincolnshire. Too absurd ! "

It is — but I suspect true. Lady
Blanche, I just want to have a good talk
with you about Wynn. I have taken a
sort of liking to the fellow."

"So have L" Lady Blanche flung her
huge Spanish fan open as she answered
and glanced at Jack over it, flashing a
bright amused look at him from her big
brown eyes, for his face had clouded.

'' That would not do, you know," he
said.

*' Don't be silly, Jack. Go on."

'well — -," he began, sulkily.

Go on about Sir Harry, I say. I like

him, and so do you. I am glad to like
him because — so do pott. There, will that
satisfy you ? "

*' * Love me, love my pal,' does not
always work," exclaimed Jack, a little
grimly.

*' O yes, it does. At least, * like me,
like my pal,' is a necessity. I should not
let you take up anybody of whom I did
not approve. But I do approve of Sir
Harry, only I will never forgive him for
not coming to-night."

Well, you know, — look here, it's just
this," continued Jack. '' I like him, and
all of a sudden I cannot make him out.
I would like him to be one of ours, you
know, — to attract him into our little set,
and to set him afloat in the thing for the
season, and here, all of a sudden, .to-night
he has been going on as if he did not
care a hano^ about the entire concern."

'' Where were you together to-night '^. "

'' At his house, down In Surrey Place.
I was dining with him. He has got the
nicest Httle diggings, you know, down
there, and the jolliest lot of funny old
rococo servants — a tip top cook, too, among
them. The whole thing Is capitally well
done, for, you know, I helped him out a
bit, when he was getting It all ship-shape.
And there I went to dine with him, forby
Jove, the fellow has already got dead
sick of the club. And there we had the
snuggest little dinner, set out by the open
window, looking out on a trim little bit
of garden, all as nice as you could wish.
But Wynn himself seemed all in the
downs, as If he were already blast of
everything, and as if the whole thing
bored him unutterably ; — after all my
trouble too ! "

'' I do not think he is altogether cut
out for London life," said Lady Blanche.

"Not altogether; but it seemed to meas

If he were the cheery sort of fellow who
liked to go right In for everything, London
or country, as It might come up. Only
to-night he has rounded upon me, and
says it is all a bore."

'' Is he In love ?"

'' Can't be. At least, if so, I don't know
with whom. I thought of course he was
looking down in this direction at the
beginning of the evening, when I saw
his sentimental mood to-night. But then
he would not come here, you know.
And I am bound to say he sent his
respects to your ladyship without any of
those suspicious blushing of which you
used to accuse him a fortnight ago."

He does not care a brass farthing
about me. Jack," said Lady Blanche,
calmly.

*' Tant mietix. I am delighted to hear it."

Not kind of you, Jack, but true," said
Lady Blanche. "He cares much less forme

than I do for him," she added, with
a pretended gravity and sentiment in her
voice.

'' Blanche ! "

Because," she went on," I care just
enough for him to be anxious that he
should go straight through It all. Wear
his hat just at the right angle, and cut
his hair properly, and be liked all round.
In fact I am interested. Jack, and he has
no sort of interest in me at all ! "

I cannot quite make out what does
interest him. That is just it."

If he were only in love."

But then you see he is not."

'' But he ought to be."

'' All very well. But, hang it, one may
buy a fellows carpet for him, and help
him to order a T-cart, and furnish his
house, but I am blessed if any one can
show a man how to fall in love, if it is not
in him to do it. Or find somebody to suit

him to fall in love with — if he cannot do
^/la^ for himself."

It is quite in the nature of Sir Harry
Wynn to fall in love, Jack."

I do not believe it."

'' Oh yes, it is — if only ■"

'' Oh, please do not you try to make him
do it, Blanche."

Oh no, I will not. But perhaps only
because I know I should not succeed. I
do not take any merit for It. If I could.
Jack, and if I could prevent your being
jealous, I think I should like to try. But
there would be no good, — he has no eyes,
in the very least, for me, — and the most
callous pair of ears possible to boot. I
waste no energies, only he co7ild fall in
love, and he really ought to do it."

Well, he must find the fair object for
himself, then. I could do a great deal fora
pal, but not that ; for you see, Lady
Blanche, if I find any one whom / think

ONE MAY DAY.

the nice sort, you know — well, I like to
keep her just quietly to myself."

Naturally," said Lady Blanche, In a
composed voice. " No, that is not the
sort of thing a man usually does well for
his friend. But never mind. I think you
will find Sir Harry Wynn will have discernment
enough in his own cause when
his time comes; and you will see he will be
enthusiastic enough, too, without any help
from you. But I wish we could do something
for him, nevertheless, Jack. He is a
nice boy. We do not want him to get
bored and go off to his rusticity, and
become a bumpkin, in disgust, after his
first season."

''No, I wish we could get him into form.
But what can we do ? "

I know exactly. Why did it not occur
to you. Jack ? He must have a real good
Platonic ' with Lady Ridgeway to begin
with ; and that will occupy him and keep

him Interested for two seasons at least.
Do you not think so ? Is he not exactly
one of her particular kind — tall, fair, blue
eyes, twenty-three, and unsophisticated ?
Could not be better for both, and the
position Is vacant."

*' What ! — Is poor little Cupid Tierce
off to Afghan?"

Really going tomorrow. He said
good-bye to Lady Ridge way at Kew
House on Thursday night."

'' Poor little Cupid ! "

^' Yes, we shall miss Cupid. But you see
Sir Harry will exactly fit the vacant place."

Jack was silent for an Instant, and meditative
; then he shook his head.

'' Not quite his form, I think. But
there Is never any telling. Let us Introduce
them, at all events. When can It be
done ? "

I am going with Lady RIdgeway to the
Opera tomorrow night."

Are you ? Then I will try to persuade
Wynn to go also. Look out for us in the
stalls about ten o'clock, and make her
majestic ladyship bow an amiable encouragement
to "me to go aloft to you. But
which Opera ? "

Oh, Covent Garden. It is Patti's first
night."

I shall be there, at all events ; and I
will do the best I can to bring Harry
Wynn."

'rand now," said Lady Blanche, "take
me back into the drawing-room, please."

Oh," he remonstrated, " it is so much
pleasant in here."

It is ; but it is past two o'clock. My
mother will be indignant, and she will
frown upon you when you come to luncheon
next Sunday, Jack."

It is so perfect here. How well your
flowers always do — better than anybody
else's, I always think."

That is because I look after them myself,
Jack. I do not leave all my conservatory
gardening to the shop-gardeners.
I am out for an hour every morning
with my leather gloves, and with my
gardening apron on, and snip and trim as
I do at home, you know. You cannot
think what trouble that tea-rose has even
me. Look how skilfully I have trained it
round the centre pillar."

Jack was looking dreamingly round the
little bower of verdure and sweet odours,
gently fanning himself with her large fan
(of which he had taken possession), and
musing over the picture she had drawn
of herself at her morning gardening, in
leather gloves and apron, among these
roses and ferns.

To-morrow she would be out there
while he probably was still sound asleep.

** What a deal of ' go ' you have,
Blanche," he said.

I hope so — there is nothing like it.
But come along, Jack, we must really join
the giddy throng," she exclaimed at length,
rousing him up, as she always did promptly,
when he showed symptoms of becoming
meditative or sentimental. " Come along,
we have had enough of it. I have had
my full quota of repose."

One last waltz, then," he urged as he
rose, restored her fan to her, and stood
waiting a moment while she collected her
sundry possessions of bouquet, handkerchief,
and long lace-edged gloves.

Another waltz ? — why, I think it is
over."

No ; I hear ' La Because ' going on
now. Do come. Let us have one turn ;
the room will be nearly empty."

Very well, then."

And she slowly drew on her gloves.

Do not forget, it is Covent Garden tomorrow
night," she continued, as he stood
waiting opposite to her.

But I need not come, I suppose, unless
I bring Sir Harry ? "

Lady Blanche looked up with a bright
smile — she was fastening the very last of
the eight buttons of the glove on her left
hand.

TJiafs finished," she said, lingering
when the process was completed, extending
her hand open for a moment and looking
down into it from Jack's clouded face,
still smiling that soft, playful, bright,
provoking smile.

'* Oh, Jack ! " She said nothing more.

He took her extended hand then for a
minute into his, and she did not withdraw
it, but she looked up again into his face,
and she closed her hand suddenly, holding
his in a firm clasp; and she shook it with a
gesture of cordiality and friendship, and
without the slightest approach to any other
sentiment at all.

It angered Jack more than it pleased

him. But he shruo-cred his shoulders with

oo

a resigned expression of countenance, and
as she rose then and stood, towering tall
and gracious and brilliant beside him, he
let her silently take his arm.

They passed Into the ball-room together,
where " La Because " was still streaming
on ; where a few dancers still swept over
the glassy floor, and where Lady Ethridge
was busy saying many polite good-nights.

And they stood a moment at the door
and looked In, Jacks heart beating fast
within him, as he felt the light kindly
pressure of her hand upon his arm. For
she did not like to have Jack In a bad
humour, and she was not above a little
gentle coaxing of him back again, to his
usual state of bo7ihoinie and cheerless.

And so she had squeezed his arm, and
even shaken It a little, with a sort of
friendly familiar gesture as they stood in
silence there ; and then she whispered :

*' All right then, Jack, let us have one little
turn."

He encircled her waist without answering
a word, and three times they swept
round the room with immense venue and
energy, — landing just in front of Lady
Ethridge in time to receive her disapproving
frown.

Blanche, what became of you ? "

Of me, mother '^, I went down to
supper."

''Ah! I did not know that Mr. Fielding
had arrived."

Nevertheless, I made my bow, Lady
Ethridge ; but I express no wonder that
so insignificant a personage as my humble
self should pass you unobserved."

'' I did not observe you," she answered,
a little haughtily. '' Blanche, Lord Atherton
is waiting to say good-night to you.
I must say, my dear, as a hostess, you are
sadly remiss."

*' Lord Atherton will forgive me," said
Blanche, laughing, and turning to give her
hand to a young man, who was bowing
gravely beside her. She blushed deeply,
however, as she looked up at him, and he
bent over her hand.

Fate seemed to stand ominously silent
and irresistible before Blanche, as she stood
there between Lord Atherton and Jack.

'will you dance again ? " Lord Atherton
asked her. *' I have been waiting the fulfilment
of our engagement for some time."

"Yes, I know I have behaved very
badly," she said ; '' but it is too late now,
Lord Atherton. I have really danced
very little indeed this evening. Our engagement
must be for another night."

And then she glanced into Jack's face,
as, with a quiet smile of triumph playing
upon his lips he stood still close by her
side. And the blush faded from her
cheeks, and a soft sweet light gleamed fora

moment In her large dark eyes — for he
was propitiated.

It would be all sunshine and serenity
again between them, and tomorrow it
would be so pleasant to have him ride upto
her as a matter of course before luncheon
in the Row.

Poor Jack — poor boy ! " she thought
softly. "It is of no use, and we both know
it ; but oh, life Is so much pleasant when
I am good friends with Jack ! "

He went away then, and Lord Atherton
also, and they walked downstairs together,
as if there was no such thing as possible
rivalry between them.

They exchanged remarks indifferently
as they got Into their overcoats and helped
each other to light their cigars ; and then
away went Lord Atherton, driving in his
brougham through the streets and squares
in the softly breaking daylight ; and Jack
plunged his hands into his pockets and

VOL. I. H

walked off towards St. James's in meditations
that were both bitter and sweet.

She cares for me — she does care forme,
God bless her' he murmured ; " but
hang it, what is the good ? How I wish I
had the needful, by Jove ! How I wish
I were Harry Wynn, or that nincompoop
Atherton, or any other of the fellows who
are not Bohemians of the ^av^, but have a
fixed position and a title or a name. It is
no good. And yet, Blanche — my sweet
white rose, Blanche— I cannot give you
up. I cannot stand back, as I suppose I
ought to do, and let one of the eligibles
step in and win. Let us have this season,
at all events, and then I will go to Kama
or anywhere else, and oblige the
austere dowager by taking myself out of
the way. And there is Harry Wynn, with
the course clear for him in life. Nothing
to do but canter easy over it, and come up
when it just suits him to the post. And

not a bit does he seem to care about it
all. So the world wags ! In fact it is an
odd world — but I wish I had never met
Blanche Ethridge on my way through it,
or that I had come up to the starting-point
with ten thousand a year."

So that was the state of matters between
Jack and Lady Blanche Ethridge, when
they agreed together to undertake mutually
the guidance and general instruction of
Harry Wynn.

They knew the world he had come into
(or so they both thought), and he did not
know it.

They knew what it demanded and what
it declined. What it denied to people
situated as they were, they had long ago
realized, although they said little about it
to one another in a general way.

It denied them a good deal, perhaps ;
but on the whole it left them a great many

pleasant things in the routine of their daily
life.

Among the pleasantness were these many
meetings, which continued inevitably morning,
afternoon and night.

And Lady Ethridge could not help it,
unless she carried Blanche out of London
altogether.

CHAPTER VI.

WHO MAY SHE BE ?

*' Will you come to the Opera, to-night ? "
was inscribed in a hastily scribbled note
which found its way to Surrey Place early
the following day.

"Will you come and see Patti in ' Romeo
and Juliet ? ' It is her first night this
season. Send me a line by Ned, and I
will send to Bacon and Oliver for two
stalls."

Ned was promenading the dusty road
outside Sir Harry's festooned windows,
when that young gentleman, with the note
open in his hand, came down into his little
sitting-room to breakfast. To a regular
country breakfast, at half-past nine o'clock.

at which tempting-looking covered dishes
and hot home-baked rolls awaited him. A
repast such as demanded an appetite un-jaded
by late hours and midnight smoking,
to say nothing of the walk round the Serpentine
with his collie, in which Sir Harry
had already indulged that morning before
eight o'clock.

Even here, on a hot London morning,
Mrs. Floy's careful exertions on his behalf
were not thrown away.

He walked to the window, and there was
Jack's one steed, his handsome brown park
hack, taking his morning exercise with
Ned, Jack's diminutive stableman, on his
back.

'' Jack wants an answer," Sir Harry
murmured to himself. 'what has put it
into his head, I wonder ? He had no
thought of the Opera when he was here
last night. Well, I do not mind ; I will go
with him."

And down he sat at his Httle table to
write.

Dear Jack,

Yes, by all means, do get the
stalls, and come here and dine first. I
shall expect you before seven o'clock.

- H. W. A. Wynn."

Then he went on with his breakfast, and
looked out of the window, where the sun
was sparkling brightly upon the young
fresh green, and he thought of Jack for a
minute, and of the prospects of the Opera
with him.

And then, gradually his thoughts veered
back to his own experiences of yesterday
evening, and he thought no more of the
Opera, and not once again of his friend.

Indeed, Jack looked in vain for him in
the Park that morning.

Lady Blanche was there, and, at a smile

and a gracious nod, Jack had joined her,
and together, for at least an hour, they had
ridden up and down, the May sunshine
dancing upon their bright young faces, and
shedding its gladdening fair lustre over the
whole gay crowd.

Up and down they had ridden, bowing
and smiling left and right to innumerable
acquaintances, and looking, both of them
(each time they turned below the Memorial),
down the hot white road, towards
Queen's Gate, expecting each turn to see
Sir Harry Wynn — to catch sight of his
straight figure, sitting firmly upon his
handsome cob, coming up towards them
as usual, with a flower in his light-coloured
coat, and the sunshine dancing upon his
bright boyish face and his fair waving
hair.

But to-day — among all the crowd of
carriages and of riders wending their way
to the Park — no Sir Harry was to be

seen at all — not, at least, till nearly two
o'clock.

Then, just as a low, pretty victoria
turned in at the gate nearest the Gardens,
Jack caught sight of his friend, not riding,
indeed, but walking slowly away in the
opposite direction, along the road towards
the Gardens' deep chestnut shades.

'' There he is ! " he exclaimed.

He ? Sir Harry ? What, walking
away by himself along there ? Why, what
an eccentric he is to be sure. He is
beyond the ride. He is right into the
Gardens ; there is no good our attempting
a pursuit. But Jack," continued Lady
Blanche, who had glanced down eagerly
into the pretty victoria which swept past
them as they spoke, "Jack, that was our
pretty girl again — who is she, I wonder?
You know the one. Jack, whom I mean.
Look, there is her victoria disappearing
along there. Such beautiful horses, and

her servants all in mourning still, and so
she is also, — but not nearly so deep as
they were in last year. Who can she
be ? I have seen her so often, and I
do so want to know. She drives every
morning along the Park, but she scarcely
ever stops. Do you not remember I
pointed her out to you once before — last
season, just at this corner too — and you
promised to find out who she was, Jack,
and you never did."

'' Neither I did," he answered. " I wonder
; she is awfully pretty, there is no doubt
of it. I did not notice her this morning, I
was looking after Wynn. But I do admire
her, and I must really find out who she is."

I see her always just at this corner,"
said Blanche, as she slowly turned her
horse. " That ought to be a clue for you.
Jack. She must live somewhere in this
direction, for she always comes into the
Park just at this gate."

They talked on together on the subject ;
and as they rode back along the crowded
ride they speculated, little thinking that
Harry Wynn had spent the morning in
unravelling, to his complete satisfaction,
this same mystery in which they were
exercised.

There was a directness and determination
about Sir Harry that generally carried
him fair and straight on his way. He
seldom missed a point for want of going
straight at it. When he wanted to know
a thing he took promptly the quickest way
to find it out.

He was quite determined to discover,
and to discover for himself in silence, the
identity of the fair heroine of his adventure
with the two dogs.

And so he set about it in a cool, considerate,
methodical manner, that arrived,
ultimately, at the desired result.

He spent the morning not in the conventional
ride prescribed by the season's
routine, but in a way quite original and
his own.

To begin with, he sent back his cob to
the stable, to the utterable amazement of
the Miss Prims.

Then, having got rid of his correspondence,
which was becoming an important
one, and rather an oppressive item in the
existence of the youthful M.P., he attired
himself in his usual Park costume, — the
light grey suit which excited so much
admiration in the minds of the Miss
Prims.

He put a fresh moss-rosebud into his
button-hole.

He slowly and meditatively lit his cigar,
and then calling Ronald, the big collie dog,
to accompany him, he strolled away up
Surrey Place towards Kensington.

It was a beautiful fresh May morning,

and those West End London streets were
sunny and gay.

Troops of people, bound for ride or
drive, or for wire-work seats under the
shade of the chestnuts, were hurrying along
in very smart attire.

The summer morning was sweet and
gladsome, and a curious brightness seemed
to fill Sir Harry's young eager spirit as he
strolled along.

He wanted — he did not know what
exactly ! but something, at which Hope
whispered pleasantly, he might with
courage arrive.

And he hoped — something scarcely defined
in his heart either, but a something
which seemed to impel him with curious
directness towards the scenes of last evening's
meeting.

He passed out of the hot noisy Kensington
Street into the shady Gardens.

He strolled along eastwards between

the rows of chestnuts, all heavy with rich
foliage, all bright with flowers. .

And he kept on his way till he reached
that central point of the Gardens where he
had been resting last night, when she had
come along from out the sunset of the west.

And he sat down on the same bench,
and puffed quietly at his cigar.

Ronald curled at his feet, and took
an unwonted siesta, reconciling himself
promptly to this new method in which it
pleased his master to pass the morning.

And there sat Sir Harry for one long,
quiet, meditative half-hour, looking along
one avenue after another, down the many
vistas of the green star, expecting nothing
definitely, but with a sort of feeling within
him that it was pleasant to sit and muse
and smoke his cigar, and to see her — at
least in fancy — coming once more along the
green avenue beneath the chesnuts' bloom.

But she did not come that morning.

And after a while Sir Harry became
impatient. He resigned even his vague
and undefined hopes, and ultimately he
sprang suddenly to his feet.

As suddenly he turned, stood pausing
for a moment, and swinging his stick
impatiently, looked once more along each
avenue in turn.

Ronald woke up then, and roused himself
also, ready to follow in any direction,
or along any way in which his master
might lead.

And after a moment's pause, Sir Harry
started, walking quickly to the right and
eastward along the very same pathway,
down which he had followed that rapidly
receding form in heliotrope, just the evening
before.

He walked quickly, swinging his stick,
hitting the little grass blades, and sometimes
the chestnut branches hanging low
above him as he went.

He reached the corner. The Memorial
loomed high above him, bright and lustrous
against the morning sky.

The Serpentine glistened in the sunshine
away on one side, little white-winged boats
dancing gaily on its lilliputian waves.

Along at his left hand stretched the
flower walk, fragrant in this sweet May
month with pink and snow-white hawthorn
and with flowering cherry and lilac-trees.


Away alongside the Serpentine lay the
other Walk and the Row, where the gay
and brilliant crowd oi flanders went to and
fro, and where he could see from where he
stood, leaning on the iron wicket-gate, the
sun gleaming upon the bright trappings
and glossy coats of the horses and on the
many-hued dresses grouped beneath the
trees.

But the gay scene did not lure him. It
had no attractions for him to-day.

He leant a few moments on the low
gate, then he swung it open and passed
through and across — straight across that
bit of flat grass lying between him and
the lower ride running along the Park on
the southern side.

He went strolling along, Ronald following
wonderingly at his back.

He reached the railing along the lower
side, and vaulted lightly over it, for he
did not well know his way in these
familiar regions yet, and had missed the
opening.

He plunged recklessly among the crowd
of riders coming from east and west. He
passed through them and went straight
towards the nearest exit, and thence out of
the Park.

This was the last point at which he had
seen her, — for just at this gate she had
gone out, carrying home her affrighted
Negro the night before.

VOL. I. I

Sir Harry paused and glanced about
him. Then he crossed the road.

'* She must have crossed," he thought ;
and she could not have gone very far, for
it had been late when they had had their
rencontre, and she could not have had a
long way to walk home to dinner.

He looked round. Right in front of
him towered the large upper houses of
Prince's Gate. A little garden, scarcely
more than a tuft of shrubbery, separated
them from the dusty public road.

He walked round this, and he and
Ronald were strolling slowly along the
broad pavement in front of the row of
handsome pillars and balustrade doorways,
when a low hung victoria, drawn by
a pair of beautiful bays, drew slowly up atone
of them, and the coachman settled himself
on his box as if arrived at his point.

Sir Harry passed close by the victoria
and surveyed it with admiration.

It was of chocolate colour, — not commonplace,
easily distinguishable in a crowd.
The cushions and damask linings were
also of the same rich shade of brown ;
and although the coachman was in black,
every other point in the harness of the
horses and the paint of the pretty little
carriage recalled and repeated the chocolate
colouring, throughout each detail.

The horses were dark bay, and matched
to a hair ; and Sir Harry's glance ran over
them with great approval and admiration.
He turned when he reached the corner
just to look at them again.

He turned, and just then a footman,
dressed for carriage duty, and carrying a
red book, a brown dust-rug, and a parasol,
ran down the steps of the house at which
the carriage stood.

He nearly ran against Sir Harry in his
haste, for he was closely followed.

Then out from the wide hall, and slowly

down the steps — once more she came !
carrying the black-nosed pug ; with the
same soft hehotrope dress sweeping the
steps behind her ; with the same little lace
bonnet set above a brown clustering fringe;
with the big, beautiful, dark blue eyes,
which had looked so deep into Sir Harry's
heart in their utterance of gratitude, looking
straight before her, all unconscious of
him now, and with that same absent concentrated
expression in them which had
struck him as she swept past him down
the chestnut avenue last night.

But this time she was not alone.
Behind her came a stout and placid-looking
middle-aged lady, dressed in the purple
and more matronly shade of the heliotrope
hue.

And by her side at first, and then hurrying
eagerly forward to assist the younger lady,
came a grave, elderly-looking man, who,
with head uncovered, and with his grey

locks glistening in the summer sunshine,
stood and talked with them both for a few
minutes after they had taken their seats.

Presently a footman hurried out behind
them and obsequiously tendered him his
hat

Then Sir Harry Wynn drew back a
step. The carriage moved ; Ronald
barked and sprang forward, and Negro
nearly wriggled out of his mistress's arms.

Notwithstanding the fright he had sustained
last evening, that intrepid little adventurer
was as eager to rush into a new
acquaintance as ever !

Ronald barked, and the two bays sprang
forward with an impetuous start.

The old gentleman stepped back, and
the elder lady bowed and smiled to him ;
the other caught Negro tight and eagerly
in her arms, and sat up and glanced round.

Sir Harry called Ronald to his heel.
She turned and heard him, but the footman

was springing to his place, and the
victoria moved on.

Their glance had met once — met once
again, however ; and Sir Harry, quite unconscious
as to what might be the etiquette
in a circumstance like this, obeyed simply
his instinct and quick impulse, removed his
hat, and swept it low in a grave salutation
as she drove away.

Her eyes seemed to rest and linger
a moment upon him, as the victoria moved
forward, and as he stood there, bowing
with a respectful gravity, Ronald curling
submissive at his feet.

And as their glance met, a sweet vivid
smile rippled all over her fair face, parted
her lips for one instant and gleamed in her
bright eyes.

One ray of glad recognition danced in
Harry's eyes to meet hers, and she was
gone !

The old gentleman turned sharp round

JI9

then, and for a moment his glance rested
angrily upon Sir Harry.

He scanned him ; he paused ; he made
a step forward as if he would speak, then
he shook his head suddenly, put his hat
on, turned sharp upon his heel again, and
strode away.

The big door was swung to, by the
servants within the hall, and there was Sir
Harry left disconsolately upon the broad
pavement, with the memory of a second
vision, — with the reflection of a second
flash from those bright eyes, to come
between him and all things practical and
sublunary for the whole day.

Nothing more could be made of it, save
scan the number of the house.

He had seen her, and he had discovered
at least this : that she was rich and well
tended, that she lived in Prince's Gate,
No. 73; and that, by consulting the '' Court
Guide " of this year of grace and election,

he might have a fair and very direct
chance of discovering her name.

Not bad for a rustic ! " I think Jack
and Lady Blanche would have said.

All this was something to have ascertained
at all events, and now he might go
back, musing and meditating on his way.

And back he went into the Park and
Gardens again, and it was at that point
that Lady Blanche and Jack beheld him,
meandering along the. dusty footway by
the western corner of the ride.

CHAPTER VII.

A CRIMSON FICHU.

Patti's first night at Covent Garden, — an
event not to be passed lightly over, even
that spring, when there were so many other
important events going on.

An important event — and every stall,
except their own two, seemed taken, as Sir
Harry and Jack struggled into their places
at rather a late hour.

The . overture was long over, and the
Opera was well on its way.

Juliet had given already some of her
sweetest and most impassioned songs, and
Romeo was working up rapidly towards
despair.

For Jack had gone down to dine with
his friend in Surrey Place, and this time
they had loitered through the hot evening
over their repast.

And Sir Harry had seemed in Jack's
opinion, even more than last night, to
yield, to the dolce far niente of a musing
fit, and had seemed quite unwilling to
leave his low smoking chair, when they
had sipped their coffee, by the open window
looking into the little garden behind.

But Jack had dragged him away, pleading
his own promise to Lady Blanche to
hasten his friend, and feeling convinced
that the immediate acquaintance of Lady
Ridgeway was peremptorily necessary to
rouse Sir Harry from the ennui with which
he had become suddenly possessed.

So they arrived, although very late.

Covent Garden was crowded, — every
box full, every stall taken, and the house
was dim in subdued light as they entered.

for a mystic scene of weird interest, with
soft musical accompaniment, was going
on.

The friends sat down, having reached
their places with as little noise as possible.

And Sir Harry with a thrill of awakened
interest and enjoyment turned his eyes
upon the stage.

The scene was remarkable and the
arrangement masterly, and the sweet,
tender tones of Juliet's pathetic voice came
floating towards them with intense beauty.

Sir Harry had never heard the Prima
Donna before.

His young heart had been quite suddenly
woke up, and every nerve in his frame had
already seemed to quiver with new life and
sensibility all throughout that day ; and
now — partly as a result, perhaps — a new
and keen pleasure, such as he had never
experienced before, seemed to vibrate and
thrill within him under the mystical force

and novel Influence of that artistic beauty,
and under the sway and sovereignty of
that incomparable voice.

He listened in the dim light, and he
gazed, — but he thought, through it all,
not of the scene before him, not of the
meaning of the song, but of that fair
bright face which had gleamed upon him
again that morning,— and of the graceful
form clad in crepe of soft heliotrope, which
had become the centre and the embodiment
of his newly roused sensibilities to
all beauty and art.

PattI could never have sung in vain
for him, — he must have woke up to some
experience of the force of artistic beauty,
had he heard her, even before he had ever
seen that heliotrope crime.

But the fact Is still indisputable that she
would have affected him very differently,
her notes would have found no ready
heart's chords on which to thrill and vibrate

had he heard her for the first time two
days ago.

The scene was over, — the tones died
away softly ; the curtain fell.

Instantly the light sprang up in the
house and illuminated every corner.

It was a brilliant night at Covent
Garden.

Jack stood up and turned his back upon
the stage.

Now let's have a good look at them,"
he said, and he put up his opera-glass and
swept it round the horse-shoe of the
house.

Do you not want to have a turn at the
glass, Wynn?" he said. 'Ts there no one in
London for whom you would like to spy ? "

No," said Sir Harry, indifferently ; then
adding instantly afterwards —

"But — by Jove! — yes, there is," and
suddenly he sprang also to his feet.

It had never occurred to him till now
that he might see her there. The
possibility suggested itself however !

Jack took down his double glass from
his eyes and stared, — Harry's ejaculation
absorbing for the moment his whole attention
in the sensation of surprise.

'' She will not be here, though," continued
Harry, " not half such luck."

He put up the glass in turn and scanned
the crowded house, while the colour rushed
over his cheek, and a curious little smile
curled his parted lips.

''No," he added, half so^^o voce, "she is
not."

But who ? " exclaimed Jack.

Oh, no one. It doesn't matter. Jack.
Whom do you see ? "

Oh, heaps of people. But, Wynn "

'' Oh, hang it, — never mind, old fellow, —
go on, — tell me who everybody is, — and I
say, Jack, who is that up there with the

crimson thing tied round her head ? I
call that very jolly now, don't you ? "

Jack put up his glass again and smiled.

*' Oh," he said in a peculiar tone, " I
wish they would push back that left side
curtain. I wish I could be quite sure
whose hand that is coming from behind it,
and lying on the cushion. Is it ? Yes, —
by Jove, that is all right."

And he put down his glass and turned
round upon Sir Harry with a bright
amused glance, just as the curtain in that
box above them was pushed back, and
Lady Blanche Ethridge bent forward from
behind it and scanned the house below
with eager searching gaze, until her eyes
lighted upon Jack, looking straight up
at her from the very middle of the stalls.

Her glance and smile answered his fora
second, then she bent towards her companion,
seemed to whisper something to
her, at which they both looked bright and

pleased; and then Lady Blanche leant back
and disappeared again behind the curtain,
while her friend stooped a little forward,
rested her arm upon the crimson cushion
in front of her, and looked straight down
upon Jack and Sir Harry with a cool, critical,
grave, far-seeing gaze, which seemed
to reach and keenly scan them without any
aid from her opera-glass.

It was the lady who had caught Harry's
notice as he had looked round the house, —
the lady with the '' red thing," as he had
called it, tied round her head, — the one
person in the whole brilliant throng about
whom he cared to inquire.

And it was little wonder that, in sweeping
the house with the careless, indifferent
glance (which was all that he had felt
disposed to bestow on the world of London
social life during the last few days), his
eyes, all indifferent as they were, should
have lit upon Lady Ridgeway. For she

was, even on that crowded night, when all
London seemed to be at Covent Garden,
much the most striking-looking woman
there.

She was on rather a large scale, for one
thing. She looked, sitting up there, as if
she must be inches taller, when she swept
through a room, than any other woman
around her, and as if the sense of her
commanding height gave her a feeling of
power and of predominance in its very
possession. For she could carry it grandly,
and she was so beautifully formed and
proportioned, that it never struck any one
to call her an inch too tall.

She was very handsome in the simple
details of feature, regularity of outline and
perfection of curve in eyelids and mouth,
and in colouring there was nothing
to quarrel with. A rich bloom gave
perennial freshness to a somewhat olive
cheek ; a brilliant glance and smile lit up

VOL. I. K

constantly, with a flash of youthful sunshine,
a countenance, that was rather grave
in repose and silence, and that carried
evidences in its graver moments, of having
passed its first youth.

The eyes that rested now so long and
critically upon Harry Wynn had just then
that grave look in them, — a deep sort of
sentiment in their expression, which seemed
uttering in that long silent gaze some
feeling that lay behind and beyond all
speech. That particular expression in
Lady Ridge way's gaze was supposed *sto
say a great deal ; " but it has never been
satisfactorily defined as yet what exactly
it did say.

It said, — plainly enough, however, as it
moved now to Jack's upturned face, — "come
up and see me ; " and it said moreover, as
it glanced back to Sir Harry, — "and bring
your friend."

Will you come up and talk to Lady

Blanche, and be introduced to Lady
Ridgeway," said Jack, instantly. " Look,
she has observed us, and I think she would
like us to go."

Like nne to go ? " said Sir Harry.

Yes, certainly. There is no one with
them at this moment, but little Everett at
the back of the box. So come along —
you will like Lady Ridgeway ; she is
very handsome, is she not ? "

'' You mean the crimson lady, — the
one with the red head-dress I mean ? "
answered Sir Harry, putting up his glass
again. " Yes, I think she is handsome.
I like that red handkerchief, Jack — don't
you ? "

Jack put up his glasses again.

Hum — ah— a little eccentric," he said,
critically, for Jack was considered a judge.
He had a prestige to keep up on this point
of lady's costume, and the crimson fichu
of the Basque or Bearnaise peasant girl.

which Lady Ridgeway wore, studded with
great diamond stars, tied round her dark
shapely head, was quite open to question
as a matter of taste.

It was becoming, and it was original —
not the fichu — but the diamonds which
flashed among its folds. But Basque peasant
girls have no diamonds, and therefore
the effect was quite disputable as a matter
of artistic taste. It marked out Lady
Ridgeway, however, for observation ; and
there was no doubt it suited her, as no
common head-dress suited any ordinary
woman in any box near. It marked her
out with a flash of light and a glow of
colour — the deep carnation tint of the
fichu and the diamond gleams amid its
folds.

Her dress was black, so was the lace
round her neck and arms.

No one could say that she did not look
distinguished and most interesting ; and,

notwithstanding all memory of the morning
and of the heliotrope crepe, Sir Harry
felt a thrill of excitement and a quickening
of his heart's pulse as Jack, pocketing his
glass, at last said —

Come along, let us go up and see
them."

And up they went.

There was a long entr^acte, and I do
not think that in all the familiar, although
many varied, ways of meeting and making
acquaintance which the London season
affords, there is one pleasant or more
conducive to rapid opening of interest and
sympathy, than that quarter of an hour of
the entrance at Covent Garden, — provided
always, that quite the right person has
taken the chair just behind, according to
her opinion — and that quite the desired
one occupies the front seat according to
his !

It was not quite the desired of his heart,
according to Sir Harry.

But still it was very pleasant, and the
ten minutes slipped fast away.

Lady Ridgeway had turned round as the
two friends had entered her box, while
Blanche, — after a glance and a smile of
understanding towards Jack, — had turned
quite away.

Lady Ridgeway had accepted Sir Harry's
presentation to her with rather a grave
bowes but she had looked at him from
under her drooping lids with a steady gaze
straight into his frank blue eyes.

And the gaze had had a light and a
fire, smouldering sofdy somewhere in its
shadowy depths — a gleam that seemed to
quiver for an instant with a curious sensation
into Harry's heart indeed, and which
made the colour rush over his sunburnt
cheek as he dropped into the seat behind
her shoulder.

Jack came to anchor instantly, without
hesitation or asking, in the chair just opposite
to him, behind Lady Blanche.

And poor little Everett — who was only
a third favourite adopted for want of a
better, and only pro tern. — received an
emphatic dismissal for that evening, and
went down rather sulkily into the stalls.

CHAPTER VIII.

A FAIR FICTION OF LOVE.

*' I AM SO glad to know you at last,'
whispered Lady RIdgeway, with a world
of untold meaning In her voice.

*' Me ! " exclaimed Sir Harry.

She did not continue to speak, but gazed
at him gravely for a second, turning round
In her seat so as to look straight over her
shoulder Into his bending face.

She threw open her large fan also, and
put It up between Jack and herself, and
bent her head behind It, as If her communication
to Sir Harry was of a very confidential
kind.

*' Very kind of you," he said presently ;

'lawfully good of you, Lady Ridgeway, I
am sure."

I have seen you so often riding past
my carriage In the morning, and I have so
longed to bow and make you stop. What
a conventional world we live In, Sir Harry !
No matter how strong may have been our
impulse of mutual sympathy and attraction,
we have had to wait for a solemn introduction
before we could even smile or
bow."

Yes, it is all a horrid bore," said Harry,
pausing a moment to recover his astonishment,
and wondering vaguely In his own
mind when his part in this mutual sympathy
of Lady Ridgeway s had come into
Hfe !

And then — taking his heart In his hand,
with a sort of native courage, just as he
had often gathered up his reins when out
hunting and " gone right in for the thing,
you know," as he afterwards said — he uplifted

his gaze, which had fallen in some
confusion upon the top of his opera hat,
and he turned it full upon Lady Ridgeway s
beautiful expressive countenance instead.

He gave her back glance for glance,
smile for smile, with a glowing cheek and
fast beating heart, indeed, but with a
youthful temerity and a ready eagerness
which proclaimed him to be remarkably
apt and promising, if she wished him to
learn a part.

And that was just what she did wish of
him.

Not much — nothing real, nothing actual,
nothing profound — only to pick up the
manner and learn the little part, and play
with her — throughout this, and perhaps
two or three other seasons to come — at
that fanciful, frothy comedy of false sentiment
in which she was fond of spending
her life.

The music burst forth, and the curtain

rose again, and from far back upon the
stage, came those thrilling passionate tones
of the Prima Donna in Juliet's last agonies
of love and pain.

And Lady Ridgeway leant back in her
chair, pushing it aside a little until she was
almost beside Sir Harry as he leant forward
eagerly to see and to listen, and ashe
held his breath in rapt silence and
gazed towards the stage.

Lady Ridgeway sighed a deep pathetic
sigh, the black folds of lace across her
bosom heaving and quivering softly with
the intensity of her emotion — so hardly
suppressed.

And Harry glanced round upon her, and
his heart did indeed then thrill with
sympathy.

For her grand dark eyes met his, scintillating
and gleaming as if full of tears,
and the whole beautiful face quivered
with a force of soft tender feeling which

it was not easy to realize was entirely
untrue.

It is wonderfully nice of her," he
thought dimly to himself; "very nice of
her to feel it all so much. And I dare say
she is just the sort of woman the world
would tell you can feel nothing." Then
aloud, or rather, very low, he whispered,
Music does affect you, Lady Ridgeway,
there is no need to ask that, at all events."

'' Does it not affect you ? " she murmured,
bending her shoulder a little towards
him, but looking away from him
towards the stage, as if overcome with her
sensibility.

'' Yes, this does — by Jove, it is lovely.
But it is not good for you, I do not a bit
believe it is, to feel like that."

I feel everything. Can one help it .^
Is it not the price one pays ? Would one
be otherwise ? Would you like me better
if I had no sensibility, Sir Harry ?"

'' I think I should Hke you, any way,"
Harry promptly and eagerly said.

And Lady Ridgeway smiled a tender
little playful smile, as if his boyish way
amused and also touched her, and she
laid her fan for a moment gently upon
his hand as if to silence him.

Not — if she would have let him look
down at the stage and listen — that he had
any special inclination to speak ! But she
had more to say to him.

She waited a second, however, looking
away from him with that tender little sad
smile still quivering on her lips, and in her
heavy eyes. And she let her fan rest on
his hand until his part occurred to him
again, and he promptly took it — the fan —
and then, for a moment, also the long-gloved
hand.

But that was too audacious, and was
instantly suppressed. The hand was withdrawn
from his after according him one
small lingering squeeze.

'' Silly boy ! What an impulsive thing it
is!" she murmured. 'now do not be
foolish, Sir Harry. Let us listen to that
heavenly music, and do look at the stage."

But I do not want to look at it," he
said

And then she turned and laughed outright
at him.

Even she was astonished at the promptitude
with which he had learnt his lesson.
And Sir Harry blushed and laughed then
also again.

He had a quaint feeling stirring oddly
within him somewhere, that — ' it was all
very absurd ! '

Certainly he did not in the least mind
looking at Lady Ridgeway, if she wished
it, for she was very beautiful to look upon,
and she was really ' very kind.'

And he would have been glad enough,
and thought it all 'great fun,' perhaps, only
that Patti was singing something so soft

and exquisite just then, that it brought
quite Other thoughts and feelings into his
head again, and he really wanted — notwithstanding
what he had said — he really
wanted to be quite still and quiet for the
moment, and to think once more of the
shades of Kensington Gardens, and of that
heliotrope dress.

CHAPTER IX.

SWEET CICELY BROWNE.

The heliotrope crepe was not worn in the
evening.

It had been changed for a soft, creamy-heed
Indian silk, when Cicely Browne,
carrying Negro, the beloved, folded close
in her arms, passed up the broad, thick-carpeted
staircase at Prince's Gate, one
evening about a week after that night on
which Sir Harry sat behind Lady Ridgeway's
shoulder at Covent Garden, and
learnt his first youthful lesson in making
fictitious love.

Parliament had opened in the interval,
and to-night Sir Harry was in his place
down there.

It was late. Cicely had taken her usual
turn among the chestnuts, and had come
in as usual to a late dinner. She had
been well chaperoned on this occasion, for,
be it said, it was merely by an exceptional
and fortuitous accident that she was discovered
of Sir Harry Wynn, wandering on
that soft May evening along the chestnut
alleys alone.

This evening she had been, as was her
wont, well guarded and safely chaperoned
as she took her customary ramble between
six and seven o'clock.

Now, as she walked up the stairs, her
slight form and her fair head, bending
tenderly over Negro's black muzzle, were
lit up by the lustre of a Venetian lamp
which, hanging from the cupola of the
lofty ceiling of the hall, illuminated with a
rich soft glow the handsome proportions
of the broad staircase and gallery, showing
the delicate tinting of the walls and

VOL. I. L

ceilings, as well as the graceful proportions
of a row of tall Corinthian pillars which
supported the staircase, and of some fine
pieces of statuary which filled the alcoves.

It was a beautiful modern London house,
and — It was Cicely Browne's very solitary
home.

It contained her, and Negro, and also
Belinda East — for so called was that stout
and placid-looking lady, whom Sir Harry
had first beheld taking her seat in the
victoria that very morning, as it drove from
the door.

Belinda, Cicely, and Negro, in the midst
of busy, noisy, self-centred, and self-interested
modern London, had long dwelt,
all three together, in this huge, quiet house,
in an old world seclusion, which in modern
times is rare.

They were related — that is to say, Belinda
and Cicely were ; and they were
mutually devoted the one to the other

with a curious bond of understanding
and friendship, which far surpassed any
claims their degree of relationship might
imply. One was an heiress, the other her
almost penniless friend !

Which was which ? Ah ! that was the
point exactly. It was the pride of Cicely's
heart to inform you that no one had ever
been able to discover. People never
found out unassisted which was the heiress,
and almost everybody quite invariably
guessed wrong.

For when they travelled together, —
which they had done occasionally, just In
these latter days — Belinda was taken
always for the majestic millionaire, and
the slim and quaint mannered Cicely for
her little pleasant friend.

And nothing ever made Cicely so nearly
angry as the discovery, almost invariably
made, that Belinda had herself told upon
them, and had enlightened some new

acquaintance as to the position in which
they really mutually stood.

Dear bright-eyed, quaint-souled Cicely,
certainly her money was the last thing one
could ever think of in connection with her.
All the dignity and prestige which it might
imply or carry, seemed reflected upon
Belinda East alone.

Up the stairs this evening went Cicely,
with a slow, lagging step. Her attention
seemingly absorbed in Negro, her head
bent over him, her cheek lying upon his
soft grey coat, and her ears unheeding the
run of general conversation which Belinda
kept on behind her, as that portentous
lady sailed, in her own distinctive style, upstairs.


It was a hot evening, although already
dark.

There was a stillness and a thundery
heaviness in the air, and in here — in to the

softly lit hall, and up the broad staircase,
and throughout the whole huge house — that
sense of a curious stillness seemed to penetrate
and to pervade.

There was, indeed, a silence and a quiet
solitude about that house which made
itself actually felt — even now, as you
passed through the hall and up the staircase
with Cicely and her sleeping pug.

A stillness which, if it was the usual and
chronic state of things, accounted, perhaps,
more than anything else for that aspect of
abstraction, of concentrated thought, and
of indifferent self-possession which, resting
upon Cicely's young face, had struck and
attracted Sir Harry Wynn with a curious
interest, in that one quick glance towards
her as she had passed him down the chestnut
glade.

And it was the chronic condition of
things. It had been a very still home,
indeed, throughout all Cicely's knowledge

of it. She had herself been the one and
only young thing in it as long as she could
remember at all.

She had had an old father — very old,
considering his daughters years. And
she had no mother to remember, no sweet
and softening recollections to abide with
her from her early days.

That tardy marriage of her father, Mr.
Geoffry Browne, had been a freak which
had seized him quite unaccountably to
himself in the course of a foreign tour
which he had undertaken very late in life.
A tour which it had struck him to make
when his fortune was becoming important,
and he himself a marked man, and his
home ready for any mistress he might
choose.

Fate led him on this tour — simply, as it
would seem, to quicken life within his heart,
and then to pluck it from him again. For
his wife, who had been a youthful, brown-haired

English-born gentlewoman (albeit
that he had met her abroad), died before
the fated tour was over, and it was only
her one little motherless infant whom he
had to bring home to England along with
him — in care of Belinda East.

It was, as it happened, the only freak of
fancy which ever visited Geoffry Browne.
He never travelled again. He returned
to his old ways of sombre solitude, pulled
down the blinds of his newly furnished
drawing-room, and betook himself to the
great leather library chair.

And thus he spent the twenty years,
which went by of Cicely's young, eager life,
before he thought much more of or for her,
than that she was a pleasant, though un-disturbing,
element in his routine existence,
amusing occasionally certain evening and
after-dinner hours.

An upper story was appointed for her
use and Belinda's as soon as they all

returned from abroad. And this upper
story became her " childhood's home."

Hers had been Indeed a curious young,
lonely life.

There when indoors, and generally in
the Kensington Gardens when they went
out, she had spent weeks and months,
and indeed years, which all rolled on and
on, unconsciously, as it would seem, to her
strange old father, although working many
subtle inward changes in Cicely and bringing
gradually much development to her.

Curious, silently evolving and smoothly
fleeting years, which seemed to promise
moreover, as she reached her twentieth
birthday, to go rolling on with equal
monotony still.

But just then, suddenly, a change came,
all unexpectedly — her father died. He
was gone — having passed away quite
quietly without one warning word, in the
grey twilight of a summer s evening, about

a year ago. He had been ailing ; but no
one knew, until all was over, that the disease
about which he had said so little, would
terminate suddenly and fatally in that sort
of way.

It had thus terminated however — and
on that summer evening Cicely had been
left alone in the world save for Belinda
East ; — alone in the great house with the
dim, darkened drawing-rooms. Alone withall
the future of her young life untold and
unread ; and quite unconscious of anything
the future might contain for her, until
Richard Garth came and gloomily informed
her that she was heiress to many thousands
a year.

CHAPTER X.

WHAT HE HAD TO DO With IT.

Richard Garth had played a prominent
part in all the recollections of Cicely's
childhood, and he stood ominously before
her as a powerful guardian of the destinies
of her bright girlhood now. He had been
her father's partner and business instrument
— scarcely to be called his friend.
For Geoffry Browne had not been given
to friendship, he had had small belief, in
fact, in the kind of thing.

The two men had been united simply by
mutual interest, and by the power of a
strong over a weaker mind. They had
laboured hand in hand together (speaking

quite commercially) as they climbed up a
dreary and monotonous pathway of success.
GeofFry Browne had been the thinker and
the astute schemer of schemes. In his quiet
way he had been a strong man, with force
to command as he had quickness to conceive.
His schemes and plans and devices
were the mainspring of the successes of
the house of Garth and Browne.

Richard Garth had been the man of
action. And although he was the elder in
commercial life, and although the firm had
begun with him, he was in fact but a
machine, working under the influence of
his partner's more acute and far-reaching
mind. Both worshipped the golden idol
together. Browne in the reserved seclusion
of his library, glorying in silence over the
magnitude of his successful enterprises,
and over the fame and the standing of the
firm.

They had worshipped together the

Firm of Garth and Browne and this was
the one bond of union between them. They
served each other's purposes, advanced
each other's Interests, and mutually agreed
to centre all their efforts and energies In
the exaltation of that soulless, lifeless thing
they called the ' House.'

The ' Firm of Garth and Browne,' and
all Its attendant glory, was the single
object for which one thought In silence,
and the other laboured, among the crowded
haunts of men.

Mr. Geoffry Browne had had about
him a certain degree of Interest quite apart
from his wealth and his love of Increasing
It. He had had even considerable mental
attractions. He had amassed books, which
he read ; and he bought expensive things,
when they seemed worth the money ; and
he had collected china and other articles
de vertu in this big, half-darkened, half-empty
house.

He had been capable, too, of that one
short passionate romance out there In
Italy ; and had his wife but lived, he might
have developed from out his gold-encrusted
self a very different man. She had not
lived, however, and Browne had become
the man he was. In many ways—of the
two partners — he was far the superior.

Richard Garth felt him always the
master. His whole soul was imbued with
the value of Browne's ideas, and with the
mission of fulfilling and executing them.
It was doubtful if they had a heart between
them !

An atmosphere of gloomy reserve hung
over Geoffry Browne's existence, and overshadowed
all the young opening days of
the lonely child of his lost wife.

If he had ever really loved her — loved
her as such tender little flowers of humanity
are loved often, even by grim and
stern fathers such as Geoffry Browne— she

would have brought some tenderness and
affection to bear on his chilled life. He
must have softened, If only he could have
drawn closer, to that little sunny thing,
whose lonely childhood was being spent
in those rooms upstairs, — while he sat
below In his lonely solitude.

But the softening never came. If he
had love for his daughter, Mr. Browne
never expressed nor realized It. His heart
or all he had ever had of heart — was
left In that Italian grave, and Cicely — when
at length he realized her — represented to
him only his — ambition !

This ultimately Indeed she did represent.
For, without any personality of feeling for
her, or for himself with regard to her, the
girl did become, just In his latter days, a
fact to him — simply as being the head of
the firm of Garth and Browne. The keystone
for a vast city fortune, and the
embodiment of a great idea— which, thus

suddenly occurring to him — he worshipped
and made henceforth the altar of all his
schemes, and the ground of all his future
plans and ambitions.

It was a curious light in which to view
a fair and delicate girl, sent to be the
brightness and natural comfort of his last
lonely days. A curious light, but so it
was — just at the end of his long strange
life Cicely had become thus a fact to
Browne as she suddenly appeared to him
the centre of his last project and of his
most brilliant commercial scheme.

This scheme, as life rolled away from
him, he confided to Richard Garth : —

The house of Garth and Browne would
be left without its thinking and scheming
head — so he must have felt for many
months back, before that quiet chill evening,
v/hen he had closed that very solitary life,
down in the grim library below.

The house of Garth and Browne, withall

its future possibilities and undeveloped
glories, would be left to the sole management
of Richard Garth ; and its sole
representative would be that fair, brown-haired
girl, who, if Richard Garth did
not marry and beget heirs presumptive of
his own, would inherit everything, and
would in her person represent all the
weight and responsibility of that eminent
commercial firm.

The charge of this girl — not as his
tenderly thought of daughter, but as the
heiress of his House — was committed to
his hard-headed partner by this strange
Geoffry Browne ; and with the charge was
unfolded to him that scheme by which, supposing
Richard Garth continued to remain
without heirs, and all thus centred upon
Cicely, the house might be raised to a far
higher pinnacle of commercial glory than
it had ever as yet attained.

As a first point Cicely's whole destiny and

future — linked as it was to large possessions
and inheritance — was to remain at the sole
and despotic disposal of Richard Garth.
'* Marry the girl," Geoffry Browne had said.
Marre her early, Garth, to the heir of
some such house as Bullion and Specie.
Some house standing as high at least as
theirs does — and choose theirs in particular,
because much centres with them upon the
son of Bullion, and they have a business
corresponding to our own. Let the houses
thus unite in one centre — and together
the interests of a vast colossal concern
may be conducted under one name. Together
they may found a fortune which
may raise the names of Garth and Browne,
linked to Bullion and Specie, to a lasting
eminence among men. We may be the
founders of a line of great names : our
representatives in two generations may
wear strawberry leaves. Follow out my
scheme, Garth," the strange-hearted father

VOL. I. M

had said one night, as they sat over their
dinner in the grim, dull dining-room downstairs.
" Follow out my scheme, and I may
die content, knowing that I may be the
ancestor of a line of Dukes, perhaps, as
wealthy as any in England, and that I
am the father of one who may at least
see her son carry the wealth of * Browne
and Garth and Bullion,' straight to the
House of Lords one day."

And so Mr. Browne had died, satisfied
with those vague and dreamy speculations
regarding only posterity, and heedless, that
in the mean time he was the father of as
sweet a child as was ever given to bless
a parent's last weary days. Died silently
and alone in the leather chair of the grim
library ; and Cicely awoke quite suddenly
to all the new positions of her life ; to the
knowledge of her inheritance and wealth,
and to the gradual realization of the 'complete
bondage under which it was all held.

Geoffry Browne willed all to her under
conditions of obedience to Mr. Richard
Garth. To him he had left the whole
destinies of her life and future, — to turn
and mould and order at his will !

Obedient to him, she was one of the
wealthiest heiresses west of Temple Bar ;
while rebellious to him, she might have
nothing.

This was her curious place in life ; this
was the destiny which she had been
aroused to realize.

At first she did not know it all. Her
father's death — which could bring but the
weight of a passing sadness to her heart —
brought at the same time a wondrous freedom
to her daily habits and ways.

She was left in the old home, for Richard
Garth held his partner's daughter personally,
in much the same indifferent consideration
that her father had done. And
as Browne had let her live, so Garth left

her to continue. It did not occur to him
to alter her style of life, or to restrict the
handsome costliness in which it had pleased
Geoffry Browne at all times to maintain
his very useless establishment. Neither did
Garth stint the young heiress of her due
portion of the current funds of the firm.

Cicely had her share, or at least Belinda
East had it committed to a faithful charge
for her. She had all she required, and
Mr. Garth interfered little with her as yet,
beyond grumbling at almost everything
she did; failing to understand or sympathize
with anything she ever wished to do ; and
prowling about in a general way, as if on
the look out for some mischief, which he
felt convinced in his own mind was hidden
somewhere away.

He had let her and Belinda make a
short tour in Italy last winter, when he
had been told that the girl was depressed
and flagging in strength after all the shock

and excitement of her father s death. At
the doctor's advice he had let them go; but
he had ordered them soon home again,
for he felt very nervous Indeed, while his
heiress was away. In fact, Richard Garth
was fidgety and anxious and actually
nervous over the whole thing.

He would have liked to fence round his
young charge and to have clipped her
wings, had he felt sufficient courage in his
anxious mind to do so. But so swift and
bright-winged a bird was very difficult to
cage !

And Indeed — as Richard Garth realized
how hard It would be to mould down the
changeful fancies of that girl's quick mind
to the tone of his own practical thoughts
this charge which had fallen upon him
seemed difficult. And as it dawned
slowly, but very forcibly, upon him that it
might not prove easy to induce Cicely's
aspirations to centre themselves on the

prospects of the house of Garth and
Browne, he felt puzzled.

It was strange, he thought, how little
she knew about It all ; and he felt It might
be difficult for him Indeed to see his way
or to carry out exactly the tyrannical Instructions
of Geoffry Browne. And yet,
this was his mission !

The time had not yet arrived, however ;
Cicely was but just of age, and young
Frederick Bullion, upon whom he and
Geoffry Browne had fixed their notice, had
not yet returned from a continental tour.
Cicely was still scarcely conscious of the
close grip Into which her father had committed
her life ; nor did she as yet distress
herself about the power which Richard
Garth had over her, beyond the fact, and
the sense, of the worry and ceaseless
trouble about business transactions, which
he insisted on forcing Into her young unthinking
life.

For in this one respect Garth dealt
differently with her ; in this respect his
conduct was a curious contrast to what
her father's had been. Mr. Browne had
kept her in ignorance; her guardian judged
that it was her duty to know ; and therefore
Richard Garth persisted in striving to
interest her in the concerns of the great
house, and in reading over and explaining
many of its documents to her. He differed
from her father, inasmuch that he insisted
on her having an understanding of the
vast concern which was hers.

It was a characteristic in which he was
the opposite of Browne, and by which he
evinced that nervous uncertainty of himself
of which Browne had been never conscious.
It was a curious help and support to Mr.
Earth's mind that Cicely should take a
part with him, and so, he bored her about
bonds and consignments through many a
long summer's afternoon ; and he wrote

her long prosy letters too, homilies on the
working of the business, written on large
blue sheets of paper. In a fine commercial
hand — long homilies, the perusal of which
utterly wearied her young soul.

All this had come gradually to her
among her many new duties, — with other
strange and novel circumstances of her
altered life.

She must take her position, — this even
Belinda said ; and as regards time and
attention given to documents, this Belinda
said certainly was her duty, — so In all
these matters she tried to learn her part.

It behoved her to entertain now serious
views of life, and to recognize the Important
part she played as the representative of
Garth and Browne — or so at least did her
guardian very often assure her.

Poor little Cicely ! She much disliked
it all. Left alone to Mr. Garth and his
bonds and documents, life would soon

indeed have assumed a serious and dreary
enough aspect for her.

But she had ever that friend at her side
who had been her support and protection,
in all her younger and lonely days.

With Belinda, the gentle, demure, but
very sagacious Belinda, she had lived upstairs
even through all those bygone
years a little bright life of her own. They
had made somehow an existence for themselves
and for Negro, that had many points
of interest unknown either to Garth or
Browne.

It had been an Innocent and obscure life
Indeed which they had led together ; its
interests and its pleasures childlike and
simple to a degree. But the two had not
been unhappy. It had been Belinda's unceasing
effort to keep that youthful sunshine
bright upon Cicely's face, and she
had succeeded.

Now, all had brightened for them afresh

just lately, from points of view In the
prospect quite unsuspected by Mr. Garth.

All had brightened, and this evening,
as Cicely (while we are Introducing her)
walked slowly up the broad stairs, there
stretched across her mental view a soft
luminous horizon all sunny and pleasant,
of which Indeed Richard Garth knew
absolutely nothing ; and life, thanks to the
shrewd character and sweet sympathetic
tenderness of dear Belinda's heart, held
now for Cicely a future brightened with
kindly friendship and many other pleasant
things as well.

Along the horizon crept up rosy tints of
hope and glittering rays of anticipation
and pleasure, while away In the silent distance,
quite unknown even to Belinda and
almost unsuspected by Cicely herself, rose
slowly among the luminous tints of her
life's fair morning — the golden day star of
romance !

She was all unconscious of It as yet this
evening, and it was with her wonted pensive
and abstracted air, that she went with
slow footsteps up the stairs from the big
dining-room, Belinda following her close
behind.

CHAPTER XI.

FOR GARTH AND BROWNE.

The postman's double ring clanged noisily
below, just as Cicely reached the head of
the broad stairs and turned slowly Into the
drawing-room on the right.

Several months ago, when she and Belinda
had returned from their first little
adventurous tour, the blinds of this large
front drawing-room had been raised at
length, after long years of shadow and twilight
had reigned in the handsome room.
Cicely had herself drawn them up one
morning, and sallied from out the window
on to the broad stone balcony beyond.

She had seemed to breathe more freely

in the stately desolate mansion from that
day. The broad stone balcony commanded
a wide, clear, expansive view, and presented
a picture of life and activity. The
bustle and cheerfulness of action lay along
the roadways, the quiet and repose of
silence stretched across the shadowy glades
beyond.

And so the broad stone balcony was
never veiled away again from her, and
night after night of this soft sweet May
time she emerged, as she now did, from
the dim twilight of the room out Into the
cool, calm air.

Belinda came close behind her, not venturing
outside the window from fear of the
twilight chill. It was quiet and soothing
out there this evening, and the clang of the
postman's ring at the street door broke with
jarring discord upon the pleasant sense of
repose. An expression of Impatience
quivered across Cicely's face. Did she

know with sure presentiment that the postman
brought disturbance to her mood of
dolce pensei'oso with that impatient ring ?
Probably so, for she turned away, as if with
determined indifference, and bent over the
stone balcony looking dreamily across the
road towards the fragrant gardens, and
beyond them to the fading light in the
calm summer sky.

She pretended complete abstraction when
Belinda from within the room called to her,
to apprise her of the servant waiting at
her elbow with a letter upon a tray. Cicely
turned at length and took it, and then persistently
she continued her meditations
again.

'' Is it from Mr. Garth ? " called Belinda
from within the room, where she now
sat upon a big centre ottoman leisurely
knitting a soft fleecy shawl. 'ris it from
Mr. Garth, Cicely?"

'' I do not know."

What ? — I do not hear what you say.
Come in, Cicely ; it may be of some importance,
my dear. You must really give
more attention to business ; you must
really not disappoint Mr. Garth. Come
in, Cicely; come and show it to me, — what!
you have not yet even opened your letter."

The girl had come slowly towards the
window whilst this harangue had been
pealing out in calm, sonorous tones. She
came just to the entrance of the room, and
then paused, and stood leaning back
against the lintel. Then she carefully put
Negro down, very gently indeed, upon a
white silky mat just within the room, and
then reluctantly, and by slow degrees, she
turned her attention to the letter, and at
length broke the pompous-looking seal.

Yes, it is business — business, Belinda,
no doubt of it," she said, as she unfolded
the letter, and proceeded with a most
conscientious, but very evident, effort of*

attention to peruse its contents. " Decidedly
business," she murmured, as she
went on.

** But in your position, my dear," began
Belinda, in answer ; but then she paused —
the sentence unfinished — waiting until
Cicely was at leisure to hear.

Cicely perused her letter — Belinda
waited, knitting placidly the while — Negro
slept and snored and curled himself deep
into the silky mat.

Without immediate remark as to the
epistle or its contents, Cicely looked up
after a few minutes and sighed — a long,
quivering sigh. She had come to the end
of it, and quite silently she folded it up
now, and replaced it in its envelope again.

May 1 read it, dear ? " said her friend,
presently.

'' Oh, yes, of course you may, Belinda,"
and she tossed the letter lightly into
Belinda's expansive lap. " Yes, I suppose

he knew you would ; I am sure you ought.
Yes, certainly — of course you may." And
once more she crossed the balcony, and
lent again in meditation on the grey stone
balustrade.

Belinda put aside her knitting, having
first carefully adjusted the pins. Then,
with a placid and slow composure, with a
cool mien and a grave smile, she perused
the following letter —

Chambers, Lombard Street,

"May loth, 1880.

*' Dear Miss,

I propose to call upon you
tomorrow at half-past one o'clock. Be
good enough to hold yourself in readiness
to give me your attention for an hour or
so while I place before you a series of
papers to which I wish your signature
annexed. Deeply imbued as I am with
the heavy responsibility of my position
with regard to you, with regard to the firm

VOL. I. N

of Garth and Browne, and with regard to
my promise to your late respected father,
it grows day by day a keener anxiety tome,
that you should fully understand the
position you are placed in, as well as the
particulars of your father's wishes — and
thus learn more readily to accommodate
yourself to our schemes.

By the papers I will tomorrow bring
you, you will see how widely our influence
is extending over colonial investments, and
how little stands between us and the entire
monopoly of this branch of commerce.

*' This monopoly is our aim, and this
centralization of Brazilian and Monte Video
investments under the names of Garth
and Browne has been the dream of myself
and your late father for years. There is
another firm in the city that bars our way
towards monopoly, and the removal of
that bar is the destiny, the brilliant destiny,
that I hope awaits you.

*' The time is now drawing near when I
may be able fully to discuss this important
matter at which I now merely hint. And I
trust that the day is indeed not far distant,
when I shall resign my heavy charge,
having completed the scheme which your
father entrusted to me, and having raised
the firm with which he was so long connected
— and which, indeed, sprang up with
him — to a pinnacle of distinction among
the great houses of commerce such as he
would have considered worthy of his
ambitions.

*' To-morrow I hope to be able to impart
to you fully a knowledge of the lines
along which we now move, and to show
you the points at which your personal cooperation
becomes important to us.

"With regard to business transactions in
general, since I last wrote, nothing of great
import has taken place. The complexion
of the money market is somewhat disturbed,

however, and we look for changes.
The Peruvian consols are at par ; the
Turkish are paying two-and-a-half percent,
less than a fortnight ago. Soon I
expect they will pay nothing. Fortunately
all ours are disposed of, and I am now
keeping an anxious eye upon the Egyptian
bonds, as they may fall also, and we must be
ready. The money article of this morning
contains many points of Information
Important to us. I wish I could prevail
upon you to peruse these articles daily
with Intelligence and care. To-day the
morning papers touch many details of
remarkable significance ; especially I would
indicate the Times leader upon the Hong
Kong rates, which are steady at 35". 9^^.,
and the Mexican dollars, which are quoted
at ^\d., being a quarter lower than yesterday.
The London Exchange is advanced
2c., to 2 5f 37c., in transactions with the
Berlin and Vienna Courses. However,

all these points are, perhaps, beyond your
present comprehension, or, indeed, beyond
the grasp of womankind at the best of times,
so I need not further enlarge upon them.
It must be my charge to watch over the
interests of the firm of Garth and Browne,
and to aid it with my instructions and
experience, first through you, and through
the person of your future husband, who
must be a worthy representative of our
name and business, and who must possess
appreciation of the commercial genius
which has raised it to its present position.

"My compliments to Miss Belinda ; will
you mention to her that I wish for your
presence at home with punctuality tomorrow
at half-past one o'clock.

I have been reflecting on what she
mentioned to me, as to the visit which your
mother, the late Mrs. Geoffry Browne's
relative, Lady Ridgeway, has paid you ;
and I would wish Miss Belinda clearly to

understand that Lady RIdgeway does not
by any means represent the class of
persons to whom I would wish you to be
introduced.

I would not request you altogether to
repel a relation ; but I would merely say
that the motives of persons, situated as
she is, are mostly mercenary ; and that the
frivolous and empty-pursed community to
be found, as I apprehend, at her house,
are precisely the style of people against
whom it was your late father's strict
instructions that I should guard you.

I hope in this matter, as in all others
in which, with him, I have been engaged,
to carry out both his defensive and his
active injunctions with exactitude and
precision.

"At present I am going abroad for a few
weeks. The firm of Latour and Martial,
with whom we are connected in Paris, is
not standing as well on 'Change as I could

desire to see it ; and I am going to Inspect
the matter thoroughly for myself.

Young Frederick Bullion, of Bullion,
Specie and Company, has arrived, I am told,
In Paris ; and I mean to take advantage of
this visit to make acquaintance with him.
This will be with a view to that union of
the two firms, as before Intimated to you,
which was Involved In the scheme of your
father, and the removal thereby of the
obstruction to complete monopoly, which
the firm of Bullion, Specie and Company
has hitherto presented to us in colonial
affairs.

"All this, however, I will more fully enter
Into with you when I return from Paris.
Meantime, be In readiness, If you please, to
receive me at half-past one o'clock tomorrow.


I am, faithfully yours,

'' Richard Garth."

Belinda perused this epistle with what
on any less amiable countenance would
have been a cynical smile.

This was a curious fate certainly to
which he consigned this bright young
heiress, and a brilliant scheme to propose
for her ambition. The forming of a centre,
the reducing of herself, to a mere passive
link for the union of the ambition of two
commercial firms. Her life's object to
be the securing for Garth and Browne a
certain monopoly of colonial Investments,
and her highest and brightest hope to push
this house of business Into a yet more
prominent rank on 'Change.

Belinda's gentle heart felt stirred and
troubled within her as she glanced out
towards the window, and her eyes rested
on the lonely figure of the young girl ; on
the fair bending head, beautiful at that
moment against the background of softly
tinted and swiftly darkening twilight sky ;

on the graceful form with its outline of soft
sweeping skirts, and of delicate creamy lace
draping the sloping shoulders. All about
and around her was so soft and girlish and
feminine. And, murmured Belinda, she
was so unprotected, save for this cold grey
wall of so-called *' guardianship," which
seemed to close so grimly around her now.
The girl was leaning languidly on the
stone balustrade, and her gaze was wandering
dreamily over the garden again. Indeed,
by this time she had almost forgotten
that letter ; she was dreaming pleasantly
when Belinda stepped out from the room
and came and stood by her side upon the
balcony. Even then she did not move or
speak for a few moments ; and her friend
stood in silence beside her. The elder
pair of kind eyes rested gently again upon
Cicely, as the girl, standing there in all her
soft beauty, mused in maiden meditation,
and, as Belinda quite believed her to be,
still '' fancy free."

Belinda gazed, and her eyes were full of
kindness, for her warm heart was very
tender Indeed for her young charge.

It had ever been so. Ever since the
day when, out of pure love and solicitude
for the child of her dear relative and friend,
she had undertaken the care of the little
unthinking Infant out at Santa Lucia now
twenty years ago. From the first day of
her charge, her whole heart's powers and
affections had been centred In Cicely, for
whom from that moment — she lived.

Bitterly had the gentle Belinda many
and many a time resented the coldness and
disregard with which the little girl had
been treated by Geoffry Browne. Many a
time had she been Indeed forced actually
to rejoice, that her enthusiastic and eager-hearted
friend, her Cicely's mother, had
been spared the realization of the coldhearted
nature of the man she had married
and loved. Many a time as Belinda returned

to their own apartments upstairs —
after some kindly expressed wish on her
part for the child's pleasure or well being
had been refused with hard indifference, or
derided with cool cynicism or contempt —
many a time had she (gathering the little
motherless child to her heart for consolation)
felt glad that the elder Cicely, her
beloved cousin, had never lived to know
the suffering, of seeing those cold hard
looks in eyes from which she sought affection,
of being withered by that cynical
indifferent smile.

She had resented many things for Cicely;
and now the nature of her fathers will —
the conditions under which, and the terms
upon which, she was alone to enjoy her
inheritance, were resented by Belinda more
bitterly than all.

Cicely's mother had been a lady — as was
Belinda herself — and her mother's relatives
and belongings, among whom was indeed

numbered no less a person than the well-known
and most 'modish' Lady RIdgeway,
were the kind of people and the sort of
circles into which Belinda felt that her
cousin's child, her own young protSgde^
should be introduced.

And to those very circles indeed, Belinda
aspired for her, making little plots and
schemes in rebellion to Richard Garth. To
such bright scenes of youthful pleasure had
Cicely been already occasionally introduced ;
and to several new and joyous views of life
were her glad young eyes already opening
through the innocent, If most Intriguing,
machinations of Belinda East.

Belinda was in many things quite antagonistic
to the guardian, and in every way
indeed she was opposed to the great
scheme. Thus, she often acted solely on
her own judgment for Cicely, and (knowing
Mr. Richard Garth) we can scarcely blame
her, for his views of social life and refinement

were coloured indeed by curious misanthropical
feelings and by certain not
altogether correct notions of his own.

Richard Garth could not believe In
virtue west of Temple Bar !

The thought perhaps uttermost In both
Cicely and Belinda's minds at that moment,
while they stood side by side on the balcony
and gazed at the fading twilight over
the garden, was the fact that the grim
guardian intended withdrawing himself to
Paris. That one fact had been conveyed
to them and impressed on them before and
beyond every other sentence of the " business
letter." He was about to abstract
himself from home.

Mr. Garth is going away, my love,"
Belinda murmured ultimately, in her low
soft tones.

Yes, Belinda," the girl exclaimed, turning
quickly round, and smiling up at her

gentle friend with a brightness In her eyes.
*' Is It very wrong, I wonder, to be glad ? "
I hope not, my dear."
** Because, Belinda, I am glad."
Belinda smiled softly, and again almost
cynically, only that she was no cynic. But
this smile certainly said, '' and so am I."

*rand yet, Belinda," Cicely continued,
clasping her hands suddenly together and
gazing into Belinda's composed face with a
curiously perplexed and wistful expression,
yet I am very fond of Mr. Garth. I do
not mind his coming, and I would do anything
in the world to please him, Belinda.
You know how kind he has always been
very kind to me. If only he just cared
a very little for things I can understand or
care for. Oh, and If he only did not care
so much for Garth and Browne. Oh,
Belinda, I wish — I wish I were not
Browne ! ' "

Belinda pursed up her mouth and smiled,

and then shook her head in a doubtful
manner.

My dear," she answered, " It Is not
such a very bad thing to be ; all will go
well, you will see it will."

'' Ah ! but how can things go well ? I
can never please him. I can never, never,
you know, Belinda, fulfil all these hard
conditions of my father's will, and then all
will go wrong," continued Cicely, sorrowfully,
'rand I shall make everybody unhappy,
and anger Mr. Garth. Oh, Belinda,
fifty times a day I wish that I were not
Browne ! '"

*• All may go right, dearest."

Oh, Belinda, it cannot, it cannot, I
know. I cannot care about what Mr.
Garth expects of me ; I know all he expects
me to do and to understand, and it
all seems simply dreadful to me. I have a .
a heart and a soul, and a life, Belinda, and
I am to throw all into a gulf of despair

some day as a sacrifice to ' Garth and
Browne.' "

*' It need not necessarily be so, my
sweet. Who knows, when it comes in
reality, you may be able to feel and think
with Mr. Richard Garth."

How can I ? It is not possible. Not
in one single way do we think in common.
How can I understand all he wants of me,
or feel the importance of what is everything
in life to him ? And as for giving
myself, Belinda, to — anybody, for the sake
of greater wealth and greater importance
to what he always calls our commercial
name — oh, Belinda, how can I '^. how can
I even think of it ? "

*'A11 may be well, my darling," said
Belinda, placidly, for she had a quiet and
most soothing nature. '' All may be well.
But let us allow that side of the matter to
rest for the time being at all events ; now
for the present; Cicely, he is going to Paris.

I wonder," added the intriguing Belinda,
meditatively, ** I wonder how long he will
stay there ; all the London season,
perhaps."

'' Yes, yes, I dare say he will."

"Then," continued Belinda, in a conclusive
tone, '' I do not think we need
trouble him about Lady Ridgeway until he
returns."

'' He knows you introduced me to her,"
began Cicely.

"He knows enough," interrupted Belinda,
with complete decision. " I 7;i2isl
act for you sometimes, my child. He
knows she has called ; he knows she was
your poor mother's relative, and that she
is mine. And all the smaller details, such
as allowing you to go out with her occasionally,
or permitting you to do such
things in a social way as it may seem right
to my own judgment — that you should
do all this — need 7io^ be confided to Mr.

VOL. I. o

Garth, my love, for It would only give rise
to endless discussion and probable disagreement
between us all. Do you not
agree with me ? "

Yes, yes — and yet," answered Cicely,
with a perplexed air, '' I should like to tell
everything to Mr. Garth, only "

'' He will not let us tell him," murmured
Belinda, assuredly again. *' He only tells
us what his views are of what he thinks we
ought to like, and do. And they are not
precisely our views, that Is all."

No, not exactly; and yet, you know,"
added Cicely, pensively, '' I am sorry for
It. I cannot tell you how much I sometimes
think of him after we have been
talking to him, and how sorry I feel sometimes
that — I cannot be more to him what
he wants me to be, I am sorry, for his
sake, that I am not a boy, Belinda. Boys
can grow up to understand all about
consols and debentures, but I fear," she

added, with a deep sigh, '' that girls never
can. At heart, they never can much care
about them, even If they may come to
understand them, you know. Then I am
sorry when I look into his hard, bitter
face," continued the girl, '' that he should
be so lonely ; that he should not have anyone
but me, and that I am only ' Browne '
to him, not a belonging that he can care
for ; not a daughter whom, perhaps, he
might love. Yes, I always feel sorry for
Mr. Garth, Belinda, for he has nothing — no,
nothing in his whole heart but gold, you
know — and, oh, gold is such a cold, hard
thing to love ! "

CHAPTER XII.

A SUNNY MORNING.

Next morning Cicely's mind was still full
of that letter. She woke up very early to
realize the fact that Mr. Garth was to
appear at luncheon, and all the morning
she was exercised in trying to imagine
what might be the possible results of his
visit to Paris.

But as usual she was ready for her drive
with Belinda and Negro when the time
came for her victoria to be brought round.

All her life long this drive had been
part of the daily routine. For, the late
Mr. Browne had made it a constant
boast, that he could ' buy anything against

any man.' That when he made a purchase
he got the worth of his money —
and that he insisted on this, whether
the purchase in point was of an old
picture, an Egyptian bond, a share ina
mine or railway, a cask of wine, or a
carriage horse.

And so the one pair of bays kept ready
in the stable were always faultless, always
good for five hundred guineas should heat
any moment want that little sum. And
he liked to have that pair of bays ; to know
that they stood ' fit ' and well groomed in
their stalls, though he rarely used them on
his own account.

He had them more for the pride of it
than anything else : certainly not with any
view to his daughter. Being there, however,
they required exercise, and this duty
of a morning drive fell regularly to Cicely's
part.

For exactly one hour and a half, and

always before luncheon, Mr. Browne had
liked to know for certain that his fine
high-stepping bays trotted over the road ;
not on the hard pavements by any means,
but round the circle of the Park.

There, in a steady, monotonous movement,
the well-drilled horses had morning
after morning taken Cicely and Belinda
along.

Now the habit seemed still to cling to
them, although the old-fashioned carriage
had been exchanged for the low victoria ;
and Belinda had almost ceased to raise
objections when Cicely suggested Bond
Street or Oxford Street after their drive in
the morning sunshine in the Park.

Bright-eyed Cicely, life seemed to be
dawning in all directions for her just then,
like that fair morning sunlight, and her
young joyous heart was lighting up to
meet the sweet innocent pleasure of her
youth that lay before her now.

She was beginning to enjoy with new
zest even their daily drive. Life began
even externally to look pleasant ; and when
Mr. Garth was not there to make her grave
by his cynical remarks, and by his disparagement
of all that allured her, and to
render her uneasy by his dissatisfaction
with her, and all that she did ; when she
could forget his letters and become unconscious
of himself, she would brighten
up and smile out with a strange delight
upon her young opening life.

Sometimes, indeed, she would break Into
a low rippling laugh as she glanced at
Belinda, and thought of all the enjoyment
and freedom which had now come suddenly
upon them both. For she had not been
made to feel cruelly the pressing of their
guardian's chain yet ; and it was impossible
not to rejoice in her new life. It was
often so beautiful, and she felt sometimes
so happy and so free.

All this she had experienced especially
and almost for the first time as she and
Belinda wandered about in delicious idleness,
in the sunny South, during that
absence from town last winter which Mr.
Garth had allowed them.

Ici luck in Arcadia', she had felt then
with Goethe. Probably she did not
express it quite in his words — but a like
rapture of glad surprise had often filled
her 3^oung soul as she saw Italy for the
first time in the early winter of last year.

For Cicely was by nature born for a
happy life : she was fair and sweet-hearted,
without one drop of bitterness in her
whole fresh healthful being.

She was formed to be well and tenderly
loved. Her capacity for happiness, and for
imparting happiness, was very great indeed,
and had there been no Garth and Browne,
and no schemes and sordid enterprises
involved in her history, she would have

been happy in most circumstances where
she was known and loved.

As it was, all alone with Belinda, and
with Garth and Browne pushed into the
background of her heart, she had rejoiced
and enjoyed herself throughout that winter
journey, as one fair scene had followed
another before her awakening and wondering
gaze. She had thrilled often with the
glad consciousness, that there was so much
of beauty, so much of sweetness, in life.

Back in London again it had been more
serious for her. Business and her position,
and many complex interfering things, and
Mr. Garth and his uncongenial ways, and
Belinda with her new views, all combined
to perplex Cicely, and to make her form
within her own heart sundry new theories
of her very own upon life.

When Belinda had, as has been already
hinted in several remarks, taken up the
thread of her old acquaintance with her

relative and Cicely's mother's relative, Lady
RIdgeway, many pleasant things had
accrued immediately therefrom.

Lady RIdgeway — that stately and distinguished
personage who, in crimson-tinted
fichu, and adorned with stars of
glittering diamonds, shone a centre of
admiration at Covent Garden on the
occasion of Patti's debut the other night —
had promptly taken Cicely by the hand.

Lady RIdgeway gave Belinda counsel,
and moreover she offered her chaperonage
and her protection to Belindass charge.
For, she was many sided — this Lady
RIdgeway ; and her brilliant poses for
admiration and success on her own account
by no means embraced the whole of her
varied character and mind.

She was many sided, and if one of her
characteristics was her craze for games of
sentiment of more or less serious description
— another was, that keen, indefatigable

interest which she took in nearly everybody
else and their concerns and destinies ; and
a special interest which prompted her to
frequent impulses of kindly action for anyone
whom she liked really — and whom she
favoured by calling sy77ipathique to herself.

A young and charming woman who
might be a possible rival to her proved as
often an attraction to Lady Ridgeway's
sympathies as the reverse. For besides
those objets of the other sex on whom she
lavished unremittingly her sentiments and
her alternate smiles and sighs, she centred
much interest on her women friends —
sometimes for their benefit — and if not
always with this result and object — well !
perhaps, she was not always the one to
blame !

At all events, for woe or weal, for good or
evil, Lady Ridgeway took a deep interest in
this young lonely girl, so richly endowed in
everything save relatives, associates or even

early friends. And she not only promised
to 'present' Cicely, if Mr. Garth would
allow it, but to introduce her to as many
good houses, and get her as many invitations
(such as she ought to have) as the
girl could desire. She gave also much
useful counsel to Belinda, which resulted in
fact in the state of matters as they at
present stood.

For she had suggested or at all events
she entirely agreed with Belinda, that '' it
was better not to trouble Mr. Garth about
everything they did, and that it was not in
any way necessary to impart all their
views and their prospects to him.

Keep up the morning drive,' Lady
Ridgeway had said, among other pieces of
counsel. ' Let her be seen by all means,
and I will talk, and speak of her, you
know — till people come to look for her asa
matter of course. Let the carriage and
its appointments be perfect, and as for the

horses you could not improve on those
matchless bays.'

Thus the drive was still taken, even If
Cicely Browne was a little tired of it, and
felt sometimes that for her part she never
wished to drive round the Park again.

It was taken because of habit, and
because Lady RIdgeway counselled it,' and
Cicely not less than Belinda felt the
power and fascination of that lady's
counsel. Indeed she could not help
rejoicing In the bright prospect of making
acquaintance with life chaperoned by her.

Nothing had been done yet In the way
of chaperonage by Lady RIdgeway, however,
because all their talk on the subject
had taken place last year at the end of the
season after Cicely's father's death. Since
then Belinda and the young heiress had
been away for that tour In Italy, and Lady
RIdgeway had also been abroad.

It was only now that she and Lady

Blanche and Sir Harry Wynn, and Jack
Fielding, — and indeed everybody we know,
had but just come to town, now that the
new parliament was opening ; that Easter
was over and the season about to begin.

But if Lady Ridgeway had not done
much for Cicely yet, at least she had not
forgotten her. Several entertainments for
her debut were already organized, — and
this very evening she was to dine with her
new found relation for the first time.

Richard Garth knew nothing of it, for
even Cicely, who was by nature very frank
and transparent, had agreed that they had
best not tell him, seeing he would certainly
be displeased. Even she was learning the
lesson, that these were minor and unimportant
details of her own young life and
prospects, about which it was surely unnecessary
(and certainly better not) to
speak to Richard Garth.

She was to dine with Lady Ridgeway

that very night, and to Richard Garth
neither she nor Belinda had said a word
about it.

They took their routine drive this
morning in much the same style as of old,
going steadily round the Park ; going
eastward along the barracks, and round
the Corner first.

They had to pause for one moment at
the Corner, for there was a crowd — and
there perhaps Cicely pleasantly realized
that all was not quite as It was in old
times, as she returned a nod from Lady
Ridgeway, who sat In her pony carriage
near the railings ; and as moreover she
bowed once again in acknowledgment of
Sir Harry Wynn's salutation as he reined
in his horse by the crossing to let her
victoria pass by.

She was still blushing in the surprise of
this encounter with him when an instant
later she met, and gave back absently —

the full gaze of Blanche Ethrldge's big,
brown, inquisitive eyes.

As the victoria swept on once more,
and Blanche and Jack Fielding, both well
mounted and well turned out in every
detail, made their way forward to join Sir
Harry in the Row, Blanche Ethrldge
exclaimed, " There is that pretty bronze-haired
girl again," and they looked after
her as they had done the day before ;
while, like a swift-winged arrow. Cicely in
her low, smooth rolling carriage swept past
the crowded Row very regardless of anyone
of them, save Sir Harry Wynn, who,
once more bending with hat in hand to his
saddle bow had looked up so gravely, and
then had broken into so vivid a smile as
his glance lit upon her !

As she moved away, his bright eyes
meeting hers again, for that fleeting instant,
seemed to illuminate her heart and whole
inner being with a new lustrous beauty
and life.

'' How bright you do look this morning,
Cicely," exclaimed Belinda, whose head
had been turned in the opposite direction,
and who had seen neither Cicely's blushing
acknowledgment nor Sir Harry's bow.

'' Did you see Lady Ridgeway ? Did
you smile to her ? Why, you dissipated,
little giddy child, I suppose that is why
you are so happy, you are looking
forward to amusing yourself at her house
to-night. Why, I do declare. Cicely, I
think you are actually revelling in the
prospects of your first London dinner."

So much for the sharpness and discrimination
of Miss Belinda East — !

VOL. I.

CHAPTER XIII.

LUNCHEON AT PRINCE's GATE.

Yes — Cicely had looked unusually bright
and happy in the park that morning !

She had quite forgotten Mr. Garth and
his dreary business and his letter. And,
after her pleasant glimpse of that sunny
social life — a life which had acquired unconsciously
a sudden interest and a new
attraction for her as she had recognized
Negro's unknown champion in its very
midst — the appearance of Mr. Garth
standing waiting upon her own doorstep,
came upon her with a chilling and disenchanting
effect. He had been there with
his * business ' only two days ago !

But there he stood again, however, and
he had come to luncheon, and again he
carried in his hand one of those long
official-looking papers which she was
already beginning heartily to detest.

It was no doubt that deed of transfer
of shares about which he had written,
and it implied an hour's weary and monotonous
explanation, prolonged indefinitely
and now looming drearily upon
her inward vision.

Poor Cicely ! business was not in her
line, and Mr. Garth often groaned and
sighed at this sad defect in her character,
and wondered sometimes with many loud
lamentations if she ' could possibly be
her father's daughter in reality after all.
Geoffry Browne had had such a head for
business, even down to his very last days ! '

"Yes; I fancy I am my father's daughter,"
Cicely made answer always to these particular
remarks, with a quaint, demure

glance at him the while. '' But perhaps,"
she would add, '' I am a little bit — just in
some ways — my mother's daughter as well."
And her full violet-blue eyes would become
pensive and dreamy as she spoke,
and as she often turned them from Mr.
Garth's rugged face to gaze up at a
beautiful Italian portrait of a gracious
and lovely woman ; which had dwelt alone
in the dim-hued drawing-room all these
seventeen years, but which now, flooded
with light and sunshine, showed points of
delicacy and refinement which accounted
for much that was most perplexing indeed
to Richard Garth, in his gloomy observations
of his old partner's daughter.

That brown-haired woman in the portrait
did not understand much about
business perhaps, and certainly she had
transmitted that want of concern for and
complete indifference to its subtle interests
to her child.

Cicely's countenance fell when she saw
the paper, for she knew it meant boredom
for at least an hour. And that was not
the worst she thought, — with a deep-drawn
sigh. That union of commercial
interests proposed some day ! She was
beginning dimly to understand it — and to
dread any reference to the subject above
everything else in the world.

With a sigh, as she scanned the blue
paper, she gathered Negro up in her arms
and descended from the carriage. 'At
the worst,' if she faced the blue paper
and signed her name with alacrity, it
might soon be got through at all events —
and whilst he apostrophized her on its
importance she might think of Lady
Ridgeway's dinner. If that was the worst
she might get quietly over it; but there
was more to be feared than this. There
was the dreadful state into which he would
certainly put himself again, as he had done

only the other morning over some Peruvian
bonds. The dreadful state at which
he had arrived when she had begged him
not even to speak to her of that commercial
union, and had hinted to him that
it was an utterly impossible thought to
her. What a state he had got into — must
it all, she wondered, be gone through
again ? Come what might, however, she
must face it ! Mr. Garth was not to be
escaped, that was certain at all events.

There he was without his hat, having
been waiting at least an hour for them.
There he was, coming to the front door
instantly the victoria approached, and
pausing while she rose in the carriage,
holding Negro in her arms. Richard
Garth, the same elderly, rather portentous,
iron-grey-haired gentleman who had encountered
Sir Harry Wynn at this very
spot by the victoria wheels only two days
ago.

You are late," he said, as he extended
his hand to assist her in her descent, and
drew it back again with a clouded brow, as
she, pleading the necessity of holding tight
by Negro, lighted quickly on the ground
without accepting his help. " You are
late ; but we must not wonder at that now.
Hours, and times of appointment, do not
matter to gay young ladies, I know."

"Why, it is only just half-past one
o'clock, or a quarter to two at latest."

You used to take your luncheon atone."


Yes, but we have altered that — and in
fact two is to be our time in future, Mr.
Garth — is it not, Belinda ? It is much the
best time for luncheon according to my
view."

Oh, that is as you like. Miss Browne,
no doubt," Mr. Garth struck in before
Belinda could answer, talking in a curiously
surly tone, and at the top of his

voice, while he followed her towards the
dining-room, passing between the tall,
white Corinthian pillars along the length
of the handsome marble-paved hall.

That is as you like ; you have only
yourself to please in these days, I know."
" I hope also," said Cicely gently, '' to
succeed sometimes in pleasing my friends —
at least, I mean to try, Mr. Garth. If they
are not pleased I cannot help it."

'who is displeased?" he asked moodily,
as he proceeded to take the seat at the
foot of the table in her father's old place.
Nobody is displeased as far as I know,
and if they are, well that is, I dare say,
nothing much to you. Miss Browne."

He always called her Miss Browne
when he came on special business ; and
(when feeling particularly unpleasant and
ill-humoured,) " Miss," without the Browne,
was also a frequent and favourite style of
appellation with him.

Poor Richard Garth. As he sat there
opposite the young heiress, looking
moodily at her down the table's length, it
was easy to echo Cicely's words of last
evening, and to feel sorry for him. It was
certainly a hard and bitter face, and the
expression was strongly stamped upon it
of his inner self. As Cicely had said,
Gold was a cold, hard thing to love,'
and in Richard Garth's heart there was no
other love of any kind at all.

Not a ray of sunshine glimmered in
the hard, disapproving eyes ; not a note
of softness was in the rough music of his
surly voice ; not a shade of feeling for her
(who almost belonged to him), in the dry,
business - like, grim address which he
adopted towards her — any more than there
was any approach of friendliness in the
really discourteously rough manner in
which he turned to offer cold chicken to
Miss Belinda East.

Mr. Garth, by all the laws of the
appropriate and the suitable, ought years
ago to have fallen in love with Belinda
East !

Circumstances favoured this result in
both their lives. For, whilst grim old
Geoffry Browne lived, no other man but
Mr. Garth was ever seen by Belinda, and
no other woman had aught to say at anytime
to the destinies of Richard Garth.

He never entered a lady's drawing-room.
If he called for a club acquaintance,
or a friend on business, he never
ventured (in any house) beyond the diningroom
floor. London houses consisted of
dingy libraries, with big bronze busts and
wire-faced book-cases, and leather chairs,
for all Richard Garth ever knew to the
contrary — until Cicely had established a
drawing-room, in this her own house, six
months ago.

Mr. Garth knew no other ladies, so

Belinda had had no rivals, and for her
indeed at one time the chance seemed
favourable. She had been willing: enough
very willing indeed to gain favour in
his eyes. She felt she might have softened
his hard heart, and made him more gentle,
more human, and, as she imagined, happier,
had he invited her to be his wife. And
what better could Mr. Garth have done ?

She was an inestimable and very pleasing
woman, amiable, bland, and most affectionate
! He had been a vise man, in
fact, if ten years before this change had
reached any of them, he had made Belinda
East his wife. But he did not, and chiefly
because he was so selfish a man. He was
not in love with Belinda. He was impervious
to all suggestions of the soft
passions ; and he was moreover by nature
suspicious to a degree. She had angled
patiently for him, — and he had known it,
and it had in fact amused him within his

own grim, cynical mind to allude frequently
before her to his lonely fireside and to his
ample fortune. To make many more or
less tender and tantalizing remarks ; whenever,
in calm intercourse, they chanced to
meet alone occasionally throughout these
years.

Belinda's day dream had quite vanished
now, however — it had vanished long ago.
Life was closing in fast and gloomily
enough round Mr. Garth, and life would
probably end without any softening of that
steely heart, which poor Belinda had found
so obdurate and hard.

And gentle Belinda having outgrown,
or outlived rather, the painfully tender
nature of her sentiments for him, had
centred all the solicitude of her sweet
nature on Cicely Browne. And, well
knowing everything, she was becoming
sorry for the guardian indeed. For that
parchment-covered heart could have no

understanding, as she knew well, of Cicely.
That nature which had no interests beyond
bonds and deeds, Peruvian shares and
money In the funds, could not have one
chord of sympathy in common with that
fair young opening life.

Belinda saw disappointment for him, and
as she was magnanimous she was sorry,
for she knew that bright girl's heart so
well. The gold might be Mr. Garth's in
the future, and over the firm of Garth and
Browne and its interests he might wield
despotic sway ; but, over that young eager
soul, and that earnest life of Cicely, he
would find practically, when the test came,
that he had no more power than one
might have to cage a swift flying bird
gaily soaring across the blue heavens in
the rapturous glad freedom of its winged
being.

He might impoverish her under the
terms of her father's will, but to bind her

love with golden chains he would find
impossible.

All this Belinda knew, and felt sorry for
Richard Garth, and for the sure disappointment
awaiting him. His commercial
hopes were his all — and they
would fail him. It was impossible to look
into that hardened bitter face, and not feel
sorry for one who had missed so much of
the sunshine and the sweetness of life.

Gold Is a cold hard thing to love,' as
Cicely had repeated, and gold had made a
cold hard man of Richard Garth.

'well, so you have been in the Park,
Miss Cicely, have you ? " he said presently
whilst they consumed their cold chicken,
and after Belinda with a bland smile to
both of them had thrown off her cloak.

** Yes, we have been to the Park ; in fact
we usually go," said Cicely, demurely.
'* We are obliged to go Into the Park. You
know Frost, the old coachman, never will

Stand much of the pavement for his horses'
hoofs. They are far too precious for
mere shopping ! "

No doubt he will have to give up all
that," said Mr. Garth in answer, with a
shrug of his shoulders, and a sigh of enforced
resignation.

'' Why, what do you think I mean to do
with him and his horses ? " said Cicely,
with a bright glance and smile.

'' Goodness knows, my dear young lady ,
what you mean to do. Who could undertake
to prognosticate where some new
freak may carry you. What you are todo
— or at least what you may wish to do —
who can tell ? "

** I am sure," said Belinda, with a reflective
air, '' we may feel quite confident
that Cicely's freaks will never carry her
to any length which we would either of us
disapprove."

'' Who knows, who knows," growled Mr.

Garth, and Cicely shook her head in
mute resignation and went on with her
luncheon in silence.

'' I am sure," Mr. Garth said presently,
'' it is really awful to see the display and
the extravagance at this moment along
that Park ; when you think of the money
squandered, and all the interest and the
double interest lost. Really, as I came
along this morning, I thought that the
very horses those idle young fools were
riding, were each single one of them
sufficient nucleus for a fortune if put outwith
judgment by any sensible man. But
there they went, the light-headed young
asses, prowling up and down with their
flowers and light kids as careless as if
the beasts they were riding were worth
no more than a donkey — just like one of
themselves."

I dare say they are not all donkeys,"
murmured Cicely in a speculative tone ;
not all of them, if one only knew."

*' Every one of them," continued Mr.
Garth, emphatically. '' Every one of them :
all idle, empty-headed, young good-farthings,
such as I have your worthy
father's stern instructions, Miss Cicely, to
keep safely at arm's length."

But I suppose you would not surely
shut her up altogether, Mr. Garth," said
Belinda, gently.

God knows," he answered in a bitter
voice. '' I do not know what to do with her
no, I do not Avant to shut her up."

'' No, and indeed," continued Belinda
in the most conciliating and encouraging
*' I have reason to believe, from all
I have heard of late, that the general style
of the young men in society in these days
is very greatly improved. I really do
believe there are some very excellent
young men to be met with now in London,
even quite among the upper circles, Mr.
Garth."

VOL. I. O

''I know them," he answered grimly,
*' the young vagabonds ; " and then in an
unpleasant, sarcastic tone he went on —
"Was that one of your excellent young
men of the aristocracy, Miss East, I saw
lounging around here the other morning
with his great lazy beast of a dog, a huge
creature that would eat as much meat
and be as expensive to keep any day as a
growing child ? Eh, was he one of the
superior kind, for, if so, he chooses queer
company ? I saw him lounging again this
morning in the Row up there, his bridle
hanging upon his arm and he down off of
his horse standing talking to Lady Ridgeway
beside the phaeton ? "

What time was that ? " asked Cicely
suddenly, with a bright flush upon her
cheek which attracted Belinda's attention
and filled her with surprise.

'what time ? About one o'clock, as I
came along through the promenade towards

here. There he was, and a fine young
do-nothing philander he looked too, with
his grey coat and smart light kids and his
big collie dog. I suppose he just keeps
the beast that he may have at all events
something to do in the looking after him.
There he was, going it finely with my Lady
Ridgeway. Is he one of your young
worthies, Miss East, I ask ye ? and what
in the name of goodness was he doing
here the other day, loafing around this
door ? "

I have not the remotest idea whom
you are talking about," said Belinda, opening
wide her shrewd though mild eyes at
him, and pausing in transfixed astonishment
in the act of lifting a piece of quivering
jelly to her mouth. '' Who in the
world are you talking about, Mr. Garth ?
I fail entirely to follow you, I vow ! "

Perhaps Miss Cicely knows," he answered
moodily, and her cheek flushed ashe

glanced at her, while a curious gleam
kindled in her eyes for a moment, and shot
across to meet his, glowering darkly at her
from beneath their heavy brows. " Perhaps
she knows," he continued, and Cicely
looked down and coloured again.

She did know as it happened — knew
perfectly well.

But did it behove her to confide in Mr.
Garth ? Was it her duty to tell the tale
of her champion, while she did not even
know his name ?

Even to Belinda, from some curious
impulse, she had said nothing yet ; and
Belinda, by a happy accident, had not
observed Sir Harry Wynn.

What a pity, thought Cicely, that Mr.
Garth had come upon him. How, without
self-betrayal, could she account for him
now ? But Mr. Garth's attention was
soon distracted, for no suspicions had as yet
really taken form, or in fact entered his

mind on the subject of Sir Harry, till
remarks had been prompted merely by a
general Innate wish to be unpleasant, and
he neither awaited nor expected a reply.
The recollection at that moment of all the
business to be transacted came suddenly
upon him, and he rose unceremoniously to
his feet.

Luncheon was over, and escape made
possible for Cicely — escape from any sort
of reply. They all rose now.

Never mind, never mind," Richard
Garth exclaimed in a rough, grating tone,
the Idea occurring to him that he might bea
little more disagreeable still ; " never
mind, you will have your secrets now, no
doubt, between ye, and you will give me
enough to do to ferret them out."

He turned away and walked to the embrasure
of the deep bay window, which in
this lower room looked southward, and
gave on to the pretty garden behind.

Miss East gathered up her cloak with a
mild gesture of resignation and hopelessness.
She arranged her bonnet strings,
and softly moved to the door. She was
tired and hot and discomposed, under her
placid mien, by Mr. Garth's unusual acrimony
and venom, and she wished to go
upstairs to cool down and to refresh herself,
and to recover her temper, which was
sadly ruffled by Richard Garth.

Cicely would not require her help during
the coming interview — so she assured herself
by a glance towards the girl. She
might depart to freedom and tranquillity
upstairs. And so Belinda departed, saying
no farewell and attempting no salutation
even, of Mr. Garth.

CHAPTER XIV.

IS THERE NOTHING BUT GOLD ?

As Belinda disappeared, Cicely would fain
have applied herself to the preparation of
Negro's dinner.

That estimable member of the small
family party at Prince's Gate was a
personage indeed whose character and
interests were well worth the studying.
Negro had nearly as many peculiarities of
temperament as Cicely's guardian ; and
among other things he did not like interruptions
to his regular hours for food.

Now accordingly he sat up on his
haunches, and flourished his paws in the
air, and barked and snarled at Mr. Garth,
and made frantic gesticulations towards

Cicely, shaking his black face furiously-above
his ribbon bow, and asserting with
violence that whether Peruvian bonds, oran
heiress's love affairs in embryo and
marriage in prospect, was to be the subject
next on the tapis, — his dinner must not be
overlooked and forgotten between them all.

*' Do you mind, Mr. Garth," asked Cicely,
in her sweetest and most demure tone —
''do you mind if I give Negro his dinner?"

A grunt from the bay window was for
the moment the sole reply.

Cicely took it to mean assent, however,
and merely shrugging her shoulders a little
bit, and arching her eyebrows with a quaint
expression, and curling up her lips, she
began deftly to cut up and carefully prepare
with salt and gravy and bread crumbs,
all properly proportioned, the daintiest
little repast for Negro that a puggy-heart
could desire.

'' Humph ! " after a moment's silence,

came from the window again ; and then, as
Cicely rose and Negro scampered frantically
after her to his appointed corner of the
room, Mr. Garth turned and watched the
pair very grimly indeed.

In a little while the girl, bending her
slight young figure carefully to the ground,
deposited the ample plateful held between
her two white slim hands in a corner of
the room, and her queer little ugly blackened
companion, who stood In a state of
wild delight and excitement upon his hind
legs and pawed the air with impatience,
still waited the word of command and of
permission to begin. At last Cicely clapped
her hands together and broke Into a
ringing laugh, and her pug dashed forward
at the signal and buried his nose eagerly in
the plate. " Oh, you greedy thing ! " and
she laughed again. She looked so fresh
and happy and childlike; such a bright
young mistress of this big, lonely, stately

house. *' Stop ! " she cried to Negro, and
the well-trained dog obeyed, and Cicely
laughed with amusement again at the
frantic antics of her favourite in his
ravenous impatience as she tantalized him
now. *' There, there, good dog ! " she
exclaimed at length. " You may begin
again, you hungry Nig. Oh, Mr. Garth,
is he not too ridiculous ? "

*' Ridiculous, Indeed ! " said Mr. Garth
ill-temperedly ; " ridiculous enough to see
you making such a fuss with a dumb and
ugly black creature as it Is, Indeed — to my
taste whatever."

Oh, he Is not really ugly," cried Cicely,
with Intense delight watching Negro's
eager and greedy enjoyment as he voraciously
devoured his food. '' Oh, how he
does gobble up ! Do look at him, Mr.
Garth— do look ! "

"Humph!" came again from the deep
embrasure of the window, and Cicely felt

obliged to desert Negro, to recall her
attention at last to her guardian and his
affairs. Slowly and still reluctantly she
turned towards the window.

I am so sorry to keep you waiting,"
she said a little sadly to him. " But oh, I
do wish you were just a little bit fond of
Negro, Mr. Garth. He is such a good
dog, you know, such a darling; and he is all
in the world I have got for my own ; for I
never feel that the horses are in the least
really belonging to me. I never can do
anything with them, you know, without first
consulting Frost."

She came forward towards him as she
spoke, and stood a moment silently waiting
his reply, looking straight before her now
over Richard Garth's bending shoulder
into the green garden beyond, which
looked tempting and radiant in summer
sunshine. How she wished that she could
escape into it. But no !

"Well, now the dog is fed," he began
just then very irritably, " you can, I suppose,
spare an instant or two to speak tome?"


Oh, I beg your pardon," she answered.
'' Did you mind it ? I thought you said I
might feed him ; I am so sorry ■"

'' There is no occasion," he replied,
shaking his head with a gesture of curious
mute resignation ; and then he continued,
" it does not matter : my time is of no
importance certainly, or at least so it would
appear. Of no importance in comparison
with whatever else may be engaging your
attention. Miss Browne."

** Oh, Mr. Garth," she exclaimed, intones
of eager distress, '' do not say that,
please. I am ready, quite ready to begin
to listen to you now."

*' Humph ! Did you get my letter ? " he
added suddenly. '' See, here is the deed."

"Yes," said Cicely, with a deep sigh,

which quite involuntarily escaped her.
Yes, I got your letter."

'' You did ? And you understand that I
am oroine to Paris, to see Frederick Bullion,
amonof other things ? " he added.

A Q^rave, reserved look at this came into
the girl's face for a moment then.

Please do not speak of that subject
just to-day, Mr. Garth," she said. '' Let
us — oh, do let us discuss the shares. I
must not keep you long, you know — and
the luncheon things must be cleared away,

and — and " a new thought happily

occurring to her mind — '' and I really
must take Nero out to have a run in the
garden. But, please, do go on with the
deed."

Ah, yes ! — the deed. There is no
hurry about that in comparison," he
answered her gloomily. " But, yes ; there,
the servants are waiting to remove the
luncheon things — had we better not go

into the library and settle in there about
the shares ? "

Oh, no, no ; in here Is much better,"
replied Cicely, emphatically, for a conversation
in the library might mean hotirs and
hours of explanation, and the prolonging
of this business interview indeed for the
whole afternoon; and oh! she was so tired
of bonds and stocks, and debentures ; and,
besides, there was no subject on earth
which she hated with such a weary hatred
as she felt towards Bullion and Specie,
although scarcely yet realizing the position
in which that firm was intended to stand
to her. And If there was any one name
more than another which filled her soul
with the Instincts of antipathy. It was that
of the unconscious and unoffending Frederick
Bullion, whose introduction Into business
conversations always meant prolonged
explanations of the complex scheme of a
commercial union, and of the vast and lofty
ambitions of Garth and Browne.

These dissertations always made Cicely-reflect
and wonder over the strange character
of her late father who had left her
so many years in ignorance of all this.
His dealings with her began now to seem
wonderful and curious indeed.

For even to her that individual and
personal difference existing at all times
between Garth and Browne was remarkable.
The former, her present guardian,
always talking to her and enlarging
upon the prospects and ambitions of
the house ; while the latter, with whom she
had passed so many years, and who had
been her own father, had never mentioned
them at all.

It was very strange to her ; and now
it often occurred to her that her father's
had been the best way! For Mr. Garth
certainly tormented her, and repairing with
him to the library would mean the whole
afternoon. They had much better remain

in here, she thought to herself, and so finish
off promptly the business of the shares.

'' There are pens and ink here, Mr.
Garth," the girl said, turning towards the
large heavy table which stood in a corner
of the dining-room. " Here are lots of
pens, and plenty of ink, too ; will you show
me what I am to do ? "

Yes, as soon as you are ready."

*' You see I am ^7nU ready now," she
answered, sitting down in the big brown
leather chair by the writing-table, and
folding her hands and letting her eyes
wander over the fresh green sward of the
little garden outside. Her attention wandering
also by degrees as he began to discourse
to her — wandering, where ? — who
could tell ?

Richard Garth stood upright beside her,
and in his hard, monotonous tones explained,
in lengthy commercial language,
the acts of transfer and consignment that

were to take place in the matter of these
special bonds and deeds.

She listened for at least five minutes,
listened as well as she could ; and then her
attention did gradually drift from her
surroundings, and she ceased to hear
what Mr. Garth was saying — until suddenly
he interrupted the pleasant current
of her thoughts by addressing some
direct question to her with the view of
soliciting the fact of how much she understood.
Cicely supposed she did understand
him, but in truth she never felt quite
certain !

I am obliged to be particular, you
know," he at length remarked to her; "as
I am quite alone in the matter, you see,
Miss Browne."

''Oh, Mr. Garth," replied Cicely, then
looking suddenly up at him at this point,
and becoming unaccountably interested,
and yet at the same time evidently

VOL. I. R

Utterly oblivious of deeds and bonds —
Oh, Mr. Garth, how I wish that you were
not quite alone. I do so often wish that
you did not really live alone, and so solitary
I do indeed always wish it whenever I
think about you."

But, you see, I cannot help it," he
answered with a curious and rather gloomy
resignation In his tone. " I cannot help
it, and I do not fancy It causes any serious
concern, Miss Cicely, to you."

"It does though. Why, — why should
you do It ? " continued the girl eagerly.
Mr. Garth, is there nothing but gold In
this world, and is there no one — no one
for you excepting nef "

There Is no one," he replied in a
strange voice, as if she had aroused his
interest by her words, and sounded his
memory in spite of himself. " There is no
one, as you are aware, belonging to me,
Miss, to represent the firm ; or at least not

any one that I ever heard of, or care to
seek. My brother and my only sister are
long since dead," he added, continuing
(after an instant's silence) with an air, and
with a feeling, of unwonted confidence and
of pleasure in the confidence for which he
could not in the least account. " They
are both dead."

But, Mr. Garth," Cicely said, turning
eagerly round then in her chair, and fixing
her large luminous eyes upon him, as a
new idea occurred to her with sudden
force — ''Mr. Garth, there must be sonne
one you know. Every one has relations
and friends. Why, even I, who am, I
think, surely the most lonely girl in all the
wide world, I, even, have Belinda, and
Lady Ridgeway — and I have you. But
is there not some one now ? " she went on
with a curious, sudden, and earnest gravity,
is there not some one who surely wants
you quite as much as you want them } "

"No one wants me," he replied moodily;
and certainly I want nobody. Perhaps
that is just my complaint."

'' Oh, but think, Mr. Garth— do think."

Then after a moment's pause, in a low
and gentle tone, she added softly —

Is it so very, very long, since your
brother died ? "

My brother died just thirty years ago,"
he answered, informing her (as she would
know) with a quiet matter-of-fact exactitude
that was intensely characteristic of
the man ; 'just thirty years this Whitsuntide.
He was like myself, Miss Cicely, he
never married. He was some years my
senior — and he died pretty young. My
sister died to me, also, when I was but
eighteen years of age. She left me — I,
just struggling over the knottiest time of
life — left me to marry a penniless fellow,
with a bit of a wretched estate down
in the wilds somewhere ; a man who

borrowed money from me and never paid
me, twice or three times, before I was one
and twenty, and when I could not afford
to lose. I never spoke to them, good or
bad, after the third time, I can tell ye ; and
I heard nothing more of their family till
long after my sister died."

But then you heard of them — did you ?
and that she had a family ? Oh ! — then you
slave some one who is wanting you, and
ready to love you after all, Mr. Garth,"
Cicely exclaimed brightly, and with an
eager glance of congratulation into his face.

But he merely laughed his grim, ironical
laugh which she hated so, and which
always escaped him when there arose for
himself personally any question of money.

*' No, no," he said. " I have had nothing
to do with them. My sister left a
daughter it seems, and with her things
were worse and worse. She married
another beggar, the young fool, like her

mother before her, and turned beggar too
herself. For I was become a richer man
by that time than when poor Catherine left
me in Rickets's Lane ; I was partner with
your father then, and was going up the
hill, and they got wind of me, one way
or another — down in their backwoods,
and they wrote to me — the beggar — my
sister's child, actually wrote to me and
asked for money to help her to bring up
her son. What did they think I was made
of, that I was going to send good money
there ? "

" Oh dear ! oh dear ! " said Cicely, sadly,
and she turned away and wearily shook
her head. '' Oh, Mr. Garth, and so you
alienated them, and drove them from you
when they might be such a comfort — such
a happiness to you now."

I want no comfort," he said moodily,
as he took up his hat ; " and I don't know
how I got talking to you, miss, about such

sort of things. Come, come, let us sign the
deed."

And he shut up within himself again,
and that was evidently all she could obtain
from him in the way of confidence for that
day.

So she took up her father's sharp steel
pen. Then she signed her name again
and again at each place which he pointed
out to her, signed mechanically — but with
many curious new thoughts running
through her mind.

For Cicely often did think (as she had
said to Belinda on the balcony only last
night) — she often did think over Mr.
Garth and his strange, dreary life, and she
frequently felt compunction because of herself.
Because of her own inevitable conduct
to him — and over her indifference to
business and to the firm of Garth and
Browne. A certain sympathy for him
because of all this often thrilled her heart.

When she thought how lonely he was,
she felt sorry for him, because she knew
how Impossible it would be that she could
ever really please him, and she was
conscious that he would be disappointed in
the end.

Yes, In her heart she was often sorry for
Richard Garth.

Good-day to you," he said presently,
as the long-suffering butler at length softly
opened the door. '' Good-day. Yes, it is
all right, Withers. You may come in. I
have had business with Miss Browne ; but
I will not keep you longer. We have
finished now."

** Good-day to you," he said once more
to Cicely.

Good-bye, Mr. Garth," she said cordially,
rousing herself from out that speculative
reverie into which, since his last few
sentences, she had retired. " Good-bye. —
But stop — one word more. When are you
going to Paris, Mr. Garth ?"

'' Oh, In a day or two, but I will see you
again before then. I have some more
papers to bring you, so I think I will come
again tomorrow."

And then, before she could say anymore
to him he was gone.

Then she wandered away to these
regretful musings once more ; whilst
Withers and his subordinate cleared away
the luncheon things unnoticed behind her
chair.

She remained for some time at the great,
huge writing-table, gazing dreamily out at
the garden, which looked bright In the
afternoon sunshine — so bright, Indeed,
as soon to disturb her dreams. She roused
herself.

Oh, how strange and hard-hearted he
is ! ' she murmured finally to herself
How cold and unfeeling, and strange,
and yet,' she said, 'so oddly kind to me;
eager for my interests, or what he thinks

my interests, and steeled to all beside. Ah !
what joys might he not have had in life ?
What may he not have thrown away ?
Just as my father did — cast from him all
family ties, all brightness of companionship,
and nearly all affections — for money. How
could they— how could they do it — and all
for nothing but gold ! '

For gold seemed but a small thing, in
the sum of life's treasures, to Cicely's young
hopeful eyes !

And so,' — she went on again to reflect
further, as the memory of certain words
said at luncheon came back to her mind —
'So he saw the champion! Mr. Garth
actually saw him the other morning as we
drove away, and I have never told Belinda
about him, and I am sure I do not
know why,' she continued to herself as
Negro noisily claimed her attention, and
the servants disturbed her with the clatter
of plates and silver behind. ' I am sure I

have no idea why. He saw him, and
Belinda never saw him. I wonder if I
ought to tell Belinda ! But what is thereto
tell, only Negro's adventure, and how
Negro was saved. Ought I to tell Belinda,
and why, I wonder, have I not done it
long ago ! I tell her everything — why did
I not tell her this? Did I forget ? No—
not that exactly. Why — ?

Well ! come along into the garden my
little nigger, and we will talk the matter
over together, just you and I. For he is
yours champion, — yes, my darling — and yozi^
must have something to say in the matter,
and — oh, dear ! I wonder, how I wonder
if Lady Ridgeway will be able to tell me
who he is ! '

CHAPTER XV.

THE MEETING OF THE STREAMS.

After this, Fate took the whole of this
complicated matter into Her own hands,
and when She is once determined it is
quite astonishing how easy things become !

The house to which Cicely Browne
(saying nothing to poor Mr. Garth) went
quite alone to her first dinner-party was a
very charming residence in Park Lane.

Not a large house — but rather an uncommon
one ; not at all like one of these
many modern mansions which in gorgeous
palatial splendour, flank what was once the
metropolis with wide extending wings — not
like one of these.

It was externally a quiet-looking, unpretentious
house, while within, good taste
and love of perfect comfort and in fact
extreme luxury, had dictated in unison
every detail of its arrangements and the
acquirement of every article it contained.

A subdued, softly tinted colouring pervaded
everywhere, with many curious combinations
of shades and hues that were at
once delicate and rich in tone, and that
were at least completely unusual in choice.

A sense of warmth in winter, and of
delicious coolness in summer, filled the
rooms. At all times the whole feeling of
the house was pleasant, and so it happened
that, without criticism or indeed conscious
scrutiny of their surroundings. Lady Ridgeway's
visitors had a way of yielding themselves
to the soft enjoyments of complete
repose, and had the habit of quickly feeling
themselves ' at home.'

They generally sank into her low chairs.

and felt contented so to remain ; as they
inhaled the delicately mingled scents of
her well selected flowers, and let their gaze
wander over furniture and hangings and
frescoes and dados that were all each unquestionable
of their kind.

The general effect of the aesthetic scene
was intensely agreeable.

Lady Ridgeway herself, however — with
her fine expressive eyes and musical, sympathetic
voice — soon claimed and absorbed
attention, until the room with its perfect
fittings, seemed gradually merely an appropriate
setting for herself.

She looked very beautiful and very interesting
that very evening, as she sat on
a low seat by her open window in the
falling twilight, and as no less important a
person than Sir Harry Wynn was ushered
into her room. He also, by one of fate's
coincidences, having been invited on this
particular evening to dinner.

It was his first dinner party at Lady
Ridgeway's, and a curious excitement
seemed to stir within him from the novelty
of the whole scene as he bent over her
hand and blushed with youthful lack of
self-control, when she looked earnestly up
at him and welcomed him with low murmured
words.

From behind a festooned portico from
out the inner room came, at that moment,
Lord Ridgeway — and with a deeper blush
that told a curious tale, young Sir Harry
found himself bowing gravely through his
presentation to this estimable nobleman,
whose existence he had never compassed
nor paused to realize until then. That
was what made him blush, indeed !

For to come and dine in a man's house,
and to have utterly forgotten all about him,
to feel his very existence coming upon you
with the force of a rude surprise, seemed
an odd thing to this most rural Sir Harry,

and caused him to colour with a fervency
as unbidden as it was in Lady Ridgeway's
eyes absurd.

How young the boy is, and how ridiculously
rustic,' she thought tenderly, as
Sir Harry clasped his noble host with
warm cordiality by the hand.

'' Very glad to see you," said Lord
Ridgeway rather kindly, speaking however
in a most callous tone and sticking a toothpick
into his mouth at the same time.

'' Thanks, so much," said Sir Harry.
'' It is awfully good of you. Lord Ridgeway;
awfully kind of you to have asked me to
dine."

His lordship shut his mouth tight over
his gold toothpick at this, and glanced at
Sir Harry with a dry smile. He drew his
lips in with a curious click too, and as Sir
Harry stood attention and Lady Ridgeway
turned away he said —

Oh, you have to thank my lady for that,

I take it ; it is pretty well her concern. As
long as she gives me my dinner at a
proper hour and punctually, and so long as
she lets me get away in fair time for the
House, I do not quarrel with her guests in
general, Sir Harry; so I am not very likely,
I dare say, to begin with you. Eh ! young
fellow ? You are the new liberal member
for Arch Aubrey, I take it, eh ? About
the baby of the Lower House; the youngest
of the pack of schoolboys who have got
themselves sent in. Well, it is a rotten
pocket borough, that of yours, and no
mistake, and one of the very first that
Dike and his colleagues will do away with
when they get in their bill. Eh, make the
best of your power while you have it, my
boy ! For this new lot we have got into
the Government now will not leave many
boroughs in the country like yours, not if
they have a good long innings, at all
events. Arch Aubrey ! Why, you take it

VOL. I. S

quite easily by yourself down there — out
of one pocket and put It into the other.
Eh, all by yourself, without opposition,
don't you ? without a penny to spend or a
speech to make In the whole business.
What, eh, make the best of It, I say, while
they leave you your fun ! "

And with another click of his toothpick,
and without waiting for the answer of a
single word, away went Lord RIdgeway,
stalking back Into the other room again,
and leaving Sir Harry Wynn by his lady's
side.

Sir Harry was rather hot and indignant.
Not that I see much fun in it all the
same," he said to Lady RIdgeway, In a very
rueful voice ; for he had not liked this
harangue of his good host's by any means,
and he was not a little aggravated by the
decampment of the noble aggressor so
promptly without affording him opportunity
of reply. The accusation was unfounded.

and the fun he failed to see ! For his
election at Arch Aubrey, notwithstanding
that it was unopposed and quite unanimous,
had cost him indeed a very pretty penny,
a good deal more than he could well afford,
and he was not in love yet with the House
of Commons. The election had cost him
a good deal indeed, and he felt the privilege
of sitting in patient silence in that
august assembly had been dearly bought.

Lord Ridgeway's attack made him rueful ;
and very indignant too when he found he
was to take his 'dusting' — as to Jack he
described it later — with submission, and
without a word.

The thing bores me unutterably," he
said plaintively, and turning now to Lady
Ridgeway to be consoled. "And as to being
my own place, it cost a lot all the same, I
can assure you. Only that of course one
wants to do one's duty and to take one's
place, you know, I would have nothing on

earth to say to the whole concern. The
ship of State would float as well without
my help — I feel that every day of my life
I can assure you, Lady Ridgeway, I do."

*^Of course you do," she softly answered ;
of course ; sit down. Bring your chair
here. Look, what a glow there is from the
bygone sunset away there over the park ;
what a delicious golden light that Is coming
over the distant gardens — look, Sir Harry,
forget all about worries and politics. See
how charmingly I just catch sight of the
last ray of light gleaming upon the Serpentine
from my window here."

It is quite delicious," he said ; and In
truth he quickly forgot his annoyance ashe
took the low chair near hers.

It was very charming, as she said, on
this hot, dusty evening to gaze from her
window far away to the west. To watch
the soft crimson glow of the departed sunset
fade gradually, as she described It, Into

the vapours and the misty shadows of the
night. To see the water gleam and ripple
in this tender dusk of the evening, and tolet
mind and fancy and memory, and soft
longings and desires, all float on dreamy
wings — far away from the dust and the
turmoil of this crowded metropolis, which
was crowded and noisy and weary as ever
even on this soft May night.

We are following Lady Ridgeway s
thoughts, for so, she asserted, went her
fancy and meditations, ' floating she said,
on mystical silvery wings,' as she sat
there musing in the twilight alone, — or
if not quite alone, with companionship
pleasantly sympathetic to herself.

With Sir Harry Wynn she had little
time however just then for sympathetic
converse, for almost immediately, as he
took his place beside her, Jack Fielding
was ushered into the room. And he had
scarcely exchanged greetings with them.

when the door was opened again and Lady
Blanche Ethridge was announced.

'rit is so good of you to come, dear,"
murmured Lady Ridgeway softly as she
kissed Lady Blanche's blooming cheek.
So good of you all to come and help
me at the debut of my sweet little heiress,
with whom I mean every one of you to
fall Instantly In love."

Lady RIdgeway's new protdgde^,^ exclaimed
Blanche, laughing, and It must be
added In a somewhat cynical and slightly
unbelieving tone.

Are Lady RIdgeway's swans sometimes
geese to your thinking," said Jack with
rather a saucy glance at her stately Ladyship's
face.

It proved so once, Mr. Fielding," she
replied with pretended dignity and an
affected haughtiness of retort. "It proved
so once ; but It was only once, when I Inadvertently
praised you in your early and
more modest youth."

One for me ! " said Jack, laughing.
Pray go on doing it, Lady Ridgeway, and
forgive my impertinence now. You are the
best champion a fellow can have, that I am
very well aware. You have but to take up
a cause, or a man or a woman — to take
them up once heartily, and I know you
are the staunchest friend in the world.
Never mind me, or at least, — forgive me,
please."

Forgiven," she said, with a lustrous
smile in her great eyes — " Forgiven."

And Jack bent with pretended reverence
over her hand.

But," continued Lady Ridgeway, " my

little charming heiress Ah ! here she

is — I need not say one word more at
all events in her praise — I leave her to
make her own impression."

Lady Ridgeway's nugget," murmured
Jack, the incorrigible, in a so^^o voce aside
to Lady Blanche. " Paraguay mines, or

something, Is it not ? — Eh. Can any good
thing come out of Paraguay ?— But — by
Jove ! — " and Jack said no more.

The door was thrown widely open at
that instant, and the servant was uttering a
name. And then — gliding swiftly forward
with a little, shy, quick glance toward one
and all of them, — looking like a sweet wild
rose, fresh and youthful, and bright with
pleasant anticipations too ; — with her fair,
delicate colouring glowing in the soft light
of the room, and her graceful figure clad
in a fabric of soft creamy lace came — Cicely
Browne !

Jack stopped midway In his exclamations
while Lady Ridgeway went forward to
meet and warmly embrace her, and Sir
Harry Wynn stood transfixed with joy
and astonishment, while his cheek flushed
once more crimson with excitement, and
his heart beat strong and fast.

CHAPTER XVI.

PRESENTATIONS.

Sir Harry had looked in the 'Court Guide,'
after his visits to Prince's Gate the other
morning, so he knew that she was probably
Cicely Browne.'

But he had not known that Cicely
Browne was Lady Ridgeway's heiress, nor
till the arrival of Jack and Lady Blanche
Ethridge had he known that any heiress
was to be there to meet him that night

So he stood transfixed for one moment,
while Lady Ridgeway went forward with
her long, gliding step, and with a murmured
welcome put her right hand on
the girl's shoulder, while she held her

lightly by the left, and then she bent
suddenly towards her and kissed her with a
lingering softness and with much impressment
of manner.

*'So glad to see you, dear child. So
you have ventured out of your nest after
all, — out of your well guarded tower rather
and by yourself, too, you dear, brave,
little thing ! "

Cicely laughed with a bright flush at
this reception. She bent her cheek to
Lady Ridgeway's rather pathetic embrace
with due readiness and gratitude, while the
rest of the group stood round and waited.
Jack gazing admiringly and In silence after
that one sonorous exclamation of * By
Jove ! ' and Blanche — who had turned
quickly round as he spoke — also opening
her brown eyes wide with astonishment,
and with a half-suppressed exclamation
and a quick glance towards Jack !

For this was her incognita of Prince s

Gate, the owner of the pretty, swift passing
victoria, who came in so unexpectedly now.
And this heiress of Lady Ridgeway's was
the pretty bronze-haired girl about whom
she had questioned Jack so often, and
whom she had noticed so lone.

So she and Jack remained silent, and
exchanged glances of amused astonishment,
while Sir Harry coloured up with a bright
vivid glow all over his face and a joyous
dancing light in his blue eyes. He stood
there looking straight across Lady Ridgeway's
tall shoulders into the blushing, fair
young face on which her stately ladyship
was imprinting that soft welcome of feminine
familiarity and friendship. He looked
straight across Lady Ridgeway's shoulder,
and, as she bent to receive this genial
salute in greeting of her friend, Cicely did
the same. She raised her glance ; she
caught sight of those dancing blue eyes
just opposite to hers, and of the glowing

eager face lighting up to greet her with
such a bright sunny gleam of joy, and
Lady Ridgeway felt the girl start. The
soft white shoulder on which her own firm
hand lay so caressingly was suddenly
drawn back In surprise, and Cicely stood
upright and paused. Lady Ridgeway, still
holding her left hand, turned round now
also.

The child is shy and startled,' she
thought ; but Cicely was more than this,
she was for one second dismayed. What
ought she to do — as he stood smiling and
beaming all delight and recognition upon
her there ?

I am sure I must no bow to him,' was
the thought uppermost for that one moment
in her mind ; and the Champion
looked terribly eager and dangerously
ready to bow. But she did not let him.
With a sudden quick instinct and resolve
she turned quite away from him and

looked straight at Lady Ridgeway, who
mistaking of course all cause of her agitation,
paused yet an instant to pat her
gently upon the cheek. She smiled kindly
upon Cicely, and shook her head.

'* Do not be afraid, dear," she said ;
'courage! These are all very nice, inoffensive
young people, and they will all
be very kind to you, you fluttering little
fledgling from another clime. But here — I
must regularly present you. Lady Blanche,
this is my particular protege, and you are
my particular friend ; will you like each
other — do, if you can, if only for my sake ! "

And Blanche, who was well acquainted
with Lady Ridgeway's occasionallydramatic
style, and Cicely who was still often puzzled
by her many and all curious moods, both
accepted the introduction with ready
alacrity.

Blanche adopted her most frank and
genial manner — the one which she found

always made its way easily, especially
among girls not quite perhaps on her own
exact level in age or anything else.

I am so glad," she said cheerily, and
she held out her hand.

"And so am I," responded Cicely, with
a pretty shy smile, which lit up her face
sometimes in a very witching way. '' I
have so often admired your beautiful
chestnut horse in the Park, and I am so
very glad."

The girls smiled and beamed upon each
other cordially as they shook hands, and
Jack performed a profound obeisance as
Lady Ridgeway then murmured his name.

You will like Mm' she said gently at
the same moment to Cicely. '' He will be
very good to you ; and now there is one
other — Sir Harry Wynn."

Ah ! surely she might bow now,"
thought Cicely — " no doubt of it ! "

'' Miss Cicely Browne, let me present

to you Sir Harry Wynn," Lady Ridgeway
went on with a little smiling affectation of
extreme ceremony. And she had evidently
a good deal more to say — but she was interrupted.


For, as Sir Harry, trying to conceal his
smiles, bent gravely before Cicely, who he
perceived instantly meant to accept the
introduction with the usual gravity of deportment
by which under ordinary circumstances
such introductions are received ; as
they both — bearing themselves as regards
self-control very well indeed for a novice
and a rustic amid this little group of quick-eyed
sharp-witted lookers-on — as they both
bowed as if they met but for the first time,
and had not on several most exciting occasions
already met and bowed before now ;
as they stood and Lady Ridgeway complacently
regarded them and prepared to
begin another of her little speeches, —
aofain the door once more was thrown

open, a name was announced, and there
entered the most beautiful of young Life
Guardsmen — whom Regent's Park or
Knightsbridge Barracks could for the moment
supply — bringing the sweetest odours
of esse-bouquet and white rosebuds into the
room aloof with him.

'' Ah — ! Captain Fitzarthur," Lady
Ridgeway exclaimed, as she greeted him
with a soft bright smile, and with her hand
extended In most pleasing welcome, *you
are the missing one who was still wanting
to make up our party. And now, Ridgeway,
will you please ring, dear, for dinner."

CHAPTER XVII.

'HOW EASILY THINGS GO WRONG.'

As Lady Ridgeway uttered her last remark,
she raised her voice and turned
towards the back room beyond the festooned
curtain.

'what, eh, dinner! Yes, I think it is
about time," came the answer in the
sonorous tones of Lord Ridgeway's voice
echoing from the back room, where, ever
since the event of his unprovoked assaults
on Sir Harry, he had been crackling the
limp pages of the Evening Standard in a
huge armchair near the window at the
further end, reading to himself all the while
in most utter indifference to the whole

VOL. 1. T

party who were assembling In the front
room, and In complete absorption In his
own concerns.

He awoke to the sense of the hour now,
however, and to his desire for dinner ; and
he violently rang the bell. The result was
dinner, and forth from his seclusion accordingly
Lord RIdgeway came !

He was not in a bland humour evidently,
and In his notice of his wife's
guests he was, to say the least of it,
laconic.

How do ye do, Lady Blanche ? Will
you come down to dinner ? What ? eh !
What ? eh ! I beg your pardon," he exclaimed
In ejaculatory epithets, as his wife
arrested him with an effort to Indicate
Cicely Browne, and to conduct at all
events some hasty form of Introduction.
"Oh! how do ye do? Will you come to
dinner ? — dinner is ready. Oh ! Fielding,
how are you .^ Will you take Miss

Browne ? What ? No, captain — what ?
Eh, him — is he to take her ? — it doesn't
matter, does it ? What ? Is that it ?
Very well, as you please. What docs it
matter ? " he went on again to his wife
in most irritable tones. '' Eh ! very well,
very well ; it is all the same. Come
along, Lady Blanche, the soup is cooling."

And then he disappeared, and Lady
Ridgeway sighed gently as she presented
Captain Fitzarthur to Cicely, and as she
followed them downstairs with Sir Harry
Wynn.

So sorry," she murmured kindly to
Jack. "But Ridgeway leaves us, you know,
at cheese time, and we will be a round
party then exactly. I dare say you will
find your own place."

And so Jack would have done, gravitating
gently towards the goal of his
intention, and dropping as a matter of
course into the place by Lady Blanche's

side ; and Sir Harry would have been on
his other side, between him and Lady
Ridgeway, making the table indeed a little
out of balance while Lord Ridgeway remained.
But Jack understood all that
exactly, as Lady Ridgeway had indicated,
and was well accustomed to the little arrangements
of Park Lane.

His lordship once departed (having
eaten as much dinner as he thought
rational or wholesome), and Jack would
usually on such occasions have had a nod
from his hostess to take her lord's place.
And then they would have been cosy, and
remained a nice little trio of couples for
another hour at least ; over dessert and
coffee — which Lady Ridgeway always liked
downstairs if her company amused her,
and provided everybody was placed and
seated as she would have them be.

But this evening poor Jack was out of
reckoning. Lord Ridgeway took it into

his head unaccountably to arrange them
all himself. It was a mere fit of absence
of mind on his part, of utter indifference as
to where they sat, and of irritable impatience
to eat his dinner.

But so it fell out. He put Blanche in
her right place by pure accident, and then,
looking round to see who next was coming,
he beheld Captain Fitzarthur and Cicely
Browne.

Oh yes, sit here," he says peremptorily
to Cicely, pointing at the chair on his left
hand. Yes, sit there ; and you — no, don't
go there," he continued to Captain Fits
'' that is for her ladyship's man.
What — why, we will never all get in. Eh,
where are you going to ? What — yes, that
will do — you had better sit down, there, in
that place by Lady Blanche ; a great deal
more room on this side at all events than
the other. I cannot conceive what my
wife means by cramming up the dinner
table in this sort of way."

It was not a pleasant greeting for a
guest, as he entered his dining-room, as
it happened, for the very first time ; and
poor Captain Fitzarthur, being well bred
and complacent, went silently to his place
■ — or to the place not his, rather, — but
which was allotted to him by his impatient
host.

Thus, when Sir Harry arrived with Lady
Ridgeway he saw quick as lightning that
there was one opening left by Cicely
Browne ; and Sir Harry had deftly slipped
into it, and was in full possession already,
when Lady Ridgeway, standing in her own
place, suddenly realized that her table had
gone all wrong.

Every one was a tort et a t^-avers indeed.

There was Cicely's young guardsman by
Lady Blanche in Jack's particular seat ;
and there was Sir Harry on her own right
hand instead of on her left, in the seat
meant for Captain Fitzarthur next to

Cicely Browne. And here was Jack taking
his seat reluctantly enough beside her —
and Lord Ridgeway calling for soup with
much irritation, haste, and impetuosity !

'' Why we are all wrong — we must
change," she began in a rather cross and
mystified tone. "Why, good gracious,
Captain Fitzarthur, what a7^e you doing
there ? "

'' I really do not know," he said meekly,
glancing towards Lord Ridgeway, and
deprecating her ladyship's wrath by a
pathetic gesture, and a little shrug of his
shoulders, and preparing, if she still wished
it, to move.

But that was not to be contemplated.
*' No, no — nonsense ! Cannot you stay
where you are," exclaimed Lord Ridgeway.
'' Won't you do there ? What is the
matter ? Eh ! what ? Don't let any one
move again. Are we not all packed close
enough '^ Surely you can talk as you are.

Sit Still, I beg of you ; such tremendous
nonsense to be sure. Eh ! what ? Weare
very well — as we are Will you not sit
down ? Ah ! that is it — all right. Now
then, God bless me, where is the dinner ?
What are the servants about, I wonder ?
Are we not ready yet ? Eh ! What is
keeping that soup '^ Where is Watkins ? "

** Yes, my lord."

And the soup was there. And then
silence — a few moments' stupefied silence
seemed to fall upon the party, while the
footmen carried round their plates, and
they began to eat without another word.

Lord Ridgeway swallowed hastily, for
the Bill of Rates and Supply was awaiting
in the Lords for his vote, and he was
impatient to be off as fast as possible. And
Lady Ridgeway, with a flush of annoyance
on her cheek, which for that moment all
her dignity and determination could not
control, remained silent also for some time

after taking her seat. She put down her
spoon In a few minutes, too provoked for
the time being even to eat her dinner.

*' You are all In your wrong places," she
whispered confidentially to Sir Harry, who
for his part was consuming his J2ilienne
philosophically, although the spell of a dull
silence had for the moment fallen even
upon him. As Lady RIdgeway spoke to
him, however (In that confidential murmur),
he brightened Immediately and looked up
at her with a quizzical smile.

'' I am very happy, thank you," he said ;
for Lord Ridge way's arrangement vas on
the whole quite satisfactory to him. " I
am very happy."

"Are you ,^ I am so glad," she answered
; and she bent a little towards him,
and looked with a grave smile Into his
sunny eyes.

She was about to speak apparently In a
low tone again, In confidence. He bent

accordingly forward to listen. There was
a pause ; for she hesitated in that uncertain,
meditative, impressive way she had, and as
she paused —

'' Bad soup ! " shouted Lord Ridgeway
from the other end.

I am sorry you do not like it," said his
wife quietly, drawing herself up at the
same time with a quick gesture of displeasure.


'well, I see you don't eat it yourself —
Bad," and he threw down the spoon. But
his soup was finished.

I am glad to see at least that yo2C do,"
Lady Ridgeway commented, looking for a
second towards him as the servant removed
the plate. Lord Ridgeway grunted. She
turned instantly away from him, and did
not notice him further until he addressed
her again.

The soup was not bad, it was a railing
accusation utterly unfounded and undeserved.

Nothing at Lady Ridge way's table
ever was bad, but her lord was slightly
out of humour on that particular evening,
and it refreshed him to say so — and so it
had been said !

When this little domestic interlude was
over she turned again to Sir Harry, and
beheld suddenly — to her intense annoyance
— that he was conversing with Cicely
Browne.

Just what she knew must happen, when
Lord Ridgeway made a mess of their places
in this tiresome way.

'' Some one must talk to the girl — and
this well meaning boy from the country had
of course felt it incumbent upon him to doit."
She had not heard what had been his
first remark. But now, they were well
started and actually conversing in low, odd,
amused tones about something that apparently
interested both. Lady Ridgeway
would have given her very life just then

(or she would have said she would) to have
heard what they were saying to each other ;
but she just then immediately fell a victim
to necessity and poor Jack. For Captain
Fitzarthur was doing his duty manfully
and making the best of his opportunities, as
most young life-guardsmen do. Blanche
seemed likely after all to have a pleasant
dinner — for it was quite remarkable how
well they were getting on.

Lord Ridgeway has certainly made a nice
mess of it, and Lady Ridgeway and Jack
must mutually resign themselves to one
another, for they were the only two left out.
The other pair of tete-a-tetes were quite
agreeably occupied now, and Lord Ridgeway
would talk (directly or individually) to
no one at all. He did dash aggressively
indeed into any of the three conversations
he fancied, from time to time, imagining
perhaps that his remarks were a pj^-opos — •
founding them, as he did generally, upon

chance sentences he overheard. And
although they were Invariably singularly
mal ct propos In point of fact, they were Inmost
Instances however most effective — for
they seldom came far short of an open
Insult to the person each time accosted,
both in the substance and the style of his
address.

For Lord Ridgeway, be it said, felt himself
privileged to be at least disagreeable to
them all — if in no other way he interfered in
his own house or at his own table with his
wife's circle of friends !

Neither Lady Ridgeway nor Jack Fielding
had the least wish for mutual intercourse
In conversation at this particular
dinner. But they well knew each other.
They were accustomed to each other's
moods and ways ; so they arrived mutually
at resignation. They knew that neither
of them had wanted this ; but they knew,
also, that It could not be helped. So

they afforded each to the other mutually
a safety valve for a few minutes of 111
temper and disgust. And then, after that
few minutes, they fell cosily Into familiar
converse and into sharp discussion. They
soon found some topic of social gossip
on which to compare notes of their knowledge
— and on which to disagree.

END OF VOL. I.

Printed BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMltHD, LONDON AND BECtLI

AlIS^lAINn
IHl JO

A>I v~d g IT

L I B R.AR.Y

OF THE

University

or ILLINOIS

Gt7474o

a Sifecttf) in Summer VLimt.

MISS GRANT,

AUTHOR OF "artiste," " THE SUN MAID," " PRINCE HUGO,
"my heart's in THE HIGHLANDS," ETC.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. II.

LONDON:
CHAPMAN AND HALL, Limited,

HENRIETTA STREET, W.C.
1882.

fall rights reserved')

CONTENTS OF VOL. II.

CHAPTER I.

RECIPROCAL.

Thus they all went on cheerfully enough
through three courses, while Lord Ridgeway
attacked them each in turn.

While Captain Fitzarthur and Lady
Blanche were very lively and pleasant to
one another ; while Jack and Lady Ridgeway
argued hotly, and contradicted each
other with much vehement emphasis atone
moment — and then bent their heads
together the next — and became mysterious
and made confidential communications

VOL. II. B

mutually, on many social scandals in which
the rest of the party were less deeply
versed ; and while Sir Harry Wynn and
Cicely Browne talked on and on in a little
rippling sotto voce current of unceasing
intercourse through the many successive
stages of the pretty dinner. For these
two were all unconscious and quite heedless
indeed of Lord Ridgeway's bad temper,
of Lady Ridgeway's irritation, of Jack
Fielding's disappointment and annoyance
as he eyed Fitzarthur in his place. They
were unconscious of all this and indeed of
anything that was disagreeable, or of anybody
else who might not be pleased. It
was all the same to them, they were both
so very happy. The wished-for meeting
had come at last, and for about twenty
Elysian minutes they might have been
out among the shady chestnuts of the
Palace Gardens, as on that first occasion
when (except for Negro's presence) they

had met quite alone. They were conscious
only of one another ; they were sensible
only of quick thrills of joy. Once again
they had met, and met at last to know and
to call each other by name.

"I hope Negro is all right," Sir Harry had
whispered as Lady Ridgeway had turned
away, encouraged to do so by a glance
which had stolen for an instant in his
direction from beneath Cicely's long, drooping
lashes. '* I hope Negro is all right ? "

Yes ; thanks to you, — he is all right,"
she had softly answered him.

Thanks to a lucky chance, you mean.
What a nuisance it would have been if I
had not happened to have been there just
at the right minute."

'* Oh, it would have been dreadful. Do
not speak of it, please. I shall be so grateful
as long as ever I live to you, and I am
so glad to be able to tell you so now, and
I shall always call you Negro's champion.

I am sure I shall. Even now," she added
shyly, 'that I know you have another
name."

'' Yes ; do call me ' Negro's champion.'
I like Negro. I consider him my very best
and my very most particular friend. It is
I who am grateful to Negro, you know —
very grateful indeed. May I come and
see Negro," he added a little audaciously.

Oh, I do not know," she said a little
doubtfully in reply. '' I do not know ; or at
least in fact — I do not really think you
may."

'' Never mind, I will some day," he
answered determinedly, *' I will some day ;
but — I can wait."

I will ask Belinda," said Cicely with
grave resolution. '' She is sure to know ;
but I am afraid you must not come. I am
sure — not just yet, at all events. But — yes,
some day, perhaps, you may."

Some day will do very well," said Sir

Harry. 'some day Is a very nice word
in my opinion ; and some day, if one is
resolved upon It, is not always so very faraway
— we shall see," and he nodded with
an aspect of resolve.

''I will ask Belinda," repeated Cicely
very demurely again.

Then it struck him to Inquire, '' Who
is Belinda ? what a pretty name ! "

Do you think so ? Well, so do I. Why,
you have seen Belinda," she added suddenly
with a bright glance at him, and with a
blush at the recollection mounting to her
fair cheek. " She was with me, you know,
that morning in the carriage, and again
to-day, when you saw me in the Park."

Oh, that is Belinda," and he hesitated
and paused. He did not like to ask her
questions, but she went on —

'' Yes, that Is Belinda. We live in the
same house, you know. We have always
lived together, just Belinda and I. Who

is she ? Oh yes — but I always forget that.
She was my mother's cousin, and she
takes care of me. She is always with me ;
she is the only one who ever really takes
care of me, or who ever has. That is who
Belinda is. Now that I am grown up I
suppose she is * my friend — and that I am
sure she is at all events."

Ah, I understand," said Sir Harry ; "and
now tell me, if you do not mind — if you
will, who was the old gentleman who — on
that same morning, you know, when I went
to Prince's Gate to find you — who came
out?"

Oh, that is my guardian. Did you really
notice him also ? "

And an uncomfortable, rather guilty feeling
assailed Cicely at this point, as she remembered
how Mr. Garth had not only on
his side seen, but had also commented
severely upon the apparition of Sir Harry.

'' Oh, your guardian —ah, and is he a

cousin also ? Do you all live together in
your nice big house ? "

Oh no ; he lives always at his chambers.
He is not a cousin of mine. He is not one
bit related ; he was only my father s great
friend."

Indeed; and I hope he is a nice guardian
and gives you all your own way in everything,
as guardians ought to do."

** He is very kind' said Cicely, and
then she sighed a deep strange sigh that
rose irrepressibly and that was almost as
inexplicable to herself as it was to Sir
Harry Wynn.

He is nos very kind, the old curmudgeon,
all the same,' thought the young
fellow angrily at this, jumping to quick
conclusions, as people with small experience
often do. ' I am sure he is not kind.
Why should she sigh ? He looked a stiff
old boy, and I should not like to come
across him ; and I am very glad he don't

live out there with Belinda and her. I
think I like Belinda.'

This was all a silent reflection. Then
he continued aloud —

Did you not think it very clever of me
to find you that day at Prince's Gate ? "

'eyes," she answered, turning her eyes
frankly upon him then, full of quite natural
and unsuppressed astonishment. " I did
think it so very clever, and at first I was
surprised, when I saw you. But then
I remembered that numbers of people
besides us lived in Prince's Gate, and that
you were probably on your way to call for
someone whom I did not know — I remembered
that."

''No, I was not," said Sir Harry, decidedly.
" I was on my way to nobody. I
was not going to call for any one at all. I
had found what I was looking for. Miss
Browne, when I encountered Negro and
you."

She gave a pleased little shy laugh at
this and turned her eyes upon her plate ;
but she answered nothing. She blushed,
however, and in spite of herself looked
very happy.

*' You knew me again," said Sir Harry.

Of course I did," she very softly
replied.

He knew quite well that she had known
him ; but he thought it very nice of her to
say that ' Of course.' And he turned his
gaze full upon her, with a bright, frank,
sweet smile, for a minute. She looked up
and their eyes met with that glad light —
the recognition of mutual sympathy, which
springs sometimes so unbidden and so
quick. His eyes softened as they met
hers and then he went on —

I did not in the least know my way,"
he said ; " neither where you lived, nor how
to get there ; but I just followed exactly the
path over which you went off with Negro
that first afternoon."

That first afternoon ! It seemed so long
ago, and yet it was but a few summer
days ! It was very extraordinary ; but they
seemed to have known each other for any
length of time now, and to have met so
often and in so many places that the
acquaintance seemed to-night simply to
complete itself — not to begin.

Oh ! he knew her quite well ! ' so Sir
Harry would have said to any one who
might investigate the subject after that one
little dinner ; and he had known her how
long ? ' Oh — for ages.' He had begun to
know her ? ' he could not exactly say
when ! ' This was his instinctive feeling ashe
went on again. " I did not in the least
know where to find you when I went to
look for you," he said.

"No ? — you did not know I lived in
Prince's Gate ? Oh, I have been there so
long!"

'' But then I did not know anything

about Prince's Gate. I did not know that
there was any such place in the world at
all."

Oh, I thought everybody knew that
much about me," said Cicely, laughing. '' I
flattered myself that the place I live
in is about as well known to most people
as any part of London, and that everybody
would know it if I only said the
name."

But then, you see, I know next to
nothing of London," he answered. " I had
never been before at Prince's Gate."

You ? — you have not been long in
town ? "

'* Precisely three weeks."

She looked round at him then in soft
amazement. What — he was not as her
guardian had judged him, after all then !
He was not one of Mr. Garth's wicked,
dissipated young London men.

Where had he come from — this bright

young champion, who had been placed for
Negro's salvation on that May evening
amonor the chestnut shades ?

But, why — ? " she began in a mystified
tone.

"Why did I come to London ? you
would say. Well, I have often asked myself
In vain, I can assure you, that very question
; though, do you know," he added suddenly,
" I think I can almost answer the
question now." He paused with his bright
eyes fixed upon her so eagerly that she
turned hers away. Then he continued
more composedly. "At all events, avowedly
I have come to London because it
has so pleased my people down at my own
old place. They have sent me up to
Parliament, you see, to sit for what Lord
RIdgeway Is kind enough to call — my
pocket borough. He talks very contemptuously
of Arch Aubrey," Sir Harry went
on with rising heat and Indignation.

But — by Jove, I should like him to seethe
tidy little corner of England he honours
with such vituperation from a political
point of view ! However, they have sent
me up to represent them, and so I have
had to come. Though what good I do
my brave Arch Aubrey men by sitting
night after night and half the sunny afternoons
as well, down in that dull old place
at Westminster, I am sure I do not know.
Don't yoti go in for women having seats
in the House of Commons, Miss Browne,
if you take my advice — I assure you it is
no holiday at all."

I am not strong minded," said Cicely,
demurely. " I do not understand anything
about those kind of things. But you ! — you
are actually a member of Parliament," she
continued, turning her soft violet orbs with
no little admiration on his sunburnt face.
'' You are really a member of Parliament,
and — you look so young," she added
laughing.

I dare say I am a good bit older than
you are," he answered a little indignantly.
I am quite sure that I am years older
than you are, I have not the least doubt
of it," and he looked critically at her for a
moment as if to guess her age as she had
insulted his.

*' I am one and twenty," she replied a
little hesitatingly, answering readily enough
the inquiry in his eyes — but not very
certain that it was quite correct to do so
all the same.

'rand I was twenty-three last Midsummer-day,
so that I am quite old enough to have
a seat in the House of Commons ; and I
am a Methuselah compared to you. Miss
Browne, — so, you must not speak contemptuously
of my youth again, if you please."

And you have been really only three
weeks in London," she continued, taking
up the inquiry in her turn from her own
side at length once more.



"Only three weeks," he answered. "And
you ? "

"Why, I have lived in London all my
life."

Oh, whew ! " whistled Harry quite low
below his breath, however — and looking
round with a merry twinkle of pretended
dismay in his eyes as he said with a sigh
" Then I dare say you are aged in worldly
wisdom and social experience in comparison
with me, to a degree that will make me feel
as juvenile and foolish every time I speak
to you, as when I endure the kind patronage
and protection of Jack Fielding or
Lady Blanche. Dear me, how sad, and
I hoped you were a novice like myself all
the time ! And now, after all, I have fallen
into a trap, and I shall be chaffed presently
by you for all my social ignorances, just as
I have been a dozen times already by
sundry astute young metropolitan ladies
to whom I have fallen a sorry prey. Ah,
Miss Browne ! "

No, that you will not," Cicely answered,
looking brightly and assuringly at him
again. '' No, no ; not by me. You need not
be afraid of me, Sir Harry, for I am a novice
much more of a novice, I dare say, than
you are. I know nothing of society, probably
much less than you do. Only think, —
this is my first dinner party," and she added,
looking down and colouring a little, " I
will tell you, if it will make you feel happier
with me, that this is my first really dining-out
dress. It came from Paris only yesterday.
From a shop that Lady Ridgeway
once recommended to Belinda, you know.
There, — you may think how little I know !
You need not be afraid of my laughing at
you, at all events."

I am so glad," he answered fervently.
** Then you will not mind me and my
ignorance, and I shall be delighted not
to feel foolish and all ' out of it,' you know,
with you. — You have really never been all

about In London yet — any more than I
have ? " he went on.

'' I have never been ' out ' yet in
London at all," she answered.

Now this zs charming ! " he exclaimed ;
now I know we shall be friends. How
curious that we should have met to-night.
Is this really your first dining-out gown ?
how pretty it is ! And tell me, did the
lilac dress, the one I saw you in, that time
in the Gardens, you know, — did it come
from Paris also ? "

"Yes," she said, nodding genially at
him with undisguised pleasure at his
evident approval of her costume. He had
apparently admired that crepe dress in the
Gardens. And she thought it very pretty
herself. " Yes," she said, " it came from
Paris too ; but it is not lilac, it is heliotrope,
you know. Nobody wears anything
but heliotrope this year."

Oh, that's it, is it ? and — well, it is a

VOL. II. ,^- C

very pretty dress indeed, and so is this
one. And now that is all right, you know,
I am sure we shall set on. I am so Mad
you are a novice also." — And then he
added once more, '' Are you really only
just out ? "

*' Yes, only just — I was presented at the
last drawing-room."

And I at the last levee!'

How funny."

Yes, it is very odd. I am glad we
have met just at the beginning." Then
he went on again after an instant's pause —

'' And now, I imagine, that you have
started you are going to ' do ' everything — •
the whole season I mean? I suppose you
are going right bang through ? "

"Oh, I don't know about that," said
Cicely. '' You see, I have no one exactly
to do it with. You see, Belinda and I are
quite alone." — Then, continuing after a
pause, '' There is Lady Ridgeway, certainly,

— she Is so very kind. And I am
to go out with her a Httle sometimes ; but
I do not know how much, because of many
reasons which I cannot quite explain. I do
not know what I shall really do — And you?"
she added, suddenly turning the query
upon him. '' What are you going to do ? "

Oh — I ? I suppose I shall get Into
a sort of tread-mill round of It all, and go
ahead like other fellows. I have got to do
what Is expected of me, I suppose, at all
events. And there Is such a lot expected
too. Oh, yes — for this season, at all events,
I mean to go In for the whole thing."

Cicely turned round upon him at this,
and surveyed him again, but this time with
grave, regretful eyes.

He answered her glance Inquiringly.

Oh, I suppose you will begin now to
be dreadfully idle, and good-for-nothing,
and bad," she said sorrowfully, and she
shook her head.

I hope not," answered Harry, heartily ;
and then In spite of himself, and spite her
grave, deeply concerned look, he broke
into a ringing laugh. '' Why should I ? "
he said merrily. " I hope not Indeed."

Oh, you all do. I know you all are,"
she continued emphatically. '' I am afraid
you are. — But — oh, why should you, Sir
Harry — why should you. It would be such
a pity ? "

*'A11 Idle and good-for-nothing — what
we unlucky M.P.s, or whom. Miss
Browne ? "

No, no ; not the M.P.s," she replied
heartily. " Oh, no, It Is not that. I do
not mean because you are In Parliament,
and that sort of thing, you know ; I
am sure at least that that Is all right.
And I do not mean you yourself exactly
either," she continued, a little confusedly,
and becoming much distressed. '' But all
those nice — I mean young people, you

know, who wear flowers and those pretty
light grey coats, and have big dear cole
dogs, and are always (such numbers of
them) in the Park just now every morning
I mean all of them."

"All of us," he said emphatically. " Do
you know — I am afraid, though unintentionally,
the description fits. But how
do you know," he added eagerly, '' that
we are every one of us so contemptible
as all that comes to. Miss Browne ?
how have you found us out I wonder —
already."

'' Oh, I know," she repeated sadly,
shaking her little bronze-brown frizzled
head with grave and melancholy wisdom.
I know, I know ; I have been told."

But who has told you ?" persisted Harry,
and he laughed brightly and gleefully then.

She looked so sweetly, so demurely and
so bewitchingly disapproving, that it provoked
him in spite of everything to laugh.

But that laugh was.^ In another Instant
much deplored by him, for it put an end
to their little happy tete-astute for the time
being.

'' What Is the joke ? " said Lady Ridgeway,
looking smiling round upon him. For
she was thoroughly tired of Jack. ''Ah —
my dear Sir Harry, what an Infectious
laugh you have ! — Come, we cannot let you
and Cicely have all the fun to yourselves
any longer. Let us share It, and let us
laugh as well."

He turned and answered her with ready
courtesy, but — with that quick, true, instinctive
taste which never failed him — he
did not repeat one single word to Lady
Ridgeway which either he or Cicely had
said.

CHAPTER 11.

IN THE TROPICS.

At cheese time, as Lady RIdgeway had
said, his lordship departed, with the
grumbled remark, " You zai/l dine at
midnight, you know ; so I never get the
chance of eating my dinner in comfort ; "
and then getting up and stalking out of
the room with a general nod round the
table to everybody, which any one might
be justified in appropriating and returning,
or in letting alone, as they thought fit.
They all bowed courteously in return, however,
and the young men half rose from
their seats, but no impression was made
thereby on Lord Ridgeway, for he had

turned his back upon them already and
was gone.

Then coffee came almost immediately,
and little packets of cigarettes were laid
in front of the plates, between the tall
porcelain stems of the dessert-service and
the small vases of sweet-scented and
clustering flowers, and the party closed in,
in cosy conclave round the little table, and
the servants quietly left the room.

Lady Ridegway in an absent, meditative
sort of manner proceeded to fill each tiny
Sevres cup with the fragrant coffee, and
dropped huge lumps of sugar one after
another without speaking a word. Then
she passed them gravely round, and sipped
her own little cupful, still with downcast
eyes and curiously meditative mien.

Jack had not moved as usual from his
place beside her. She had made no sign
to him to do so.

Lord Ridgeway's chair was still empty.

Presently Lady Ridgeway raised her fine
expressive eyes, and she swept them slowly
round the circle of her guests.

Blanche seemed very happy in tete-astute
with Captain Fitzarthur, who, it just struck
Lady Ridgeway almost for the first time
as her glance now rested on him, was certainly,
as she said to herself, ' a strikingly
handsome boy.'

He was nearly five and twenty, and a
captain, and she herself was not yet very
old ; but everybody was a ' boy ' in Lady
Ridgeway's diction, or at least if they were
bright and good-looking and pleasant, she
always called them so. It felt so comfortable
and easy. ' Yes, Captain Fitzarthur
was certainly a very handsome boy.'

Blanche seemed amused with him, and
Jack was still out in the cold, and Lady
Ridgeway was tired of Jack.

She remained silent and still paused
without saying another word to him ; while

he, also quite speechless for the moment,
took up a cigarette and rolled it absently
between his fingers.

Suddenly she transferred her gaze to
the other side.

Cicely Browne and Sir Harry were
deep in murmured tete-astute again, and
Lady Ridgeway's eyebrows arched curiously
for a moment, and then a line appeared
drawn darkly for a second across her brow.
Only for that second, however. She immediately
recovered herself, and one of
her sweetest and most brilliant smiles suddenly
lit up her face.

Cicely, dear,' she said, with soft emphasis
on the caressing word, '' Cicely,
dear, I know you hate smoke, or at all
events I know you are unaccustomed to it,
so let us go upstairs."

Cicely smiled in answer, but hesitated.

She did not quite know what might bethe
conventional answer due from her, and

she was quite unaware that she was either
averse or unaccustomed to smoke. Certainly
not the latter. Her father had
always smoked, and every evening when
she had been sent down to him she had
been wont to find him musings over a clear.
What should she answer '^ She paused.

But Lady Ridgeway evidently did not
expect an answer, or was indifferent as to
what, the answer might be ! She certainly
did not await one. Without further consultation
with any of them she gathered
up her fan and gloves.

'' You seem to have finished your coffee,"
she said, speaking again to Cicely ; '' and
you, Blanche," she continued, " are you
ready, dear ? "

"Quite ready."

'' But must we stay behind ? " came then
from. Sir Harry in a piteous tone. '' Must
we stay here ? I must follow Lord Ridgeway's
example, you know, in a few minutes,

and betake me to the House ; but may I
not come upstairs first, Lady Ridgeway,
please ? "

Oh yes ; you may come as soon as
you Hke, all or either of you, but — yes,
stay behind now. We are quite tired of
you for the moment, and we shall like you
much better after you have smoked your
cigarettes."

They were not long over the cigarettes.

Lady Ridgeway was scribbling a note at
her writing-table, and Blanche and Cicely
had had little time to arrive at acquaintance
in the back drawing-room, when the three
trooped in, and Sir Harry made his way
with ready directness towards the sofa
where the two girls sat.

Jack leisurely followed him, and Captain
Fitzarthur paused by Lady Ridgeway, who
had looked up at him from her writing
with an encouraging smile.

*' Will you excuse me a moment ? " she
said. This horrid ten o'clock post — one
has always something that must go by it !
I have just received that," she continued,
tossing a card across the table to him.
** You will be there, of course ? "

Oh, the F 's Shakespearian tableaux!
Rather ! — I mean yes, I am going.
I hear they are to be very good."

All the beauties to stand, and Millais
arranging them."

*eyes, Mrs. F does the thing very

well. Are not you to be among them .^
Among the beauties, I mean } "

Am I to take part in the tableaux f
No," she said with a light laugh. " Life
is not long enough to give one's self so
much trouble about anything, in my
opinion, as all that implies. They asked
me to join them, certainly, but I backed
out. I wonder who is to take the part (in
my place) which they proposed for me ; I

must Inquire. And now, what are those
people laughing at In there, I should like
to know ! "

And she rose as she spoke, and came
from behind her little table, and walked
into the back drawing-room, slowly followed
by Captain FItzarthur, who paused
in the alcove near the archway where the
piano stood, and touched It, dropping his
fingers on to the keys in an absent manner
as he looked down the room towards the
further end.

Jack had taken his place near Lady
Blanche now, and seemed happy. Sir
Harry Wynn was standing up and, with
one hand upon the end of the sofa, was
bending towards Cicely Browne. Lady
RIdgeway, dignified and majestic, her tall
figure drawn to its full height, and her
hands clasped and hanging down before
her, stood midway between the four. She
was surveying them. She was puzzled.

Lady RIdgeway was quick, and it was
almost impossible to deceive her faculties
of observation ; and as for her intuitions,
they were quite curiously keen.

She felt a state of things even before
she had time to observe them. She had
electrical sensibilities and sympathies — or
so she always said — by which the sensations
of other people's inward beings, became
disclosed to her inward perceptions,
long before circumstances or opportunity
had had time to declare them.

So, she had quickly realized that there
was something quite unexpected in this
tableau before her now — in this meeting of
Cicely with Sir Harry Wynn !

She knew nothing:, and nothing suggested
itself to her ready and speculative
mind. For she had spoken of Sir Harry
only yesterday to Cicely Browne, when
she had asked her to dinner ; and the girl
had betrayed no knowledge of him at all ;

and naturally, for at that time she did not
know her champion's name.

And to Harry she had certainly mentioned
the heiress, her '' little protege of
the Paraguay mines" at the Opera that
night, and surely in all probability she had
told him that it was Cicely Browne.

And yet, these two — Lady Ridgeway
was too quick for it all to escape her —
they had some 'past' between them! They
had recollections which came up, colouring
their young fresh cheeks, and lighting up
the gleam in these two pair of bright
gleeful eyes.

A past' — there was no doubt of it — and
yet ! Lady Ridgeway could make nothing
of it at all.

At all events they were both radiantly
happy, and evidently quite delighted to
meet.

She stood contemplating them for a moment,
while Cicely turned her eyes from

Sir Harry's bright bending face, and
looked up at her hostess, while a warm
wave of colour swept over her cheek once
more as she met that imperious lady's
quizzical and inquisitive eyes.

Lady Ridgeway smiled, looked at the
girl from head to foot, as if she had suddenly
appeared in a new light to her, and
as if she were an interesting and unread
puzzle.

Then she slightly shrugged her shoulders,
curled her lip with a curious little expression
of resignation, looked at Harry for a
moment, (who returned her gaze with nothing
but bright triumphant pleasure in
his glance,) and then she turned slowly
away, and walked off to Captain Fits
at the piano, with a sensation rising
oddly within her to which she was quite
unaccustomed — the sensation that she had
been just a very little bit sold !

For she had read all, save the main facts

VOL. II. D

and circumstances of the case ; all its sentiments,
all its tendencies and probabilities
were plain to her now as an open book —
Sir Harry Wynn was not fair, free game

Captain Fitzarthur stood still by the
piano, still lightly fingering the notes. He
had been watching them all, and he had
been admiring the picture. The long,
pretty, softly-lit room, with its back-ground
of green foliage visible in the conservatory
away at the lower end ; with its bits of
artistic colouring, some pale and delicate,
some rich and deep ; with its glow of light,
where the shaded lamps, standing on small
velvet tables, threw crimson circles a little
way around ; and with all its alcoves and
corners of deep shadow, where Lady Ridgeway
had placed her vases of sweet-scented
flowers and stands of green fernery,
and where small inviting-looking causeuses
were arranged for tete-astute. Captain Fits
critically scanned it all, and then

turned his gaze on the group half-way
down the room. The four bright young-upturned
faces, and the tall figure of Lady
Ridgeway in their midst.

An evil or a good Genius — which might
she be ?

For one for all — she had influence with
each of them. Her presence lay with
impress upon their lives — a presence of
power it could not fail to be — and the
world would scarcely credit her with being
a presence — for good !

She turned and came towards Captain
Fitzarthur. It was impossible to read
from her face one single sentiment with
regard to any of them, which might be
passing in her mind.

You sing, do you not ? " she said, In a
soft tone.

A little, yes, sometimes," he answered ;
"only stupid sort of comic things, you
know."

'' Then sing now, I like anything comic ;
Hfe is dull enough without our assistance,
and anybody who can enliven it with
the comical deserves public thanks. Dosing
! "

'what? 'Here stands a Post!' or
The Policeman's Song ' — or what ? "

*' Oh, anything," and he struck the piano
' struck it ' literally, for the notes rang
again beneath his sudden and vigorous
assault, and Jack, who was just growing a
little happy and sentimental by Blanche
Ethridge's side, emitted a low protest in a
suppressed groan; and Sir Harry stopped
his eager flow of remarks, and looked up
with a half-dissatisfied smile. Cicely only
opened her eyes with astonishment — and
Blanche yawned ; while Lady Ridgeway
threw herself into a deep chair by the
corner of the piano, and broke into a ringing
laugh as Captain Fitzarthur proceeded
loudly to inform them that when —

The Coster's finished jumping on his mother,
On his mother,
He loves to lie basking in the sun —
Oh ! take one consideration with another,
A policeman's life is not a happy one,
Happy one."

*' What a funny song," murmured Cicely.

Great rubbish," growled Jack.

Hush, Jack, for shame," expostulated
Lady Blanche, demurely.

How can he do it ? How awfully
clever ! " exclaimed Sir Harry.

*' Quite too delicious," said Lady Ridgeway,
emphatically. "That is too charming.
Oh, Captain FItzarthur, do go on ! " and he
proceeded

Lady RIdgeway laughed her ringing,
musical. Impetuous laugh again, and looked
down the room at the group with satisfaction,
as she saw them all silent, or laughing
In spite of themselves, and felt assured that
her diplomacy had succeeded, and that tete-astute
— even ordinary conversation, and

most certainly sentiment — were all quite
effectually annihilated for the time being.

Jack was looking down disgusted, but
Sir Harry was looking up and gazing
straight at her, evidently immensely
amused.

'rit is such a boy," she thought to herself.
"He delights in anything. This
suits him exactly. Now, do go on, Captain
Fitzarthur ; let us have some more."

Do you know this ? " said the young

fellow, and he dashed into the cheery, stirrings

chorus of —

Here stands a Post !
See the flag upon it waving."

Famous ! " exclaimed Sir Harry, and
he drew near the piano in spite of himself.
What a capital thing to march to."

Now — good chorus," shouted Captain
Fitzarthur, and Lady Ridgeway joined : —

•' Here stands a Post. Behold it and — Beware."
shouted Harry along with her, and his

colour rose as he laughed again,, and his
eyes sparkled with fun.

Then Captain Fitzarthur sprang up from
the piano.

There, that's enough of that, I think,"
he said. '* What rubbish it all is, to be
sure."

Oh no ! It is capital ; how it catches
one's ear," laughed Harry again.

Famous," echoed Lady Ridgeway, and
she smiled up at him, and went on again —

"Here stands a Post ! — Yes ! but who put it There?"

Again Harry joined her. They chanted
vociferously together for a minute, and
Captain Fitzarthur laughed, and strolled
down the room.

Do you like comic songs ? " he said to
Cicely.

*' Yes ; I do not know— I think I do,"
she answered, with a little slight hesitation,
anxious to be truthful, and yet not

rude. " I never heard one before, you
know, at least not sung. I have heard all
those tunes before upon the organs."

Oh yes ! that is their test of merit. A
comic song Is nothing, you know, until
they have It on the hurdy-gurdy, or, at
least, If they don't have It, you may be
sure that It Is no count."

No ? How very curious," said Cicely.

Meanwhile Blanche had just softly
touched Jack upon the shoulder with her
fan. He looked up at her.

She was gazing down the room, beyond
the piano, towards the conservatory, her
large, calm, brown eyes fixed gravely, as If
she observed nothing specially, and as if she
were all the while merely listening to what
he said.

But he Instantly followed her gaze.

He understood her, and knew what she
was pointing out to him, and what she
thought.

For, of course, as yet Jack knew nothing,
and Blanche had only observed a very little,
concerning Cicely and Sir Harry Wynn.

But they had their own little scheme for
his education and development, and so
they watched, and smiled furtively towards
each other now.

Lady Ridgeway had risen, talking
earnestly to Sir Harry the whole time, and
she had continued to talk, he bending
courteously to listen, while she turned,
keeping him steadily by her side, and
walked across the room, slowly and deliberately,
away from them all, towards the
entrance to her pretty flower-room, on the
other side. I say flower-room, and not
conservatory, quite advisedly, for only so
can it be described.

It was not an ordinary glass conservatory
like anybody else might have had, buta
round edifice, dimly illuminated and full
of flowers, with a vaulted blue ceiling, from

which pended a globe lamp, soft and many-tinted,
like a large, lustrous pearl. Snowy-lilies
of the Nile and crimson amaryllis,
and tall graceful ferns stood in groups
round a few pieces of beautiful sculpture,
and beyond these were cool, dusky niches,
even more suggestive of tranquil converse
than the corners of the drawing-room had
been, where low crimson seats and long
American rocking-chairs were set back
into the shadow here and there.

The whole atmosphere was laden with
the sweet, drowsy odours of the rich exotic
blossoms which gleamed softly among the
ferns.

'* Come into the tropics," said Lady
Ridgeway, lightly. '' I do not say at
present — come and see my birds, for they
are all asleep now. You must come and
visit them in daylight. Sir Harry."

The tropics ' seemed cool enough on this
sultry evening as they entered, however, —

for SO was the little luxurious retreat
arranged — cool In summer, and warm In
winter, was exactly what Lady RIdgeway
meant It to be.

'' It Is kept always at the same temperature,
you know," she explained, as she
passed Into the curious flower and bird-room
with Sir Harry. " Day and night,
summer and winter. It Is always the same,
or else my foreign birds would not live
here, and, you know, they are my one little
craze ! "

And then only It was, that Sir Harry
saw, entering this enchanted temple of
verdure and flowers, with all Its soft
luxury of cool and quiet repose, that It
was an aviary also as well as a flower-room
; and that the tropical flowers and
foliage and ferns all existed to set off and
to keep up the character of their natural
surroundings, for the little pink Java
sparrow, for the bright-winged goldfinch,

and for the soft, tender-noted love-birds
who, with many other curious specimens
of the feathered beauties of foreign comes,
slumbered on their little gilded perches in
peaceful dreams of soft Southern lands,
among many varieties of the Eugenia,
Eutaxia-Floritundas, Gnidia-Pinifolias, and
Gordonia-Javanicas of their native woods,
such as all now stand at home in our
conservatories.

It was a pretty, fanciful boudoir, and it
spoke the erratic and fantastic character
of the lady who owned it and who spent
indeed, as she often asserted, many of her
happiest hours — quite alone — yes, save
her birds, her ferns and her curious fish
in the crystal bowl beneath the sparkling
fountain — quite alone in here.

I know few people would believe it. But
Lady Ridgeway had curious nooks and
corners, odd, unexpected sides always appearing
and always afresh surprising you,
in that strange diversified nature of hers.

And she loved her birds and her queer
fish far more than all of them — Guardsmen,
young M.P.s, and Baronets put
together !

And Sir Harry believed this — fully and
frankly believed it — when she, in her
wonted fashion, now introduced him into
her grotto, as into ' the one place where
she was really thoroughly contented,
thoroughly at home, — and perfectly happy
upon earth ! '

He believed, perhaps a little more ingenuously
than she had meant him to
believe it, for it was quite natural, and
explicable to him.

For had he not, (as far as birds and
beasts and flowers and fishes went,) much
the very same crazes himself ? Had he
not the old kennel, where he had spent
about the happiest of all his hours at
home ? And had he not his nursery for
baby pheasants, and his collection of antiquated

falcons and decrepit crows, all as
tenderly cared for as her tropical favourites
here ? And did he not know every wild
woodland bird-note, from the first chirp
of the peewit to the last farewell of the
departing swallow, In the green, wild woods
at home ? So he could sympathize — enthusiastically
sympathize — as she took him
from cage to cage, and as they peered in
warily at her bright plumed birds all
asleep on their gilt perches now.

His first Impulse, after an exclamation
of delight when he found himself within
this enchanted bower — his first impulse
was to rush back and fetch Cicely to see
It. A curious impulse, and one which
he did not pause to analyze although he
was keenly aware of it. * Oh, let me just
go back and bring in Miss Browne to see
all this ! Oh, how lovely it is, she must
see it all ! '

But somehow: — Lady Ridge way detained

him, and prevented this Intention. This
was to be her hour, so she told herself,
and if she allowed flirtation within the
sacred precincts of this shrine of nature in
its rarest and most delicate forms — well,
at least, she chose to limit it to her own
peculiar flirtations, and thus only her most
especial and most Platonic friends were
invited here. Cicely had seen it all before
now, and she should see it again. But not
now ! No, this hour was for herself and
for Sir Harry.

She had expected that it would surprise
weir Harry, and she liked amazing him !
She liked seeing him look rather mystified ;
and somehow it amused her to see that
bright boyish flush come up on his cheek,
and to know within herself that something
in the utterly unconventional style of her
own doings and surroundings was surprising
him to the verge of perplexity
indeed. And here throui2:h flowers and

birds was one pathway towards the depths
of his sympathies and interests as she knew.

'He is such a dear thing; such a
thorough rustic,' she thought of him. ' I
do like making him open his youthful,
astonished eyes. It is such a nice boy.
I Hke him. But now — let us see.'

So she dismissed the suggestion to go
back for Cicely Browne, and after slowly
conducting Harry all round her aviary, and
taking him from one snowy or crimson
lily to another as they nestled, all gleaming
with soft starry lustre and delicious perfume
among the dark Dracaena leaves,
she invited him, almost imperiously —
quite irresistibly, at all events — to sit
down close by the fountain-basin with
her, — on a low, quaint wicker-work couch,
that was pushed back amid the foliage.
And she leant back then and contemplated
him quietly for a moment, as if
she would read to the very springs of

his heart and sentiments ; as if she felt
them to be at once deep and interesting
and solemn. For this was the character
of her flirtations at certain stages, and now
as she felt they were approaching that
particular stage in their acquaintance, — a
curious, earnest gravity gathered in Lady
Ridgeway's fine eyes.

Sir Harry turned, and with those bright,
dancing, blue, laughing orbs of his he eyed
her wonderingly.

Lady Ridgeway was Indeed a very wonderful
and a very Impressive woman to his
mind. She made him think of such wonderful
things: of strange stories, of thrilling,
deep romances, of traditions and strange
tales of foreign lands ; of Italy and the Troy
and of Byron's poems ; and of the
isles of Greece, and of something which he
had almost forgotten, about some beautiful
Sappho who had loved, and sang, and
died, or jumped over the rocks, or — he

VOL. II. E

could not exactly remember what ! But a
confused echo of all this rang in his mind,
and this sort of effect Lady Ridgeway had
very generally upon him ; always when
they were alone, indeed, and when her
eyes became deep and absent and dreamy,
and her voice low and musical, and so
thrillingly sweet.

What was the matter with her ? Dear
Lady Ridgeway ; and she was so very kind
to him. What was her secret sorrow for
which she seemed ever to be craving sympathy
in that voice, which at such moments
gave meaning unutterable to each common
word ? What did she silently endeavour
to say, by the gaze of those wonderful eyes,
whose language, mute but expressive, suggested
such heart-searching things ?

What was her sorrow ? ' Ridgeway
seems pretty much of a brute, certainly,'
he thought ; ' but then,' the matter-of-fact
Harry went on to reflect, 'she does not

seem much to mind him, and if she had
not Heed him, well, she would not have
married him, I suppose.'

But what was the matter ?

There was nothing the matter — ! as Lady
Ridgeway's Platonic adorers, growing wise
in the course of unravelling mysteries and
of developed intimacy, generally were
allowed to know. There was nothing the
matter. She did not mind Lord Ridgeway,
and those melancholy eyes, with their unutterable
language, were nothing more or
less than 2. pose.

As yet Sir Harry did not know this,
however.

He looked sympathetic, and Lady Ridgeway
looked still more kind.

And it was very pleasant in there — quite
delicious, in fact.

There was the cool refreshing ripple
from the fountain playing close behind
them ; there was the soft twitter of a half-awakened

bird now and then, among the
ferns and the flowers, and that was all that
broke the silence for several minutes, while
Lady Ridgeway leant back, and rested her
eyes upon him with that grave, searching
gaze.

Suddenly a voice rose in soft tenor notes
of sweet passionate song within the .


"Jack," murmured Lady Ridgeway gently,
I am so very glad Blanche has made him
sing. This is something different from
Captain Fitzarthur's chorus."

Harry almost started, the notes were so
eager, so passionate, so soft and sweet.
His cheek flushed quickly, and a light of
deeper feeling than Lady Ridgeway had
ever yet seen in them, gleamed in his blue
eyes. They suffused tenderly as Jack
sang on. It was that song of songs last
year. Tost's exquisite music weaving
itself in rich musical rhythm round Violet
Vane's eager, passionate words.

I think of all thou art to me,

I dream of what thou canst not be ;
My life is worn with thoughts of thee,
For ever — and for ever.

My heart is fall of grief and woe,
I see thy face where'er I go,
I would, alas ! it were not so,
For ever — and for ever."

'' For ever, and for ever," Lady Ridgeway
murmured, as if pierced to the very heart.

*' Lovely ! " exclaimed Harry, warmly.

Poor Jack ! " added Lady Ridgeway,
softly, with a sigh.

Why ? " Sir Harry turned straight
upon her.

Oh, Sir Harry, Sir Harry, the world
has not opened your eyes as yet ! Never
mind poor Jack ; do not let us peer into
his shadowy sentiments. Let us accept
the frank utterances of his delicious singing
as merely the outcome of his art, or
let us leave Lady Blanche to settle it all.
I do not want to talk now of either of

them. I want you — I want yoti — Sir
Harry," she added, suddenly and frankly,
I want you to tell me something of yourself."


He turned, and smiled into her face
again pleasantly.

She was so intensely sympathetic, or
what he simply called to himself, ' kind.'

'' I should like to tell you anything," he
said. " I would tell you anything in the
world you pleased. It is awfully nice of
you to care to know, Lady Ridge way —
about me, I mean. I cannot think why
you should be so kind. But what — what
am I to tell you ? " he asked.

She paused a moment, and critically and
hesitatingly she scanned his eager, honest
face. Then — ■

** What do you think of my little Paraguay
heiress?" she softly said. 'what
do you think of my little Cicely Browne } "

Then he coloured up indeed. He

looked away towards the rich green screen
of ferns between them and the drawing-room,
and his eyes rested a moment on
a bunch of starry stephanotis gleaming
among the green leaves — and they seemed
pure and sweet and snow-Hke to him,
Hke his thought of the Httle lady of his
love — and he turned his eyes, blue and
clear and transparent as the waters under
the sunlight ray, upon the dark dreamy
face beside him, and — '' Lady Ridgeway'*
he said, " do you know that I am deeply
and unutterably in love with Cicely
Browne."

CHAPTER III.

CONFIDENCES.

To say that Lady Ridgeway started would
be to do her Injustice. I doubt whether
she was ever startled by anything, or that
she, in truth, ever cared really enough
about any of those vague excursions she
made Into the realms of sentiment, to
result In her being taken aback visibly by
any announcement with regard to them
whatsoever.

But she was as nearly startled by the
suddenness of Sir Harryss announcement
now, and by the earnest gravity of his
manner as It was possible for her to allow
herself to be.

She did not exclaim anything. She was
silent.

But, a great surprise took possession of
her whole countenance and of her eyes,
for a moment, as she leant forward and
returned Sir Harry's steady and eager
gaze. Her lips parted, and she smiled
then, a curious, sweet, and very winning
smile at him, as if the thing amused and
pleased her intensely ; but as if, at the
same time, she were quite utterly incredulous
of what he had said.

*^ 42c ^ 4£l

^r *7v 7jr *^

There was a pause. The young man
crimsoned warmly as he felt her keen gaze
upon his face, and his eyes kindled presently
with a curious, rather angry flash in
them, as he encountered the soft mockery
in her sweet unbelieving smile.

There was a pause — and only the fountain's
ripple and the twitter of the drowsy
birds broke the silence as she gazed so

curiously and Intently at him — with that
odd, little, derisive smile upon her lips.
Then —

Sir Harry, what do you mean 1 " she
very softly said.

'' I just mean it," he answered. '' I cannot
in the least account for it. Can you ? "

'account for your falling in love, in one
evening — deeply, unutterably in love — with
little Cicely Browne ! "

Oh, no — not in one evening," he exclaimed.


*' Ah ! " She drew a long breath. "Ah,
then it is true — you have met before ? "

He laughed a little shyly then, and in a
few rapid, graphic phrases, he recounted
the adventure of the two dogs in the
Gardens, a few evenings ago.

And Lady Ridgeway sat up then, and
her face brightened all over, and her eyes
sparkled and radiated with sincere and
genuine sympathy and amusement.

No ! " she exclaimed — '' no, it is quite
impossible — but that is soo romantic ! and
she did not, until this very evening, even
know your name ? But you knew hers,
Sir Harry?"

I knew she was either Miss Cicely
Browne or Miss Belinda East. I did not
know which, you see," he added, in a
funnily matter-of-fact tone, " because they
are both down, in the Red Book, at number
seventy-seven, Prince's Gate."

'' Oh dear ! the Red Book ; and that is
the way you went about it, was it ? Well,
I must say, there is a melancholy element
of the matter-of-fact and practical even in
this most adventurous and chivalrous of
all love tales of these nineteenth-century
days ! So you bought a Red Book, and
you looked her up — did you ? "

Yes, that morning, after I had seen
her in Prince's Gate, and made sure somehow
that she had come out of her own

house, to drive with her mother — as you
know, I then thought it was. I went
straight to the first book-shop I came upon,
and I bought a Court Guide, and I looked
her up."

'rand you mean to say that you fell
really in love then, in the Kensington
Gardens ? "

I suppose I did," he answered. '' I
know I have thought of nothing else ever
since that evening. I cannot account for
it. Can you, Lady RIdgeway ? She was
like a kind of picture, you know, coming
down that loner chestnut avenue in the sunset
that first evening, and I was sitting
there so very solitary and so bored, and
then, when she walked away down under
the trees, with that quiet sort of unconsciousness
about her, and with her pretty
dress sweeping over the daisies and the
blades of grass, — well, somehow, I wanted
so awfully to talk to her — I knew, somehow,

we should get on, you know. I
knew quite well that she would understand
and answer, just as I should like her to
answer, to every word I said. I cannot
account for it. I had the feeling. Then,
when I carried her the little frightened
dog, she looked like a frightened child
herself then, — almost ready to cry ; and
yet so demure and dignified, that, all I
wanted to say, all I meant to say, vanished
right out of my head, and I could not say
one single word after I had put Negro
into her arms. I could only stand dumb
and abashed before her and take my hat
off, while she looked up so prettily and
seriously at me out of her dark blue
frightened eyes. They are blue, are they
not, or are they violet ? Well, I had a
feeling that I would gladly have died for
her then and there. Lady Ridgeway, and
yet all the while I could do or say nothing,
only bow and open the iron gate for her,

and let her walk away. If I could have
kept her I would have given anything in
the world. I did so want to hear her
speak, but she went away."

'* And next day you traced her out
again ? '

Well, I came upon her, you know,
before I had began even to trace much. I
went as far as I could see her go across
the Park, and out of it, and then I found
myself in Prince's Gate."

"And at her own house door."

Yes, I supposed it was hers, but I did
not know that until to-night ; not for
certain, at all events."

*' And what does Jack say to all this
romantic story ? "

*' Jack ? why I have never told him
one word about it, Lady Ridgeway," the
young fellow eagerly said. 'how could
I .^ One does not talk of things, you
know, in that kind of way— not when one

feels about them, at all events. Only —
you have made me talk, and I am sure I
do not know why, or how either, for the
matter of that, and I am sure it is very
kind of you to let me worry you with my
little tale."

I am deeply interested," she gravely
answered, — and so she was. More interested,
in truth, than she was often, in those
d/as^ days of her life through which she
was just then gliding. She was interested,
for the thing was genuine — there was no
sort of doubt about that. The boy was
evidently sincerely and quite heartily in
love !

And Cicely, how was it with her, she
wondered ! Was she aware of the devotion
of this suddenly captured young knight of
hers ; and did she reciprocate the sentiments
that were being so eagerly confided
to this — might-be — dangerous confidence
now ?

Cicely ? she had seemed quite unconscious,
and quite at her ease with him
during dinner-time, but certainly strangely
happy and bright. If she reciprocated, it
was still spontaneously. She had not yet
recognized, or realized either, all the depth
and fervour of the current into which their
chance acquaintance and their chance
meeting was to drift her young life as yet.
She was unconscious evidently — she would
play no studied part from her own side.
The game lay, to make or mar, in Lady
Ridgeway's hands then still.

The stereotyped " frisky matron," or
*' sentimental matron," or '' selfish and self-absorbed
matron," with whom we are all
supposed to be so well acquainted in these
our modern times, would have promptly
marred it, or would have tried to do so at
least, no doubt.

She had Sir Harry in there quietly to
herself just then, in an excitable and impressionable
frame of mind.

He knew almost nothing of Cicely.
Anything Lady Ridgeway told him, or any
view she might take, he was bound to hear,
to receive, and believe from her, for he had
no ground from which to discredit or
contradict it.

She had him in there — among the ferns
and the dreaming love-birds, twittering
softly in their gilded prisons — there, in that
dusky solitude, with the ripple of the
fountain making soft music near them, and
the sweet heavy fragrance of countless
exotic blossoms filling the air — and he
seemed tolerably happy and satisfied too.

Yes, notwithstanding all the disturbing
nature of his confidence, he seemed happy
and composed enough, as he leant leisurely
back on the wicker sofa by her side there
now.

He was not in the least impatient. He
was ready to listen as he was eager to tell.
He was drifting, gently and sweetly, down
VOL. 11. F

the easy stream of soft confidences which,
as Lady RIdgeway knew well, was often
merely a facile channel for the flow, a little
later, of other sentiments and other confidences
of a more direct and more personal
kind.

She felt at that moment as if she could
have done almost anything with Sir Harry,
and turned his life's destiny, for the time
being, in any way she pleased. Or, at
least, it would have been an easy thing to
try to do it, whether her success were complete
and permanent, or not.

Many women might have done it, and
the world would have vowed that Lady
Ridgeway would have done it, most certainly
of all — would quietly have put out a
firm, subtle hand, and have plucked up the
budding sentiment by the very roots ;
withering it, when she had dragged its
living fibres forth to view, with the blighting
chills of soft, contemptuous smiles ;

blowing the light, gossamer thing, which
often describes a youthful fancy, (such as
this appeared,) blowing it away as easily as
possible, on the breath of a few derisive
words.

All this Lady Ridgeway felt it was in her
power to do at that moment — and all was
simply, just what conventional judgment
would have expected her to do.

But she did not do it. Perhaps because
this young Sir Harry was not an ordinary
man. Because there was just ' a something
' in the warmth and the glow of his
sparkling and eager eyes that somehow
quivered to the real centre of her heart fora
moment, and that touched a deeper spot
than was often reached (in common worldly
intercourse,) in that medley of contradictory
curiosities Lady Ridgeway called
her feelings.'

He was so sincere, that he roused her
almost to sincerity. He was so real, that

all artificial and pretended sentiments
seemed to pass into sickly nothings, before
that flash in his honest eyes, — just as
glittering theatrical footlights, would
dwindle before the rays of a rising morning
sun.

He loved Cicely Browne — that was evident
; loyally and sincerely loved her — and
Lady Ridgeway felt, that if she crushed
this love — as in truth, she may have
crushed other loves before — she would be
doings a deed as rude and ruthless as if
she had broken one of those fair blossoms
of the conservatory from its strong stem,
in the fresh dew of the morning — before it
had time to bloom into life and beauty
beneath the warmth and the fulness of the
light of day.

'* I am so glad you told me," she murmured,
presently. '' I believe, do you
know. Sir Harry, that you are quite
genuine and sincere,"

I should not know how to be anything
else," he answered, genially. " Lady
Ridgeway, how awfully kind to me you
are."

I like you," she said quietly, " and I
want you — to — believe In me."

He glanced suddenly round upon her.
Unbelief was not anywhere in his nature,
but her tone disturbed him. Why should
he no believe in her ?

Qui s excuse s accuse,' was not a motto
with which he was familiar, or to which
his mind naturally turned ; but still, he had
a sort of feeling or instinct, for the moment,
that Lady Ridgeway might not be
always entirely safe.

Else why should she utter with such
slow, intense and earnest pathos — ' I want
you to believe in me ? '

Was it not the custom to believe in her'*
Was she in the habit of sometimes encountering
a general incredulous scepticism

among her friends and surroundings, as
to the genuine nature of her feelings and
views ? Sir Harry was quickened inwardly
to wonder ; but still he was quite heartily
ready to believe.

*' Believe in me," she said, putting her
hand lightly and cordially upon his, *' and
do not believe anybody else — about me.
Believe only just myself, and I will help
you. Sir Harry. I will help you, and
fight loyally upon your side. For I daresay
it will be a fight. For perhaps you
do not know," she continued, " what I
can confidently tell you, that you have
fallen In love with the most valuable
heiress of this eventful year. Do you
know what a rich financial prize you covet
in little Miss Cicely Browne ?"

** I did not know it till I saw her here
to-night," he answered. '' Not till I heard
you call her an heiress ; not till I saw
that your heiress, whom you were talking

about, was my Cicely Browne. And perhaps
you will not believe inly now ; but do
you know, I am sorry."

I believe anything you may like to tell
me," said Lady Ridgeway, gently; 'rand I
believe you now, because, moreover, I
think it is extremely probable that it is in
your character to feel as you say. But it
is very silly, Sir Harry. An heiress,
under certain circumstances, is a very nice
thing ; and to be one must be also uncommonly
pleasant. I only wish it had been
my fortune. It would have made a very
different story of my life. Only, I was not
one, you see — so I am myself instead at
this moment — eh.^ But, however, to return
to Cicely. Yes, she is a nice Httle heiress,
Sir Harry, and if you succeed m, captivating
her youthful and unappropriated
affections — well, you will have done pretty
well for yourself, and for your charming
old title and name."

*' It is what my father did," said Sir
Harry, a Httle sorrowfully, "and exactly
what I certainly never intended to do."

"Well, fate seems to have done it for
you.

Yes, as far as I am concerned," he
said.

Well, I do declare, it is the very prettiest
thing in a bit of real-life romance, I
have come across for a long time," exclaimed
Lady Ridgeway, enthusiastically.
Oh, Sir Harry, what a delicious thing it
is to be fresh and impressionable, and
young. And now — well, she is to go outwith
me, now and again, you know, all
through the season, and I promise — yes,
I promise, that I will be a really good
friend to you."

Will you ? Thank you so much," he
repeated ; and then his gaze seemed to
wander a little absently beyond the green
fernery screen.

Light laughter and the singing of
merry voices came across to them from the
drawing-room. For Blanche had derided
Jack out of his musical mood by this time.
She had said that his * ditty ' was faraway
too sentimental for her taste, and she
had forbidden him to sing again.

And so, all the while that that confidential
talk was going on in the bird and
flower-room, the four in the drawing-room
had been passing a pleasant, merry
hour, upon which no sentiment nor serious
influence had been allowed to intrude.

Blanche had repudiated Jack's overtures
for special converse at an early moment in
the evening. She had known that he was
cross about the dinner, and she did not
want to be worried over it, for she was in
particularly good spirits herself. And she
wished to make friends with Cicely, who,
she saw, was not, as regards Captain Fits
especially anxious for a tete-astute

on her side. So Lady Blanche had kept
them all talking in a pleasant quartette;
and when Jack had returned after his thrilling
performance of Tost's most effective
masterpiece, she had made him sit down,
had re-Introduced him to Cicely, and had
drawn from the girl quaint revelations of
her own past history, and of her solitary
life with Belinda In the big house at
Prince's Gate. Blanche had made her tell
them about Negro, and even a little about
her guardian ; and a great deal, too, about
all the strange adventures which had befallen
her and Belinda, when, in company,
they had tried for the first time to make a
journey together, and had gone to Italy
for a few weeks last year — of that eventful
journey indeed, from which Mr. Garth had
so soon recalled them.

Lady Blanche's impulsive and very easy
manner of assuming immediately a ready
acquaintance soon drew Cicely forth from

her shell, and Jack's pleasant smiles from
across Lady Blanche soon made her feel
at home with him also, while Captain Fits
perfectly well-bred ways struck
her as wonderfully agreeable and nice.
She soon ceased entirely to be afraid of
any of them, and was quite happy throughout
the evening, although often inly wondering
why Sir Harry Wynn had gone
off so completely, and had never come to
speak to her again.

Back he came at last, however — walking
leisurely by Lady Ridgeway's side ; and
he came up to her, with a curious bright
glance in his blue eyes, and with a flush
upon his cheek — that Blanche noted, and
of which she had (easily as she thought,
but quite wrongly as it happened) guessed
the cause.

And Lady Ridge way turned to Jack,
who had sprang from his seat as she
approached, and who stood smiling before

her now. And she said, In that soft die-away
tone of hers, which had so much in
it, and was so unfathomable to the unpractised
ear, '' Oh, Jack, — that song it is
too lovely — it will ring in my ears all tomorrow,
and I shall go chanting ' For ever,
and for ever,' all the morning, I know,
until poor Ridgeway will be nearly mad."

Don't," said Jack. " Poor Lord Ridgeway
indeed," he added, laughing. '* Do
you know I am nearly tired of it myself."

"So am I," said Blanche, emphatically.

' Did I not see thee, day by day,' "
murmured Lady Ridgeway, softly.

As if one did not see everybody ' day
by day,' in this London world of ours,"
Blanche continued impatiently, " as if there
were any sort of possibility of getting out
of their way."

Do you want to ? " said jack.

*' I did not say I did," she answered
with an Indignant little flash of her brown

eyes at him. "I never said I did. But If
I did, I could not, you know, so I only
think you need not go singing incessantly
and heartrending such self-evident facts."

"Alas! Here is one self-evident fact,"
exclaimed Sir Harry, suddenly drawing
his watch from his pocket as he spoke.
'* I must go off to that House of Commons.
Why, good gracious, it's nearly twelve
o'clock ! "

Not much good your going," grumbled
Jack.

Oh, I dare say they will sit till
nearly three," exclaimed Captain Fltz-
arthur. " They have no sense of time
in the government of the country at
present."

Must you go," murmured Lady Ridgeway,
turning then upon Sir Harry, and
looking with earnest significance into his
hesitating face.

'' I do not know ; I suppose I ought.

How could I SO have forgotten the
time?"

Quand on est heureux on ne demande
pas quelle heure il est,' said Jack, almost
in a whisper, and addressing only Lady-blanche.


The allusion was lost upon Sir Harry,
who had turned to say good-night.

But Lady Ridgeway caught it, and she
flashed a brilliant glance instantly upon
Jack.

'* Ah ! " she said, " if you only knew all
I know. It is so interesting — but, you
will never guess."

Sir Harry coloured.

Confidential," he said gently, as he
held Lady Ridgeway's hand.

And sacred," she answered him.
Must you really go 1 "

I must, I fear,— though what good I
am to do there, is much more than I
can tell."

Oh, I will tell you what good you can
do in the House," said Lady Blanche.

Tell me, then," he answered, turning
to her with his sunny, ever ready smile.

*you can ask us all to tea there, and
get us seats in the Ladies' Gallery for the
Irish debate ! "

Oh, can I really — would you come ?
Can one do that in the House of Commons,
Lady Ridgeway, and would you
really come ? "

*' It is allowable, if the places are to be
had," said Jack ; " but that is such a
nuisance just now, you know — every place
is taken up, they tell me, for weeks to
come."

Oh, I will manage it," exclaimed Sir
Harry. *' If it is within or without the
bounds of possibility to do it, it shall be
done ; only, Lady Ridgeway, will you come
if I do ? "

*' I will come certainly. You get the

places, and order the tea, Sir Harry, and
we will be sure to come."

*rand you, Miss Browne?"

I should like it of all things — but "

*'0h, no ' ifs' and ' buts ' ! I hate them,"
exclaimed Lady Ridgeway, emphatically.
I am your chaperone, remember. Cicely,
and I mean to take you, my dear. Never
fear, Sir Harry, I will bring her. You
must persecute all your friends (as well as
exert yourself) and ballot for three ladles'
places on the afternoon of the Irish debate;
and you may feel sure of me and of Lady
Blanche, at all events — and, yes, also of
Cicely. Do not shake your head, my
dear; I promise you I will manage Belinda.
Yes, Sir Harry, you may depend
also on seeing Miss Browne."

'' Then I will go down this very night,
and ask all about it," exclaimed Sir Harry,
enthusiastically. *' It never struck me that
there was any fun in having a seat in the
House of Commons till now ! "

CHAPTER IV.

TO BELINDA.

Belinda — ! I have met him ! "

My dear ! Whom ? "

'' Oh, I forgot, I never told you ; " and,
with a deep blush coming over her fair
cheek, Cicely suddenly arrested herself ina
flow of exclamatory confidences, and
sunk on to a low stool at Belinda's feet.

They were in the chaste seclusion of
Belinda s dressing-room. That serene and
ample lady had already arranged for slumber
her tresses of soft, light hair.

She had put on her cool muslin dressing-gown,
for the night was hot, and she had
opened her window, which looked out

VOL. II. G

down the wide green garden behind
Prince's Gate, and she had sat down, with
a little shaded lamp, to read comfortably,
and in composed patience to await Cicely's
return.

With an eager exclamation the girl had
burst in upon her.

Oh, Belinda, I have met him ! "

Belinda slowly closed her book, putting
a mark in, and deliberately lowering the
light now she required it no longer, and
then she turned her calmly astonished
gaze upon Cicely's flushed, happy face.

The latter pushed back her thin cashmere
cloak, and put up her two round, shapely,
white arms and rested them upon Belinda's
broad and comfortable lap, upon which
Negro indeed lay curled up at that moment
sleeping the sleep of a just pug,
who had no troubles of conscience, no
fears for tomorrow, nor no memories of
the terrors of days gone by. Even liver-coloured

retrieve evidently had no power
to haunt Negro's slumbers, curled up as he
was now upon Belinda s knee, and soothed
by the frequent caressing touch of her
large, soft hand.

Cicely rested her chin upon her own
arms just for a moment, then she threw
her arms round Negro, pressed closer to
Belinda, and put her face down wistfully
upon Negro's fawn-tinted coat.

Yes, I have met him Negro, your own
champion ; and oh ! Negro, he is as "

'' My dear, whom on earth are you talking
about ? Do speak distinctly. Cicely.
Do not bury your face in the dog's back,
my child. Get up, Cicely. Let me look
at you. Did your hair keep nice and tidy ?
Did you enjoy your dinner ? and whom, in
the name of goodness, have you met ? "

'' Belinda, dear, beautiful Belinda ! " exclaimed
Cicely, looking up now, and fixing
her grave, blue eyes upon her friend's

broad and comely face. " Fancy my never
telling you until this very moment. Fancy
your never seeing him in the Park this
morning, nor on Saturday, as we drove
from the door. Even when Mr. Garth
saw — only he knows nothing really. Nobody
knows anything, no one but Negro,
and me, and him. But I have met him,
I have met him ! And now, Belinda, I
must confess."

Confess ! confess what ? Good gracious,
my darling child, you frighten me
right out of my senses," Belinda exclaimed.
*' What have you been doing, you look
excited. Cicely ; what on earth have you
been about ? "

'' I am tremendously excited," the girl
very composedly replied.

Good gracious ! what have you been
doing ? What was Lady Ridgeway thinking
of? Did she not look after you?
No ? well, then, I will never, never, never

let you eo out without me ao^ain. Do not
laugh, Cicely, it is shameful ; and really, I
did my best for you, and — my sweet child,
you look very nice."

And then, with eyes full of a sudden
gentle tenderness and admiration, which
no amount of anxiety or perplexity could
entirely suppress, Belinda stooped and
gazed into the girl's bright blushing face
as she sat there, in the soft lamp-light,
curled up on the low footstool, looking
very lovely indeed. Her whole bending
form was a listening shimmering mass of
soft ecrue silk and lace — and the strings of
large pearls round her neck and twined
through her bronze-gold hair, and nestling
in her puzzled fringe, gleamed also in the
dim lustre of the lamp with quite curious
beauty. Her eyes, as she glanced fearlessly
and frankly up into Belinda's bending
and inquiring countenance, were very
bright with eagerness and life, and they

were full now, moreover, of mischief and
mystery and fun. For the gravity was all
!sone for the moment as she saw Belinda s
dire perplexity and blank dismay. ' What
glad she been doing ? '

Yes," she repeated, '' I have met him ;
and now you had much better be quiet,
my beloved Belinda. Be patient, and
listen to me, and let me confess ! "

Confess ! Confess what ? " began Belinda
again.

'' Confess — that — I have found my hero,"
said Cicely, tersely. " I have found my
hero, and, Belinda — I have begun my
romance ! "

Good gracious ! "

'' Yes ; now do listen. It is about Negro
quite as much as about me. Listen ! and
)ou will acknowledge him a hero, if ever
there was one in Kensington Gardens In
this ozcr day — a nineteenth-century hero,
Belinda. Now listen ! "

And then Belinda did listen, and in her
turn, like Lady Ridgeway, was made the
confidential recipient of the history of
that canine encounter, and of the passing
peril which had beset Negro that May
Day evening opposite Prince's Gate. And
wider and wider opened Belinda's clear,
calm eyes as Cicely waxed eloquent and
enthusiastic, and as the tale went on until
the climax was reached in Lady Ridgeway's
drawing-room that very evening, and
Cicely had recognized her own and Negro's
champion in young Sir Harry Wynn.

'' My ! good gracious ! " was for a moment
once more all Belinda found to say
in commentary; as she sighed one long
sigh of amazement and bewilderment, so
profound and mighty indeed, that it heaved
in its searching intensity, not alone her
hands and her eyes and her shoulders, but
her whole massive frame.

Ultimately she replied many things — but,

'What will Mr. Garth say, I wonder?'
was repeated and repeated many times.
And this comprised indeed, in one sentence,
the sum total, of the whole burden
of what she said !

CHAPTER V.

CONSPIRACY.

Must we tell Air. Garth ? " said Cicely
the next morning at breakfast.

Aly dear , your guardian is a very

peculiar man' Belinda answered, as she
poured out the tea ; '' and I do not know,"
she added, with a somewhat sophistical
morality — " I do not know that one is
bound to tell everything in this world, although,
of course, we must never tell fibs."

No, not fibs, of course," assented
Cicely. " I told you no fibs about Sir
Harry you know, Belinda ; I only just
said nothing about him, and I am sure
there was not any harm in that ! "

There would have been if it had gone
further," remonstrated Belinda, with some
severity.

'eyes, but then it did not, and when it
did — well, now I have told. But, dear
Belinda, let us keep him to ourselves.
Why must Mr. Garth deliver a solemn
tirade and give me an endless lecture
about it ? May I not meet anybody or
know anybody without telling Mr. Garth ? "

You would know very few if you did
not," said Belinda, conclusively ; and then
she went on with her bread and butter.

For Belinda did not 'go' with Richard
Garth in all his views for Cicely, and she
rather enjoyed a little plotting on their
own account. She was amiable and most
harmless, and had the warmest sympathy
for youthful sentiments, this fair Belinda.
And perhaps, just on all these accounts,
she was not the very safest defence and
guide of youth !

'Never mind,' she thought, 'the child
mus be allowed to have a pretty little
romance like this — just a fair bit of brightness
in her life. She must have it left
alone, for the moment, at all events.'

Yes, between them, they would guard it
safely away from the withering blight of
Richard Garth's grim satire, and from the
rough destructive hailstorms of his matter-of-fact
remarks. ^

So it was that, as they sat over breakfast
together, they agreed that nothing should
be said to the guardian about Sir Harry
Wynn ; nor indeed about any of those interesting
and bewitching fascinations of
music — whether sentimental or comic, or
grave or gay — or of the society, which,
with all its surroundings and attractive
accompaniments. Cicely, as she graphically
reported, had enjoyed at Lady Ridgeway s
dinner.

Thus it was — that nothing at all upon
any of these subjects was said to Richard
Garth when one day a week or two latter
he appeared again at Prince's Gate.

For he had not yet gone to Paris.

I wonder how long he means to stay
to-day ? ' mused Belinda, moodily, for they
had made a little plan with which his
arrival might seriously interfere.

Lady Ridgeway had asked Cicely to goto
tea with her, and Richard Garth must
be got away before the tea hour arrived.

They wondered what had brought him
to-day when he had not apprised them of
his coming. But he had come — and at
luncheon he explained that that former
day they had left their business unfinished.

He had brought more papers in the
usual way with him now, however, and
Cicely once again had to purse up her face
into its quaint, demure, business expression
for at least an hour. '' Her attention had

wandered that other day," he said, " so he
must go over it all again now."

So Cicely sat, wondering what had happened
to the Paraguay bonds since that
last time ! Sat while the soft sunshine
streamed in through the fern leaves in her
bow window, and while she strove to listen
to his explanations of obscure financial
facts.

And her attention seemed to wander
farther than ever, and yet she felt so
happy that she almost loved the bonds.
For, there seemed to dance for her in the
sunshine, (flitting as it did in swift rays
across the floor,) a new sort of sweet
brightness to-day that called her out from
the heart's solitude of her old existence —
towards her youth and its fair promise,
and towards the glad, gay prospects of her
eager life. She did not seem as she sat
and listened to him to-day, to be the
same Cicely Browne who had listened only

two weeks ago — before Lady Ridgeway's
dinner-party — to these same explanations
of his. She felt so happy.

I wish I could put some seriousness
into you," said Mr. Garth, emphatically, ashe
folded up his paper once again and
looked up at her as her eyes, with quick
dancing lights in them, wandered restlessly
away.

'ram I not serious" she said, with a soft
cadence of apology in her tones.

'' Your eyes keep laughing," he murmured
discontentedly.

Oh, Mr. Garth, dear Mr. Garth, and
I have been so serious my whole life long.
You know my life has been so serious —
how is it possible that my eyes can laugh?"

'' They are laughing to-day," he answered.
" What has come to you, I
wonder .f^"

She almost told him — almost just at that
moment — as she turned her gaze suddenly

upon his grim, concerned face. She let her
hand drop softly upon his for one instant,
and a smile stole round her red curved lips;
a smile stealing down, as it were, from the
absent and brightly gleaming eyes, — and
she almost told him, for the secret did not
He in depths unfathomable within her
young nature yet. She could have told
him just then — just as a piece of happy
fun, had he seemed to draw it from her —
had he looked for one instant sympathetic
or kind.

But no — he was her guardian, in the
most austere sense of the word. Her o^rim
guardian, and her jailer, (as she now almost
felt him to be) set above her with that
grim burden of sacred trust from her own
hard and unbending father — the charge to
guard her from all the pleasant, sweet
things of life !

Should she tell him that life had stolen
unawares upon her; that a sunday had

penetrated the still shadows of her lonely
home ; that a ripple of gladness had
danced before her eager young eyes upon
the dull monotonous stream, which had
described the past ?

Should she tell him ? Nay, was It not
perhaps her duty to tell him that she had
made the acquaintance of one ' Sir Harry
Wynn ? '

She looked round. Somehow to-day she
could have done so, while a few weeks later
she could not have done so In the same
light, unconscious way : she could still today
murmur Sir Harry's name composedly
enough at all events ; and if Mr. Garth
had only known It, and paused with one
kindly glance just then he also might have
become the confidant of — a pretty tale !
But—

I want to speak to you, Cicely, about
something else," he said suddenly.

Have we not done yet ? " she murmured,
with a sunny smile.

'' No, not yet ; do not smile," he said
roughly. "It is serious. I have no more
to say about the bonds. But," he added,
with just a slight hesitation, " it is just this.
I am an old man. Miss Cicely. I have
my own ways of life, and this charge
of Geoffry Browne's falls heavily enough
on me."

I am sorry," Cicely whispered, with a
little deprecatory sigh. '' Those dreadful
bonds. Yes, I am sure they must be very
wearisome to you, Mr. Garth, indeed."

No, no; it's not so much the bonds. I
can manage the money part. I have been
used to that sort of thing all my life, you
see ; but it is you. It is just yourself. Miss
Cicely, that keeps ever troubling me, when
I think of all the young villains — the
young adventurers — all seeking out a
case like yours. And when I think of my
word to Geoffry Browne, my promise to
see you safely done for, I am just weighed

VOL. n. H

down with the thought of the whole
thing."

I wish you would not, Mr. Garth," said
Cicely. '' I wish you would not, indeed.
I think — I think — perhaps I shall never
marry at all," she continued, hesitatingly.
'' Would this save you any trouble ? " she
said.

No, no ; not a bit of it. If you did
not marry, all your money would go in the
end to the bad — to the Church, I mean — to
some beggarly curate, who would preach
it out of you for his choirs and parishioners,
and for libraries and such like. No, I
must see you married. Cicely; so I am just
going to make up my mind."

*' Vizir mind, Mr. Garth ! " she exclaimed,
then, with a little start of horror.

Yes, of course ; and I think I slave
made up my mind, as I have several times
already hinted to you. But I will settle It,
and then I will let you know. I have fixed

on a steady, likely young man, my dear,
none of your lilac-gloved and collie dog
young gentlemen ; and when I have made
it all quite straight I will just let you know.
And then, there is my money, too, you
know. Eh ! Cicely, I should not at all
wonder if he came into a better thing than
at first he might imagine — that young chap,
I mean. Into a better, in fact a very good
thing, my dear; for, indeed, I do not know
in this life to whom I shall leave my
money, if not to you."

A hard little expression had come into
the girl's face as he had announced his
intention of thus choosing and arranging
alliance for her. A look of quiet determination
which would have recalled his
friend Geoffry Browne's stern countenance
to Richard Garth at the moment, if he had
not just turned his eyes away. She looked
calm and self-controlled, but quite determined.


'There are limits — yes, to all things, in
this world,' the quiet little look she cast
sideways at him seemed just then to say ;
but as he went on, and touched on his own
money, her eyes softened, the strangeness
of the whole position came over her mind,
as it did continually in these latter days,
since she had learnt to think, and to
observe and to feel.

Those two grim, old, silent men to whom
she had belonged for her whole past life ;
who had both of them had only her to
own, to consider, or for whom to care ; who
had both seemed to care so little, and who
yet had always cared so much, not for her,
indeed, individually, perhaps, but for her
as their heiress — the centre of their
interests — the point at which their livelong
labours were to meet, to consummate, and
to blend.

The thing seemed affecting and strange
to her.

And she ? wayward, glad young thing !
Was her whole being to be offered up a
passive, unresisting sacrifice to the consummation
and realization of the schemes and
projects of these two heartless and unimaginative
men ?

Geoffry Browne and Richard Garth! As
they owned their gold in partnership, and
disposed of it at their mutual will, — so also
had she been, indeed, their joint possession.
And must she yield to whatever grim,
unlovely destiny might present itself to
her guardian as the one necessary climax
of the undertakings of his own and his
late friend's career ?

Cicely shivered as the idea occurred to
her that she might be thus made over like
a debenture or a Paraguay bond. Yet the
idea of the whole thing softened her, at
the same time as it struck her, with deep
apprehension and dismay.

This grim, lonely man, had he really

none but herself, Indeed, In all the wide,
crowded world — none but her to be the
ungracious and ungrateful recipient of his
legacy In the future, as of his care and
concern for her now ? No one but her —
and she cared so little !

Poor Richard Garth! all his life he had
laboured, and now she was to have his
fortune ; as a new heritage of bondage It
would devolve upon her some day, and
she — she did not want It at all ! The
thought of those lost and forgotten relations
of his, of whom he had spoken yesterday,
had often recurred to her since then. And
once again now she spoke of them.

Is there no one else, Mr. Garth ? " she
murmured softly. " Is there no one else
for you to care for, among those whom you
mentioned yesterday, you know ? Is there
no one ? I am sure I ought not to have
It all. Is there no one else for you to think
for and perhaps to love ? "

There is no one," he answered drearily.
Browne and I always agreed on that.
You were to be our heiress, you know; and
your husband, when we had found a right
one, should take on the affairs. You have
always been our heiress, Cicely, and why
should I look out another now ? I have
taken the thing as it stands," he added,
in hand, you see, just as your father left
it to me. Who is there indeed for whom
I should break up and divide the business
Browne and Garth — Garth and Browne
just as you may like to put it. We have
been partners always, and I may as well
indeed I am determined to leave it so
now."

'' But you told me," urged Cicely, gently,
" you told me yesterday of others. Oh,
Mr. Garth, I do so want you to have
something nice and pleasant in your life
besides only me ; something happy — to befor
your own self — for your own interest

quite apart from mine, you know. You
told me," she added hesitatingly, '' that you
had once a sister. Do not you think that
there might be some one belonging to her
whom you could think of, you know, along
with me."

My sister," said Richard Garth, and
rather angrily now, "made a beggarly
marriage before I left the Stoneshire fens.
She married a man without a penny, with
nothing but a strip of farm acres and a
tumble-down house at his back ; and her
daughter had to beg from me, I tell you —
beg for her idle, good-for-nothing, young
scamp of a son ; she begged, and it was
the last chance she had of begging, for it
is an offence I never yet forgave to friends
or relatives, and I have heard nothing of
her, nor written anything to her since."

What was her name ? " asked Cicely,
softly, thinking, with a sudden new gleam
of sympathy in her heart of this unknown

mother pleading for help for her impoverished
son.

What was her name ? Oh, confound
her name. Indeed, I believe I forget It —
besides, she changed it. But, what does
it matter now ? Poor relations are to be
avoided like the deadly plague, I tell you.
Cicely ; and you remember my words to
you, if any such ever find yoti out."

** I wish they would," said the girl a
little sadly. " I wish they would find me
out. But I do not seem to have any,
either rich or poor, unless Lady Ridgeway,
indeed, and I can hardly call her a
relation, — for as she was only connected
with my poor mother, she is scarcely one
at all."

So much the better — a nice relation
she would be, indeed ! She would soon
lead you into mischief if she was related
to you in any position of influence, or if
you took up with her. It is a good thing

indeed for Garth and Browne that you
have got no real relations, Cicely, and that
I have well shaken off mine."

But it did not appear to Cicely in the
same light.

How grim it all seemed to her when he
had risen and left her after that last remark
left her with only a curt, dry farewell,
although he was to start for Paris that
night.

How grim all this money — money on all
sides to come to her, to centre inevitably
upon her in a dreary, sunless state of existence,
from which (had Richard Garth
his own way with her life) all brightness,
all joy, all beauty would be excommunicated
and fenced out, and even all companionship,
all sociability, all affections as
well.

What a life he would make for her if
she indeed were to yield up herself a
living sacrifice on his altar of gold ; what

an existence for her warm, loving heart to
contemplate.

And yet such a life her father had led.

This existence for seventeen years had
been Belinda East's and hers.

But how could she lead it longer ?

How indifferent she felt to all her
riches ! How indifferent as she sat there
and mused over the contrast of all that
had surrounded her, at Lady Ridgeway's
dinner ! How little did money matter —
after all !

She felt all this talk of wealth and
amassing more wealth to be a dreariness
and a waste. How little did it matter
when compared with the gladness and
bright, soft attraction of a healthful, joyous
and natural, social life ! They all seemed
alive — alive within their hearts, all these
bright new friends of hers, while it seemed
indeed now to her that her heart had been
always empty, nay, dead.

Were all young hearts quickened and
awake, and glad and satisfied save hers,
she wondered ? and was that sweet glow
which seemed warm within her now buta
gleam from the day in which all others,
save herself, were living always — but a
spark from that natural human love and
happiness which warmed all other hearts ?
She wondered !

For some young lives do come up thus
to the very fringe of the meeting streams
where ' childhood parts and womanhood
flows on,' with the same absence of light
and colour in the background of their
memories as Cicely now recognized to bethe
case with hers.

She had never lived before, she felt ;
never dreamt till now of what to all her
fellow-beings around her 'life' seemed to
have implied. A bright gaiety of life
reaching them in countless varieties of
many fair, sweet and pleasant things

seemed the portion of others. In a word
natural enjoyment.

Poor little Cicely ! Life seemed all one
hazy dream of beauty and soft illusions to
her now.

It was a dangerous state of feeling, for
life, human life, with all its jars and disappointments
and discords is not what she
now thought it was. And the men and
women we meet in life are not the bright,
transparent beings of bliss and amiability
which they appeared to her. Not all of
them at all events.

This is a world of thorns and stings, and
its paths have treacherous turns, often
threatening such eager and heedless feet
as hers were, with many a rude shock and
fall.

To Cicely, just then, the path over life
wound onward before her hopeful eyes all
smooth and sunlit. It looked so easy she
feared no pitfall ; she looked for no snare ;

and for her the garden of all this unexplored
paradise of social existence bloomed
brightly — fresh and sweet-scented.

It was rich with roses that were all
quite thornless, and no serpent with cruel
sting, seemed anywhere to lurk among the
flowers.

It would be a cruel serpent in truth that
could sting that unsuspicious heart — and
in this fact lay the best security for Cicely.

Her life garden might prove but an
earthly paradise indeed after all was told.
The thorns that grow on earthly love-flowers
were there, and these thorns must
prick her indeed as another. But thorns
are not deadly as are the serpents' sting,
and it is as regards the serpents and their
poisonous powers that there is hope for
Cicely. For some natures are like
charmers, and draw all the poison from
those serpents' sting.

Some women, young and old, have the

unconscious and blessed effect of making



their sister women whom they meet better;
of drawing out from each their nobler and
gentler qualities quite in spite of themselves.


Some men also have this effect on the
women they have to do with, and such
had been the effect upon Lady Ridgeway,
(who was often consigned in descriptions
to the snake-like category) the effect upon
her, to begin with, of the unsuspicious,
transparent and open nature of Sir Harry
Wynn. And such, too, let us hope may beat
all times, and always, the effect of association
with bright Cicely Browne, as she
travels through this tangled and perilous
world toward the weird wilderness of disillusion,
or to the quiet haven of a happy
rest.

May such be the influence which she
also may intuitively wield over Lady
Ridgeway, and any like her who might be

moved, wantonly and unthinkingly, if not
actually wickedly, to injure her or wish
her ill.

Poor Richard Garth wished her no ill,
but he knew no good to desire for her.

Nothing save gold — more and more
gold for possession ; more debentures in
Trunk Railways ; more bonds in the Paraguay
stock, and Some One, as the ultimate
result of her life, to marry her — some one
really, to take good care of it all.

Such were the limited and romantic
views which, in planning for Cicely,
crowned his most ecstatic dreams.

What Lady Ridgeway wished for her
was still vague and undefined. Lady
Ridgeway's frame of feeling and mind
were dangerous, for it had certainly
formed no part In her original intentions
that Cicely should so promptly captivate
Sir Harry Wynn.

CHAPTER VI.

TOWN OR COUNTRY LIFE ?

'* May I call for her, do you think ? " Sir
Harry said, as he parted from Jack one
day some time after Lady Ridgeway's
dinner, after a morning stroll down Rotten
Row, where he had in vain looked out
for Cicely. " May I go and call ? "

It was the day Mr. Garth had lunched
at Prince's Gate.

*' Why, yes, of course," said Jack, in
reply. "You have met her and been
introduced and taken her down to dinner.
Certainly, it is always a compliment ;
call, but only leave cards, you know."

Oh, but I do not care about doing that

VOL. II. I

in the least. Why I cannot for the life
of me see the use of it."

'' What an unconventional fellow you are,
Wynn ! The use ! I am sure I do not
know the use — who does ? only everybody
does it, so I suppose there must be some
use ; but if you do not want to shoot cards,
you know — well, I do not see what you
are to do."

*' It is just this, Jack, I want to see her,
and she said I might go to see her, —
or at least she did not exactly say that
I was not to go, and — by Jove! I will.
This is a hollow world of yours. Jack — I
begin to think it is ; and I am not going
to give in to its conventionalities at all."

"What?"

Yes, I am going. Plenty of time before
the House meets this afternoon — so there
it is ! "

Well, you are the most rebellious pupil
any fellow ever tried to do with. I have

put you upon your feet, Wynn, you know,
and may you not get irretrievably smashed,
is all I pray for after all. You will hardly
ever be civil to the right people. I am
going to leave cards at Lady Ethridge's,
for instance, to-day, on account of the ball
you did not go to when I did. Had I not
as well leave yours? It is 'the thing' todo,
you know."

Yes, you may leave them if you like,"
said Sir Harry, indifferently.

On Lady Blanche ! " laughed Jack, ashe
took the couple of cards from Wynn's
hand ; '' cards are sufficient to leave on
Lady Blanche — but riot on Miss Cicely
Browne."

Hah ! and lucky for me it may be so,"
retorted Sir Harry, turning away and
tossing back his fair hair in the sunshine
"lucky for me it's not Lady Blanche,
Jack, seeing she is pre-engaged."

By Jove ! I wish she were," exclaimed

poor Jack, disconsolately. " Engaged indeed
! Hah, you had better tell that
to Lady Ethridge, my boy. That she is
not engaged is, alas ! the limits of my
comfort and the utmost range of my hopes ;
and that cannot last long, as I know well,
Heighho ! It Is a bad world. You are
right. Good-bye, Harry ; bon voyage at
least to you. You are a clever little boy
in your own way — carrying on your little
game all by yourself on the quiet like
this. Eh ! And to think that I imagined
you one of nature's rustic children — and a
Village Flower."

It was in accordance with these resolutions
that, — soon after luncheon that same
day ; after Richard Garth, with his grim
matrimonial projects and dreary look-out
over past, present, and futurity, had taken
himself off to Paris, his pockets full of
bonds and debentures, and his mind full

of moody musings over his financial far
more than his youthful charge-that same
afternoon, just as Cicely had done skimming
round the room in a renewed sense of
freedom, Sir Harry Wynn, smart and
bright as summer and sunshine and hope
and happiness could make him, rang the
huge hall bell, and followed the astonished
servant across the marble-floored hall, and
up the broad stairs.

A moment and he was in her owen
pretty room, and bowing over her ready
hand with happy glance and smile.

I am so glad to see you," she exclaimed
in spite of all previous doubts and hesitation.

And I am so glad to come."

*' Belinda, this is Negro's champion —
Sir Harry Wynn. Negro, be quiet, you
naughty, ungrateful dog ! "

For Negro welcomed his champion in
his own peculiar way with vociferous and
noisy barks and snarls.

"What a stupid little dog he is not to
know you," exclaimed Cicely again, quite
impatient with her favourite for almost
the very first time in his short eventful
life.

She stooped to pick him up as she
spoke, while Belinda made a very beautiful
bow to Sir Harry Wynn.

Pray be seated," said Belinda, blandly,
and she waved him towards a chair-quite
near her own !

But Sir Harry had other views. He
only smiled, and looked with one of his
quick bright glances towards her for an
instant ; — then he turned to the bow
window where Cicely had retreated with
her obstreperous dog.

Never mind," he said gently — and
laughing as he spoke over her frantic
efforts to silence her favourite. *' Never
mind, you know they always will bark.
That is to say, pugs always will. Why do

you not have a terrier — a thorough-bred,
black and tan, good-sized terrier, I mean ?
I think they are much better dogs than
those wheezy pugs."

Do you think so ? Oh, no. I think
Negro Is perfect. Only he Is very silly
and stupid. But he will be quiet in a
minute, you shall see. There, now, are
you a good dog, or must I turn you out,
and then you will perhaps never see your
champion again ? "

I hope he will see me many times,"
said Sir Harry ; " he is a very jolly little
dog."

You should see him when he is in
good humour," said Cicely, assuredly ;
"and now — yes, Belinda, we are coming
instantly to sit down — will you not sit
down, Sir Harry ?"

"What, here?"

'' Yes, if you do think this bow window
pleasant than within the room. Belinda,

will you not come here ? What are you
doing ? "

But Belinda was a good chaperone, composed
and unobtrusive. She had no intention
of moving into the bow window from
her own comfortable chair ; she had merely
smiled a soft contented smile to herself as
Sir Harry had turned towards Negro and
Cicely, and then she had betaken herself
to her crochet, and was quietly nodding
over it again.

It was a hot afternoon indeed, and Sir
Harry had somewhat startled and for a
moment disturbed her. For, in point of
fact, in this interval between luncheon
and the driving hour, in this one of the
many calm intervals of her quiet existence,
Belinda generally went to sleep. Especially
in the summer-time, and on a hot
day like this — even her surprise over
Sir Harry had soon passed into a soothing
and softly sedative stage. Belinda

slumbered, and Cicely's voice calling gently
to her remained unheeded.

The two Others had turned together now
towards the bow window, and they moved
further into its depths as if intuitively and
by mutual silent consent.

It is so good of you to let me come,"
he murmured.

'' I think it is good of you to have
come."

'' Good to myself then," he answered.
'' That is all I know about it, at all events."

He paused and looked up at her, then
down again, then away towards the garden
beyond. It was pleasant and sunny, as
well as full of soft shadow out there.

*' That is a very nice garden you have,"
continued Sir Harry, suddenly. " It is
not like London in here in the very least."

"It is all my idea of London," she
answered ; " and I wish sometimes it was
more ' like London,' as you say."

You have had a quiet Hfe in the midst
of this noisy, bustling wilderness, then ? "

'' I have never had any other kind of
life," she answered, " and I am so much
accustomed to it that I never even hear
the noise."

'' But have you found it dull ? Your
voice just for the moment seemed to say
so," he went on, with a sympathetic smile.

'' Well, I must confess," replied Cicely,
that I have wished often for a little more
action in the routine of my days. I have
wished, I say, because I am speaking of
the past. I seem to be going to have
enough of it now. It all seems to becoming
to me so suddenly," she continued,
brightening up as she glanced round at

him ; " I seem suddenly to begin to

Ifs
ive.

But," he went on, with a curious dissatisfaction
and a ring of eagerness and
anxiety in his tone — "but, is that what

you think it means ' to live.' Racket,
bustle, and noise. Do you hate everything
quiet ; quiet places, I mean, far away
in the country, where no noise nor racket
nor bustle can ever come, and where
nobody thinks about parties at all ? "

'' Ah, well, I do not know. I have never
tried t/ia^ kind of life," said Cicely. " I
scarcely know anything of the country, you
see," she went on demurely, replying to his
questions straight and truly as he had put
them, and resting her large eyes calmly
upon his as she spoke. '' My life has
always been bounded by these four walls
of this London house. Sir Harry. So it
has been until almost any other kind of life
seemed impossible to me. So about the
country I do not know ; — but," she added,
with a curious hesitation and with a
deepening of colour, " I think I should
be happy just in whatever place or surroundings
those I liked to be with, cared to

live. I think there are so many things
more to me than places and external surroundings,
do you not think so ? I do not
know by experience any life like you have
led in the country, you know; but I do not
think that if I were you — I mean if it had
been given me as 77ty life — that I should
find it dull."

He smiled a curious, quiet little happy
smile ; and he listened without any interruption
while she thus unravelled herself
dexterously out of her rather entangled
little speech ; and he still looked away, as
she paused, — his eyes wandering over the
garden. Then at length he said, '' I think
it is a better life in the country in many
ways than in town."

'' Do you mean as regards amusements,
or better things — as regards things about
which one really cares } " she said.

*' You mean cares inwardly, in one's own
self } " he answered.

Yes. I mean do you think it a better
life in the best sense of the words ? "

He paused as if her question had somehow
reached a further depth within him,
and he became grave. He deliberated as
if not quite decided what to say or in what
tone to answer her. The question had
evidently been gravely and sincerely put.
He looked away still for a moment; then
he turned suddenly, and their two pairs of
bright expressive eyes met with rapport
and quick interest again.

That moment of gravity and deeper
thought had drawn their souls closer
together than they had been before.

*what I think is," he said eagerly at
length, 'that there is a great deal more
more reality — what shall I call it ? — more
real happiness, and, yes, more actual and
worthy life to be found amid these country
scenes and surroundings than there is in all
this that seems to fascinate us in London.

But I may come to think differently — for
as to London I have only begun life."

"That is just what I feel," she answered,
smiling. *' I am only just beginning
life, although I have been in London
always."

How curious," he said, smiling In reply.
Does it not seem, Miss Browne, as if we
had begun life together ? I hope — how I
wish I thought I might hope "

He stopped suddenly, and then went on
again quietly —

I am afraid I was going to say something
which, although I do really hope it,
I must not say just yet — not now at all
events. Let me say this — I hope, yes, I
may hope, that we will get on better and
better, and not less well, as we meet from
point to point of the way ahead of us ; and
above all, when we have finished our parts
in London life and come to compare notes
at the end of our first season, I hope we

may think about everything in the same
way, and agree on all topics."

Oh, shall we compare notes at the
end?" she said eagerly, quite delighted with
the idea. " Oh, do let us ! how interesting
it would be ! "

'' By all means at the end ; and by the
way, also, often," he replied. " I wonder
what you will think of it all by the
thirtieth of July. Yes, let us agree to
compare notes, Miss Browne. "^

"Oh, how interesting! how very charming
it will be ! " she exclaimed with a bright,
fresh enjoyment at the thought of his
companionship and sympathy. " For I
have new thoughts every day, you know,
about everything, and I am always having
new experiences as well."

'' And now you will tell them all to me,"
he said.

How I should like it," she answered ;
and then she was silent, and blushed faintly,

and there suddenly quivered over her Ipsa
soft tremulous smile.

Then — before either of them spoke again
the footman, announcing that Cicely's
victoria was at the door, suddenly entered
the room.

He aroused Belinda from her soft
repose, and broke ruthlessly upon the tete-astute.


And Sir Harry rose — bowed his adieux
to both ladies — and then went his way.

CHAPTER VII.

I GIVE YOU ' PRIMROSE.'

So It was, just with them as It had been
with Blanche Ethrldge and Jack, they had
beofun Hfe too-ether.'

It was an Intensely Interesting thought
to Cicely ; and that they were going to
compare notes ' as they went along, on
every possible occasion on which they
might meet, was an Idea that seemed to
bring a new zest to everything ; and finally,
that when their first season was over, they
were to tell one another what they thought
about it all, and how they then might feel
towards this new life of theirs — this London
life of which Cicely had long wistfully

VOL. n. K

contemplated the outer surface, and which
Sir Harry had regarded doubtfully from
afar.

It all seemed intensely interesting to
her, and Sir Harry's visit seemed to gild
all the future of her coming season with
fresh attraction and life.

This, their scheme. Cicely frankly disclosed
to Belinda, when they had a talk
together while out driving that afternoon.

Belinda smiled over it all with calm
contentment.

Rather an interesting arrangement,"
she philosophically called this scheme,
thinking the while that she would say
nothing about it to Mr. Richard Garth.

Cicely and she were tooling along the
Park in the victoria now, to keep their
engagement with Lady Ridgeway at five
o'clock.

Does it not sound interesting to compare
notes ? " said Cicely. " Do you think
we will have many curious things to say."

Your points of view are very different,
and accordingly very different will be your
ideas, most certainly," Belinda remarked
finally, after Cicely had several times enthusiastically
described the scheme.

'' Of course it will be all different. Of
course there will be a great variety in all
wee do ; but so much the more variety will
there be in our observations, Belinda. Do
you know, I think I will write mine down.
I wonder if Sir Harry would do so also.
You know, — it is all new to him, he says,
while only the inner reality of it, is new tome.
How strange it seems ! And yet I
think he has seen further into it all than I
have already. What does he mean, Belinda,
by a fuller and more worthy life
elsewhere ? "

'' He is not altogether a frivolous young
man, you see," said Belinda, reflectively.
'* Indeed, being a Member of Parliament,
how could he be? It was very civil of him

to come and call this afternoon, my love ;
and in fact I call him a most exceedingly
well-mannered young man."

'' Oh, I am sure he is not frivolous. Why,
you know, now he has gone clown to the
House," continued Cicely. '' Just fancy, he
looks so young and so merry, Belinda, and
all the while some of the great important
things of the country are on his shoulders,
and he has had to go down to hear Mr.
Forster speak. Is it not interesting ? I
am so glad to have a Member of Parliament
for my friend. Belinda, he is not
coming to Lady Ridgeway's this afternoon,
so I will only just go in for a minute to see
what she is going to do ?"

In they both went, for Lady Ridgeway
was at home and expecting them, and they
found her engaged also on her part in a
variety of schemes.

For this was the state of the case with
Lady Ridgeway now.

She had resigned Sir Harry on her own
account, after that frank and unsuspicious
confidence of his, and she had promoted
Captain Fitzarthur to his intended place !

And now this new ' first favourite ' must
be cultivated assiduously, and all kinds of
things were open to be done. And as she
had quite decided to adopt Captain Fits
on her own account — she was ready
now, and quite eager, to throw herself con
more into the cause of Sir Harry with
Cicely, and to promote the dawning
romance of those two young lives in
every possible way.

For as she had the handsome guardsman
at hand to call up her carriage or to play
the cavaliers seventy In every other respect,
she had resolved to be quite nobly magnanimous
and to leave Sir Harry undisturbed
to fall in love more deeply with
Cicely Browne.

The season would be short ; and the

question remained of all that they were todo
together.

Time was fleeting, and — as Lady
Ridgeway determined that the thing must
be done — this present season would bethe
time to do it. Sir Harry and Cicely
Browne would be her own special pretty
piece of match-making for that year. In
fact she had gone in for it, and what Lady
Ridgeway resolved upon — generally took
place !

My dear," she said softly, as she received
Cicely this afternoon, " sit down ;
I want to talk to you. I have given you
up Sir Harry Wynn."

'' How good of you," said Cicely, demurely,
with a quaint glance at Lady
Ridgeway 's emphatic countenance, but with
a quiet smile as well.

'' Yes, I have resigned you Primrose. I
call him Primrose, you know, because he
is so fresh and young. I did not give him

JD

the name. Lord RIdgeway did ; and it
was rather quick of him. He asked me at
luncheon to-day, ' My dear, what is the
name of this new young man?' I said,
Sir Harry Wynn,' you know, guessing
whom he meant. ' Ah, but I mean his
toy name,' my lord facetiously said. * You
have had a Cupid, and a Dolly, and a
Pansy already,' he went on, ' and I suppose
you will call this new man Buttercup or
Primrose, now ? ' I thought, you know,
Buttercup would be ugly — even ' dear little
Buttercup ' — but I thought Primrose was
perfect for Sir Harry. Do you not think
so, dear — with that fresh, fair look he
has, and with his light brown wavy hair,
eh ? And it is much nicer than Rosebud,
as Jack called him to me one day
here, for he is not a bit pink and white.
Primrose is a charming name for him,
and it was very clever of my lord, don't
you think so ? "

I do not know," said Cicely, gravely.
I do not think — well "

'' I think for my part," said Belinda,
'* that it is a curious feature of the present
day, this giving every young man a name."

*' It is a fashion of the day, however, dear
Belinda," said Lady Ridgeway, solemnly.
** It belongs essentially to the day. We all
have our names, if we only knew it ; and,
indeed, mine is ' Sultana.' I do not think
it is very offensive that I am so named.
And I am sure Sir Harry will like us to
call him Primrose, Cicely dear."

I am sure I will not," said the girl
quickly, colouring again with a vivid rush
of colour over her cheek.

"Well, yes, by-and-by you will, perhaps
not just yet, I dare say. For the present,
I will be satisfied if you come with me to
meet him at Hurlingham tomorrow. Eh,
what do you say to that, about four in the
afternoon ? "

Are you going to Hurllngham, Lady
Ridgeway — are you going tomorrow ? "

'' Yes, and going to take you along with
me, you little demure thing. What, Belinda,
is it not the right way to work, eh ?
Only do not tell Mr. Garth one word of
it, or — well, it might explode the whole
Paraguay mine. '

'' We judge it best not to tell him everything,"
said Belinda, quickly.

And you judge wisely, Belinda. Why
trouble his mind with affairs beyond his
department ? why annoy him with what he
is happier in knowing nothing about ?
No, say nothing to Mr. Garth, my sweet
Cicely, but don your n^ej)e de chine — the
cream one this time, dearest — and come
with me to Hurlingham tomorrow. And
now, yes — is that the carriage, Westwood ?
I must be going out."

I shall not see Mr. Garth again for
some time' said Cicely, as she rose to

depart, and as Lady RIdgeway bent to kiss
her soft cheek.

No ! what Is going to become of the
grim guardian, my love ? "

Mr. Garth is going for the most of the
summer to Paris."

No ! " exclaimed Lady Ridgeway. '' But
you do not say so ! Oh, Belinda, shall we
be left undisturbed to our little social
schemes ? "

'' He is going," said Belinda. " I believe
he starts to-night."

"Bon voyage to him," laughed Lady
Ridgeway, merrily. '' And now good-bye,
my sweet child, and remember you are
ready when I call for you in the afternoon
tomorrow."

CHAPTER VIII.

youth's young dreams.

It was a very sunny and bright tomorrow
that dawned upon them next day, in
Prince's Gate.

And as Cicely rose to greet it, and
looked over the gardens from her bedroom
window, she felt, that as the summer rested
on every branch of the chestnuts, and
smiled in every fleeting ray that brightened
the shimmering waters, so had summer
risen upon the long shadowy winter of her
bygone life, lightening the grim monotony
that had described her past youthful years
with delightful new hope and joy.

But, yesterday — or just beyond so few

yesterdays — she and Belinda had been
elinor out their Ives alone. No change
came with changing weeks or seasons ; no
brightness had seemed to penetrate the
stately quietness of their home.

Now all was flushed with a new life ; all
gleamed with countless rays of bright
attraction ; all was coloured with sweet
varieties of delight. She had a place of
her own in life, and a circle — a little knot
of bright, pleasant friends — who all united
to make that life smooth and attractive to
her ; a little clique, who were all dear and
sympathetic and pleasant ; while central
among them was One who (though she
did not yet define what she felt for him)
seemed to give reality and substance to
the attractions of all. Her heart had
found a centre, where, all unconscious and
yet contented, it remained.

How quickly it had all taken place, too,
this happy change. How swiftly life had

come hastening on for her In the events of
the last few weeks. And to what was It
hurrying ? What might the season bring
to her as It rippled on pleasantly to its
close ?

It was nearly the end of May now,
and the season was working up to Its
height ; and although Cicely had not gone
in for It regularly, still she had done many
things so very new to her since the beginning
of It all, that the past few weeks of
her existence seemed to constitute quite an
epoch In her life. Why, since only the
beginning of April she had been ' presented,'
and had been taken by Lady
Ridgeway to many delightful editions and
fetes. She had seen everybody she ought
to have seen — was quite ait fait — and was
able to give a just opinion on all the
Beauties of the day. All seemed delightful
to her indeed, — she was so perfectly fresh,
and her heart felt so young. She had been

an apt pupil, Lady Ridgeway had said
approvingly, and she had crowned her
successful tutelage by captivating Sir Harry
Wynn. Now, for the first time, she was to
go to Hurlingham, and Lady Ridgeway
was to call for her at four o'clock.

Gradually and surely she had been
sliding from out the shadow in which her
young life had passed, and slowly there was
unfolding before her eyes a prospect of the
future in which the names and dignity of
the house of Garth and Browne had no
part at all.

They had brought her up to represent
them in their financial glories, these two
grim, stern men ; and in her heart's hidden
depths, when she came to look into it —
there was no reflection of financial glory at
all. Whatever was true, and good, and
genuine, and real ; whatever was fair,
whatever was bright, and fresh, and young,
and beautiful — these things, and these only,

did Cicely love. She had no regard for
her money, and she could not excite herself
about the dignity of Garth and Browne.

As she dressed to-day in her soft crepe
de chine, the dress which Lady Ridgeway
had asked her to wear, Cicely mused
much to herself over these last few weeks'
experience of men and things, and thought
much, amidst all the rest, of Lady Ridgeway.


How kind had Lady Ridgeway been to
her ! How her own bright softness of
nature had disarmed that brilliant lady's
general acrimony of feeling ! For, yes,
she had been to her little demure cousin
Cicely really and sincerely kind.

Lady Ridgeway was a puzzle often to
Cicely, so great a puzzle indeed that after
wondering about her friend's happiness, or
lack of happiness; over her fancies and her
strange, variable ways ; over her love, or
want of love rather, for her prosaic and

pragmatical spouse, Lord RIdgeway ; andover
her likings for so many other people,
besides Sir Harry and herself, Cicely
generally left the puzzle unread altogether,
and remained satisfied with the consciousness
that Lady Ridgeway was indeed most
kind to her. Still she wondered often
over her ; and to-day, besides Lady Ridgeway,
Cicely thought much of Blanche.
She had become very quickly fond of
Lady Blanche, and a sort of curious, quick
sympathy, too, had told her that, with all
her brightness and her gaiety, Blanche
Ethridge was not happy ; that the strict
law of the world she lived in, was a hard
law for her ; that she loved Jack Fielding,
her cheery and ever faithful Jack, but that
for him she could not resolve to sacrifice
all that implied social life. For Lady
Blanche was caught in the network of
social obligations and requirements — and
Cicely already wondered at the small

things which seemed to have for her irresistible
power.

She was sorry, for she Heed Jack, who
was the friend of Sir Harry as well as of
Blanche, and she often wished she could
do something for both of them. They
wanted money, she knew ; and it seemed
to her such a curious want, and so strange
that any one should ever want it, or at least
really desire it, as if it brought with it any
happiness, or was the source and origin of
any real happiness whatever.

Had she not had money always ? And
it had seemed to bring her nothing that
was worth having at all !

Like nearly everybody in this world.
Cicely Browne undervalued her gift, and
failed to credit it even with that amount of
command over the pleasant things of life
of which certainly with all truth wealth
can boast possession. She did not in the
least connect it indeed with any of the

VOL. II. L

pleasant things she already owned and
enjoyed. For her money did to her, in
fact, represent only the dignity and the
dreariness of the firm of Garth and
Browne !

Sir Harry Wynn had no money, for so
much already she had been told ; and how
much nicer he was, she thought, than all
the terribly rich people whom from her
earliest and most childish days she had
occasionally seen. How much nicer !

Well, it is possible to overvalue money,
certainly ; but Cicely Browne, on the other
hand, but little credited that important
part which it plays inevitably in life.

This morning, most assuredly, the glow
of her bright spirits came from no sense
of the luxe and costliness of her surroundings,
as she dressed, as Lady Ridgeway had
requested her, in soft cream-coloured crepe
de chine.

And as she stood ready awaiting the

carriage as four o'clock drew near, her
hopes and anticipations were so simple and
almost childlike, that it was difficult to
realize her to be the solemnly important
individual whom Mr. Richard Garth was
so anxious to convince her that she was —
the representative of the firm of Garth and
Browne, — the recipient in her own slight
person of all the wealth which had been
gathered in the course of these two long
lifetimes, and of all the pomp and responsibility
accruing thereunto.

How bright you look, child," said Lady
Ridgeway, almost enviously, as she drove
up to the door to find Cicely waiting for
her, and as the girl came down to her
carriage step.

'' How young and ridiculously happy !
Come along, we must drive quickly, for
of course I am late. There is a real pleasure
in taking you about with me, Cicely ;

it Is SO easy to bring that ripple of sunlight
on your face."

I am so happy ! " murmured Cicely, as
she took her place by Lady Ridgeway's
side. " Good-bye, Belinda."

And as the carriage rolled on she looked
up, kissed her finger tips, and nodded
brightly and smiled, for there was Belinda,
holding Negro close and tight in her arms,
bowing over the balcony, and, with her
large soft hand, waving a fond farewell.

'' You are happy : well, and so you
ought to be, why not ? — plenty of money,"
began Lady Ridgeway, putting this important
fact first in her intended enumeration
of Cicely's advantages.

Oh, it is not that," said Cicely, hastily
shaking her head.

More than you think, my dear. There
is not much that is very pleasant in life to
be had without it."

'' But it is quite the contrary," said Cicely.

Until six weeks ago, Lady Ridgeway, I
seemed to have money — just what everybody
else seems to want so much — I had it,
and it seemed sent to mock me, because I
had nothing else ! no brightness, no happiness,
no youth at all, only quantities of
money ; — for I suppose I must have had that
at all events, for they were always telling me
so — yes, telling and telling me every day.
But I did not see how it could be any
happiness to me, for (with all the talk of my
money) except Belinda and Negro, there
was nothing in the world in those days
that I cared for at all ; but now "

"Now you do care for some things," said
Lady Ridgeway, smiling round upon the
bright young face.

'' Ah, now it is all sunshine," the girl
exclaimed. " But, oh, Lady Ridgeway,
surely money has nothing to do with it. I
know it is not because I may be some day
rich that yozi are so kind to me ; and it is

not because of money that I care for you.
And, do you know, it Is just the caring that
makes me really so happy — the being
cared for, and having people to like, to be
fond of, and to be with some one besides
Belinda, though she is always dear and
good. It is that feeling that brings sunshine
into everything ; and I am sure it
would be just the same if I were not —
what Mr. Garth is never weary of saying —

am.

The representative of Garth and
Browne," said Lady Ridgeway, laughingly.

"Yes, exactly," said Cicely, with a dissatisfied
sigh.

'the representative of Garth and
Browne, and the dearest little, quaint,
charming heiress in the world, my love,"
continued Lady Ridgeway, laughing, bending
forward as she spoke to lay her hand
upon Cicely's. " A little heiress, certainly,
but none the less bewitching all the same,

and I think I can tell of one who agrees
with me. Eh, Cicely, have you seen Primrose
to-day ? And do you know where weare
? " she continued, as the carriage, which
had been driving slowly along by the Park
and Kensington Gardens, now turned
down along Gloucester Road. '' Do you
know where we are 'going to ? " she went
on with a merry smile. " Eh, can you
guess ? Yes, to the right, through Cromwell
Gardens," she called to her coachman,
and in another minute they had turned up
Surrey Place.

All the three Miss Prims were at the
window, as the Ridgeway barouche, with its
heraldic splendour on panel and harness,
and its powdered servants in full season
attire, drew up by the pavement of Number
Nine. And with intense and breathless
interest they watched affaire, as Sir
Harry, with hat in hand, dressed smart
and trim for an afternoon's outing, and

with his burnished brown curls glistening
brightly in the sun, rushed out before
the footman had reached the ground, and
flung open the little iron gate. Behind
him hurried Reuben, of Arch Aubrey, in
the Wynn livery, and holding back the impatient
Ronald from springing forward to
his master's side. And at the further
corner of the garden, behind a flowering
syringa bush, the Miss Prims could catch a
view of Mrs. Floy herself — that worthy
and important lady whom the whole neighbourhood
had learnt to know and to
esteem — standing discreetly back, but
watching eagerly to see Sir Harry depart
in Lady Ridgeway's pretty carriage, — -' fora
day's pleasuring, bless his 'part — may he
get it and a thousand more ! '

Mrs. Floy always dashed a tear — or an
imaginary tear rather — from the corner of
her eyes, with her snowy apron, when she
mentioned ' Sir 'Arry ' ; and as in her

wonted fashion she invariably ' blessed 'is
part for a dear young gentleman, and 'is
own mother's son.'

And this was a feeling, indeed, that
most women experienced as they watched
young Sir Harry, although they expressed
it in different language, or as some did not
express it at all ! In fact. Lady Ridgeway
and Cicely at that very moment both felt
something very much the same as Mrs.
Floy when he rushed out bright and
smiling to greet them ; and likewise,
indeed, did the Miss Prims feel it as they
watched him from over the way.

But Cicely only blushed and smiled a
silent response to his eager greeting, and
Lady Ridgeway said —

"Well, we have come to fetch you.
Are you ready ? It is a good long way to
Hurlingham, and we shall require our time !"

Ready ? I have been ready this half-hour."


'jump In, then."

He turned the handle of the carriage
door. But one Instant he turned and
lingered then.

Good-bye, Ronald," he wistfully said.
Tie him up until I am quite out of sight,
Reuben, then let him run Into the garden.
Good dog ! Do you think I have a nice
little garden ? " he continued, turning
round to the two ladles, and pausing before
he jumped Into the carriage, as he saw
them both bend forward to scan his little
domicile with admiration and interest in
their eyes.

'rit is charming. How quiet and fresh
and nice it does seem here," said Lady
Ridgeway, with much sentiment in her
tone.

Yes, is it not ? It Is a cosy little
digging, as Jack calls It. Look at that
syringe tree, Miss Browne, and at my
purple clematis creeping right over the

verandah. If this weather lasts it will
be soon In flower."

'rit Is delightful; and what lovely flowers
you have In your balcony," said Cicely,
admiringly, In her turn.

Ah ! yes, I will tell you about them.
I just accidentally said one day, In Mrs.
Floy's hearing, that I wished I had some
Arch Aubrey flowers, and she wrote and
made the gardener send up a whole van-ful
of pots from the greenhouse. They
were all raised In Stoneshire air, and that
Is why that scarlet geranium has such fine
bloom, Miss Browne, I beg to tell you.
We are proud of our geraniums down
there."

'' I have seen none like it in London,"
said Lady Ridgeway.

No ? Really I am so glad, I must
write and tell Crisp, the old gardener.
Yes, I do think my little balcony is very
fair."

'rand your rooms must be so pretty.
That little French window opening on to
that bank of crimson and blue flowers is
quite charming," exclaimed Lady Ridgeway
again. "Is that your drawing-room, Sir
Harry .^"

Or my smoking-room rather ; that is
all it really deserves to be called. Yes, it
is rather a pretty little room ; and there is
quite a nice garden with a beautiful vine,
too, at the back. Will you not come in
and explore, Lady Ridgeway ? Is there
not time ? "

No, no ; no time to-day. Come along,
Sir Harry, the Prince and Princess will
have arrived, and the lane going down to
the gate at Hurlingham will be so crowded
we shall never get there. But I should
indeed like to see your rooms some other
day."

"When will you come, then — tomorrow
:

What, Sunday ? " exclaimed Lady
RIdgeway. '' No, not to-morrow. On
Sunday afternoon, as I have often told you,
I am always to be found at home — for
special friends, at least," she softly added.
But," she went on again, " get in and we
shall talk it over. I should like immensely
to come and drink tea with you some
day."

I shall be overwhelmed with the distinguished
honour, and quite delighted and
enchanted as well," exclaimed Sir Harry,
with much eloquence, as he sprang into the
carriage at length, and took his seat opposite
the two ladies, the tall solemn footman
solemnly shutting him in. Then —

To Baron Grant's," said Lady Ridgeway,
much to his and to Cicely's astonishment.
She added, impatiently, to the
servant, " You know where I mean."

"That is more than I do," said Sir
Harry, opening his eyes full upon her as

the footman mounted the high box, and
the barouche moved on.

Lady Ridgeway laughed, and coloured a
little.

Oh, you know that big place in Kensington
where they are going to give that
ridiculous, prodigious ball — Baron Grant's
house. Captain Fitzarthur is there, and is
waiting all this time for us. A friend of his
is among the special bachelors. Fits will
have to be one of them himself, I imagine ;
and, by the way, Sir Harry, so will you.
Fits has gone to see the decorations today.
I promised to pick him up, and then
we shall tool on to Hurlingham. Eh! have
you any objections ? " she added, a little
captiously, as if any one would have dreamt
of making objections to what she did !

None in the world," said Sir Harry,
readily, " except that my inconsiderate
curiosity has interrupted our arrangements
for my projected tea. Let us return to

that subject. I have not taken in the big
ball yet. My tea is much more interesting
to me at present. Well, when is it to
be, Lady Ridgeway ? Say, please, if it maybe
next Wednesday, or when ? "

It is far too pleasant a proposition to
be allowed to drop. Next Wednesday be
it then," laughed Lady Ridgeway. '' There
is a party at Camden Hill, at the Duke
of A — • — 's, that day, you know, and I will
go as early as possible, and come back
quickly to you."

"Ah, I forgot the Duke's. Must we all
go?"

'eyes, and let us go together."

Good," said Sir Harry ; " and then we
will come back to tea."

"If you are true to me ; but you are
false, though fair. Sir Harry," continued
Lady Ridgeway, thus keeping up a ceaseless
ripple of talk with him —-thinking it quite
sufficient for them in the mean time, until

Captain FItz had been picked up, that Sir
Harry and Cicely should be allowed to
contemplate one another from opposite
sides of the carriage without exchanging
remarks.

'' You are false as you are fair."

Oh, Lady Ridgeway ! "

'' Yes, false ; else how about the seats in
the House of Commons ? "

Oh, if you knew," he began in despairing
tones, and with an eagerly deprecating
manner — '' if you only knew "

Yes, I know all about it ; they are
taken for weeks and weeks to come."

Every one," he answered sadly. " I
have been there at the ballot every day.
But, I was just going to tell you : on
July the fourth I have got a claim in,
and several fellows are to come with me
to ballot. I mean and will succeed that
night. Lady Ridgeway. Will you come to
tea with me down here on Wednesday

next, and come to the House on the fourth
of July ? "

'' That is a good long way ahead, almost
too far to make an engagement. Sir Harry,
I think. Shall we come on the fourth of
July ? qui vivre vera ; but I know at least
that we should like to come — eh, what do
you say, Cicely ? "

Oh, I should like it," the girl exclaimed
'' I should like it so much. Oh, Sir
Harry, will you take us to hear a debate
in the House of Commons '^. "

Will you really come to tea with me ? "
he retorted, with a sunny smile. *' That
would indeed be kind."

'' Of course we will," said Lady Ridgeway,
with enthusiasm,

'* Ah, that is splendid ! How proud and
happy Mrs. Floy will be. She shall make
you some Stoneshire cakes, and will telegraph
for some fresh Arch Aubrey flowers
and cream."

VOL. II. M

Well, we must try not to linger over
the Duke's music and ices next week.
Cicely, you know, I am going to take you

there, to A Lodge with me, my dear.

Look here, what a great, huge place this
is — what a ball to be sure it will be !
And where is Captain Fits ? Ah, there
he is ! Come along ! " she continued,
kissing her finger tips. " We are dreadfully
late. Get In."

There is lots of time," said Captain
Fits, leisurely, as he climbed slowly Into
the high swinging barouche. '' Good
afternoon. Lady Ridgeway. What do you
think of this barrack ? It is a capital
place, I can tell you, for a ball."

"Is it really, now ? What ! is the floor
good, and will there be plenty of dancing
room ? "

'* Enough for an army or so. It seems tome,"
answered Captain Fits, as they drove
off again. " There Is heaps of room ; and

such a jolly garden, too, with a regular
lake, and every kind of thing ; and it will
all be lit up. It will be no end of a thing
the whole affair altogether. You will
come, of course ? " he added to Lady
Ridgeway.

I do not know that I will. I hate
a rabble."

'' But this will be select."

*' Very likely ; a select five thousand or
so out of the general optimum gathered of
the London world."

'' All the Beauties, and all the Royalties,
too, will be there."

'' Very likely," said Lady Ridgeway,
crossly, for she had a particular and
curiously fractious manner for her chosen
intimates at certain stages of her friendships.
'every likely; and between Beauties
and Royalties we shall none of us ever
get down to supper."

I will undertake that yoic shall not

suffer, Lady RIdgeway. Do come to the
thing, and I will see it is all smooth and
jolly for yotc, at all events."

'' You are to dine with me that evening,"
she said in a low tone then — with a
sudden bright flash of her fine eyes upon
him as he sat bending towards her in the
carriage. '' Yes, you have not forgotten,
have you ? You come and dine quite ' on
the quiet' with me, Fits, and we shall see
about oroino^ to the bios ball."

He smiled, dropped his eyes under her
sudden glance, and threw himself back in
the carriage. Lady Ridgeway's eyes still
rested on him, the brightness and laughter
fading out of them quickly, and a grave
and melancholy languor taking its place.

*' One gets so weary of balls," she said
sadly, as if inviting sympathy from him
for some suddenly remembered anguish
which seemed to weigh upon her heart.

Lots of things are much jollier, certainly,"

said Captain FItzarthur, philosophically
; and then he turned his glance
round upon Sir Harry Wynn.

Very few words had passed between the
other two since they had moved from
Baron Grant's mansion.

It was so pleasant driving quietly on
through the warm summer air; so pleasant
to Cicely, who in all her former summer
drives had had no companion more interesting
than the excellent Belinda ; so
pleasant to lean back and hear the musical
ripple of Lady Ridgeway and Captain Fits
soft voices by her side, and to
respond with smile or nod to Sir Harry,
who spoke now and then, as she stole a
bright shy glance at his face from beneath
the lace edging of her parasol.

They were both very happy — she in her
own demure way, and Sir Harry in his.

As for Sir Harry, indeed, his whole
being was just then becoming gradually

and delightfully suffused with a sense of
the general brightness of life ; of the pleasant
novelty of companionship ; of the
sweetness of Cicely's presence ; of his satisfaction
in her presence as a quietly realized
fact ; and he felt for his part that he
wished to say little, but that it was quite
enjoyment enough to lean forward, tilting
his hat over his eyes to shade them from
the glare of the sunshine, and to gaze
dreamily Into Cicely's happy, thoughtful
face, as she nestled back in her soft crepe
and lace by Lady Ridgeway's side, making
a youthful and pleasant contrast indeed to
that distinguished lady's imposing presence
and peculiar dignity of charm.

The drive to Hurlingham was not a
pretty one, even in this full summer time —
not even now when every little square or
group of houses they passed were embedded
in green foliage, with every shrub
in full flower. It was not a pretty drive ;

but to Sir Harry and Cicely it seemed
beautiful with that soft radiance of their
first happy romance ; for that * light which
never was on land or sea' had suddenly
risen for these two, until it seemed to them
to gild the dull ugliness of suburban
London with a wonderful and quite satisfying
beauty and glow.

Turning into the lane which approaches
Hurlingham, they were soon in the string
of carriages and the crowd. For it was
a great day, and the Prince and Princess
were coming, and every man who had a
ticket-book, or who could distribute those
pink papers of admission for ladies, had
been besieged for these social favours for
several days before.

Hurlingham was in full beauty, and today
in full dress. The weather was so
hot now that people were glad to get
away from town.

Cicely was delighted with it all ; and

Sir Harry was almost as enthusiastic.
Lady Ridgeway and Captain Fitzarthur
were of course more or less blast, and at
least quite composed ; and thus in varied
frame they all sat, more or less patiently, in
the carriage, as it rolled slowly up to the
entrance, and came up close behind the
royal cortege to the gate ; then in they
swept, under the thick overhanging trees,
on to the green sward of the enclosure, and
joined the long rank of carriages and drags
that moved slowly to their places round
the Polo Park.

For it was also a great polo day, and
the rows of seats round the field were
quite crowded. There was the marquee
for the Prince and Princess, and tents also
for more general use. There were rows
behind rows of gay dresses, and a marvellous
blaze of colour shone from the
perfect banks of bright toilets under the
rays of the sun ; and there were the polo

players, in their gay-coloured shirts, on
their sturdy little ponies ; and there were
drags and carriages innumerable, and
Beauties, professional and unprofessional,
and all the glitter and gaiety of Hurlingham
on an early summer afternoon, as
every one has seen it a dozen times, but
as Sir Harry and Cicely Browne had
never seen it until to-day.

Now I call this quite perfect," said
Sir Harry, as he turned to stroll by Cicely's
side ; for they had all descended from the
carriage, and Lady Ridgeway had attached
Captain Fitzarthur to herself.

This is perfect ; let us explore the
whole thing. Miss Browne, will you ? And
let us ask Lady Ridgeway to tell us whereto
find her when we come back'*

'but may we — what do you think ?''
answered the girl, hesitatingly.

Is it not pretty much what every one
else does here ? " he answered, smiling

curiously. " Look ! Lady Ridgeway has
deserted us already." .

'' But must we not follow her ? "
No ; do not, please. Let us go this
way ; wee cannot miss her. There the
carriage is to stand ; and I do not much
care for polo for my own part, but I do
want to explore the whole place with you."

CHAPTER IX.

BY THE RIVER.

A SUMMER afternoon.

Music floating dreamily towards them
across the water ; the sound of voices
echoing cheerfully from the neighbouring
field where the polo ponies were galloping
to and fro. The soft green sward beneath
their feet ; the cool shadows of leafy
boughs waving above their heads, and
that pleasant solitude which when near
a multitude is so particularly soothing
in such a summer scene.

Alone as in a forest glade, and yet with
that sense and brightness of a crowded life
close round them just to prevent the sense

of solitude from being too intrusive and
intense.

Away they wandered, and Lady Ridgeway
was soon forgotten even by Cicely,
nearly as quickly and as easily indeed as
Lady Ridgeway could herself forget !

I do not care much for polo," said Sir
Harry ; '' do you ?"

'' I think it is a pretty sight."

'* But it is not sport — at least it is
not so to my mind, any more than the
shooting at pigeons in the sort of way
they do it here. Of course the riding
must be very jolly, but I do not like
to see the polo ponies knocked about
as they are."

*' No; I do not like that, Sir Harry, either.
The poor ponies — but they do not always
get all the knocks — it is dangerous for the
riders as well, is it not ? "

'' Yes, like most things, it is the danger
lends excitement to the game. But I

think it is much pleasant being here
to-day, for my part. Would you like, however,
to go back and look at the game,
Miss Browne ?"

No ; I like this," she answered, and
they strolled leisurely on.

They had found their way round by the
old house into the pretty sloping garden,
and now they wandered down to the
river's edge.

A broad walk ran along here, shaded by
the green wide-spreading branches of the
trees. The sun was sinking lower every
moment, and the light on the waters was
gleaming softly, and the soft hues of the
evening shadows beginning to darken the
distant landscape beyond. They passed
down from the grassy slope on to the
river walk.

How charming ! " said Cicely. " How
pretty the whole view is at every point, come
upon it where you may. I have a cockney's

love of the Thames, Sir Harry, which I
expect you will not share with me."

I like it," he answered. " I like water
everywhere. We have a river rushing
through the Park at Arch Aubrey, which
has made me think no scenery perfect
without it anywhere else. How I wish
I could show you Arch Aubrey, Miss
Browne. I do not know why — but I have,
wished to show it you ever since the day
we first met."

I should like to see It," she answered.

And then, with a sudden rush of enthusiasm,
he went on —

I suppose it must be because It is
the place 1 love best in all the world,
and because you are fast becoming my
greatest friend in the world ; but I do
wish it, every time I see you In the Park
or walking in a garden. Anywhere like
here, or in the Botanic, where we met the
other day. I think to myself that I should

like to see you just walking across the
grass plot below the drawing-room windows
at Arch Aubrey, and going down through
the flower garden to the river."

I think you are fonder of Arch Aubrey,
and of all your old home, Sir Harry, than
of anything you have found in London ! "

Well, I do not think I am intended fora
London life."

You keep longing for your old life ? "

I long for the freshness and reality of
things. I long for the breeze blowing from
the Downs. I keep thinking, as I sit in
the House during debates in the evening
there, of those long beautiful summer
nights last year, when Will Darrell and I
used to set our fishing lines by the old
mill ; and lie watching as the fish rose, till
daybreak came up over the skies. I often
did it, for I do love to see the midsummer
night right through and through more than
anything in the world. I like to hear the

night sounds in the air, the corn crake in
the hay-fields, and the buzz of curious
night birds among the woods. I Hke to
feel the night all round me then, do you
know, out there by the river-side at twelve
o'clock ; and I am afraid that I hate it in
the House of Commons, and I do not
much care about it, even at the music
parties and the balls."

But it all amuses you ? "

'' Yes, in a way. I cannot quite tell you
what I think about it. Sometimes it all
seems to me to be bewildering and to be
exciting enough, then suddenly I get tired
again ; and then it all seems so monotonous
that I think if I have much of it, it would
become a sort of treadmill to my mind.
And after all, do you know, I think what I
really only do like is to meet you when I
go to places, and to compare notes, as we
said, with you. For before I had known
you, and now when I do not encounter you,

I feel there is nobody there at all that I in
the least wanted to know or to see."

*' But you have been going out a good
deal, much more than I have ; you have
been to numbers of balls in these few
weeks, have you not ? "

'' Oh yes ; I was at Mrs. Rochester's
last night, and at Lady Gorton's the night
before ; and then at the Frazer' ball the
night before that again. Yes, so I was —
and at the Weldon' and the Hardings'
and the Villiers' last week. But at not one
of those places did I meet you, as I had
hoped to do, — and it all seemed merely
vanity vanitatum, mere vexation of soul
to me. Eh ! so you see the only thing
I can really care for, is to meet you when
I go out. You are the first friend, you
see, I ever had."

And you are my first friend, Sir Harry,
except Belinda — and Lady Ridgeway, she is
my friend now, too."

VOL. n. N

'' It does seem to me so curious that
your life up here in this crowded London
should have been as quiet as mine."

*' And without much life to care about
either," answered the girl, " only Belinda
and Negro ; for my father never wanted
me to care about kim at all."

And your guardian ?"

"Oh, he does not much care — not forme
at least," said Cicely, quaintly ; " not
for me, myself, only for the things which
he wants me to be and to do."

** What sort of things?" he said suddenly.

Oh, things I cannot explain exactly,
because I do not even myself understand.
It is a scheme, you know, and he just
wants me to obey in it. But I do not
think I shall," said Cicely, with a curious
expression of determination coming over
her young face.

"No? why not ? " he laughed merrily, ashe
looked round upon her. Her obedience

her rebellion — It seemed to him altogether
such a quaint Idea !

'' Because I will not obey. At least,
I am quite sure I will not — and then,
oh, then, Mr. Garth will have to choose
somebody else."

"■ What do you mean ? " he exclaimed.

Oh, I do not quite know, — at least I
cannot explain," she went on, rather confusedly
; for she was thinking of Frederick
Bullion, of that reference to her marriage,
and of Mr. Garth and his object, that
special object in visiting Paris now. '' Oh,
I cannot explain ; but I will riot obey. I
am quite sure I will not. But no, I cannot
tell you why ! " And she stopped — turning
away from him, and blushing deeply then
under the quick glance of his eager eyes.

I cannot explain to you. Sir Harry; but
I am quite satisfied that I will not obey."

No ! — " he began wonderingly ; but
she interrupted.

"No, certainly not. Can you not imagine
that I will not ? " she exclaimed, with sudden
fervour and vehemence. '' Do you not
think with me. Sir Harry, that the right
and best things to live for, are what we
cannot get by buying — I mean what weare,
what we think, what we feel ? "

They had paused beside the rushing
river, where the evening shadows were,
falling quickly now, and they sat down, as
if by mutual consent, on one of the seats,
beneath a great lime-tree; the water rushed
on at their feet, and they gazed at it a
moment. How rapidly it glided — softly,
silently, now in shadow, flowing onward
rapidly and yet placidly here, as the
currents of their own two young lives,
still smooth and placid, although flowing
eagerly and swift.

What were the best things in life to live
for — for them at the outset of their bright
young hopeful lives ?

Not ' the unreality of the glittering
pleasures of this great metropolis,' mused
Sir Harry In his philosophic moods.

Not ' the things we can get by buying
as Cicely had quaintly expressed It In her
dissatisfaction with what had been as yet
her own portion In life.

That pleasant process of 'comparing
notes ' went a little further that summer s
evening in that garden at Hurlingham by
the river-side ; and when at last — wandering
unwillingly back into the crowd again —
they came within hearing of the music and
the ringing shouts of the polo-players and
the cheers of the lookers-on, they found
Lady Ridgeway still loitering contentedly
there, with Captain Fitzarthur by her side.

Sir Harry Wynn and Cicely felt somehow
that they had progressed far into
mutual friendship acquaintance that afternoon
!

CHAPTER X.

SUNSET AT Birmingham.

'there you are, you two naughty people,"
Lady Ridgeway cried, pretending to feel
surprised at their absence — as if it were
not the very thing she desired and had
planned for them to do — and as if she
would not have been intensely annoyed
with them if they had done anything else.

'' Where have you been ? We have
seen shoals of people ; and now the polo
is just over, and the Princess has just left.
Have you seen Mrs. Angry ? she has
turned up again. No ! How dull of you.
Where have you been ? "

'not at all dull, thank you all the same,"

said Sir Harry, with a pretty little cavalier
air of sauciness which he was learning to
know that Lady Ridgeway liked. '' We
have not seen any one remarkable, as far
as we know, but it has not been at all dull.
We have been exploring."

And have you explored to the extent
of finding any strawberries? How hot it
is, to be sure. Come, Fits, let us ignore
these two unworthy renegades, and let us
go into the garden and find some ices."

'' But may we not come too ? " asked
Cicely, demurely ; for she had a feeling
somehow that it would not do altogether
to lose sight of Lady Ridgeway again.

Oh, yes, do come. Of course I meant
you to come. And there, I declare if that
is not Blanche Ethridge and Jack. How
is it that we have never seen them till this
moment ? And there is Lady Ethridge
behind with Sir Edward Smythe. Oh, they
are making for their carriage. I see they

have been over by the Princess's tent.
And now they are going. There Is no use
inviting them to come and have some
strawberries with us — not a bit. But,
dear me ! I forgot — I do so want to speak
to Blanche about a plan for tomorrow.
Oh, Fits, do run and ask her to come, just
for a minute, this way."

All right, I will catch her easily," said
the gallant and obedient young guardsman.
And off he started across the grass
towards the Ethridge barouche, which
stood a little way down the long row of
close-packed drags and carriages.

Lady Ethridge had just reached It when
Captain Fitzarthur arrived at the same
point. He raised his hat, and turned to
speak to her, and to her daughter also.

'ris Blanche coming ? " said Lady Ridgeway,
pausing to watch eagerly what happened,
as Captain Fitzarthur delivered his
message. 'ris Blanche coming ? Yes, Jack
has turned with her ; that is capital. And

Lady Ethridge has got Into the carriage to
wait ; that is just what I wanted. I love
not that austere dame. And Fits ? why
he is joining somebody else, and is talking
to them, the fiend ! he is not coming back."

''He will not linger long, I dare say,"
said Sir Harry, smiling with a bright,
amused glance towards Cicely, as the three
stood together there, awaiting the approach
of Jack and Lady Blanche Ethridge, and
cooling themselves pleasantly in the evening
air. It was sultry and still now, and
suggested idling and loitering under the
trees upon the soft turf.

"Look ! Fits is coming," said Sir Harry,
presently.

"Good boy!" Lady Ridgeway murmured,
and with a tender cadence in her voice, as
if he were her dearest and most hopeful of
sons. "Ah, now this is all right at last.
I want to consult him, and I must talk
over tomorrow with Blanche."

And on Wednesday ; please do not

forget, Lady Ridgeway, that on Wednesday
you are coming to tea with me. And will
Lady Blanche come ? because, you know,
that Jack "

We will ask her," said Lady Ridgeway,
emphatically. " And Jack also, of course —
poor Jack — ah ! Blanche, how good of you
to walk all this way to me. Look, dearest,
will you come on Wednesday and have
tea with your Jack and Sir Harry ? "

With Jack ? " She glanced round at
him, where he was waiting silently and
rather demurely by her side.

'' I mean that Jack is coming also, of
course, to take us to Sir Harry Wynn's."

'' To eat strawberries and Stoneshire
cakes. Lady Blanche, which my old housekeeper
will be proud to manufacture for
you," Sir Harry put in, with a courteous
bow and smile as the young lady turned
towards him inquiringly.

Sir Harry did not altogether like Lady

RIdgeway's method of pitching his invitations
at her friends' heads !

Blanche Ethridge looked very handsome
this afternoon, and the warm tints of her
rich colouring were glowing now in the
soft slanting light of the sinking sun. But
she looked nearly as grave and disconsolate
as Jack did, and the fine spirited eyes that
now turned upon Sir Harry were glistening
with unusual softness, as if laden with
unbidden and unshed tears.

The fact was, she had been having a
long scene with Jack all through that
bright afternoon, and the contest in her
proud heart between the world, with the
pomp and glory thereof, and those precious
few things which, according to Cicely, cannot
be bought, had been fierce and strong
that day; and Lady Blanche had nearly
yielded, with all her far-famed good sense,
nearly yielded to her compassion for herself
and for Jack.

Nearly, but not entirely. The proud
young head was still held unbending
high before him, and the heart steeled
hard against such follies as romance.

But the combat had given her eyes and
her fine eager face softness for the time
being; and Sir Harry met the glittering
eyes with a softened glance In his own.

Will you not come and have tea with
us, Lady Blanche ? "

Yes ; I will, with pleasure."

I am so glad."

There was more gravity In her expression
than the occasion or the engagement
demanded, and Lady RIdgeway laughed
merrily and a little loud. She was rather
cross and Impatient, for she had a word to
whisper to Blanche on quite personal
affairs.

'' One would think he was Invltlne her
to his funeral," she cried. " Eh, Blanche,
what an air of gravity you have. Look

here, listen to me a moment. I have
something quite a secret to say ; don't
listen, any of you. I want to whisper to
you, Blanche."

But Blanche did not turn to her quite
immediately. Standing by Sir Harry's
side, her eyes at that moment lighted full
upon Cicely, upon the young girl's bright,
cloudless, although pensive, face ; and there
was so much freshness and happiness in it
at that moment that Lady Blanche, in her
own faded, jarred, and very divided soul,
felt curiously and quite suddenly touched
with a sense of that brightness, and of
the completely embittered sweetness that
beamed so very evidently from Cicely's
young awakening heart.

If she could only feel as did this child,
for one undisturbed and entirely satisfied
hour ! She bent suddenly towards Cicely.

I have not met you, have I, before today
? " she asked.

** No, Lady Blanche ; how are you ? "
'' I am tired, and weary, and dead sick
of it all, as one is generally after a long

Hurlingham afternoon ; and you ? "

''Oh, I have thought it all so delightful!"
"And so has Sir Harry Wynn ? "
So have I," said that young man, emphatically,
looking with laughing and defiant
gaze into Lady Blanche's eyes.

He liked her even better than Cicely
did already, and answered her challenge in
his own cause : ''So have I."

"Well, it is nice to be young ! So was I
three years ago, but not new to it even
then as you and Miss Cicely are. May I
come to see you ? " she said suddenly,
taking Cicely's hand again and looking
wistfully into the girl's face. " I should
like to have tea with you some day, as
well as with Sir Harry. May I come ? "

Oh do ; I should like it so very much.
How nice of you," said Cicely, enthusiastically,

for she had always thought Blanche
Ethrldge delightful, and had wished she
might have her for a friend.

May I come tomorrow, then ? "

'' Yes ; how charming of you — do."

"Well, at five o'clock, when everybody
else is wandering round Achilles, I will
come. But," she continued impatiently,
'' you will have Sir Harry."

Cicely coloured, and for a moment looked
rather shocked and annoyed.

Had he heard Lady Blanche ? ' she
wondered. Apparently not, for he was
looking the other way. He left her to
answer, at all events. It was not his
habit, nor his right — not yet, at all events,
while the world encircled Achilles — to
repair for quiet cups of tea on a Sunday
to Prince's Gate.

Cicely was, meantime, left to answer, ashe
seemed not to hear.

'' No," the girl said presently and very

quietly. " No, we shall have no one there.
Belinda does not like any invitations to be
given for Sundays. But she will be glad
to Sq you''

Belinda is an old dear," said Lady
Blanche, emphatically. '' So tomorrow at
five o'clock I shall appear."

And, Blanche, perhaps you will now
attend to me for an instant," exclaimed
Lady Ridgeway, somewhat indignant at
being unnoticed so long. '' Attend to nne.
I sent for you — sent Fits running after you,
my dear — and all this time you will not
listen to me. I want to whisper a word in
your ear. And there is Lady Ethridge
frantically gesticulating ; and it is too late,
far too late for us to have our strawberries.
It is dinner time and we must be getting
home," she continued emphatically, and in
an irritable tone. " Listen, Blanche " — and
she drew her friend aside for a whispered
conclave, of which only short sentences

could be heard, such as ' Fits coming to
luncheon ; ' ' Yes, tomorrow at two ; ' ' and

Is coming ' (the name was unheard) ;

'and we must have a fourth;' ' yoti will
come — yes — ? then that will do ; you area
darling ; good-bye, my love, until then.'
'' There Is your mother getting frantic,
child." Lady RIdgeway added this aloud
at last, speaking suddenly In a raised tone.

*' Oh — ! good-bye to everybody," cried
Blanche, as she started off, almost running
across the green sward — with Jack, as
ever, by her side.

'' How will that end ?" said Lady Ridgeway,
as she turned round to scan the crowd
for her own carriage.

VOL. If.

CHAPTER XL

MUSIC IN MOONLIGHT.

That evening, returning late to town,
leaving Cicely at Prince s Gate and dropping
Fits at his club, Sir Harry drove
eastward with Lady Ridgeway, until he
reached the little ' diggings ' (as they where
called) in St. James's Street where Jack
Fielding lived.

There he was to dine with Jack, and
have a late friendly repast ' sans bacon,' as
that young gentleman said, and then together
they meant to go later on and seethe
new burlesque at the Gaiety.

But when the two young men had
dined, and had talked over the events of

the day ; and over Lady Ridgeway and Fits,
in a light and airy manner; and when they
had rested after the fatigue of the drive
from Hurhngham, and had Ht their respective
cigars, it was found that neither of
them cared to go to the Gaiety that night,
nor yet to any of the many parties which
were open to their choice.

Lady Blanche would not be at any of
them, nor yet Cicely Browne ; and so it
happened that when Sir Harry said — ■

Fact is, Jack, I half think I will go
home," his friend accompanied him to the
open door, and finding it was a glorious
moonlight night, he took his hat and
strolled along with him by the edge of
the Green Park.

The stars were glimmering softly over
palace and city ; and Jack walked on
and on until he entered Hyde Park and
presently found himself just at the gilded
Memorial, not far from Cicely's house.

On they walked these two friends,
smoking languidly, musing, often silent,
occasionally exchanging words.

For silence is the privilege of friends,
and is oftentimes far more expressive than
any speech, — especially when the heart is
too full for utterance with feelings all too
deep for words. So these two felt now.

They remained silent, for memory was
busy with both of them.

Men do not often talk of their Move
affairs,' though they may chatter readily
of many women whom they do not love.

You have come the whole way, old
fellow," said Sir Harry, at length breaking
the silence as they passed along the top
of Queen s Gate and reached the Gloucester
Road. "And it is a good bit of a
walk from St. James's Street. You must
go back in a hansom. Jack, I expect ;
but come to my den first and have a
seltzer and another cigar ! "

*' Shall I ? It Is getting late, is it not ? "
said Jack, meditatively; "but I don't mind
the walk." *

'* It is a glorious night," said Sir Harry ;
"but come In, it is not a bit too late. Why,
it is not eleven o'clock yet. Come along,
Jack, come home for a bit with me — do."

They had reached Surrey Place, when
the Miss Prims were just closing their
windows, and when all the quiet neighbourhood
was thinking of bed ; when all
the flowering and sweet-scented shrubs
were sending forth their delicate aroma
Into the still air, and when Sir Harryss
French casement — opening out upon the
little balcony, full of verbena and delicate
heliotrope — which last flower he had lately
specially ordered to be sent to him from
home — was almost the only casement still
open to the soft night breeze, revealing the
shaded lamp and the low smoking chairs
waiting him within.

'' How jolly the little place looks," said
Jack, quite sentimentally. " I am so glad,
Wynn, you came to live in this quiet little
nook up here."

'' Yes ; it suits Mrs. Floy and Ronald
infinitely better than St. James's would ;
and I think it suits me quite as well."

Ronald sprang upon them with ecstatic
joy as they both entered, and Sir Harry
raised the two great shaggy paws to his
shoulders.

You dear old faithful boy ! have you
had a dull day ? What between politics
and polo London is in your opinion rather
a bore than otherwise, is it not, Ronald ?
You like the country best — that Is it, down
old boy — that will do ! that will do ! Walk
in, Jack. Ah, I see they have given us a
light ! "

The lamp burnt softly in the small,
pleasant settlement ; it was placed on a
table in the back room, where the window

opened on to the garden filled with jasmine
and with flowering lime.

It stood upon Sir Harry's small writing-table,
where a day's correspondence was
waiting the young member for Arch
Aubrey ; correspondence that spoke of
business at home, and that required attention
— besides a dainty and more ornamental
correspondence that spoke of engagements
pleasant, though quite as pressing as
any more serious business ones could be.

Sir Harry turned to these, whilst Jack
went into the inner room and turned
towards the small piano.

"Sing 'For Ever, and For Ever,' please,
like a good fellow," Sir Harry called to
him, as he saw him raise the lid of the
piano and look round him for a chair.

Oh, ask me for anything else than
that ! " replied Jack, with some bitterness.
'* I sung it with Blanche's accompaniment
last night ; not that, please."

"Well, anything you like, old fellow,"
Sir Harry called out from the inner room,
with some astonishment, for he had immersed
himself now in his letters, and
Jack's tone only had reached him ; he had
failed to catch the sense of his words.
** Anything you like, I am sure ; play whatever
you fancy, my dear boy, I am sure to
be equally pleased."

And soon the Miss Prims — who were
just slipping into bed, and had tied their
night-caps, in the most careful, if not
most becoming fashion — hastily put on
their dressing-gowns, and came to the
window once more. For there stole
from behind the flowers and from within
the open casement of Sir Harry's room,
the soft notes of a sweet-toned voice, and
the low, tender accompaniment of a
passionate German song.

One after another, for nearly an hour
that night. Jack sang softly his sweet

liede7^y while Sir Harry dreamt over his
letters with thoughts wanderings far afield

o o

from his constituents' petitions.

While the Miss Prims listened sentimentally,
and actually forgot to go to bed ;
while Mrs. Fruitage at Number Six
declared that ' these young gents were
really awful ; ' and while Mrs. Floy
hearkened in a semi-doze, and brushed
away many an imaginary tear — Jack sang
out like a true nightingale, sang out into
the quiet shadows of the night, until the
echoes of his musical voice rang up and
down the little street, and Surrey Place,
with its scented gardens, seemed quite
filled with melody on that sweet summer
night from end to end.

And I, too, opened wide my lattice and
listened with all the rest. For, indeed, that
was the very first I ever heard or knew of
those two friends who were together so
often in Surrey Place.

The first I heard of those two — with
whose story throughout that year's season
I was later to become so intimately
acquainted, as to be enabled even to
chronicle it here.

That was the first I heard !

Jack sang, and sang ; and so soothing
was the strain, that I listened while the
moonlight shone clearly above ; and the
soft blue summer sky seemed to echo his
strains so sweetly that they rang in my
heart long after he had ceased, when
I closed my window as his last lovely
song died away ! It was Greg's exquisite
Ici Hebe rich — in Zest und Ewigkeit.^

I wish," said Jack, as he finished singing,
and came to the little balcony of the
back window, near Sir Harry, '' how I
wish, Wynn, that I had not made ducks
and drakes of my life ! "

But have you ? "

Pretty well I have. I do not do anything
really, you know ; nothing in the
city, I mean, and nothing at the bar goodness
knows — though I believe I really
might, if I only had the pluck to set to
work ! "

And why don't you, Jack ? "

*' Oh, I do not know. She would not
have me any the more if I were as steady
as Time."

Have you asked her ? "

Ugh ! it is not a case of asking,"
groaned Jack. " I know it is not."

I am not quite so sure that I do,"
replied Sir Harry. " I would really ask
her, Jack."

'' Ask Blanche Ethridge to marry me ;
a good-for-nothing, do-nothing, empty-pocketed
scamp like me ! Are you mad,
Wynn ? "

No — not you according to that description
; not you as you a7^e ; but as you

may be. You reform, Jack, and settle
down."

Settle down to poverty," laughed Jack,
bitterly. . '' No, no, Wynn, old fellow ; that
is not for the Lady Blanche ! "

I do not think," said Sir Harry, gently
removing his cigar from between his lips,
and puffing the fragrant smoke out into
the still air before he finished his sentence, '
I do not think you give Lady Blanche
half the credit due to her for a tremendously
plucky character, as I take her
to be. I believe she would go through
anything she once made up her mind
to!"

"It may be," sighed Jack again; 'but
then, she would never make up her mind."

'' I should try and help her to, if I
were you ; and it is a case in which you
will have to give up some things for her,
Jack!"

By Jove ! I would give up everything

for her," the young fellow exclaimed, " ordo
anything for her sake ! "

'' Well, with such a determination as that
you ought really to succeed, old fellow!
But I should go straight to the point and
ask her."

*' I have made no use of my life," said
Jack, disconsolately. " I wish I had
all I commenced it with, five years ago.
Look here, Wynn, why the deuce has
London so much less power in it for lots
of people — for you, for instance — than it
had, unluckily, for me. The same life, the
same amusements, the same attractions,
and here yoti are, smoking a cigar in quiet
placidity at an open window, when London
is full of go and racket, and every fellow
in the metropolis (except such blase, embittered
men as I) is enjoying himself; — -
and here are you, I say, who are not in
the least blase, and who have not drank
to the very dregs of the cup as I have,

just as safe as if you were at home in the
country."

Safe," said Sir Harry, calmly. *' Yes,
I think I am pretty safe; but then, you see,
it has not the same kind of attraction forme.
I like it all immensely. Jack ; but I
should prefer very much living at home."

'' But why ? "

'' I cannot tell you why this life does not
attract me more. I like lots of things in
it; but everything is somehow so fresh and
cheery and bright in the country. But you
would disenchant me with London even if
I did care for it, Jack. If I listened to
you, — and believed that you were saying
what you really feel — eh ! you would
like to make me take your cynical view
of it, and make me drink with you to the
bitter dregs below the sweet waters, before
I have got to the end of my first season.
I know you think I have not gone in
thoroughly for the whole thing, not gone

far enough. But I think you have got
yourself partly to thank for that, Jack. Yes,
perhaps I have not studied altogether in
vain with you, Mr. Philosopher; and possibly,
quite unconsciously to yourself, you
have had a good deal to do with imbibing
me at the outset with a nil admirer view
of it all. Now, I seem impelled to turn
lecturer : — why, if you do hate these
things, old fellow, why cannot you give
the whole life up ? "

Do you think it is in me to do it,
Wynn ? "

'' I do think it is."

I have had no luck," continued Jack ;
"' not, at least, until I met you, my boy. I
have had bad luck in my surroundings ; I
mean in my pals. I have been a man about
town, Wynn, ever since I was a little chap
in jackets ; and city life came naturally tome
— the life of a flanettr on a boulevard,
or a lounger in a club. But I see it all

now. I see what a fellow really wants
when he comes to a certain stage, and I
see that others have it because they have
worked up to the point. I have spent all
my life uselessly. I wish I had joined
Fotheringham in chambers when wee left
Trinity together, as I once meant to do."

Fotheringham, the barrister, the man
who wrote that capital book last year — was
he at Trinity with you ? "

Yes. And, would you believe it ? we
were such pals ; we were, though, awfully
good friends. And I like the man still;
like him thoroughly, though I have not
spoken to him for ages, and though I do
not see him twice in a year ! "

He is a clever fellow."

Yes ; and we were to have taken
chambers together; only I went to Paris,
you see, and was caught up in a sort of
whirl of many pleasant things, and there
was an end of me; while Fotheringham

buried himself alive, as it seemed to meat
that time. He took to law and literature,
and law and literature have served
him well. And so matters have turned
out quite differently for us both, Wynn.
Fotheringham is master of Woodlands,
and is to marry Lady Roewentworth's

pretty daughter next week ; whilst I

By Jove ! why cannot somebody make
a man of me yet ? Eh ! surely I am still
young enough not to say die ? "

You did a lot for me, Jack," said his
friend, kindly, 'rand I wish I could do
anything in the world that would be any
good to you."

Oh, I did not do anything for you,
Wynn ; it was your own wise head, not L
Alas ! but for yourself, I should probably
have done very differently for you, and
have expected complacently only the usual
results. If you had gone to the bad, you
know, I should not have wondered, and

VOL. II. p

I suppose I would have watched you in
the devil's train, going down the hill
with grim resignation, and have merely
shrugged my shoulders philosophically, and
said, ' It is what they will all do.' No ; it
is not thanks to me that you have come no
croppers, Harry. No, you owe it all, certainly
and totally, to your superior self."

Not entirely so," laughed Sir Harry.
*' I am not so superhumanly superior. No,
I take it I owe more than we either of us
know yet to a certain evening in Kensington
Gardens, before I had been much more
than a week in town."

Ha ! la robe de heliotrope I " laughed
Jack.

'' Yes, that is about it," responded Sir
Harry. '' But besides this," he went on,
'you have more to do with my steady-going.
Jack, than any merit I can take on
myself."

''No, it is only your luck, old boy; your

luck all round. But I will not croak anymore
to-night, nor pour out my sentimentalizing
any longer in music, or the neighbourhood
will complain. By Jove ! it is
half-past twelve o'clock — I must be off,
Wynn ; and don't mind me, old fellow, for
it is really a tremendous comfort to come
and talk it all out to you."

Come as often as you like," said his
friend, readily. " Have another cigar. I
do owe you a lot. Jack, let you say what
you like ; and it is no merit of mine, I
know, that I have not gone in for everything
as madly as anybody else — and come
to grief, like many another fellow, before
my first season was over. It is not my
merit ; it is a good deal due to you, Jack,
as well as to Prince's Gate. I know it
well, and I do wish I could pull you
straight. Could you not give it all up.
Jack, and turn a new leaf over in time."

Jack lit a cigar leisurely, and stared

Straight Into the lamp-hight as he listened ;
then he turned to young Sir Harry, as he
stood tall and lithe beside him, his fair
sunburnt face clouded with grave anxiety
for his friend. Those bright blue eyes of
his, clear and free, as they were, both from
all expression of dissipation or the light of
false excitements, were a curious contrast
to the pain and weariness of Jack Fielding's
own.

There was but five years' difference
between the ages of these two; but to-night,
looking at them both, one so fresh, and
bright, and vigorous, the other so careworn
and almost haggard, It seemed as If
there might be five-and-twenty Instead.

** Look here," at length exclaimed Jack,
stretching out his hand, *' If you will help
me, Wynn, I will give the thing a try."

Help you — of course I will, old fellow,
any way in the world I can."

'' Well, I will think about turning over

that new leaf. You are an M.P., and
might give me a hft, you know ; and there
is Fotheringham, he would do anything he
could for me, I am convinced. So I will
really think it over, and look round it all,
for I am tired of this old life, as tired as
ever I can be ; and if there is any way
out of it open to me, I will follow it up —
I will."

'' Yes, do go to Fotheringham, and have
a talk over it : and I will speak to Mr.
Riches, our county member, tomorrow
afternoon ; and don't be so coldhearted,
old man, about Lady Blanche. I would
really give her a chance of saying * no.' "

Oh, she has said it a thousand times
already, in a thousand ways — if not pointblank,"
said Jack, dolefully. "There is no
use in me saying anything more to her."

"Try again. Jack; try again, and try
in plain downright English — for once, try
with all your heart, again."

*' I am sure It will be, with all my
heart," the other answered.

Then you must succeed."

'' You are an awfully good fellow, Wynn.
How odd it seems to have had this chat
with you. Two months ago I played the

Mentor to you by way of and now —

you turn round and show me the way in
which I should go."

And I wish you good speed. Jack,
when you commence that journey, and
fair success with the Lady Blanche."

'' Heighho ! that is another affair, Wynn.
Good-nio^ht. I will Q-et a hansom round
the corner, I have no doubt. Good-night,
I shall probably knock up against you
tomorrow."

Good-night, Jack, good-night. '

CHAPTER XII.

ON THE BALCONY.

At five o'clock the next day, Jack found
himself rather sad and disconsolate, notwithstanding
all Harry's encouragement.

It was Sunday, and he was in his usual
place, for that day and at that hour,
sauntering round the monument of
Achilles ; but he had the unpleasant consciousness
that Lady Blanche was not
among the crowd.

He could find her nowhere — let him
search and saunter in every direction. He
knew that she was to have lunched with
Lady Ridgeway In Park Lane. But he
had not heard her make that engagement

to drink afternoon tea with Cicely at
Prince's Gate — where, In point of [fact,
she had just arrived at that very moment ;
whilst Jack was wandering solitary amid
the gay Sunday crowd.

How bright and gay Indeed It had all
seemed to him a few seasons ago, and how
terribly It all bored him now !

Always the same people to meet, he felt
always the same number of bows to
make, the same Beauties to see, the same
civilities to exchange, the same compliments
to pay.

Jack was unhappy to-day, and felt the
nothingness of it all !

And this,' he thought, ' was one of the
things upon which he had spent his life.
Among such an assembly as this a few
years ago it had seemed to him to be a thing
of desire, to be bowed to by Lord Rayment;
to be touched on the shoulder by Cecil
Banger ; to be greeted so sweetly by Lady

RIdgeway, or to be beckoned to a place
beside her own by the Duchess of St.
Mars. And for all this popularity of the
crowd, this " being in favour " with the
leaders of society, and for far many more
things still more trifling and useless (as it
now seemed to him), he had expended his
youth, his substance, and the brightest,
best years of his life.

They shall not have the whole of it,
though — no, hang it, they shall not,' he
murmured to himself as, passing her Grace
of St. Mars with a bow, and declining
the still kinder encouragement of Mrs.
Fitzaddle to take a seat beside her, he
went off for a long meditative walk alone.

I will pull myself together, by Jove I
will!' he continued; 'for Harry Wynn
will help me, and Fotheringham has not,
I am quite sure, forgotten me, and — and —
well, I will talk about it — yes, I will talk
about it to Blanche tomorrow.'

Blanche was in fact herself talking
^ about it,' just at that very moment, to
some one else.

Something — quite unaccountable — had
suddenly roused up in her a keen interest
in Cicely Browne.

A feeling had come to her that Cicely
would understand and would sympathize
with her.

And she fancied, that if she only knew
Cicely well enough to talk openly to her
of their two different lives, and of their
several views and prospects, she might
gain an insight, as it were, into the younger
girl's heart and sentiments, and might even
perhaps catch, if but for the gleam of a
passing moment, a warm reflection of that
heart's brightness within her own.

Cicely Browne always looks as if she
enjoyed life,' mused Lady Blanche to herself,
' and I never seem to feel any
pleasure in it now.'

So, therefore, she had gone to drink tea
with Cicely — in obedience to a caprice and
a whim ; and she arrived in a hansom,
indeed (accompanied only by her maid),
driving up to the door just as Belinda,
walking slowly home from the church in
Ennismore Gardens, also reached Prince's
Gate. Blanche, meeting that staid lady on
the doorstep, introduced herself. Smiling
in her most genial and pleasant way, she
said, after the first greetings were over —

Of course I have often heard of you.
Miss East, and I have, in fact, once really
met you. Do you remember one day you
came into Lady Ridgeway's when I was
sitting there ? "

Yes, yes, I remember quite well,"
Belinda had assured her — with the addenda,
'' you were talking in the back
drawing-room with that very amusing
young man."

Ah ! yes, so I was — with Jack. That

was Jack, Miss East, a great friend of
Lady RIdgeway's and of mine."

As she spoke the door opened.

*' Did Miss Browne tell you ? " Lady
Blanche continued, turning again to Belinda,
instead of asking the servant any
question at all. '' Did Miss Browne tell
you that I had invited myself to afternoon
tea ? "

Belinda quickly and smilingly reassured
her —

'' Yes, yes. Cicely is expecting you ;
and I am so very pleased. Pray come
upstairs. Lady Blanche."

They walked together, side by side, up
the broad staircase, with its handsome
balustrades and soft Persian carpets, —
talking all the time.

On the first landing Belinda glanced
into the morning-room.

'* Ah, she is not here. Wise child ; the
heat of the room reminds one of the

tropics. Come this way, Lady Blanche,"
and she threw open the door of the large
drawing-room, which was cool and shaded,
and most pleasant on this warm afternoon.
Every Window was open, and the sun-blinds
without hanging low.

On the broad stone balcony, overlooking
the fresh green gardens, sat Cicely quite
alone.

She sat on a low wicker-chair, under
a little canopy of white and crimson lawn,
which, stretching above her head, threw
a pleasant shade and softened colouring
around her.

Negro, her ever-faithful companion, was
curled up on a cushion near her, and a low
tea-table stood by her side.

*' Oh, I am so glad to see you," she said,
as Belinda and Blanche entered the room.

"Yes, my dear, here is Lady Blanche,"
answered Belinda, serenely. " Now I
think this is very pleasant for you. I am

SO glad ; and I hope you have a cup of
tea for us, my dear, for it has turned
terribly hot, not a bit of shadow between
this and Ennismore Gardens of an afternoon
; and Mr. Blame's sermon was very
long, and I got a little sleepy, although
it was quite remarkably good," Belinda
rippled on placidly as she undid her
bonnet-strings, standing just within the
window, while Cicely drew Blanche out
on to the balcony, and set another little
wicker-chair for her beside the tea-table
under the cool shadow of the awning.

Yes, here I am — come with alacrity,
you see ! " said Lady Blanche. " I have
been wishing very much to come and
see you. It seems to me we have all
penetrated into your seclusion one by one.
First Lady Ridgeway, then Sir Harry,
and now I ; and next time," she added,
laughingly, '* I will bring Jack with me,
too."

'' I am sure we shall be delighted to see
him — shall we not, Belinda ? "

Yes, I am sure — certainly, any friend
of Lady Blanche's," murmured Belinda,
vaguely.

"A very great friend," continued Blanche,
with a slight deepening of her rich colour.
I will bring him some day, for I know
he is dying to come. I must introduce
him really into this delicious retreat ; and
we must present him to Miss Belinda.
But, now I think of it, she knows him
already. Do not you remember Jack ?
Yes, you have seen him. Miss East, — you
saw him at Lady Ridgeway's that day —
don't you recollect ? "

What, that very agreeable young man
who showed me the paroquet in Lady
Ridgeway's aviary ? Why, Lm sure we
should enjoy his visit extremely — I am
sure of it indeed."

'then Jack shall come," affirmed Lady

Blanche, decisively, sitting down on the
low chair by Cicely's side.

Now," she exclaimed, 'have you a cup
of tea ready for Miss East ?"

I have," said Cicely, with a quiet,
amused smile at her enthusiastic ways ;
'' and here Is a cup for yourself. You must
put in the proper quantity of cream and
sugar — just as you like it. Lady Blanche,
will you, please ? "

I will — many thanks. Oh ! I am glad
to have some tea, and so enchanted to be
in peace, too. I am so tired after all that'
gabble of Lady RIdgeway's Sunday men ! "

Cicely laughed as Belinda repeated, with
an air of disapproval and amazement —

'' Sunday men ! "

'' Does she have quite a separate set for
Sundays ? " asked Cicely, presently.

"Oh no, not altogether. There is
always the special favourite, of course.
Captain Fitzarthur for the moment, as it

happens ; In a week or two it will be
somebody else. But on Sundays they
seem always oppressive to me. There Is
a force and continuance about them that
is lacking on other days — a sort of feeling
of 'still they come! I get tired of it, I
know ; and then Lady Ridgeway Is several
degrees more sentimental and ridiculous
and empress of a Sunday. She was quite
affected with the depth of her own feelings,
do you know, to-day."

And after all," said Cicely, laughing a
little demurely, and with quaint cynicism
of expression for which the other had
scarcely given her credit — 'rafter all, can
she ever really feel ? "

"In a sense — yes," said Blanche, impatiently
; and then she applied herself to
her tea.

No further explanation or analysis of
Lady Ridgeway's feelings followed, and
Cicely asked no more questions. She

VOL. II. Q

bent forward to administer a portion of
cake to her pug.

My dear, I am hot, very hot," said
Belinda, from within the room.

'will you not go up and rest, dear,"
responded Cicely, In compassionate tones.

*' I will, if Lady Blanche will excuse
me."

'* Oh, certainly ; do not think of me,
please. I hope I have not disturbed any
of your Sunday arrangements ? "

No, not in the least," exclaimed Cicely.
I always sit out here before dinner on
Sundays. I have been to church, of course,
in the morning ; and now I can Imagine
nothing pleasant than to talk to you for
the next two hours. Lady Blanche — if you
will be so good," she continued, 'ras to
stay here and talk to me."

"Just exactly what I came to do," said
Blanche, graciously ; and the two girls
looked across at each other with an enthusiastic

glow of dawning friendship in
their eyes. *' I came simply to talk to you,
and I have wanted to come for such a longtime."


I am so glad."

"And I am glad, too, my dear," called
out Belinda from the drawing-room ; 'every
glad, for now you have Lady Blanche
Ethridge's company I may really go up
and rest."

Yes, do go, Belinda dear, for the remainder
of the evening ; do, Belinda."

Well, I will, my love. It is a kind
suggestion ; and now you have Lady
Blanche I may. Ah ! I am so glad," she
added, turning to Blanche suddenly as she
came forward to the balcony, " I am so
glad you have come ; it is often so dull for
the dear young thing, you know."

But she always has you, Miss East ?"

Yes, Belinda," cried Cicely ; " how you
do talk ! "

"Ah, that Is all very well, my dear,
having me with you ; but young people
should have others of their own age to
mix with, as I often said to Mr. Browne,
your father, and to Mr. Garth, since he
died."

"And they did not agree with you,
either of them," said Cicely, laughing ;
and as far as being tired of you goes —
neither do I agree. No one could be
dull with you, Belinda — only I do wish
you would go upstairs and rest."

"Well, I am off, then. And, Lady
Blanche, you will really stay ? "

As honos as Miss Browne will let
me."

Then I think you will not go away Ina
hurry," replied Belinda, as she gathered
up her belongings and slowly departed
upstairs.

Cicely poured Blanche out another cup
of tea.

Thanks, so much," said Blanche ; 'your
tea Is refreshing, and I had felt so tired
before I came in. What a dear is Belinda
! "

Is she not ? She is the best being in
creation ; and she has been like the sweetest
of mothers to me ! "

I can quite imagine it. I think I shall
love her almost as much as you do. But
why does she not marry your guardian,
Mr. Garth ? "

Marry Mr. Garth ?— Belinda ! "

The colour started to Cicely's cheek and
ran hotly over it for an instant. It seemed
such a very odd idea. And Blanche was
so precipitate.

Blanche was eyeing her quickly and
keenly now, and with some surprise.

Is the idea so very extraordinary ? "
she asked ; '' or have I said anything very
dreadful ? Why should she not marry
him ? I have heard a good deal about

him ; but NO, — surely not, oh no ! — you do
not Intend to marry him yourself ? "

Cicely looked somewhat shocked. The
grim countenance of the head of the house
of Garth and Browne suggested nothing
of romance or marriage to her mind.

Evidently Lady Blanche knew nothing
of him, or of the whole subject in question,
or, at all events, of the arrangements of her
father's will. Certainly, Blanche had never
heard of Frank Bullion, or of any of the
schemes proposed ; and of Mr. Garth she
very naturally knew little. Only she had
deeper and wider knowledge of human
nature than had Cicely, and consequently
came to quicker and shrewder conclusions
than did that unconscious girl.

Mr. Garth seemed a curious and rather
complex fact In the general surroundings
of life to Blanche just then, as the thought
of him suddenly occurred to her. But
Cicely went on — '' He does not like me ;

quite the contrary," she said, rather sadly.
'' I do wish he would marry Belinda. I
think it is a beautiful idea ; why then she
might represent the house of Garth and
Browne instead of me. How charming!"

But do you represent it, you little
quaint, demure thing ? "

'' Oh yes, I do. Do you not know that ?
That is my destiny. I have got it all ; all
its responsibility, and interests, and dignity,
on my shoulders."

'' And its fortunes, too," said Blanche,
smiling. '' Not such a bad destiny, after
all. Miss Cicely."

Oh yes, it is ; at least, I think so. I
do not want the fortunes ; I do not in the
least care for them ; and their dignities
and responsibilities, with which Mr. Garth
is always trying to impress me, are all only
a trouble to me."

But if you happen to want to marry a
poor man ? "

That is just what is so dreadful ! I
must not do it ! "

Not marry ? "

Not marry without my guardian's
consent."

** Whew ! And it is probable his consent
will not quite go with your selection,
dear ? "

*' Quite certain," said Cicely, with a very
melancholy, but at the same time a very
decided, air. *' It is quite certain that it
will not."

And has he selected ? "

Cicely assented, with a sigh.

*sand your taste does not go with his
decision ? Have you seen the selection ? "

No ; but I am sure that my taste will
not go with it. My point of view seems
more than a hundred thousand miles away
from his. We could never agree about —
well, about a selection of that kind."

** Dear me ! now this grows very interesting

; here is a really deep complication.
But, Miss Browne, or dear little
quaint, demure, sweet Cicely — for do let
me call you so — you would not throw away
your position, and all the pleasant results
of your life, for the sake of some one
single person ? Now, would you ? "

'' I think I would," Cicely said, blushing
deeply. '' At least I know — not speaking
of any one person in particular — that I
hold fortune to be quite the smallest thing
in life. ' Caring,' if even only for a friend,
is something infinitely more precious to me
than anything fortune can buy. Oh, Lady
Blanche, I have tried and proved how
utterly powerless fortune is to bring me
anything worth having at all. All my
riches have never brought me anything I
could care about — not all my life. I have
never had any one to care for me, save
Belinda, and my little black-nosed pug !
And now, do you know, I feel quite sure

that all the things which wealth can buy
are not worth a single real heart-feeling,
a single thrill of carnot for some one —
even," she added a little pensively, " even
if you are not quite sure that you are cared
for again."

And if you were quite sure."

*' Then I think one could be so happy,
that no poverty could take away from,
nor no wealth add to, the feeling," said
Cicely, with composed and unquestionable
assurance in her tone.

Lady Blanche sighed and turned away
from her, gazing from under the fringe of
the balcony tent out towards the green
trees beyond.

Then she shook her head. '' I wonder,"
she hesitatingly said, and then paused once
more. " I wonder If this view of life is
right ? — I fear it is a very youthful and
romantic view to take of it all. And —
how odd It Is, how we have reached this

subject ! For it Is the very one on which
I wished to talk to you, — on which I felt a
sudden impulse to talk to you yesterday
afternoon."

'' What — ? Of my heavy Inheritance, of
the wealth of Mr. Garth's and my father's
firm ? " asked Cicely, a little surprised.
She felt there was something curiously
sympathetic to her In Lady Blanche's
manner and tone, and she was inclined to
talk to her, or Inclined to listen to anything
she might have to say. But she was
a little surprised, notwithstanding. " Did
you come to ask me, Lady Blanche, how I
liked It all ? "

'' It almost seems as If I had, does It
not ? But no — no, that is not exactly
what I wanted to say. You look so happy,
Cicely."

But it is not the wealth of the firm of
Garth and Browne that makes me feel so,"
she answered smiling.

"No?"

No, certainly not. But, Lady Blanche,
really, all my wealth, as they call it, and
my heavy concern in the old firm, is not
an Interesting thing to talk about, — I try
to forget it as much as I can."

But it approaches what I want to say,"
said Blanche, persistently. '' I want to ask
you — now may I ? Do you think — really
think — after a lifelong experience of
wealth and all that it can bring, do you
really think that the best things in life
cannot be bought with money ? "

'* I do, most certainly."

And does your happiness — for I see
you are happy — does it come, then, from
quite another source ? "

If I am happy," said Cicely — " and I
do think that I am — I am quite sure that it
must come from just the same cause that
may bring happiness to the peasant, the
poorest peasant on a wild hillside. I do

not think there is any difference between
us in that respect, do you know. It is like
the sunshine, it falls quite equally upon us
all — do you not think that about happiness?
about the only real kind which is an
indestructible ' something ' within ourselves.
For my part I am happy — first, because
it is my nature, in spite of everything, to
be happy ; and, secondly, now I am
specially happy," she added, a little sadly.
Well, perhaps, for all I know, without
any good or substantial cause at all ! But
it is not from any possession I have, but
from — a feeling."

'* And you think that particular feeling
is one of the good things of life to be had
without any money at all to buy it. Well,
I wonder."

I am sure the things which can only
be had for money do not deserve to be
called good."

"An extreme view, I imagine," said

Blanche, with meditative composure. '' But
I somehow Hke it to-day. And now for
your good things, let us see. First and
foremost, 'caring,' I suppose, as you say,
for some one, that is a pleasant feeling.
It certainly cannot be had for money, nor
(for the matter of that, unless it comes
naturally) for anything else ; and then love,
love in return. Cicely ! Ah ! what say
you of it } Has life taught you that that
cannot be bought for money either ? "

'' Not if it is real love."

*rand you believe love. Cicely, to be
worth more than all other possessions ; you
think it a thing worth living for in itself .-^ "

I cannot imagine anything else that is
worth living for," said Cicely, firmly ; " unless,"
she added, with a thoughtful air,
unless it were duty — right and duty, you
know ; and that resignation to a ' must-be '
that might come — they say it does come —
after life, and all we care for in it, had been
given up."

Does It come always, then, If love has
been given up ? " said Blanche. " Resignation
and a new source of happiness
without It."

'' Yes, If our love Is given up from a
right motive," said Cicely, thoughtfully.
It must be hard ; but I am sure it does."

'' But not when poor Cupid Is given up
from a wrong one — a motive In any way
false."

'' Oh ! Lady Blanche, what motive could
make one give up love if we had once
found it ? " Cicely answered, with passionate
eagerness. " What motive — save
some stern duty, that demanded sacrifice
with a voice stronger — than even love
Itself?"

'' Duty," murmured Blanche, slowly. *' I
wonder what is duty. Oh, Cicely, — I may
call you Cicely, did you not say so ? it is
such a sweet, soft name."

'' Yes, certainly, do call me so. I like

some people to call me by my name — and
so few people do."

Then I may ; and you call me Blanche.
Listen, Cicely, dear, sweet little friend, I
want to talk to you about all this. Why
are you so sympathetic to me, I wonder ?
Why do I want so much to talk to you ? "
continued the elder girl. '' Who can account
for these things ? I think it is because
you see life from such an unconventional
point of view, because you do not measure
everything with exactly the social line that
we. do. And I am sure you would never
act as I am acting, feel as I feel, and do as
I am doing at the present time. No, I am
sure of it, you would never love him,
utterly and desperately as I do, and yet bethe
ruin — the complete ruin of Jack ! "

Oh ! Lady Blanche."

*eyes, the ruin; the boy loves me. Cicely.
Yes, I have got his love, and I toss it
away from me day by day, evening by

evening, and season after season. For the
last three years and more I have been
doing it, discarding him, just as I have
tossed away the faded bouquets he has
brought me fresh and beautiful every night
I have gone to a ball. And yet I love him ;
I love him despairingly, little friend. It is
true — it is all true ; and is it madness,
Cicely } What do you say ? "

'* You will be sorry for it some day, I
am afraid. I think you v/ill, I must say."

'* Do you think I shall ? Yes, yes, I
think so too. Cicely. I think it is probable
quite certain, in fact. For never, never,
will I love any man as I love my Jack."

But well, then, my dearest," began
Cicely, eagerly

*' Ah ! we should be so poor, so terribly,
so superhumanly poor," interrupted
Blanche ; " it would be madness, far worse
than madness, to marry him, dear. Better
for us both just to stay as we are ; only

VOL. II. R

one cannot stay, one must 'go on ' somehow."


But would you mind so very much
being poor ? "

Not for myself so much," said Blanche,
throwing up her small proud head. " I
think I could face most things, as far as I
am myself concerned, if I had Jack. But
it is what the world will say, Cicely — one
hates to think of it. And then, oh, then,
there are so many things one would like
to have which would be impossible if one
were poor."

I cannot really fancy anything one can
care for apart or separate from those one
loves," said Cicely, in a low tone.

'' There is a good deal in that," replied
Blanche, ruefully. " I know if I were
married now — to any one else, I mean —
and if I saw Jack, just hanging about
the ball-room in his old usual way, I am
sure I should care for nothing in life in

comparison with a word from him. And
if I saw him, as I fear I should, going
lower and lower down into the mire, in
which he is even now fast sinking, I would
always think of these three happy seasons
we have had together, and I should be
miserable because I had not married
him — and that I know."

Then why do you not marry him ? "

How can I ? Ah, Cicely," she presently
continued, " it is all very well for
you. You theorize very prettily on the
subject now. But look at these rooms of
yours, and these large, delicious balconies,
and your victoria and your splendid horses,
how could you give them all up ? "

I have had them always," replied Cicely,
*' and I can assure you I did not know
what people meant by being — well, really
and intensely happy until — as it seems tome
— just the other day."

** And then you were happy ! — when i* —
when you got your new set of diamonds ? "

No, no ; I always knew that I was to
have them. No, it is quite another feeling ;
something I must not tell you, and that
you could never guess."

I think — I think I could," said Blanche,
smiling with an arch glance at her. '* But,
it is happy for you. You need not separate
the two. Cicely. There are the
diamonds safe in your possession. And
you may — you can, accept the man you
love, when the hour comes, dear, and keep
your honour and glory as well into the
bargain."

Not my wealth ; and I suppose you
mean my honour and glory by that. That
is just what I know I shall not keep."

But why ? "

For the reasons I just told you — or
at least hinted to you, for the story would
be a long one to tell. But I know only
this, that I feel quite convinced that my
position and my happiness will prove two

different and separate affairs in my case
also, and that they cannot be joined together
in any sort of way. I shall have
to choose some day between the two."

"And if so, you will choose, I suppose
"

Happiness," said Cicely, in a low,
decided tone. " Yes, if it should ever
be my blissful fate to be called on to
decide."

'' And it is mine to decide now ; and yet
I cannot do it," said Lady Blanche, despairingly.
" Ah, Cicely, why cannot you make
me see it all with your eyes ? "

I wish I could," said Cicely. '' But
why. Lady Blanche — why is it that you do
not marry ? "

Because," said Blanche, '' the only
persons whom I am supposed to be
allowed to marry are Lord Atherton or
Lord Lisle. I do not wish to marry
either without any love for them ; and how

can I love them when with every sentiment
of my heart and soul I love my Jack ? "

'•' Oh, Lady Blanche — then of course you
could not."

Of course I could not — but that Is just
what I cannot get anybody to see but you.
Lord Lisle does not expect my heart, he
says, ' not under the circumstances.' But
I wonder what he does expect," continued
Blanche — " what Is left to give him ? for,
Cicely, with every bit of me I think I love
Jack."

-Then "

Then why not marry him, you are
going to say ? How can I, we should be
so poor ? "

So very, very poor ? " Cicely murmured
in an undertone. " I suppose I cannot
know how much that really means, or it
would appear worse to me."

'' It really means," said Blanche, decidedly,
pretty well all the worth of sublunary
life to us."

Then cannot two people who love
each other be happy without a great
deal ? "

"Well, we should not starve exactly for
the matter of that," continued Lady Blanche.
We should have enough to keep body and
soul together ; but then — one appears to
get the necessaries of life by nature, it
seems to me ; one never take them into
consideration at all when thinking of one's
incomes. Of course I have a pittance of my
own settled on me by my dear grandmother ;
and Jack, I know, has a wee thing somewhere,
that comes In In dividends, which
he Is always going down to the city to
obtain ; but that goes, I believe, in cigars,
and I fancy is not enough even to buy him
gloves. He wears such beautifully fitting
gloves ; and then, there is his tailor — for I
know I should not at all like Jack if he
did not wear a good coat."

Oh, how can you say so ? "

*' No, I should not ; and then there are
his hats — Lincoln and Bennett's. I know
they are expensive, Cicely ; and Jack is
continually requiring a new hat. Could
you go and marry a man — whom you
loved ever so intensely — if your imprudent
marriage was simply the cause of him
wearing a cheap old hat in the end ? Oh,
Cicely, there it is, you see ; and I am sure
Jack would feel just the same towards me
if I had to wear ready-made dresses."

I do not think he would."

'' Oh yes, he would. But I might get
the better of that. I tell you what it is,
Cicely, I should go to Whitely's. Have
you ever been there ? "

No, never. But why to Whitely's ?
What do you mean ? "

Ah ! because all the young wives who
make poor marriages do go to Whitely's,
my dear, for there they get such pretty
things so cheap. Not that I ever bought

any, you know ; but I will tell you who
took me there, if you like."

'' Who, dear ? "

It was Kathleen O'Brian," continued
Blanche, most seriously. *' You know she
did it — she would do it — she made a love
marriage with her own cousin, Lord
Desmond O'Brian's son ; and he is at the
bar, just as Jack is — and for years and years
he did nothing ; but now he works hard,
and he is doing very well. And, Cicely,
of all the people I know in our big
Babylon, Kathleen O'Brian is the very
happiest. Yes, she is ever so much
happier than I am ; of that I am sure."

And she has married for love ?"

Yes, for love, and for nothing but love.
Of course it was very foolish, and imprudent
; but she gets on. She works and
manages beautifully, and gets as pretty a
dress from Whitely's, I tell you, — as I
can, even for three times the money, from

Madame de Rouge. So that Is just It, you
see, Cicely — and when I look at Kathleen,
and see how happy she Is, I often feel
tempted, sorely tempted, to marry Jack."

I should have thought you had the
courage for anything — or, at least, for anything.
Lady Blanche, that was really right
and good."

"Yes, I have courage until I think of
Jack in a bad hat, and then I feel terribly
dismayed. Then, there Is my mother, too !
she will not hear of It, — If I married him it
would be a very great blow to her. But I
am sure I need not let that altogether
influence me ; for If I marry Lord Lisle, I
know it will be much worse for her In the
end ; for I should become such a bad — ah !
such a bad woman — that I am certain I
could be a good daughter no more. Not
that I am one now, I am afraid ; only I do
my best now — and I should then feel that
I could never forgive her If she had thus

quite Spoilt my life ; and I know she
would become fond of Jack, Cicely. No
one could go on always hating" him."

Oh no, I am sure not ; but then I
wonder which is the right after all, — if
your mother wants Lord Lisle ? "

Ah ! you must not go round with a
fresh argument on the other side of the
question, backing up the forces against
Jack. Oh, Cicely, do not vere round like
a weathercock, now."

No, I am not veering round, only if
your mother wants it "

My mother does not realize or know.
It cannot be right to do what would make
me a bad-hearted woman."

•' Ah ! I think you are unduly hard in
anticipation upon yourself."

No, I am not. I feel I have plenty of
evil in me, and so has every one for that
matter. We are all made up of good and
evil ; circumstances often develop the one

or the other. I might become very wicked
as Lady Lisle, I feel convinced ; and who
knows, Cicely dear (if I do the other
thing instead), but I may yet become an
exemplary domestic angel like Kathleen
O' Brian, and make a man of Jack."

It would be worth trying, if only for
his sake," said Cicely, softly.

Yes, and just for his sake I often
nearly give in. It is something, do you
know, to feel a man's destiny in your hands
to the extent which I know surely that
Jack's fate is in mine."

Something worth living for to make a
true use of such a power, Lady Blanche.
It would be a work worthy of your real
self, your best and deepest self, to save
that life by the sacrifice, for love's sake,
of all the world holds dear for you," and
Cicely lit up with a new and eager enthusiasm
as this view of it broke afresh over
her now.

"Between you and Kathleen," said Lady
Blanche, smiling, with a sudden new sweet
light coming over her own face, too, as
she stood up to take farewell of Cicely,
and glanced down upon the younger girl.
Between your unparalleled romance of
sentiment and theory, and Kathleen's more
practical example, I believe I may end in
making the sacrifice, dear, some day, for
my life is becoming a weariness to me from
the conflict going on continually, and from
the difficulty of seeing my way."

** I hope I am advising you rightly,"
said Cicely. " But I cannot help saying,
think of it ; think of all you might do for
him ; how you may render another life so
happy as well as your own. Try and see
it with the eyes only of your better self"

'' Ah ! my better self. I wish it would
always keep the upper hand. For Jack
does belong to the best self, Cicely, only I
cannot always listen to him."

** Why not?"

'' Well, when I am at balls sometimes,
you see, and people come crowding round
me, then I feel the price at which our
world holds position. And then I feel as
if I could marry Lord Lisle, and rest
satisfied with the prestige his rank would
bring. But then, Cicely, in the morning,
working in my little greenhouse among my
flowers, with the fresh, sweet air blowing
in upon me, I dream of Jack always, all
that time, as I work with my little trowel
and spade, and with my big leather gloves
on ; and I think of all those songs of his
about love in a cottage. And then again
I feel as if I could be very, very happy
just in the smallest bit of a cottage
garden, even if Jack were nothing but
the gardener, and if I had to work all
day long in my leather gloves. Is it not

odd ? and yet "

And yet," repeated Cicely.

**I suppose I may yet be the Viscountess
Lisle!"

Oh, no," exclaimed Cicely.

Oh, yes, dear. My mother would say
you are a bad counsellor," said Lady
Blanche, playfully. *' I must go away, and
not listen to you any more."

Think over all we have sid, at all
events," Cicely replied then ; *' because I
do like you, and I feel so sorry, so very
sorry for Jack. Oh, dear Lady Blanche,
let me plead on which ever is the side really
of your better self, of your real, deep,
loving-hearted self. I suppose some things
are foolish — I suppose one must not msirry
everybody one loves ; but surely in your
case it is not entirely foolish, only in some
points of view."

'just so, you little romantic dear thing.
It is not foolish as you put it. It is only
all ozir ambition set against what the world
terms moonshine — only a position set
against a heart."

You will regret It If you marry for
position only, dear, dear Lady Blanche."

Ah ! that Is precisely what my mother
says. If I marry for fancy, and not for
wealth. Well, we shall see. And now'
farewell, my little sweet demure friend. I
am so glad I have found you, and you
have been an Infinite comfort to me. It Is
nearly dinner hour, I declare ; " and Lady
Blanche stooped down then, and pressed
Cicely's cheek lightly with her lips In a soft
farewell.

*' Good-bye," said Cicely, a quiet, tender
smile playing over her face, and a grave,
wistful look coming Into her eyes, for a
moment then.

'' Good-bye." But she kept Blanche
lingering for an instant longer as she held
her hand.

'' It is so nice," Cicely said, at length,
gently, *' to have a friend, a real friend."

'' Very nice, dear," Blanche answered,

cordially, as she again kissed Cicely's soft
warm cheek. " And I am sure I have
found a real one in you. You give me an
example ! Make a start on some quixotic
journey before the end of the season, and
I will follow after ! "

And then with a bright, merry laugh,
before Cicely could retaliate, she was gone.

VOL. n.

CHAPTER XIII.

AH ! THE GOLDEN DAYS.' *

It was some time after this before the five
o'clock tea came off, at which Lady Ridgeway
and her party had promised to be
present in Sir Harry Wynn's rooms.

That tea was not drank for some time
after the long conversation reported in the
last chapter.

The fact was, so many engagements
crowded quickly on them all just at this
time. It was found impossible, to begin
with, for the whole invited party to come
back in time from the Duke's, as Lady
Ridgeway had proposed in fixing the
original day. And without the whole

group of friends the proposed little festive
gathering in Surrey Place would have
been incomplete.

The tea, therefore, was deferred from
day to day, and from week to week, and in
the interval affairs progressed rapidly in all
directions, and many things occurred.

First of all it must be reported that
Sir Harry Wynn Aubrey Wynn became
gradually, but very certainly, a very
fashionable young man.

He was invited simply everywhere, and
little more need be said. He was truly
bien repaid ; and within those few weeks
he went to every kind of entertainment
that social London could afford !

He dined with Prince Richard, lunched
with the American ambassador, went to
the Guards' ball, and to all Mrs. F — 's
tableaux. He flirted mildly with Lady
Violet Making, under the chestnuts, at
various breakfasts at Making Park. He

betted moderately on the Cup Day at
Ascot, and on several other occasions besides
; he lost and he won pretty evenly at
such scenes, but the amusement did not
fascinate over much ; and as to other kinds
of betting, he certainly lost one night at
cards so utterly and irretrievably (for the
moment), that he felt as he came back to
Surrey Place that night a wiser and much
sadder man. It was only, fortunately for
the scant acres of Arch Aubrey — only on
this one night.

This thing did not fascinate him either ;
and he was quite disgusted with himself
over the results. He paid up, kept one
horse instead of two for the remainder of
the season, and never in such form played
again. The one horse he kept was the
good broad-back cob, and on this he rode
continually morning by morning in the
Park.

He went often to the Opera of a night

before going to meet ' some one ' at a
couple of balls, and as (with all this) he
was seldom absent from his place in the
House of Commons on any occasion that
it was really expected of him to be there,
it may indeed be said that he was fairly
drawn on with the bright stream ; and that
he was doing London thoroughly, — burning
his candle at both ends at once !

But then he was young and vigorous,
and quite fresh to the whole thing. It
had no feeling of the treadmill for him.

It was his first season, and all was fresh,
and bright, and delightful, if not as overwhelmingly
fascinating as it proves to so
many.

He went here and there, enjoying himself
in a pleasant, hearty kind of way: from
drawing-room to drawing-room, tasting
one variety of pleasure after another, seeing
everything that was to be seen, doing
nearly everything that was to be done;

and always fit and ready, in good spirits
and in good heart ; seldom doing anything
which were better left undone, because
(besides good principle and high standards)
he had Inherited that excellent thing, a
fine taste ; and therefore, ' good form all
round ' was what everybody declared him,
in different sorts of phraseology, on all
sides. For, it was a curious fact that this
particular description of him, ' good form '
quoted, as it was, from Jack Fielding's
first account of his coming, to the Pall
Mall clubs — this description stuck to him,
for it seemed always exactly to suit.

So Sir Harry, flitting to and fro, went
through a good deal of life of many kinds.

He carried a brightness of his own
about with him everywhere, and it was
easy to see that he intensely enjoyed his
first season in town.

In truth, he was very happy — and from
another cause, moreover, besides all that

o

have been said. Besides all he did, all he
learnt, all he heard of men and things and
their busy doings In London life, from the
stately piles of Westminster to Kensington
and little Surrey Place ; besides all the
many varieties of scenes and places that
came before him, there was soinethmg
particularly and personally his own —
which went on growing and developing
from bud to blossom, from flower to fruit ;
a something that ran like a golden thread
of beauty through the passing days for
him ; a something that explained his spontaneous
happiness more truly than all else
besides.

Sir Harry was frequently to be seen In
Kensington Gardens ; and It was curious
that, In the midst of so much else that
quite Irresistibly occupied him, he should
find time, day by day, to spend hours
there — watching and waiting anxiously for
the appearance of, some one, whom he had

first met In these Gardens — for the vision,
in fact, of Negro, BeHnda, and sweet Cicely
Browne.

During the hours just before dinner, or
later still, in the cool evening shades, when
(with Belinda's portly form walking beside
her in careful companionship) Cicely would
often emerge from between the tall pillars
at the door of Prince's Gate.

And it was curious how often he sauntered,
smoking a quiet cigarette, by the
Memorial, and how frequently he was found
waiting until they might turn his way, and
so give him the opportunity of coming
forward gracefully and without the appearance
of having watched for their coming,
as indeed he had done.

Belinda expressed invariably well feigned
surprise at seeing him ; but Cicely (who
really certainly felt no surprise, only gladness
and complete satisfaction at the vision
of him) soon learnt to feign nothing, and

soon came to say nothing either, but to
erect him with a soft smile of welcome as
she took his hand, and as he turned along
with them.

These were pleasant evening strolls,
after the heat and glare and dust of the
day ; and they were none the less pleasant
perhaps, because, just now and then, Belinda
became exhausted and would sink
placidly on to a vacant corner of some
well-filled seat, while the other two were
left to wander down the long green alleys
of the Gardens or across the grass towards
the round pond without her ; certainly
they did enjoy the quiet solitudes when
left 671 tete-astute.

Each time as they walked they compared
notes, as they expressed It, exchanging
feelings, thoughts, views, and aspirations
upon all subjects, and becoming continually
more mutually contented with one another
as they found how very closely they agreed.

Their views of life, their thoughts about
nearly everything, seemed to flow so
naturally into the same channel, that they
came daily and quite spontaneously to
mingle their young hearts' best and deepest
feelings in a sweet current of ready sympathy,
that daily sprang more easily and
became more pleasant to them both.

Sir Harry was the principal talker, however,
at these times.

His conversation being often quite
curiously boyish and unsophisticated, and
being generally very personal, as a youthful
spontaneous flow of confidences is often
apt to be. But Cicely never tired of it ;
she was always quite delighted to listen to
him ; and it somehow pleased her Intensely
to feel that day by day she grew to know
him more really and intimately, and that
she became daily more familiar with the
names and characters of every person he
cared about, and especially with every

detail of the things animate and Inanimate,
and of all places and scenes that had an
interest for him in his own old home at
Arch Aubrey.

Cicely felt she could have entered under
the old gateway at Arch Aubrey, passed
through the low door, traversed the hall,
and penetrated every corner of the quaint,
antiquated towers without guide or direction,
so thoroughly had she come to
know It all !

She knew all the people, too ; ' the
boys,' as Sir Harry called them, who
formed his athletic club on the village
green. She knew all about Abel Wright,
who won the cup at South Lynn ; and the
name of Ralph Thorny, who was the best
cricketer in the county, was a household
word to her ; and so indeed were the
names of all the other champions of Arch
Aubrey who where favourites of the young
squire.

ONE MAY DAY,

She knew every bend of the blue river,
too ; and she could have sketched, from
description, the old mill wheel below the
waterfalls, where Sir Harry was wont to
set his lines at night.

And she had heard much even of the
badgers, and the hawks, and the aviary,
and of all the odd menagerie of wild things
at Arch Aubrey Towers.

She grew to speak of all these things
familiarly on these quiet, sweet summer
evenings, as they wandered in pleasant
converse in Kensington Gardens or along
the Park.

His was, of the two, the nature which
gave itself forth most easily. He talked
and drew her into his own life. While as
she listened, and yielded right willingly
sympathy and ready interest, her heart
glided away half-consciously from out the
more silent depths of her own life, to
mingle and flow on in the bright fresh

stream of his. She talked, indeed, much
less to him than he did to her.

They were both quite unconscious of this,
and were both quite satisfied in their happy
intercourse. But the one curious result
was, that though they met so often, though
they conversed so much, the season was
far on its way, and drawing quickly to its
close (and their romance also hastening to
its climax), while still she had as yet told
Sir Harry nothing of the circumstances of
her own life.

He had always so much to say that was
so bewitchingly interesting; so much to tell
her that she liked to hear — that in return
she had told him little !

The fact was, there was not much to
tell of these quiet bygone years of hers.
And as for the scenes in which these years
were placed, why, the scenes lay around
them and need not be described.

For Prince's Gate and Kensington

Gardens had been till lately all the world
she had known.

She never spoke to him of her guardian,
or indeed mentioned even the name of
Mr. Richard Garth, that gentleman being
still absent in Paris. She had alvv^ays a
shyness in speaking of the firm of Garth
and Browne which she represented, and
willingly she never even remembered her
wealth.

So Sir Harry knew little, and thought
even less, of anything connected with this
side of the subject, and his pleasant hours
at the time were in no way disturbed by
any memory of Garth and Browne. In
fact for a long time he never did think of
this phase of the matter at all.

The background of sweet Cicely's life,
and of her business and financial position
and belongings, never for one moment intruded
itself upon him during the happiness
of these summer weeks.

For he was personally quite absorbed in
herself! It was such a sweet, new thing in
his own life, this sympathetic intercourse ;
this congenial, pleasant companionship, so
completely satisfactory. It was so new
an experience ; it was so unexpected an
influence, and so strong.

Sir Harry felt it was all completely
perfect for many weeks. And thus, quite
undisturbed, did the friendship develop
sweetly, and so on.

For it went on smoothly for long just
then, without interruption or discordant suggestion
or idea of possible difficulty in its
perpetual continuance for all time to come.

They told each other at the beginning
of those excursions down the chestnut
alleys of Jack and Lady Blanche, and they
both agreed that in their respective positions
(as friends and confidants to both
sides) they would do all in their power for
their two friends.

But then they were both astonished to
see Jack and Lady Blanche go on after
that fit of dejection they had experienced
much in the same way. They were
astonished : for these two were new to that
sort of Hfe, and but Httle accustomed to the
philosophic manner in which love affairs
with all their ups and downs are carried on
for years, and through the vicissitudes
sometimes of many London seasons, in this
century of grace.

Love-making has got into an odd condition
in our own modern London. But
Sir Harry Wynn and Cicely had hardly
realized this as yet.

CHAPTER XIV.

A RIVAL OUTDONE.

What with one thing and another ; — what
with all the doings and interests which
have been enumerated, they were well into
July before a day came when they could
all accept Sir Harry's invitation to afternoon
tea.

Lady Ridgeway herself proposed at
last a day for that purpose. For, as it
happened, she wanted to keep Captain
Fitzarthur at home for that afternoon
in particular, having just heard a rival
another Platonic friend of his — invite
him to go to Maidenhead for that day.

Overhearing this. Lady Ridgeway had
made a gallant charge, hastily making this

VOL. II.

fresh engagement by catching Sir Harry
as he passed her in the crowded corridor
at the German ambassador's one night,
and claiming his old promise to entertain
her at tea. It was dexterously done, and
she much perplexed Sir Harry. For she
turned round with almost an injured air,
and laid her hand softly upon his arm, as
she asked him, in a suppressed tone, 'when
he meant to invite them all to Surrey
Place ? '

Sir Harry thought that she had forgotten
all about it.

'' Invite you. Lady Ridgeway ! " he said.
'* Why, I invited you weeks and weeks
ago. Do you not remember the day we
went to Hurlingham together ? You promised
to come the next Wednesday —
but you played me false ! "

'' Ah, now I recollect. We could not
get away from the Duke's as we intended,"
she said regretfully.

And you have never come since."

Ask me again, Sir Harry, or — stay-let
me ask myself. May we come now-next
Wednesday — instead of the one on
which we failed you six weeks ago ? "

Of course you may. You knows I shall
be delighted," he eagerly exclaimed, returning
her pensive scrutiny of his countenance
with a deep, long gaze into her dark
eyes — using his own too with an acquired
force which practice, and much variety of
opportunity indeed, had taught him of late.
You know I shall be delighted, Lady
Ridgeway," he repeated. " How kind of
you to propose — what you know will give
such genuine happiness to me ! "

Lady Ridgeway laughed softly and pleasantly,
and shook her Watteau-painted fan
at him playfully as he still looked down
into her pensive, melancholy eyes.

But she wanted nothing more of him for
the moment ; and Captain Fits had still to

be captured and clawed away from the
detestable siren who was alluring him to
Maidenhead.

So Lady Ridgeway released Sir Harry.

Very well, we shall come on Wednesday,"
she said conclusively ; and then
withdrawing her soft gaze from his at
length, she smiled — a quizzical little well
satisfied ripple playing over her lips fora
moment. And as he bowed and stood
aside to make way for her, she passed on.

END OF VOL. II.

Printed bY WILLIAM CLOWES AM) SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND Eccles.

OF THE

UN Diversity

or ILLINOIS

V.5

ww^^

^ ^!utc6 in Rummer time.

BY

MISS GRANT,

author of "artiste," "the sun maid," " prince hugo,
"my heart's in the highlands," etc.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. III.

LONDON :
CHAPMAN AND HALL, Limited,

^. ^ HENRIETTA STREET, W.C.

1882.

{^All rights reserved.)

CONTENTS OF VOL. III.

I. Sir Harry 'at Home' . . i

H. At Westminster . . 29

HI. Enthusiasm . . . 50

IV. 'Un Petit Souper' . . 71

V. Belinda is Dark and Deep . '^%

VI. Sunshine after Rain 118

VII. * I will protect his Name' . 15S

VIII. Cicely's views on — 'Gold' . 171

IX. A Wistful — 'Farewell' . . 209

X Daybreak with Mr. Garth . 227

XL Not 'an Engaged Letter' . 249

XII. A most Aggravating Belinda 257

Xii What, with Evening came! . 272

XIV. His Dear, Dear Name? . 279

XV. A Real Heir . . ••• 3^5

XVI. The Paradise of Romance . 312

^ ^!;etcj m Summer '^im.
CHAPTER I.

SIR HARRY 'AT HOME.*

Thus July had almost forgotten June
when at last the eventful evening came
on which Mrs. Floy made Stoneshire
cakes, and decked the little rooms with
choicest flowers from Arch Aubrey, and
made them gay with fresh, snowy muslins
to receive Sir Harry's guests.

On this soft July evening towards five
o'clock, Lady Ridgeway — who was beginning
to suffer from a certain state of senti-vol.

III. B

mental anguish, through which she invariably
passed in the course of a season's
Platonic ardour — declared that she was
ennuyee to death of everything in town,
and that the only thing which could
possibly have given her any pleasure that
day, was the prospects of this little tea at
Sir Harry's; 'at least,' as she asserted, 'it
would be something quite original and new.'

All this she had just been saying in fact
as she drove along in her barouche to
Surrey Place, accompanied by Blanche
Ethridge, that evening at five o'clock.
They arrived just as she concluded It all,
and just as Captain Fitzarthur strolled up
also very leisurely to the little gate.

He was just in time to meet them, and
to assist her descent. He bowed, and
smiled languidly, as he took the footman's
place with an accustomed air, opening
the door of the barouche, and holding
out his hand. Lady Ridgeway descended

slowly with a languid and dejected dignity,
which, odd to say, excited certainly the
admiration of the Miss Prims. Of course
they were watching at the opposite window,
and Sir Harry's party was affording them
great delight.

'* What a pretty little place, by Jove ! "
said Captain Fits, as Lady Ridgeway
alighted by his side. " An odd fish is
Wynn, to be sure, to have buried himself
in a ' bijou ' residence down here."

'not a bijou. Hush, Fits, what are
you talking about ? Remember, Lady
Blanche and I have come here to tea."

Blanche Ethridge was now descending,
and Captain Fitzarthur turned leisurely
to lend his assistance once more.

I mean In the sense In which the
house-agents use the term," he answered
Lady Ridgeway. " Do you know the
style. Lady Blanche ? An elegant bijou
residence to let in a very genteel quarter,

with hicrh art decoration, French lattices,
and a fretwork balcony, — here we have it
all ! Wdl, pon my word, Lady Ridgeway,
I declare it is a regular Kensington
Arcadia."

How absurd you are, Fits ! Hush,

here Is Sir Harry ! and there is Jack

with him too, — and Ronald. Oh, you
beautiful darling ! " she exclaimed, as the
huge brown-eyed collie ran eagerly down
the steps before the two young men, in
his anxiety to give them a noisy welcome.

Here we are, Sir Harry, quite punctually,"
she said, as she stood tall and
gracious and stately, awaiting him outside
the little gate.

He flung it open and bent over her
outstretched hand with an air of a courtier
of a bygone century — not at all In the style
of Captain Fits.

'* The Sultana is welcome indeed to my
humble threshold. Will she deign to cross

it, and enter beneath the roof of her most
obedient slave ? "

My slave, indeed ! Do you all hear
that ? What would Cicely Browne say, I
wonder, if she could hear you, eh ! and —
Ah, ' speak of an angel,' here she comes
with Belinda, to answer for herself. Yes,"
continued Lady Ridgeway, as the young
fellow raised his head at her words and
looked anxiously up the street. " Yes ;
here she comes ; but she is not within
earshot yet, as you wisely noted before
you uttered such an extravagant profession
to me. My slave, are you ? I declare I
will tell her — only I do not believe a word
of it, and will make no such idle boast."

Oh, Lady Ridgeway."

That is the truth," she exclaimed; " but
Ah, Cicely my dear, here you come.
We are in capital time, all of us, are we
not Sir Harry ? Well, and how are you
to-day, my sweet sprig of heliotrope ? "

For, Sir Harry had asked Cicely to
wear the heliotrope crepe on this day when
she came to tea with him ; and she
had not forgotten her promise, although
the request had been made some weeks
ago.

She had not forgotten ; and there she
stood just as he had first beheld her, with
the soft dainty folds of her pretty dress
falling round her graceful form ; with the
tender shades of the dark and light
heliotrope mingled together dexterously
by the skill of a Parisian artiste ; with the
little lace bonnet he had noticed that first
day, nestling above the brown fluffy
fringe on her forehead, and with her large
pensive eyes full of soft lights, and
glistening with ineffable happiness, as
she looked shyly up into his face with
a glance that spoke unconsciously a
silent utterance of love and joy.

Lady Ridgeway's raillery fell quite

harmlessly on these two as they stood and
paused one moment, while each held the
other lingeringly by the hand.

How lovely and charming sAe looks ! "
was his silent thought.

How bright and brave is /le / " she felt
with a quick, sweet heart-thrill.

Sir Harry's tea was a great event in
Surrey Place ; and at that moment, as
Cicely and he stood greeting one another,
and Lady Ridgeway's barouche moved
slowly forward to wait under the shade of
the neighbouring trees ; and as they all
stood grouped together, the ladies in their
soft-hued silks and crepes, and the young
men in their light summer suits, Surrey
Place was awake from end to end with
observation, and this gay little assembly
round Sir Harry's door was watched by
many eager eyes from every window.

Certainly it was a pleasant thing for
the young bachelor to have his friends to

tea," as Mrs. Hawks remarked afterwards
to the Miss Prims, approvingly.

These good ladies — the dear Miss Prims
had drawn the curtains across their little
parlour window, indeed, that they might
not appear to pry. But they nevertheless
watched the group opposite, of Sir Harry's
gay, bright friends, with quite a rapturous
enjoyment, — Miss Pamela especially admiring
the fine athletic form of Captain
Fitzarthur, and Miss Olivia becoming
eloquent over Lady Ridgeway's lace.

It was a real pleasure," as they remarked
to one another, when at length
they assembled round their own simple
tea board. '' A real pleasure to watch
that happy party." '' They all seemed
such nice bright young people over there ! "
*' The very sight of them," said Miss
Olivia, 'seems to do one good."

For, the Miss Prims were enthusiastic,
as all persons are, who really enjoy life.

They took a strong Interest in young Sir
Harry and his doings, and they had
watched him from day to day with an
enjoyment in all his enterprises that was
scarcely inferior to his own.

Never had they been so excited however
over the occurrences at Number Nine
as they were this afternoon. They could
hardly take their own tea in tranquillity
In turns they jumped up and down, Miss
Pamela reporting to Miss Olivia, and then
Miss Olivia taking the post of observation
in turn again. They peeped behind the
blinds, one or other of them incessantly,
the whole party opposite affording them
delight and interest quite untold.

Meanwhile in the little house over the
way Sir Harry's entertainment went on
most prosperously.

Will you not come in ? " he had said to
Lady Ridgeway, when he and Cicely had
finished greeting one another, with that

silent gaze and hand clasp, as they stood
out there on the hot pavement in the rays
of the slanting, setting sun.

Will you not all come in ? You must
feel tired, Miss East," he continued to
Belinda. " You must be tired after your
hot bit of walk from Prince's Gate. Do
come in and be refreshed by Mrs. Floy's
Stoneshire cakes and tea. Come, Lady
Ridgeway, please come in," and he turned
and walked slowly beside her along the
little flower-bordered pathway and up the
steps.

It was a lovely July evening, and Sir
Harry's little nest looked delightfully
embowered in verdure, and was almost
quite covered with clematis, now in full
bright bloom.

Rich, long sprays of purple blossoms
hung low above the doorway and over
the French windows — opening on to
the balcony, which was gay with scarlet
geraniums, also in full flower.

You know how to make things pleasant
about you, Sir Harry, certainly," said Lady
RIdgeway, laughing.

*' There Is no doubt of that," said Belinda,
opening her placid eyes in astonishment.


I like to have things pleasant," he
answered brightly ; " and at least, In such
hot dusty weather as this, I like the freshness
of flowers. In fact they are a weakness
of mine ; I quite delight in them."

So I should think," said Lady Blanche,
'' How charming It all Is ! "

Look ! " he continued, smiling round
upon her as she spoke, " all these came up
from Arch Aubrey this morning ; and I
would have sent them to you. Lady Ridgeway,
and some to Miss Browne and to
Lady Blanche also, I assure you, only I
had the hope that you were coming to
carry them away with you this afternoon."

They had entered the little drawing-room,

but as he spoke he turned back once
to greet Cicely. She came behind the
other two. For — though he had addressed
Lady Ridgeway in his last words — it
was evident, from his quick, eager glance
and smile, that for Cicely was the special
welcome to his rooms, and for her pleasure
were all his efforts for this entertainment,
his decorations, and his flowers. All were
meant for her quite especially — and Cicely
blushed from delight and admiration as she
came into the little room.

Jack had been with Sir Harry all that
morning, and together, with their united
skill and good taste, they had converted
the small, unpretending apartments this
afternoon into a perfect summer bower,
*' fitted somewhat," as they said, " for the
reception of their friends."

Every corner of the Arch Aubrey garden
had been despoiled, and not one, but quite
a van load of hampers had arrived, very

early on that day in answer to an emphatic
telegram from Sir Harry.

And so the rooms were sweet with the
odours of a fresh country garden — full of
delicious tea-roses, and tall fern sprays.
The fireplace was completely blocked up
and hidden ; the cheffoniers, backed with
their little mirrors, reflected the brightness
of the fair floral bower, and the French
windows were draped with soft tinted
muslin, — so that only the flowers and the
drooping clematis were visible from within
the room — while the view of the street
and of the Miss Prims' curtained casement
opposite were quite hidden away.

The little piano was drawn across one
corner of the front drawings-room, and on
each side of it tall branching ferns stood
in terra cotta vases, their green foliage
speaking also of the freshness of the mild
Stoneshire climate from which they had
come.

In the little back drawing-room, beyond
the curtains with which they had draped
the archway between the folding doors,
stood the round tea-table covered with
Mrs. Floy's inviting feast.

The hissing tea-urn stood aside in a
corner. It was so hot an evening that for
once the pleasant domestic music would
not have been a welcome sound.

Mrs. Floy, resplendent in a stiff grey
moira antique that had belonged to Sir
Harry's mother, and crowned with a high-peaked,
snowy cap, stood bowing with a
smiling but respectful mien beside a little
buffet, arranged just behind the archway,
waiting and ready to pour out the tea.

All was ready indeed when Sir Harry
drew Lady Ridgeway into the back room
for the little afternoon feast.

How delicious it all looks," she exclaimed.
'' But, my dear Sir Harry, we
shall never be able to face any dinners."

That will not matter for once," he said.

Besides," cried Lady Blanche, " this
sort of thing is so infinitely preferable to
any dinner in the world."

I am so glad you think so," he said ;
and he laughed softly, with a bright pleasure
in his voice, as he placed a chair for
her, and continued, " Now, Lady Blanche,
do, please, begin."

.The little round table was well covered.
There were huge piles of strawberries, —
sent up with the flowers, from the old-fashioned
beds under the grey garden
walls of the Arch Aubrey garden. There
were cool-looking glaciers of beautiful,
thick, clotted cream, fresh from the old
home dairy, and skilfully iced by Mrs.
Floy. The china was a unique tea service,
also Harry's property, — a relic of past centuries
of Arch Austrians and Wynns. It
was pretty and quaint, and of priceless
value.

It had been Mrs. Floy herself who had
ordered this to be sent up indeed, with the
cream and the flowers and the fresh picked
strawberries, when she realized that Sir
Harry was actually going to have a party
of fine company to tea.

*' He don't know all that's doo to him,
bless 'Is 'part," she had said tenderly; "but,
thank God, I does."

So she had ordered up the old service,
and had set It out to her heart's satisfaction,
with her home-made loaf and her plates of
hot, tempting cakes, and sweet, golden
butter. As to this latter delicacy be It
said, en passant, Mrs. Floy constantly regarded
It from her seclusion behind the
curtained archway with an especial and
quiet artistic pride. For, as she well knew,
its lovely golden tints were due to much
teaching from herself which the young
dairy-maid down at Arch Aubrey had
had bestowed upon her with patient zeal ;

and Mrs. Floy's own fingers had manufactured
and woven it into these marvellous
and elegant devices of flowers and shells
which looked really quite artistic and most
tempting.

The whole tea-table looked very, pretty,
and it was certainly a dainty little afternoon
repast.

The room was cool and pleasant, too,
for the sun had sank already behind the
branches of the tall elm trees at the foot
of the little back garden, and the soft
evening rays came slanting between the
thick green foliage and played among the
ivy leaves that covered the dingy old brick
walls.

There was a little porch beyond the
French window towards the back, leading
on to a person beyond. And there was a
little verandah round this last, with light
spiral columns supporting a sloping, projecting
roof Round the spiral columns

VOL. III. C

twined a jasmine, in full flower, and a
scarlet japonica — the bright colouring of
the latter mingling with the starry clusters
of the white flowers.

Low chairs were grouped around this
window, and looking out from it on to the
little green garden beyond, you might
really imagine — as Lady Ridgeway exclaimed
ecstatically — you might imagine
diet you were miles away in the tranquil
country, and never dream of being within
a stone's throw of Kensington Road.

Tea, strawberries, home-made cakes,
golden-hued butter, and fresh iced country
cream soon disappeared in a quick succession
which gladdened Mrs. Floy's good
heart.

"Sir 'Arry, God bless 'im," did the
honours gracefully. Jack was unusually
bright and lively ; for Lady Blanche was
unusually soft and gentle to him, and he
beamed in the radiance of her smiles.



Lady Ridgeway was more empi^essd than
ever in her kindness to Sir Harry, and
was indeed more charming in her own
especial way than he had ever known her
before. She was not pathetic either, but
bright and playful in her manner both to
Fits and to him, and in fact to everybody.
Until the little repast was over they
talked merrily together in a circle — but
then the scene slightly changed. They
separated. Both during tea, however, and
all through the hours that followed they
were all very happy in their different ways.

Cicely was most particularly and unutterably
happy, for somehow she seemed
to receive especially Sir Harry's unceasing
attentions and care. And quite naturally
she seemed to fall to him when they had
settled into their places and glided into
closer conversation and divided into little
groups of two.

She seemed to fall to him as If from the
powers of a fate which rules such allotments
instinctively, and he was soon devoting
himself to her amusement with
eagerness and delight, while Captain Fits
languidly responded to the pleasing
influences of Lady Ridgeway's empressement,
and sunned himself passively in the
light of her deep, eloquent eyes.

The rest of the party found also their
attractions.

Jack, who forgot to be cynical, or despairing,
or disconsolate all that evening
(while Blanche was so encouraging to him,
and no rival was near), soon beguiled her,
when tea was over, towards the back window,
where, as the sun set slowly with a
soft warm glow behind the elms, they
leant together for a long time upon
the balustrade of the little balcony; he
smoking a cigarette in a pleasant and
contemplative reverie — and for a time



almost in silence— while she pulled the
faded leaves and broken twigs from the
red japonica and the jasmine with the
unconscious ardour of a flower-lover who
cannot resist doing a bit of gardening
work when the opportunity offers.

They leant there for a long while, very
happy in their own peculiar way. Then,
Lady Ridgeway drew Fits away with her
for some time into the front room, and they
sank into two low chairs near the cur-tamed
and flowery window, and soon
subsided for their part also into repose
of person— while occasional sotto voce
murmuring alone suggested any activity
of mind !

And Cicely found herself wandering with
Sir Harry from picture to book-case, from
whip-stand to pipe-holder, and from mantelpiece
to cheffonier, examining with a
tender touch all the treasures he had had
up, for the decoration of his small residence,

from Arch Aubrey — and lending a
ready ear to his explanation of their
various uses.

Belinda, who had received the united
attention and devotion of the whole party
during tea-time, had now fallen into a
ready acquaintance with the worthy Floy,
and had actually retired with her, to
inspect the remainder of the house with
o^reat interest, and to obtain from her
the wonderful Stoneshire receipt for those
delicious and Incomparable tea-cakes. It
was in fact this desire, expressed as a
graceful compliment on Belinda's part to
Mrs. Floy, which had first opened up a
conversation and developed the channels
of sympathy between the two.

Thus the time was passed pleasantly
away by one and all of them, and before
they knew it, or half suspected it, it was
nearly seven o'clock.

Lady Ridgeway's horses had been exhibited

a long time to the admiration of
all Surrey Place, and now at last she
sprang up with an exclamation as Sir
Harry's little Sevres clock amongst the
roses on the mantelpiece rang out the
three quarters after six.

Oh, we have been here nearly two
hours ! " she said. " Sir Harry, I must be
off We dine early to-night, for I am
going to hear Albans sing in Litcia at
half-past eight."

I am so sorry," he said. '' How the
time has passed. I wish you would
come again tomorrow. Lady Ridgeway,
please."

Ah, how pleasant it would be, for us
at least, if not for Mrs. Floy. But, tomorrow
we must all meet about the
same time at Mrs. Raleigh's. Is not
tomorrow the day of her dramatic tea ? "

Yes, it is tomorrow," said Sir Harry.
'' Shall we meet '^. Are you going — and

you ? " he continued, glancing round upon
Cicely. '' Then I will go also, certainly.
I am so glad."

I had almost forgotten it," said Captain
Fits.

But," began Sir Harry again, *' I wish
you would not go away quite so soon now.
I hoped we should have had some music
during the afternoon. Jack, you lazy
fellow, you promised me you would sing."

Jack turned a happy face towards them
all, taking his arms from the balcony, and
looking round into the room.

He was very happy, more so than any
of them knew. For that afternoon he had
done a good deal !

He had told Blanche about his friend
Fotheringham, and about all he had said
to Sir Harry ; and she, somehow, had
arrived at speaking to him (much in the
tone she had used to Cicely). of her own
growing belief that people were sometimes

quite happy and contented on a very few
hundreds a year.

And although Jack dared say nothing
quite definite — not even then in answer to
her — there had been something in her
tone as she spoke of all this, that made
him wonderfully happy, and that called up
anew his resolution, that he would go once
more and talk to his old friend, Jim
Fotheringham ; that he would go on the
very next day.

Are you really going — quite determined,
Lady Ridgeway ? " Sir Harry
continued again as her stately ladyship
rose leisurely from her low chair, and
turned to say ' Good-bye ' to him — " really
going ? But, stay one moment. How
about the evening that we were to have
together at the House ?"

'' Have you got the seats, Sir Harry ? I
thought you had forgotten us, — and it all
rests with you."

"Yes, I have foot them for the twenty-seventh,"
he said — " for three ladies. Will
you and Lady Blanche and Miss Browne
come on that particular night ? Do you
think, Lady Ridgeway, that that will do ? "

"It will do capitally. Yes, of course
we will come. I am engaged for the
Dykes' ball, and for no end of other things
for that night already, but I will throw
them all over without remorse. however
of you to get three places at this
crowded time. Is the twenty-seventh to bea
good night ? What will be going on ? "

The Prince Imperial's Memorial will
be discussed."

Oh, how interesting how charming.
I am so glad. \Miat a treasure you are,
Sir Harry, I declare. When it comes to
doing anything for one, that implies exertion
in any way at all, he is worth ten
of you, Fits — yes, Fits, he is."

'• I am worth nothing, I know," said

the guardsman, placidly — " at least not in
this business. But then, you see, I do not
happen for the moment to be an M.P.
Eh — of course I am worth nothing."

And yet — no," said Lady Ridgeway,
laughing softly as she turned her c^yes
upon him. '' We underrate your value,
Fits. Five nights aijo, when the desideratum
of the whole world was the Knightsbridge
ball, you were a comfort, Fits. But
what a time you had of it, my poor dear
friend, for the whole of that fortnight,
before the event came off"

And I shall have a time of it for ever
after," he replied laughingly. ** How angry
was the Dowager Duchess of Raleigh
when I declared I could not give her ten
tickets. She had had, as it was, eight for
all her sisters and her cousins and her
aunts, and I thought it hard to give her
every one I could get hold of, just because
she happens to be my grandmothers

cousin, — and does not care a straw about
me ! I have been afraid to q-q near her
Sunday luncheons though, ever since, I
can assure you."

Poor FItz ! " said Lady RIdgeway,
compassionately. " But now, please, will
you call up the carriage, for really and
truly I viust go."

CHAPTER II.

AT WESTMINSTER.

The London season was drawing rapidly
to a close, and already town began to thin.

But in the House of Commons there
was as yet little prospect of a reldche.

There was a great deal to do, and since
the exciting elections of April very little
had been done ; and the Liberal Ministry
the strongest since the Reform Bill had
passed — were rapidly getting into those
deep difficulties of the Irish question, and
all the other knotty points which have
since absorbed them.

In all these Sir Harry strove hard to
take the interest expected of him ! Ashe

went down to Westminster every afternoon
during that busy season, and sat
upon the red benches, sometimes late into
the hot summer nights.

He had tried to take all the interest he
felt he 07tght to take, in the various debates,
and measures, and bills that came
before the House. But it had been somewhat
of a vain-trying, until one hot night
the question came on, as to whether the
Memorial to the Prince Imperial should
find a place in Westminster Abbey, or no ?

Sir Harry could never quite explain to
himself —-why ! But there had been something
in the touching and romantic elements
of this debate, which had fired him,
and he lit up on this subject with an intense
excitement and enthusiasm quite new to
his experience of the House of Commons
with all its complex and prosaic questions
of Water Supplies, Burial Bills, and
Irish grievances. Here at last was a question

which the eager and chivalrous-hearted
young member for Arch Aubrey
could understand. He almost, in fact, experienced
a Conservative reaction on that
occasion, at the part which the Radicals
played in this cause. He had been excited
over it all, indeed, for some time.
And this one point of political debate
in the session of 1880 had often formed
a theme of discussion between himself
and Cicely Browne In those Kensington
Garden walks of theirs. His eloquence
had almost worked her up to a pitch of
enthusiasm equal to his own. And It had
been at her eager request indeed that he
had succeeded In obtaining seats in the
Ladles' Gallery on the night on which this
subject would be discussed.

Sir Harry's warm young heart had
throbbed with sympathy for that gallant
young Prince, when he had fallen as a
British soldier only one short year ago.

And when the question came up In the
House, Harry thought of that evening
when he had shed hot tears all alone In
the old library at Arch Aubrey, as he read
of the brave boy — falling out there amongst
the savages — his breast pierced deep with
wounds from the Zulu spears, and his
face turned full upon England's foes. He
had felt so Intensely about It ; and now
the recollection of all . his feeling came
rushing back upon him, and all his excitement
and sympathy were aroused again.

So he had striven hard, and to his delight
succeeded In getting seats for Cicely and for
Lady RIdgeway on the night of that debate.
He had got one for Lady Blanche also,
but it turned out when the day came, that
she was unable to go. And the party
were Lady RIdgeway and Cicely only —
under care of their young M.P.

Cicely was a much more ardent politician
at all times than was Sir Harry Wynn as

it happened. She entered into all his
enthusiasm for the young Prince ; but
besides this she was enthusiastic upon
many points, and she was keenly alive
indeed to the interests of political life.
To her this first visit to the House of
Commons, under the auspices of her own
particular Member, was an event to which
she had looked forward all through that
season. For all her life long Cicely had
dwelt in London, and although her days
there had been passed so quietly, yet continually
all around her she had heard the
echoes of political strife, and the reflection
of those stirring interests had seemed to
reach her from time to time.

She had also read many political novels,
and she had entertained many quiet deep
thoughts of her own on many and various
important political questions through all
her life gone by. All these thoughts and
views she had lately imparted (in various

VOL. III. D

long talks on the subject) to Sir Harry in
answer to sundry statements of his ; and
although she was never a voluble or ready
talker, yet she spoke to him often on the
high objects and destinies which were
involved, as it appeared to her, in a
politician's life.

Cicely's ideal of a hero had been at all
times, a man, not only attractive and brave,
but a politician, an eloquent speaker, if
possible, in the House ; one who would be
strong before his fellow men, and a hero
of the people, who thought and felt and
laboured for the good of all.

Thus it was an especial cause of pride
to her that Sir Harry Wynn was a Member
of the Imperial Parliament — even though
she was forced often to acknowledge
privately to her own self that he was a very
different type from her original ideal. He
was so young ; he was so bright and sunny
in his moods and ways, while her ideal

politician had been rather serious and
grim.

It was evidently very difficult for Sir
Harry to regard many points of political
controversy with any interest at all — and,
poor fellow, she knew he had had a
seriously trying time of it during many an
hour in his place of honour, on those red
benches, throughout the season.

On that particular Friday night in
question, however, he brightened into real
excitement, and his eyes sparkled eagerly
as he met the two fair ladies at the outer
door.

Cicely had come with Lady Ridgeway
in her brougham. They arrived early
after an impromptu tea-dinner — such as
most women love — and they announced
that they were determined, and prepared,
to stay bravely throughout the debate.
They were ready, as Lady Ridgeway said,
to hold against all comers and invaders

these precious seats in the wire-fenced
gallery, won for them by the persistent
balloting of their gallant young M.P.

Cicely felt a thrill of excitement and
pleasure, and many an old thought and
aspiration rose up in her mind, as, with
Sir Harry walking proudly by her side,
she mounted the long stairs to the little
entrance of the ladies' gallery ; and many
a recollection of some favourite political
novel came back to her, as she passed
through that House, of which she had read
so many descriptions, and in which she
had often longed to have a real vested
interest through some one for whom she
cared. She had her wish now gratified, for
Some One ' for whom she did care, made
certainly a part in that august Assembly ;
and although Sir Harry was not like Mr.
Coningsby, nor any other young political
hero of her favourite Writer — still, her interest
was as deep and keen for his sake as

it could ever have been for any of them ;
and although he owned no silvery tongue
of eloquence, nor was ever in the least
likely to make a speech of any kind, — still
he was M.P. for Arch Aubrey, and a
politician even in spite of himself! As
such she was duly proud of him as they
ascended side by side to the little door.

'' Well — ! of all the holes, I always do
say that this gallery is the most disgraceful,"
said Lady Ridgeway, in a voice
calculated to dispel all illusions, as Sir
Harry held open the door for her to enter.

*' It is very small and dark, certainly," he
said. " I was rather astonished when I came
up here for the first time the other day."

'' Oh, I think it is quite delightful,"
answered Cicely however, pausing by his
side as she followed Lady Ridgeway
through the little narrow doorway, and
gazing from the highest point of the

gallery through the trellis-work of the
railing, away over the House.

'' I am so glad to be here. I am so glad
to see it at last," and she clasped her
hands together in excitement, drawing her
breath in and gazing with a deep flush
upon her cheek. She glanced for an instant
round at him. *' Oh, Sir Harry, how good
of you to bring me here to see it all ! "

There was not much to see from where
she stood — only the length and breadth of
the House, with its carved and vaulted
ceiling, and long red-covered benches; with
its galleries running down either side, and
with nothing but the heads of all the
Members, grey, black, brown, light-hued,
and bald, as the case might be, all sitting,
rows and rows of them on either side.

Do you think I shall see all the great
men ? " she whispered ; *' and will you tell
me who they are ? and, oh ! shall I hear
Mr. Gladstone speak ? "

I cannot tell you that," he answered,
laughingly. " And I am afraid you will
not see much from this place — hearing is
another thing. They tell me you can
hear really capitally from up here."

Oh, that will satisfy me."

Look then ! " continued Sir Harry; " I
will take you down there to where Lady
Ridge way has got — to the front seats, just
behind the screen. What a horrid shame
to have that screen there. I wish they
would bring a Bill in to take it away. You
would be much better without it ; and if
we looked up high enough we could see
you. But now I wonder what you can see.
You are in good time enough, at all events.
See, Lady Ridgeway is beckoning ; she
has succeeded in securing two capital seats
in front."

They walked together down the steps
now, following the way taken by Lady
Ridgeway already.

Very few ladies had arrived as yet. The
Httle gallery was nearly empty, but as
usual very dark, and very limited indeed
in space. From the front row, through
the wicker screen, however, Cicely got a
full view of the House.

Oh, how I should like to be a Member,"
she sighed.

"What — ! do you think it so very jolly .'^ "

No, not jolly ; it is not that, but it looks
so real. Sir Harry, where do you sit ? "

'' There, near the centre, in the third row,
behind that big broad-backed fellow with
spectacles — do you see ? There is my
place, looking very empty. I must go and
fill it soon."

*' And where is Mr. Gladstone ? "

** Not come from dinner yet ; but he sits
just below you. I fear you will only seethe
top of his head ! "

*' And Mr. Bright, and the Member who
is going to speak, you know — I forget —
who is it ? Yes— Mr. B— s. Is he here ? ''

Not yet. There is Bradlaugh, that
man with the massive, close-shaven face.
And that is Mr. Forster — just come in, —
and Dr. Lyon Mayfair now coming up the
middle of the House. And there, also, is
Labourers ; he will sit near the cross
benches. Do you see ? he has just taken
his place."

How intensely interesting it all is,"
exclaimed Cicely. "It is wonderful to see
them all, actually with one's eyes, after
reading so much about them."

You are a keen politician."

'' Oh, I think it is always wonderful to
see people you read about. Do you know,
I felt that even, when I first saw the Shah."

Ah ! that was before my day," laughed
Sir Harry. " But you do not go in for
women being in Parliament either. No, I
know you do not. Miss Browne — not for
women's rights and all that, eh ? "

Oh no ; you know I do not. I have

often told you ; but if I were a man I
mean, you know, I should never be happy
until I was in the House of Commons. I
am so glad you are a Member, Sir Harry."

** I think I am only now becoming conscious
of the pleasure in the fact of your
gladness," he replied, looking smilingly at
her. " But I will stick to it at all events,
since — well, since you have shown me that
it is such a desirable thing to do."

Oh, I think it is just the only thing a
man should care to live for, unless he had
got to work for other sort of views — I
mean, unless he had some one for whom he
must earn independence."

"I dare say there is a good deal in that,"
he replied, '' if I could only see it at all.
At all events, I do like to have work
of some kind, and I do feel that life without
work is scarcely worth living at all ;
and I will tell you what it is. Miss Browne,
I will try to put some go into my politics



from this night forward — under your inspiration,"
he added eagerly, and turning
round upon her again.

*' Yes, do. Sir Harry."

But I am an enthusiast to-night, at all
events, on my own account," he continued.
'' I do hope they will do it all right, and
that the Opposition will be squashed. You
are listening. Lady Ridgeway ; I hope you
have found more interest than we have
done in Mr. G — y's speech. But hah — !
now the excitement is going to begin. —
Look ! there are the Radicals crowding in ;
it is they who are going to vote, you know,
against the Memorial being placed in the
Abbey. What a shame ! I declare it is a
regular whip. And there is B — s ; do
you see, that stout fellow just come in this
minute .'^ he is the man they have got to
make their big speech."

I see him," replied Lady Ridgeway.

'rand there is Mr. Gladstone and Sir

Stafford' Northcote — look, Miss Browne;
there are a whole cluster of big men
coming in from dinner. I am afraid I
must go down, or the County Member will
wig me, and declare that Arch Aubrey
shall be disfranchised by next year. Shall
you be all right, Lady Ridgeway ? I will
come up presently again ; and as soon as
I can get hold of the old fellow out in the
corridor, I will order you some tea ! "

Is it not delightfully exciting and
interesting ? " whispered Cicely to Lady
Ridgeway, taking down the glass from her
eyes, after watching Sir Harry come in at
the far end and find the way to his place.

Well, my child, as far as excitement
goes," said Lady Ridgeway, a little tartly,
"if I were not acting as chaperone to
a dear little girl, who has come to look
through an opera-glass at a charming
young man fifty feet away, I should say it



was rather a waste of time, not to say a
little dull. I am not much of a politician
myself, Cicely, and, except this spring at
the opening, I have never once sat in my
place in the other House. Ah, no. I am
very glad if it pleases you, dear ; but
for my part I would rather be drinking my
coffee at this precise moment in the aviary
at Park Lane with Fits. Poor Fits, I
wonder what he is doing with himself tonight.
Having dinner at the Guards .^ By
the way — yes, of course he told me ; and
then coming to have supper with me at
ten. Don't forget that you are coming
home with me to supper."

*' I told them to send the brougham forme
to your house at eleven," the girl
answered.

Then the ponies may rattle their bits
in the moonlight till twelve, for not a
minute before that hour shall you go,
my dear ; and probably not till ever so

much later too. We shall want something
to wake us up after all this, you know,
Cicely."

Does it bore you so much, Lady
RIdgeway ? "

Bore me ? — oh no. I wanted to see the
new House ; I wanted to come. Besides,
if it amuses yoti, dear. Do you really like
it. Cicely, you original child } "

Oh, I like It intensely."

That is to say, you like gazing at Sir
Harry Wynn through your opera-glass,
and thinking that, as in all other forms, he
is charming as an M.P. Eh! I think
that is about it. Cicely."

The girl coloured hotly, and down came
the glass from her eyes.

I was not looking at him," she said.

"You can do that, you think, any day,"
continued Lady RIdgeway. '* Well, I do
not know," and she raised her own glass
and fixed it straight upon Sir Harry. " I

do not know that there is anybody much
more worth looking at among them all.
He is really a handsome boy. And how
absurd it is for him to be sitting down
there among these rows of solemn fogies,
with that ridiculous demure expression
on his face. The naughty boy, he is
looking up and trying to see us ; — and now
he is smiling. Ah, there is indeed much
need of a brass screen up here, I fancy,
when such youthful politicians as Sir
Harry sit on the benches down below.
In vain, in vain. Sir Harry. I do not
believe he can catch a glimpse of us,
although we have such a full view of him."

I was not looking at Sir Harry," said
Cicely, in a deprecating tone.

Were you not, my dear ? "

No ; but at that stout gentleman there,
Mr. B — s,' he called him, who is going to
make a speech to-night."

'' Good gracious, is he ? I wonder who

has been talking all this time, and what
he has been talking about ! But now — are
we going to have the question about that
poor boy's statue brought up ? for that is,
I suppose, what we have come to hear,
eh ? Good gracious, what a disgraceful
shame it is to make a fuss about such
a thing ! They say the Dean is besieged
with letters, and the Queen has expressed
her wishes In vain. So much for a Radical
Government, Cicely. All the court, all the
best-feeling people of the whole nation
on one side, while the House of Commons
has to suspend the entire business of the
country to listen to the views of a 'Mr.
B — s' on this subject, with which surely
he has nothing whatever to do. What
are we coming to, I should like to know ! "
Mr. B — s spoke, — and Lady Ridge way
heard his eloquence with indignation.
Indeed, if Mr. B — s could have listened to
the criticism of the ladies' gallery, he

would have realized the unpopularity of
his action throughout the country, if not
with ' the Brave,' at least with ' the Fair ! '

Would that he could have heard them !
Would that he could, have been subjected
for ten minutes to the scathing eloquence
of Lady Ridgeway's tongue ! Before such
sharp and delicately sarcastic criticism as he
would have encountered behind that brass
trellis, even he might have been brought
round to a different view of his theme.

But he did not hear. Lady Ridgeway's
barbed arrows could not reach him. So
quite unconsciously on and on he went —
through that long and weary speech —
through many an inappropriate quotation,
through perorations of most grandiloquent
prose — through stanzas of ' The Garland
of Fodry ' and ' Dew Drops from the
Mane' and — the House of Commons, and
the whole outside world as well, were
obliged to listen to him.

VOL. III. E

CHAPTER III.

ENTHUSIASM.

Brimming over with indignation, Sir
Harry came up to them just as Mr. B — s
was about to sit down.

"What bad taste," he said; "horrible.
I am quite ashamed of my country, and of
the party to which I belong, I feel as if
B — s had made a Conservative of me tonight."


o

Has party spirit much to do with it ? "
said Lady Ridgeway, turning round to
him.

Oh, it is certainly quite a Radical cry.
B — ^s is nothing but a tool. I must say,
I don't feel at all proud of any of us tonight.

No one seems to have anything
adequate to the position to say."

I do not wonder that you feel hotly,
Sir Harry — even against your own party
too. But "

'' Well, I do think we might find something
better worth doing than this. I
think it is pitiable, and I heartily hope my
own side may not win. Indeed I wish the
other side had made a whip of it ; but they
have not ; there are scarcely more than a
hundred of them in the House at this
moment, and the Radicals have been
marshalled in strong. Well, I cannot go
against my party, I suppose ; but I will
tell you one thing, I shall not vote at all."

Stay up here with us then," said Lady
Ridgeway, smilingly. " You will be much
happier than down there, you know, and
you will be safely out of the way."

I fear I must not," he said, blushing
and glancing round the gallery. " This

place Is only meant for the ladies, you
know, and we may only come to visit you
for a few minutes just now and then. Ha ! "
he continued, laughing merrily at the idea,
*' I think there would be some new kind of
whip invented if we M.p's took to passing
the time up here. I must go down directly,
for this fellow sooner or later will have to
stop, and then we must see what is to be
done about it all. But now let me go and
ask about your tea."

He had managed to sit for these few
moments on the row close beside them,
for some ladies had been away to the tea-room,
and had left a vacant space. But
now they came back in a hurry to claim
their places, and Sir Harry hastily rose.
He stood upright at the end of the row
for a moment, when he had made way for
the ladies, looking over the House. And
Cicely thought she had never seen him
look so handsome as he did then — flushed

and grave and eao^er as he was. She
had never felt so proud to be called ' his
friend ! '

He stood there with eyes sparkling with
inclination, and with crimsoned cheek —
listening to the last few sentences of B — s'
ecstatic eloquence, and hearing at last
(with a murmur of assenting applause) the
repeated call to divide.

We have done with him at length," he
exclaimed, as the stout orator ceased his
flow of poetic ' bathos,' and voluminous
prose, and as he sat down, amid the laughter
of the entire House, and the strong indignation
of many even of the most liberal
Members assembled there.

Now I am ready. Let us have our
tea," said Lady Ridge way, rising; "and
we will come back immediately, and hear
what next comes on."

Will you come then ? I have no doubt
it is all ready," said Sir Harry. 'will you

come to the little room across the corridor ?
It is very nice and comfortable there."

Cicely rose also, and they went with
him, threading their way between the close-packed
seats, leaving their cloaks on their
own chairs to secure their remaining
reserved until their return to them.
They struggled out at last through that
crowd of eager politicians of the fair sex,
who now filled the gallery In a close pack.
They reached the corridor beyond.

I have made friends with the whites
fellow who takes care of the
ladles here," said Sir Harry, who with his
bright face and frank ready smile always
made fast friends Indeed on every side.
'' I have made friends with him ; and I
hope he has got everything you may require
for tea."

And so he had.

Cicely declared she had never eaten
such bread and butter, and Lady Ridgeway
said —

*' The fact is we are as hungry as
hawks, Sir Harry, after dining at four
o'clock."

And so am I," he replied. '' I am
always somehow fearfully hungry down
here."

Well, for my part, I have always had
a horror of politics," said Lady Ridgeway,
emphatically, " but ^/la^ is an aspect of
terror in which I never viewed them before.
I believe you are all really half-starved
down here — when you do not come home
for dinner, or when you remain until daybreak
in the morning. I believe you are
starved."

"Well, yes, I think we are very often.
But I shall do famously to-night. It is
good bread and butter. I wish you and
Miss Browne would come down every
evening to tea ! I would have it always
ready for you."

He had sat down with them at the old

wooden table in the quaint little room,
and was consuming bread and butter like
a schoolboy, which Lady Ridgeway cut
for him in dainty pieces.

The old attendant had given them buta
limited supply of plates and cutlery, and
all the luxury of appurtenances were
centred indeed, quite accidentally, upon
Lady Ridgeway 's place.

'* Only one knife ! but I will cut for
everybody," she had declared, as they had
all three sat down.

But you are coming to supper with me,
Sir Harry," she continued, as she cut him
a third slice of bread. Do not forget that.
You know, you are not to spend the small
hours in the House to-night, you are to
come back to supper, and — now don't you
spoil your supper. Eh ! Will this only
just keep you alive till then ? "

I must stay for the division," he said
sadly.

Yes, of course ; but so will we. Weare
in no hurry now we have had our tea,
are we, Cicely ? "

Oh no," the girl answered. " I do
hope we shall stay."

Yes, dear, yes, of course wee will. We
must see the question out, and — I wonder
how they are getting on with it ! Have
we finished, and shall we go back ? What
is going on ? Oh ! you most unpractical
of M.p's; you do not even know who is
speaking now."

'' I am not quite sure," answered Sir
Harry, laughingly. '' Let us go back and
see. Who knows, perhaps now that B — s
has finished, we may have some one you
would like to hear."

Do let us go, we are all ready," said
Cicely, and the three went together from
out the little tea-room. They struggled
back to their places ; and as they passed
through the little narrow door, the Member

for L ds was standing near It, having

put some ladles Into their seats for the
night.

And as they entered through the small
door, they realized that a firm sonorous
voice was ringing through the House, Intones
of strong feeling and enthusiasm,
speaking evidently with an outburst of
indignant eloquence, which on the subject
was refreshing to hear.

'who Is that?" said vSIr Harry, in a

low tone, to the Member for L ds,

whom he happened to know.

'* It is Hutchison. He Is making a capital
speech ; and he takes a right view — moreover,
taken from the right side. He is

not a Napoleons," continued the L ds'

Member cordially; 'quite the contrary; but
he hates all this, to-night, all the same ; and
they say Gladstone will be up immediately
in opposition to B — s ; but it will be of
no use. There will be a division presently,



and there are not sixty votes on the other
side."

Sir Harry passed on with a shrug of
his shoulder and a frown of disgust, and
in another moment he had reached the
front again, and was by Cicely's side.

Miss Browne, I think you will have
your wish gratified," he whispered, as he
handed her into her seat again, and as he
bent over her for a moment before he left
them to go to his empty place. '' I think
you will have your wish gratified, and you
will hear some good speakers to-night."

Yes — ? " said Cicely, leaning towards
the screen and listening with sparkling eyes.

I wish I was as fond of it as you are,"
said Sir Harry, admiringly. " You would
make a ten times better Member for Arch
Aubrey than I."

Lady Ridgeway laughed, while Cicely
turned round to him with a deprecating
gesture of her head, and Lady Ridgeway

Opened her lips to say something in suggestive
raillery to both of them — but before
she could begin her attack Sir Harry had
taken himself away.

Cicely felt she was most fortunate that
night — everything happened as she had
wished it to be.

Mr. Gladstone rose soon, and held her
attention enthralled with intense interest
and excitement for nearly half an hour.
Then Sir Stafford Xorthcote, whom she
also wished to hear, rose, and Cicely (feeling
it all very wonderful and very fascinating,
in spite of Sir Harris's disenchantment
and Lady Ridgeway's sarcastic remarks),
sat listening and delighted — whilst time
sped fast away.

Excitement waxed high in the House,
and even Lady Ridgeway rose at length
to the eager spirit of the occasion, and she
heard Sir Stafford Northcote's fine rounded
sentences with a murmur of applause.

She became interested. Even Mr. Gladstone,
she confessed, carried her with him
while he was speaking. But she was too
good a Conservative not to abuse him
when he ceased.

'' He always wanders," she grumbled,
nothing more violent for the moment
occurring to her to say. " He always
wanders ; besides, his party have got beyond
him, and he cannot carry it, with all he
has said. Why, his party are dead against
him, and that valorous champion of theirs,
Mr. B — s,' will gain the night in spite
of everybody, so they need not waste their
time. But how I like to hear Sir Stafford
Northcote," she exclaimed, when he rose,
being true as ever to her flag ! " Listen
to him, Cicely ; how warmly, yet how
moderately, he does it. But little will
they care ; it will not affect them one bit ;
they never lose an opportunity of doing
anything that is thoroughly vulgar and in

bad taste. Why, my dear, the last time I
was In this House, was not Sir Stafford
Northcote making a charming speech In
reference to the poor Princess Alice, only
a week or ten days after her death ; and
would you believe It, at the most solemn
part of It, when every other Member had
taken his hat off, and had risen to his feet,
two or three of the Radical clique kept
their heads covered, folded their arms, and
never rose at all ; and If you will tell me
that a large and Important body of political
men In this country are to be fairly represented
by such contemptibly trivial acts of
irreverence and discourtesy as that was,
then all I say, is, that In these degenerate
days the country has become utterly unworthy
of really great men, and the House
of Commons will soon cease to be a goal
of desire for any gentleman of culture or
high sort of Instincts at all. Ugh — ! It Is
all those horrid Radicals,— eh } Do become

a Conservative, dear," she whispered
confidingly to Cicely ; '' do ; and then you
will make Sir Harry one by-and-by."

How could I ? " whispered Cicely,
reddening under Lady Ridgeway's steady
gaze. " That I never could, — I am sure,
at all events, — for he says Arch Aubrey has
been a Liberal borough for ever so many
years. But do listen, Lady Ridgeway, I
want to hear this. Oh, how could anyone
refuse the poor darling Prince's monument
a place in Westminster Abbey after
such a beautiful speech as that ? "

Can you see how enthusiastically Sir
Harry is applauding," exclaimed Lady
Ridgeway, laughing aloud with delight.
Well done ! for a Liberal Member, —
cheering the other side ! Look at him
through your glass ; he is quite excited."

Oh, it is all so exciting," Cicely exclaimed.
" I wish we could come to the
House every night, Lady Ridgeway."

That is more than I do, dear," she
answered. " Heighho! these wei^e speeches
certainly worth hearing. But now, I do
wish we could get home to supper. Do
you know, I am very tired."

'' Are you ? Shall we go then, dear
Lady Ridgeway ? Do not remain only
for me."

'* I promised Sir Harry we would wait
for him, my child. No, I am not impatient,
and it is nearly over now. They
are dividing. Look at all that gang of
the undecided Members ; they are walking
out. What poltroons ! No, I suppose I
must not say that exactly ; yet I am sure
I could manage to make up my mind, one
way or the other, somehow, if it were L"

'' Is it not a shame to make all this
fuss about the monument resting in the
Abbey ? Do you not think so, Lady
Ridgeway ? "

'' Yes, dear, of course I do. We all do,

all of dis. I mean — It is nothing but a
horrid Radical cry. Ah ! the poor dear
Empress. When I think of her lovely
Tuileries' balls, how dreadful It all seems."

And Lady RIdgeway talked for some
seconds philosophically of fate, and of the
changes of destiny — for just then she was
tired of llstenlno-, and Mad to use her
voice ! Meanwhile there was a movement
below, while Cicely watched still unwarily
with anxious eyes. Then the victory was
proclaimed, and greeted noisily with much
unparliamentary and most unnecessary enthusiasm
from the triumphant side.

What had that poor young Prince indeed
done that T n should have waved

his hat so ecstatically at the expulsion
of his statue from Westminster Abbey ?
Would any Radical champion of the nineteenth
century wen for himself so good
a claim, I wonder, to such an honourable
resting-place for his Memorial — some day'*

VOL. in. F

Why did C y cheer so vociferously,

and Mr. B — s light up with enthusiasm
as if a volume of his poems had found
a publisher, and had been favourably
reviewed by the Athenaeum on its first
page.

A victor is always and often justly
triumphant, but such a victory scarce called
for such uproarious applause.

'' Well, — they have done it," murmured
Lady Ridgeway, as Sir Harry met them
in the low doorway of the ladies' gallery.
*' They have done it at last," she repeated,
as she glanced into his face, which looked
unusually grave. " And it is a disgrace to
them — in my opinion at least."

'' Do not tell anybody, Lady Ridgeway,"
he whispered. '' But I voted after
all with the other side. I could not help
seceding from my party. I could not remain
negative when the moment came to
vote, but it did no good after all. Comedown

quickly. I have called up your
carriage."

He walked beside them down the long
stairs.

You are not to go back," said Lady
Ridgeway. "Not to-night, mind."

I do not think I will. I am dispirited,
and quite disgusted as well," replied young
Sir Harry. " I do not seem to see at all
how the old Ship is going to sail in the
future."

*' The brave old Ship of State," laughed
Lady Ridgeway, " Oh, there is no fear of
her, my dear boy. Do not trouble your
young head. Sir Harry, but come along
home to supper with me."

'' Oh, I do not see it at all," he went
on. '' When I hear some of these fellows
talk "

Qzn vivre verra,' laughed Lady
Ridgeway again ; and then she added
emphatically, " Come home to supper."

'' Shall I ? "

'' Yes, of course. I told them to bring
the landau instead of the brougham tonight,
and so there is a place for you."

Oh, how thoughtful of you."

We could scarcely leave our courteous
host of the House of Commons behind,
stranded alone in the moonlight, or let
him follow us in a hansom all the way
alone — could we now, Cicely ? How fascinated
you have been all the evening,
dear ; and what a funny child, you ! Why
do you care about it all ? "

I do not know ; but I do. I do care
about it, and it does fascinate me more
than anything else. Oh, I have enjoyed
myself, Lady Ridgeway ; I have indeed."

'' And what o'clock is it ? " continued
Lady Ridgeway. " Only eleven ! Why, I
thought It was advanced far Into morning.
I am so hungry. I declare to you, never
will I dine again at four o'clock."

Meanwhile Sir Harry had found the
carriage.

'' May I really come?" he said, hesitating,
when he had carefully put them into it.

'' Yes, yes, of course," exclaimed Lady
Ridgeway, almost impatiently now. " Get
\x\, please, ^o pour parler, if you love me.
I am so anxious to get home to supper."

Sir Harry laughed, and obeyed instantly.
'* You have had enough of fine
speeches. Lady Ridgeway, you think, for
one niorht ? "

I never want them from my friends,"
she said, with a quick change of voice, and
bending forward to lay her hand, for an
instant, upon his arm. " And now we
must not forget our poor Fits, who has
been waiting for us this hour or more at
least. To the Guards," she continued,
turning to the servant, who paused still at
the door waiting for orders. " To the
Guards' Club."

Then they drove out of Palace Yard.

Poor Fits ! he must have gone to sleep
and woke up again many times already ;
and he must be hungry for supper," said
Lady Ridgeway, then. "He could not
conceive what to do all the evening without
us," he said, " especially as I ordered
him to dine at six, that he might be
hungry when we came home."

CHAPTER IV.

'UN PETIT SOUPER.'

Lady Ridgeway's little suppers were quite
special entertainments.

She often enlarged upon them in conversation
with her friends, — lamenting
loudly to everybody, that '' at most houses,
with so few exceptions — only her own,"
she said, " and two or three more — the
old charming fashion of suppers had quite
gone out."

She enlarged on these nocturnal rduiiio7is
of hers to many people, but she invited
very few to partake ; only indeed her one
chosen favourite of the time being, —
discreetly chaperoned by a few pleasant
couples of congenial friends.

Cicely had never before been asked to
one of these particular banquets ; not from
want of favour In Lady RIdgeway's eyes,
but from a sort of fear, strange to say,
which that intrepid lady felt of the bland
Belinda, and from an undefined terror of
Richard Garth, of which she was conscious,
and which exercised over her projects
a certain salutary restraint and
control.

Cicely had often been to dine with
her during the season ; had been to tea
and to luncheons before now — Indeed to
every other variety of meal — but never had
she been Invited to supper until to-night.
This was to be a quiet lltde affair however,
only Sir Harry and Captain Fltz-
arthur being, besides herself, the chosen
guests.

*' Ridgeway has not got back from the
Lords yet, I imagine — or perhaps he is at
his Club," said Lady Ridgeway, as the

carriage, after picking up the guardsman,
reached her door.

They had driven swiftly through the
soft summer moonlight to Park Lane.

And, dear me," she continued, in an
amused tone, " Cicely, there is your
brougham, I declare, standing waiting
there already."

So it is. I really must go home at
once."

*' No, no ; come in, if only for a short
time. Come along ; it is early yet, and aswarm
as midsummer ought to be to-night.
Neither man nor beast, nor yet BeHnda,
can come to any harm."

I am sure Belinda is sound asleep
long hours ago," laughed Cicely, as she
followed her hostess into the hall. She
went rather hesitatingly, and with a feeling
that she was doing perhaps something, that
was very pleasant, but which she ought not
to do. And these feelings arose probably

because It was in answer to Sir Harry's
sudden appealing glance that she had consented
to stay with them, and not because
of any force and influence of Lady Ridgeway's
persuasive powers.

They all went upstairs, however, tired
and hungry, as the hostess had said, and
all felt inclined for pleasant converse, and
all had a great deal to say.

In Lady Ridgeway's own small ,
opening on one side into the
green fern-filled aviary, — where the love-birds
and the (so called) ' birds of paradise '
were all sound asleep, — they found so
dainty a little repast awaiting them, that
Mr. B — s was soon forgotten.

Politics seemed too material and too
mundane a subject for such a pleasant
and ethereal hour.

The most delicate of little midnight //<;7/jr
was soon consumed by the two ladies,
and some devilled bones and kidneys were

brought to delight the gentlemen s more
substantial tastes. And so politics were
soon exchanged by Lady Ridgeway for
lighter and more congenial themes, and the
conversation flowed at the small supper-table
very gaily — at least between Captain
Fits and herself. With the other two,
although they were very happy, it was
different.

Sir Harry was rather distrait and grave,
and Cicely was reflecting within her own
deep little thoughtful soul over what
could be the possible cause of his abstraction.
And so she was absent also —
both of them only contributing the quota
of sympathetic notice necessary to keep
the cigarette conversation afloat.

Both were thoughtful ; and both too full
of their own and of one another's personal
and individual feelings to respond with
sincere alacrity to the sallies of endless
badinage kept up by Lady Ridgeway and

Captain FItz. Still, though they did not
respond with eagerness ; they did so
sufficiently to keep things going. It was
pleasant, and they both felt it pleasant,
although their mood was not a noisy one.
For Captain Fitzarthur was amusing in his
languid way, and Lady Ridgeway's spirits
had gone through a reaction of great
exuberance.

Between the two, the little supper was
going on as merrily as a sleigh bell, and
all were enjoying it in their respective
ways, when the door opened very suddenly,
and Lord Ridgeway entered upon
the scene. It is not too much to say that
a thrill of dismay and consternation electrified
every one of the guests, and Lady
Ridgeway was indeed the one person of
the party who maintained complete composure.
Certainly, as she well knew,
supper parties were not in Lord Ridgeway's
line ; but if he liked to come — well,

his place was ready. Captain Fits would
not interfere with him in any sort of way.
So she quietly said, with a slow, deliberate
intonation, " Ah ! have you just returned
from the House, or do you come from
whist, Ridgeway ? " and she moved her
seat as if to make room for him. She
spoke so very quietly, that, knowing many
things, it were quite curious to hear her.
Had one known nothing, one might have
thought that he were just the particular
person whom she expected momentarily
to see !

'' Of course I come now from the Club,"

he answered shortly ; " and — well "

and he stopped and stared from one to
the other of the party ; and then fixing his
eyes fiercely upon the table, while Cicely
put down her fork — '' Well, of all the
unwholesome things to eat at this hour
of the night, commend me to devilled
kidneys," he said at last.

It Is an uncommonly good thing for
supper," protested Captain Fits, in a
languid tone. 'ein fact," he went on,
"like most other things that are evil, it
is the pleasantness thing out."

'' Is it a brood devil ? " said Lord Rido^e-
way, coming forward into the small space
between Captain Fits and his wife, — and
eyeing the kidneys critically as he paused.

A devilish good one," said Captain
Fits, with his wonted charming and ever
ready wit.

Then I will have a bit, I declare I
v/ill," said Lord Ridgeway, suddenly.
'' Gad, Evelyn," he went on, as he sat
down, " what out-of-the-way things you do
eat, and what out-of-the-way times you do
choose to eat them ! "

I do not eat devilled kidney myself, asa
rule," said his wife, calmly.

But we have eaten them — Fits and I,"
said Sir Harry, '' and I assure you they

are excellent. You are quite right, Lord
Ridge way, to have a bit."

*' Where have you all been to ? — to ' La

Fille du Tambour Major,' at the A

Theatre, I suppose."

No ; we have been at no such place,"
said Lady Ridgeway. '' Did you expect
to meet us there ? "

I — ? " he answered — " I have not been
out of the club since eio^ht o'clock. I dined
there with Tanjore, and we played whist
for sixpenny points, till half an hour ago,
and I never went to the House. I lost
every shilling I had with me — by gad I
did. Tanjore had devilish good luck."

We were better employed a good deal
than all that comes to," said Lady Ridgeway,
loftily. '' We have been to the
House."

"What house ?"

Why, Sir Harry's House — ^/le House
the House of Commons, to be sure."

You could not go to a much worse
place than that, at all events, In these
days," said his lordship, viciously. *' Did
you hear B — s ? A lot of men came
into the club and harangued about him,
at ten o'clock."

'ewe heard Mr. B — s in person."

I would have preferred hearing Offenbach,"
murmured Captain Fitzarthur.

So would I, a thousand times," responded
Lady Ridgeway, emphatically.

"What the deuce took you to the
House?" said Lord Ridgeway. 'was it
to get an appetite for devilled kidneys ? I
wish I had not eaten them ; I shall be confoundedly
ill tomorrow, I know. How
could you eat them ? " he added, looking
quite fiercely across at Cicely.

I have not eaten any of them, I'm glad
to say," she said, with a demure smile.
But, Lady Ridgeway, I think I had
much better go home, in case I should be

tempted by Lord Ridgeway's example,
after all, to eat some now."

"If you followed Ridgeway's example,
my dear, In all things, I fear you would
have, as he predicts for himself, some
sorrowful results. But why go yet ? I
know Sir Harry is longing to show you all
my love-birds asleep."

"Just exactly what I was longing todo,"
he answered gaily. " Lady Ridgeway,
how do you manage to read one's
thoughts ? "

L read your eyes," she said, smiling at
him, *' and they have been telling me so
this half-hour or more."

It looks so cool and delicious," he said ;
'' and that fountain, playing all this time in
there, seems to call one Irresistibly to go
in."

Well— go, then."

*' No, really, I cannot. I must go home
to bed," persisted Cicely. " Think ot

VOL. III. G

Belinda, Lady Ridgeway, and think of her
anguish of mind all this time."

*' She knows you are safe with me,
dear."

'' Yes ; but really, please, I must go."
Quite right, quite right," put in Lord
Ridgeway at this point from the supper-table,
— for they had all left him, and were
now standing round the aviary-door. For
his lordship had captured another devilled
bone now, and was enjoying it in cool
epicurean indifference to tomorrow and
its results. '' Quite right," he shouted.
It's the greatest mistake sitting up late
at night ; and these ridiculous birds are a
nuisance. Much better o-q home to bed."

o

*' For a romantic view of things commend
me to your lordship ! " said Lady
Ridgeway, playfully. '' I wonder how I
ever came to marry such a prosaic man ! "
and she sighed and glanced at Fits despairingly
; and he sighed, too, with

languid and not very suffering resignation.
He returned her glance towards
him, however, with a sympathetic gaze.

But I quite agree with Lord Ridge way,
as it happens, on this occasion," said Cicely,
decidedly. " And I am going. Goodnight,
good night ! " And she gave her
hand to Sir Harry and Captain Fitzarthur,
and raised her cheek for Lady Ridgeway's
kiss.

So much for our little evenings ! so
much for our poor love-birds in the
aviary ! so much for our cosy quartette !
Good night, my child ; sweet dreams to
you. At all events, soit have no troubles
from your conscience ; and the worst which
can befal you will be a nightmare of
B— s!"

*' Good night," murmured Cicely, shaking
her head, and laughing the low, amused,
half-deprecating laugh which was at all
times her only answer to Lady Ridgeway's

sallies. " Good night, Lord RIdgeway. I
take your advice, you see, with gratitude,
and I am gone."

'' Good night, good night, to you ! " he
exclaimed vehemently. " Sensible girl ;
yes, quite right to go home and go to bed.
Confound the love-birds, they are nuisance
enough all day with their twitter twitter
(those creatures of hers in there), without
bothering oneself about them at night.
Thank goodness if they are asleep, and
let them alone. Good night ! I am
sure I wish I had never found you
eating these confounded devilled kidneys
and bones !"

'' I am coming downstairs with you,"
said Sir Harry, when Cicely turned to him.

'' Do, will you ? — that is nice of you,"
assented the hostess. " Yes ; put her
safely into her carriage."

This he had every intention of doing.

He conducted her down the lofty illuminated

staircase, where they found themselves
quite alone.

It was so very late that the men-servants
had disappeared, probably to fresh editions
of devilled kidneys below ; and Lady
Ridgeway's boudoir bell, resounding to
summon them to the hall, only rang
through the lower regions as Sir Harry
led Cicely downstairs.

'' I shall see you to-morrow' he said, ina
low, grave voice.

I hope so," she answered.

'' Shall we meet at any particular party ? "

No ; not for certain, that I know of."

'' Well, then, may I come with the
openly avowed purpose of meeting you,
and of having a nice tranquil talk with
you tomorrow ? May I come along by
the Memorial about six o'clock ? "

Belinda and I are pretty sure to be out
then," answered Cicely, without reference
to his direct question — in this manner

cheating her conscience out of the belief
that she was consenting to a regular
rendezvous with Sir Harry Wynn.

You will be there ? Very well, that will
do, I think. That is pretty much exactly
what I meant. There is a great deal we
want to 'say about — about things of this
evening, which, even if Lord Ridgeway
had not so ruthlessly disturbed us, we
should never have said here."

*' Lady Ridgeway is not fond of grave
talk," replied Cicely ; '' is she ? "

No ; and I feel as if I had a great
many grave things to say."

I shall like to hear them," the girl
murmured, and by this time they had
reached the foot of the stairs.

The large door leading from the marble-floored
hall into the domestic regions was
opened, and two footmen appeared.

Their tete-astute was nearly over — even
already, as regards its important elements,

quite at an end. The servants rushed
forward to the front door and flung it open.

Cicely's Httle brougham stood there
awaiting her.

Good night," Sir Harry whispered, ashe
handed her in ; and then he held her
hand for a moment, and paused-as if he
would have said something else, even at
that moment. But there stood the servants,
waiting solemnly till he was ready —
waiting at the carriage wheels behind him
and on each side. So he thought better of
it, and only once more said — " Good night."

Then he closed the door — stood back as
the horses moved on — and then watched the
little brougham until it was out of sight.

CHAPTER V.

BELINDA IS DARK AND DEEP.

Next day it rained.
After such a honor time of beautiful

o

serene weather, after weeks of perfect sunshine
and bright clear days, it rained all
the morning, and neither Cicely, nor Belinda,
nor Negro, could go out.

Cicely was tired and did not mind it in
the morning, though she watched the sky
in some anxiety, lest it should persist in a
downpour all the afternoon.

She spent the morning, as ladies generally
do after they have been to the
House of Commons, in perusing the
speeches, with a far greater interest than

she felt for that daily record of orations ina
usual way. She read aloud the long
columns of the Times to Belinda too. She
described the manner and attitudes of
each speaker ; and indeed gave an account
of last night's scenes in so graphic a
style, as to work up that composed lady
into much the same state of excitement
which she had herself experienced concerning:
the marble Memorial of the Hero-prince.
Cicely expressed forcibly to
Belinda her wonder " How anybody could
doubt that Sir Stafford Northcote's view
was the ris^ht one to take." And also her
surprise that any one could '' differ from
the opinion of Sir Harry." Indeed, both
she and Belinda were filled with indignant
surprise when they perused their paper, to
find that some persons could and did hold
different opinions on that subject from
either Sir Stafford or Sir Harry.

Belinda was not quite sure, indeed, of

her own view, being seldom absolutely
certain upon any point. But she was very
sympathetic as a listener on the topic, and
constantly expressed herself that '' it was
certainly very sad ; of that at least I am
quite sure, my dear," she said repeatedly.
'' It is extremely sad for the poor young
man — why should they not have his statue
in Westminster ? It seems very disagreeable
of them, and quite absurd."

In fact, all that morning they devoted
themselves to the Memorial question, and
one would have imagined that political
and parliamentary debates were the special
subjects in which Cicely and she
found their natural element of continual
converse ; and only this was odd — that
in describing the debate she quoted so
much less of the round periods of Sir
Stafford Northcote, Mr. Briggs, or even
Mr. Gladstone, than the sayings of Sir
Harry Wynn ! His particular view of

the case seemed much the best worth
repeating to her mind, and — one, quite
unquestionably beyond dispute !

In all this, too, did Belinda agree with
her, with an accommodating sympathy of
view that was most agreeable.

They passed a pleasant morning, notwithstanding
the rain.

Just at luncheon time, however, their
thoughts were violently whirled into a new
quarter ; and a crowd of irrepressible
feelings and fears and questions rushed
rudely in on Cicely's mind.

A porter's ring at the door-bell surprised
them, bringing a note from the Reform
Club, which announced that — Mr. Richard
Garth had returned to town.

The firm had required him again in his
place at the Board of management, and he
had returned.

Cicely would once more be summoned
to give an account of all her personal concerns

and projects, and reminded that she
belonged to Garth and Browne.

It was rather a shock to them.

Life had gone on pleasantly and
smoothly enough without Richard Garth.

Would it flow on as calmly, and ripple
with such bright soft currents, and sparkle
with such pleasant sunshine, now that he
had returned to take charge of her, and to
weight her with all the dignities of his
commercial house ?

Cicely doubted it, decidedly doubted it ;
and therefore it was with some depression
that she ate her luncheon, and perused her
note from Mr. Richard Garth.

He had returned, and would call to see
her that evening. What new views and
schemes and impossible suggestions might
he not bring with him '^.

It was a fact indeed, becoming daily
more evident, that two minds cast in a
mould more opposite as that of Cicely's

and her guardian's could not readily be
found. There was absolutely no one
point of view — on any single matter of
importance — on which they could ever
possibly agree.

He lived for the accumulation of wealth
and for his particular ambitions ; all his
hopes were centred in the advancement
of the firm. To exalt the name of Garth
and Browne ; to render it of weight and
importance among people who measured
everything from a civic point of view ; to
guard the wealth already amassed, and add
to its proportions — all these were alone
the hopes that absorbed Richard Garth.
All this Cicely well knew ; and now what
was she to do with him, and with all the
unsympathetic projects he would soon unfold
to her. It was impossible to her to
feel that the civic honours of the house
of Garth and Browne were of any sort of
importance whatever !

How little she had cared for it all at
any time ; and how small had been the
happiness which had come to her in former
years, amid all the pomp and luxury with
which the two old men had surrounded
her as the representative of their house.

Happiness had come to her lately, but
it had come from, '* what — cannot be obtained
by buying," as she was so fond of
saying often to herself.

It came from the simple flood of young
life, with its bright interests, its natural joys
and pleasures, which had been so swiftly
swept her way.

It came from a sympathetic presence,
from the light of two bright blue eyes,
from the cadence of a ringing voice, that
softened often to a strange sweetness as it
addressed herself.

From all these mystical little things in
fact, of intercourse and sensibilities, which
she had not yet learned to call frankly to

herself just — love ! She recognized It all,
however, as being a new and precious
happiness quite apart from possession of
things internal or external, indeed quite
apart from everything else save — itself!

And she thought she knew that Sir
Harry Wynn would care as little as she
did for the wealth and the honours of the
house of Garth and Browne.

But," she wondered, 'what would Mr.
Garth's feelings be for Sir Harry }''

"It did not matter much," she thought,
*' as things stood at present, and while Mr.
Garth knew nothing about him at all."

But perhaps he might have to know,
and then — and then ?

Sir Harry belonged to Lady Ridge wayside
of life, and Mr. Garth hated everyone
and every thing connected with Lady
Ridgeway. And often had he said that he
never wished to hear her name — much less
to hear the names of her friends !

So, Cicely reflected, and finally the resolution
came to her. She would say nothing
to him for the present about Sir Harry, nor
in fact make any revelation at all until it
was absolutely necessary for her to do so.

Belinda (when Cicely at length opened
up the subject with her) quite agreed in
this view. Belinda was always more or
less of the opinion that there vere things
in life, good and necessary things, which
were much better not mentioned to Mr.
Garth ; and Sir Harry s friendship was
certainly among the list of these good
things. For who could tell how It might
suffer by a revelation of Its pleasant existence
to him ?

No, they would welcome him back to
his native Isle that evening, and inquire of
him about his travels ; and they would tell
him that Cicely was well, and was still
certainly disengaged, and had not been
brought Into any sort of trouble by Lady

Ridgeway — and with all that he would be
satisfied, and expect nothing more.

And surely, at least for the time being,
they need not mention to him in any way
that there was such a person in this bright
genial world as Sir Harry !

Mr. Garth thought himself a very
shrewd man — shrewd and 'perceiving,'
difficult to deceive, and one from whom
it was not easy to hide anything that it
might concern him to know.

But on these personal subjects of their
friends and friendships, he was but a child,
after all was said, poor man, in the hands
of these two most virtuous and well-meaning
women.

He was a child as regards his power of
penetration into those mystical and occult
subjects, about which indeed he was little
worthy to be informed.

'' I will tell him all about the House of
Commons," said Cicely, enthusiastically ;

VOL. III. H

and, as he is a Liberal, he v/ill be delighted
to know that I have heard Mr. Gladstone
; and he will be quite interested in
Mr. Briggs and Mr. Courtney, and Mr.
Trevelyan, who got up the question last
night. You know, Belinda," she added
suddenly, "they are both club friends of
Mr. Garth's ; so just imagine how exciting
it will be telling him that I have seen both
of them, although, of course, I do not
aofree with them at all."

With this view of their prospects for
the evening they both felt encouraged.
They discussed the subject fully over their
luncheon, and by the time that repast was
over, both felt strengthened and braced inspirit
for that coming encounter with Mr.
Garth. Only Belinda sighed with a little
personnel pathos over the memory of him,
obdurate and unimpressionable as he ever
was ; and she added, ''He is an odd man,
your guardian, my dear," as she brushed

her crumbs away, and as Cicely at length
rose from the table and proceeded to make
Negro his dinner.

When, the dinner ready, she and Belinda
walked together into the deep bay window
of the dining-room, and saw that the rain
was nearly over; that very few drops were
falling now on the broad steps leading
into the garden ; and that the black-nosed
pug might be turned out for a run, — he
gobbled up his little meal of minced meat
and bread-crumbs first, and then out he
went, tumbling down the stone steps head
over heels in his impatience to reach the
garden ; and then away he scampered,
going off at full gallop along the damp
green grass, whirling round and round the
flower-beds, tearing up to the window for
one instant In answer to Cicely's whistle,
and then dashing off merrily again.

And there Cicely stood at the open
window, and laughed and clapped her

hands and called to him, bringing him
back over and over again for nothing ; and
then throwing a scarlet ball down the
length of the garden, that he might rush
after it, more frantically than ever.

Both she and Negro enjoyed it, and
Belinda brought out a chair into the deep
bay window, and looked on composedly.
The girl looked so bright and fair, and
so very young and joyous too, as she
stood there laughing and clapping her
hands, while her little black-nosed favourite
rushed to and fro. She looked so slight
and young, that Belinda, after watching her
tenderly and in silence for a moment, shook
her head, as she had often done when she
thought of the firm, with all its weight of
honours and responsibilities, and of Richard
Garth. How little could he understand
this young being, left thus in his grim rule ;
her whole destiny probably resting on his
decree and administration. It was already

impossible to connect the two ideas of
Cicely and the business ambitions of
Richard Garth.

Is it not deliciously cool and fresh ? "
Cicely exclaimed at length, leaning back
against the lintel of the window, and
throwing her head up to breathe the soft
air. ** Look out, it is perfect. How the
rain has swept the dust from the leaves,
Belinda. Look at the trees there — are
they not quite green again as they were
in spring ? "

Rain is valuable in the great heat of
summer, my dear," remarked Belinda, with
her usual striking originality of thought.
'most valuable — yes, I see the trees
are quite fresh again."

"Yes, and the shrubs, and even the
flowers ; and, Belinda, the rain is quite
over now. Do you know that a little later
we must have a regular good walk ?"

A walk ! It will be sadly damp, my
dear."

*' Oh no ; it will only be deliciously fresh
and cool. Belinda, are you not longing to
see the bie gardens, with all the branches
and boughs washed quite clean again, after
seeing" what a wonderful change the rain
has made in a little corner like this ? "

Do you wish to go to Kensington
Gardens, my dear, this afternoon ? "

Yes, Belinda ; yes."

But it will be so damp, my dear child.
I do not really think it would be wise ;
and after being out so late last night. Do
keep quiet, Cicely ; do keep quiet, and
stay within doors one day."

Belinda, I must go."

The girl spoke in a demure, but quite
decided tone.

'' My dear — and what may that mean ? "

Belinda looked up with a curious quiet
glance. Cicely turned her head away.

It means only that I have promised."

Promised Sir Harry Wynn ?"

Not that exactly, Belinda. Now do
be a dear, Belinda ; be sympathetic and
kind. I did not exactly promise him ; but
I said — well — that, perhaps, it was likely we
might go out ; and I do so wish to hear all
he has to say about — about last night."

*' About the debate of last night ? "

Yes, of course ; he said he wanted to
tell me, and I do so want to know all he
he has got to say."

Did he say he wished to speak to
you ? "

'' Yes, yes, Belinda ; I know he does ;
in fact, yes — he said he did."

But have you not many opportunities
for his speaking, my love, if he has really
anything special to say ? "

'' Well, not so many as you would
imagine," said Cicely, in a conciliatory tone.
You cannot think, Belinda, how difficult
it is sometimes to ore things said. At
Lady Ridgeway's, for instance, she is

always trying to keep a general conversation
going, and Sir Harry and I do not
always like talking that sort of nonsense,
you know, like Lady Ridgeway keeps up
that does not really mean anything at
all. Oh, It Is very difficult ; and we very
seldom have a nice talk, Belinda, except
when we meet together in the garden with
you."

"And he said he should be there today
? "

Yes, of course ; he said he would lookout
for us."

'' And that he had special things to say
to-day ? "

Yes, things about last night, you
know," responded the judicious Cicely,
hastily.

She knew no more than Belinda did
what Sir Harry might really want to say
that day.

But, at all events, she preferred that

Belinda should not question her, for she
was full of a sort of doubtful, half-pleasant,
half-painful, wonderment herself on the
subject, and she felt she would much prefer
that Belinda said really nothing to her
about it at all.

It was all so new, all so delicious, in its
vagueness ; it was so perfect, she felt and
said to herself; and yet she could not put
it into language when speaking of it to
another.

It was perfect ; but it was all a vague
undefined feelings still.

'what could he have to say," she
repeated aloud, as she tried to face the
question, and felt that Belinda might
require something further in the way of
a statement — something more reassuring
from her — " what could he have to say tome,
only to give his views of Mr. Briggs
and the poor young Prince Imperial, about
whose gallantry he was so enthusiastic ? "

What else could Sir Harry have to
say? Nothing; and this was what she
assured Belinda, turning round upon her
in the bay window with a bright blush
upon her cheek.

'but," she persisted, 'was not this in
itself sufficiently tempting to induce her
to brave the damp and rainfall. Was not
the prospect of meeting him sufficiently
inviting of itself — simply just as usual
meeting him

Now Belinda had her own view. She
was a soft and bland and sympathetic person
in a usual way, but she was shrewd and
far-seeing, beyond what anybody could
have imagined her, at the same time.

She saw — from her heart — did Belinda
really, and she saw quite as far from that
region, and oftentimes far more effectually,
than many other persons see with the eyes
of what may be far superior minds. And
on this occasion she saw something which

not even Cicely herself had yet fully
realized. Belinda fancied she saw that the
crisis was not far off, and she felt, moreover,
that it was high time it came.

The season was actually over now. In
two days she and Cicely would be gone
from Prince's Gate. They had taken a
small, pretty, dainty retreat at Maidenhead,
in fact, for the summer, and tomorrow they
were leaving town.

Once gone — and what would become of
Sir Harry ?

He would disappear from out the immediate
surroundings of their lives. But,
would his influence on the life of Cicely
depart with him ? Certainly not, thought
the astute Belinda ; and therefore was it
not most desirable, before any of them
separated, that he sJioidd have ' something
to say ; " and there was a ' something,'
that was evident. So he had told Cicely
last night. Why not give him the opportunity

he wished for — and — even this very
afternoon — let him say his ' say ' !

Why not, indeed ? Was it not desirable
it should now be clearly said, for Richard
Garth had returned too, and he would
come and see them to-night.

It was becoming time, quite time, Belinda
felt for her part, that he did now hear
something of Sir Harry ; and quite time,
indeed, that they did allow the shadow of
that bright young presence to cross the
dreams of wealth and aggrandizement of
Garth and Browne. And Belinda also
wondered, as Cicely had done, ' what Mr.
Garth would say to Sir Harry.'

Mr. Garth ought soon to hear of him,
though she was ready to humour Cicely
by saying nothing for that one evening.
Certainly he ought to hear of him ; and
she, Belinda, in her position, ought to
introduce his name. But then again (as
she reflected), what exactly, in the present

precise state of matters, what could she
say of the young man to Mr. Garth ?
Only that ' he was a friend of Cicely's ; '
that he was apt to call ; ' ' that she had
met him at Lady Ridgeway's, and that he
belonged to that fair chatelaine s set.'

That he was young — of the age when
men are prone to marry — if they have
taken a fancy to any one in particular, and
if they have sufficient to support a wife.
But beyond this she could say nothing
definite. Cicely still was free, and so was
Sir Harry. He had not yet proposed to
Cicely, and for all that any of them knew
to the contrary, he might never mean to
propose. If she opened up the subject,
she might be simply starting a train of
exciting surmises that might be after all
fallacious. Sir Harry, perhaps, never
would propose ! And yet — and this was
the most important fact of all to Belinda's
mind, and the fact difficult beyond everything

else to reveal delicately to Richard
Garth's rough, unsympathetic ear — the girl
loved — loved, undoubtedly, that bright,
sunny-hearted Stoneshire boy ! He was
sympathetic to her — he was altogether
delightful to her.

Yes, Belinda knew this, although Cicely
had not yet confessed it, even to herself.

She loved him ! and if Belinda was Inclined
to allow It, it was moreover more
than probable he would that very afternoon
confess frankly to Cicely, that he
too loved her.

There would be a commotion In the
firm of Garth and Browne ; but that commotion
must be gone through. As to its
results, when all these revelations had
disturbed Mr. Garth's financial dreams,
Belinda would not dare to contemplate.
Results had best always, she thought, be
left to time.

I will have to bear the worst of it all,'

she sighed placidly, ' If he does not happen
to like it ; he will never forgive me for
letting it come about. However, what will
be, will be ; and why not this afternoon ? '

Yes. The rain is quite over now,"
said Cicely, suddenly breaking in upon
all these perplexing meditations of her
amiable friend.

My dear," replied Belinda, '' would
you mind closing the window ? I do not
know that I have not got the rheumatism ;
just a little twinge. It is really very
damp ! "

Rheumatism, Belinda ? Then you cannot
oro out ? "

Cicely's tone was most disconsolate.

I do not really think I can go, my
love."

Oh, dear me. Well, I am sorry, Belinda,
for — for your rheumatism."

"And for poor Sir Harry," laughed
Belinda, for she was playing now a very

deep game — deep for her at least ; and, In
truth, she was quite alarmed at herself.

'' Oh," said Cicely, still disconsolately
but with kindly resignation in her tone.
'' Oh, it does not matter about him, Belinda
; he can go home, when he is tired
of it, if he finds we are not there."

'' I dare say he will wait a long time,"
sighed Belinda. '' You see there is no
sitting of the House this afternoon, as it
is Saturday. Yes ; I am sure he will wait
there a long time. I know — I wish he
would come in to tea."

"He will not do that, I am quite sure,"
said Cicely ; '' for I told him that if we
were not walking we should be out in the
carriage at this time, you know ; at least,
I did not exactly tell him, but he will feel
quite certain of it. He will never imagine
that we are in the house."

What a pity he could not know we are
at home ! "

"Ah, yes," sighed Cicely, rather impatiently
; " ah, yes, there are so many pities,
but of them all, the worst pity is your
rheumatism, dear. Do let us come upstairs
; it is more lively in the front
drawing-room, at all events."

Very well, dear," said Belinda ; and
she rose, and they left the room together,
while she still looked perplexed and meditative.


Let me put this round you," said
Cicely, as they walked through the hall,
and she picked up a soft creamy shawl
from the top of a pile of carriage rugs as
she spoke.

Look ! they have brought down the
wraps and things ; but it is certainly much
too damp for the victoria, at all events,
and too hot for the brougham, although
it is chilly enough indoors. Put this on,
Belinda, dear. Your rheumatism is really
a pity indeed ! "

VOL. III. I

Thank you, my love, thank you," murmured
Belinda, as the girl wrapped her
gently in the soft fluffy shawl. '' I think,
do you know, that the greatest pity of allis,
not my rheumatism, which really is not
severe, but that you should lose your walk,
and your fresh air to-day."

That does not matter at all."

Yes, I think it does ; and then there
is your Sir Harry."

They had walked upstairs with the slow
lingering footsteps of people who have got
nothing in particular to do, and they turned
into the front drawing-room as Belinda
made the last remark.

Into the large room, with the balcony
and its coloured awning overlooking the
fresh green garden and the park, where
Cicely had talked to Blanche Ethridge
through that long afternoon, so pleasant
and so deeply interesting to both of them,
some Sundays ago ; and as they paused

and looked out of the window, Belinda
glanced at Cicely, and said —

Dear me, the rain is really quite over,
indeed. What an annoyance is this tiresome
rheumatism. I am so grieved that
you should not have your walk. What do
you think, my love — would you take a turn
just in front of the house — just there, you
know, where I can see you all the time —
and then if you should chance to meet Sir
Harry — well, you could tell him we have
not gone out to drive ? "

'' Oh, Belinda, do you think I may ? "

I cannot see any great harm in it, my
dear child. He wishes to see you I
know."

'' Oh, I should so intensely like it,
Belinda."

Well, then, I will take the responsibility
of decision, my love. Go — only do not belong
away, and do not forget me, indeed.
It is too bad," she added suddenly to

herself, In a kind of apology. '' Too bad
to keep a child shut up in the house this
lovely afternoon. She must go out just a
little while, as long as the rain keeps away.
There cannot be any harm in just a little
stroll."

Then she added aloud, " My dear, I
think if you are really going you should
go at once ; and do not forget to keep off
the wet grass, Cicely."

*' Oh, you dear, good Belinda," cried the
girl; and she turned round suddenly and
threw her arms round her friend's shoulders
and kissed her, such a warm flush rising to
her own cheek, and such a bright sweet
light to her eyes. " I do so want to see
him," she said.

'' And I firmly believe, my darling, that
he wants to see you." 'Heighho! I hope
I am not doing very wrong,' she thought
to herself, when her charge had hurried
off with delight and alacrity. ' I cannot

see it — I do not see It, I declare. He
may wish ever so much to propose to her,
but if we do not give him an opportunity,
how on earth is he to do it, — just to-day
when, no doubt, he has made up his
mind. And I really cannot see much harm
in it, he is such a charmingly well-bred
young man — and, well, I have done it now
on my own responsibility ; I must face
out the end of it with Richard Garth.*

CHAPTER VL

SUNSHINE AFTER RAIN.

It was a fresh sweet afternoon in kensington

Gardens.
« >

The whole fashionable world was assembled
at Madame de Rate's garden
party that afternoon. Cicely felt very
glad, as she tripped over the road and
reached the cool space and shade of the
park, that she had not accepted Lady
Ridgeway's proposal to take her there.

A garden party on a wet day, where
such numbers have been invited as might
be suited to the size of the grounds, and
not to the rooms, is an appalling assembly ;
and on this afternoon Cicely was amused

within herself as she thought of the fate of
Madame de Rate's guests, either promenading
about the wet grass in thin
shoes and Indian musHns, or compressing
themselves into the inadequate proportions
of her saloons. Yes, she was glad she
had not gone !

There was something in the afternoon —
for her as well as Belinda — that was
suggestive to the imagination. Quietness,
solitude, with one sympathetic companion
only', seemed the thought that best harmonized
with her mood ; for a soft excitement
seemed to possess her, a pleasant
exhilarating sensation lingering from the
influences of the night before.

There had been something in Sir
Harry's voice and eyes, as they had listened
together in the House of Commons; as they
exchanged glances of sympathy again and
again ; as they whispered their thoughts
and exchanged their views and impressions,

a 'something' — all through the
evening, In fact — that had awakened a
new feeling" of sweet, undefined consciousness
within her.

As she came out of her house that
afternoon a variety of thoughts and
mingled feelings. Indeed, possessed her.
She thought anew how pleasantly and
sweetly her life had flowed on lately, as
she had passed from one scene of brightness
and pleasure to another. The time —
the days and weeks just gone, were all
delightful to think of — and now where was
it all to end ? The thought forced Itself.
It had hardly occurred to her until this
afternoon ; but now, as she came out and
crossed into the park, she thought, what
will happen after tomorrow, when she was
gone to Maidenhead ? Was it all to end
really and for ever here ?

The bright exhilaration of her spirits disappeared
as she thought of this, and a soft

melancholy took possession of her instead,
as she reached the grass sward beyond the
ride and beyond the rows of trees just
opposite her own house, and as she
traversed it towards the Gardens. Was it
all to end now ?

Then the memory came back to her
of the beginning — of Negro and his peril.
She had not brought Negro with her on
the wet grass to-day.

She thought of her walk — that one
single other walk which she had accidentally
taken alone there. She remembered
so well the beginning of that walk.
How hard she had had to beg Belinda
to let her get out of the victoria, Belinda
being too exhausted for a stroll. She
remembered that they were coming home
from Melbourne Park, and that she had
set her heart on getting out at the far
north-west corner of the Gardens, and was
treading her way down the chestnut alley

towards home alone, for she had overpersuaded
her friend, and had got out of
the victoria with Negro.

Ah ! if Belinda could only have foreseen,
would she ever have allowed her to go ?
She remembered the whole walk. It had
been so delicious. The trees were heavily
laden at that time with snowy blossoms ;
and now there was not a single blossom
on any of the branches in the whole
Gardens, and the chestnuts had become
like any other trees.

But they were all fresh, and green, and
beautiful to-day. The dust was gone ; the
leaves glistened like emeralds, all drenched
as they were with the heavy summer rain
for a soft, liquid ray of sunshine was
breaking now from out the dark, lowering
clouds, over Kensington Palace, and its
golden radiance caused each tiny leaf and
blade to sparkle like jewel-stars.

The sky was illuminated too with a

glow from the half-veiled sun, and a deep
crimson, vapoury light — like a rosy veil
let down from between the dark clouds —
was creeping over the westward heaven,
causing It to shine like the dawn of day.

It was delightful to be out now, and
Cicely trod with light footsteps over the
grass, going straight across the open
space towards the Gardens, quite forgetting
Belinda's faint injunction 'not to go
beyond the sight of the windows of her
house.'

She quite forgot this, for a sudden fancy
had seized her She would visit just once
again, and quite alone — as again by happy
chance she was — she would visit the scene
of her own and Negro's great peril, and of
his rescue from the attack of the hungered
mastiff by Sir Harry Wynn.

.She would stand once more where she
had stood that day, when he placed her
restored favourite In her arms. She would

go and stand, she thought, by the lltde
swinging gate which he had opened for
her. How often she had since thought
of it — every time they had met since
then, indeed. How well she remembered
how he had looked then ! How well she
knew every sentence he had said ! She
remembered every word that he had said
on most subjects, indeed ; and she felt
sure that she could almost tell now what
on any topic of mutual interest he would
be likely to say.

But the memory of these first words
exchanged between them was, perhaps,
sweetly cherished above all other words,
although all thoughts and words of his
had become gradually precious memories
to her.

'' I like his thoughts on everything," she
murmured now to herself. " He never
says one word on anything that ever jars
on me ; and nearly everybody else does

jar me — when it comes to real opinions, at
all events. I do think that Sir Harry and
I look on everything in life with the same
sort of eyes."

In fact, she had learned to look with
his eyes so effectually and inevitably, that
it was a happy thing indeed that those
bright blue orbs, through which Harry
regarded the lights and shadows, the good
and evil, the pleasures and work and
duties of his own young life, where good
eyes, clear and transparent — seeing straight
and steadily, and seeing invariably true.
For Cicely had learned to look on everything
in the light which she caught from
him.

She was thinking now, as she trod across
the grass, what a change had come over
her life since the day of that first walk
alone with Nero here. Before then she
had begun to go out with Lady Ridgeway
indeed; some little bits of passing pleasures

natural to her position and age had already
been brought in her way. But she had
not cared much about it all. And though
she liked Lady Ridgeway, she could never
exactly suit herself to her ways of life. So
before Sir Harry came among them she
had often been a little doubtful, and felt
perplexed and strange.

How different all had seemed since
then ! It had all seemed quite changed
and all right ; all pleasant, all smooth, all
happy, her life-stream rippling and bright
with soft sparkling sun-rays like a brook in
the summer time ; — and now, how would it
end for each of them ?

She was thinking over all this as she
crossed the open grassy space, and skirted
round by the Albert Memorial. She was
thinking, and also looking about, lest he
should be waiting for them — looking, and
ready to ask him eagerly, as Belinda
desired her, to come In to tea.

She went round on the south side of
the Memorial steps, and looked up at it.
She did this daily in her drive or walk,
for from her childhood the Memorial had
always pleased her, and she liked to see
it, especially after rain ; and now, in the
bright liquid rays breaking from the heavy
clouds, it sparkled all over, while the
rain-drops hung like diamonds on every
pinnacle and point.

She stood and gazed an instant, and
then went on.

She reached the other side, and the
whole breadth of the Gardens lay before
her. The masses of rich green foliage,
drooping with their weight of summer
rain — the branches laden with heavy
foliage, rich and full leaved, and glistening
in the slanting light. Straight in front
of her ran the long walk, stretching away
towards the other side.

At the southern end of this walk stands

the little Iron wicket at which Sir Harry
and Cicely first met, that bright May
evening, three months ago.

And there now, as she once more
approached It on this dewy July afternoon,
there — with the slanting sun-ray glistening
on his fair hair, as it glistened at that
moment on myriads of emerald leaves —
stood again Sir Harry, leaning quietly on
the railing, idly hitting the small pebbles
at his feet with his black cane, and looking
leisurely about him as if in no hurry ; as If
he had no Immediate Intention of moving
away ; as if there he was, ready to wait
and watch patiently, until the friend for
whom he waited came towards him across
the grass.

And as it said, tout vient a celui qui
salt datte7idre — so In fact she came !

Before he was conscious that he had
lingered long ; before he was nearly tired
of waiting and hoping that she would

come, there she was — walking softly across
the grass, with the same light tread, which
he had at first noticed pleasantly — walking
straight towards him to where he stood by
the gate.

He did not spring forward ; he did not
move. She was coming; he remained
still.

She reached the gate ; she looked up ;
she smiled — and then he raised his hat,
and he, too, brightly smiled and bowed.

Then she stood by the gate also.

"Ah! here you are," he said. "I was
afraid to hope it."

*' You did not expect us after all this
rain ? "

I did not expect — nor yet hope even ;
but I wished very much indeed, and
fortune has favoured me. I am so very
glad you have come."

They stood still with the low gate
between them, he leaning with his hand

VOL. III. K

over the other side, she looking straight
up at him, her lovely bright eyes so soft
and full.

They were silent for an Instant. They
were thinking of the same thing, and both
had quite forgotten, in fact, that they had
come there to talk of last night s debate !

'' This is the very spot," said Cicely, Ina
low, sweet voice — 'this is the very
spot where we were standing that evening,
when (do you remember) I first saw you,
and you rescued Negro, and me also, from
that dreadful dog."

Yes," he said, also In a low, suppressed
voice. " I did not know," he added, bending
towards her across the gate, and
looking with a sudden grave and tender
look In his eyes as they met hers — '* I did
not know that I was rescuing one who
would become so very, very precious tome
as you have been ever since that day.
I did not know it then. — But — oh —

Cicely, you must know — you must feel how
I care for you ; for it seems to me as if
the thought has lived in every moment of
my existence since that May-day evening,
been expressed in every action, and been
spoken in every word. Cicely, you must
know — I love you, dear."

She was silent — quite grave and still and
silent for an instant ; then, as she looked
steadily up at him, with happy glistening
eyes, she said —

Oh, I am so very glad you feel like
that for me ; — oh, I am so very glad."

And she looked quite happy then.

A great passionate throb of intense joy
filled, for one moment, his strong young
heart.

A wave of colour rushed over his face,
and an infinite look of tenderness came
into his bright eyes.

Her simple, unaffected response to him,
the unshadowed joy unmistakable in

her upturned gaze, the fulness of her
confidence, the completeness of her unconditional
surrender, touched him inexpressibly,
and he answered the soft eagerness
of her clear sweet eyes with that light
of gentle and protective tenderness in his.

*swill you come through?" he said,
pushing the swing gate open for her, and
she passed to the other side.

He took her hand then and drew it
within his arm, and slowly they turned
down the green alley together.

Belinda's last injunction to keep within
view suddenly occurred to Cicely's mind ;
but, * under the changed and fresh aspect
of their intercourse, surely,' she murmured
soothingly to her disturbing conscience, " it
could have no application for her or for
Sir Harry now."

It was a glad, sweet evening, and just
tea time ; but neither of them remembered
Belinda's tea.

The rain had quite ceased, and right
above their heads the sky stretched now
in a tender grey-blue, while away to the
west the crimson light deepened every
moment, as they went down the chestnut
glade.

Little clouds of soft feathery mist crept
among the damp branches, and the leaves,
moved by a soft southern breeze, shed
myriads of diamond drops upon the grass.

It was delightfully cool, and after so
many days and evenings of dust and heat
and intense dryness, it was refreshing as
well. The birds came out after the
shower, and sang and piped and chirruped
the sweetest jubilee in the trees, and all
nature seemed to wake up invigorated with
unusual gladness as the rain drifted away,
leaving a sweet refreshing dew behind.

All the Garden, sparkled ; the flowers,
lately quite dust-laden, now raised their
heads, all seeming indeed to smile, every

blade and cYery leaflet sparkling softly ;
while the daisies, which had drooped begrimed
and weary through many weeks of
summer heat, now found strength anew to
raise their white coronets once more, and
to glisten like so many stars upon the
grass.

It was an evening of intense sweetness
in the midst of the o^lare and heat and
noise of the busy city stretching on every
side. And it was quiet in here, — and the
glad hearts of these two felt the softening
and soothing influence of all nature's
rest, as they passed down the long chestnut
alley together, murmuring words of tenderness
and passionate sweetness, as they exchanged
the soft and deep assurances of a
life-long loyalty and love.

Cicely could not remember much that
was said by either of them, during the
great and deep happiness of that first hour.

Of what was said — little seemed to

remain with her, save the dear memory of
Harry's repeated and eager telling of his
love.

But what she felt during that time, she
knew would never be forgotten.

The sense of happiness so complete, the
deep content and quiet that, after weeks
of uncertainty and excitement, took possession
of her soul, all remained with her
indelibly graven on the deepest memories
of her heart.

All was perfect, and the feeling of what
Harry said — his voice mingling the while
with the whisper of the south wind and
the ceaseless song of the birds — t\\Q feeling
was what remained with her — after the
memory of his many and repeated words
had seemed to passed away.

This is where I was sitting the first
minute I beheld you," Sir Harry said,
when at length they reached the centre

spot of the Gardens, and a pause took place
in the passionately tender expression of
his love.

Here I was seated, — and from here
it was I saw you, coming down that
avenue. Yes, in the heliotrope crepe, to
which I am still so devoted ; and that
angel — my best and beloved angel —
Negro, running behind. Do let us sit
down just here again for one moment ; it
all seems so delicious and so strange ! "

And you did not know anything about
me ? "

Nothing. I merely saw "

But, Sir Harry ! "

"No more 'Sir Harry,' if you please."

She blushed and paused a moment, and
a sweet little smile beamed out upon
him.

Put any other little word before the
'Harry' that you like," he went on; "but
not that any more*'

Afy Harry ! " she murmured softly.
And, oh, I always did like your name ! "

And I, yours."

"■ Did you ? Did you really now ? "

Yes ; of course I did. What a quaint,
sweet, old-fashioned name it is ! Do you
know, I think you were meant for Arch
Aubrey. ' Cicely ' is just exactly a name
which my mother would have loved. It
seems always to sug-gest the sweet old
rose bower behind the wall in the garden
to me. If you knew how often I have
imagined you at Arch Aubrey ; and now
to think that I may see you there, and
as my own Cicely, too — my sweet one !
my little love ! "

Harry, do you know all about me ? "
said Cicely, presently, in a quiet tone — butin
a peculiar tone, too, as if she had taken
some resolution. " Do you know really
about me ? "

He coloured suddenly.

Yes, indeed," he said ; '' I know more
of you than you have ever asked about 7;ze,
my little sweet one. I have been trying
to tell you, do you know, all about myself,
Cicely, all this time ; and now I know
scarcely where to begin. Do you know,"
he added, after a pause, and in a very
grave tone — '' Do you know. Cicely, that
I am very, very poore" And then, as
she only smiled up at him with softening
eyes in answer to his query, he continued
after pausing a moment, to watch wistfully
the lights and shadows of her sweet,
changeful face — 'rand, dear, I should not
mind that — I should not mind being poor !
It has been always so with us. Why
should I mind ? Only, now, suddenly
somehow just now, I do — I do mind,
because I think, Cicely, of you. I know
you are richer — far richer than I am — and
I hate my poverty for the first time in
my life, for it seems to make all the

difference to me now. I feel that because
of it, it is an unworthy thing for me to
ask you to be my wife — and yet, see, I
cannot help it ! — although you are rich,
and I am so very poor. Cicely — cicely,
I wish now that I were rich indeed, my
dearest ; that I might pour out my wealth
at your feet ! "

But why, Harry — why need you have
anything if I have it ? or, at least," she
added, almost sotto voce '' if I can keep it
to give it all to you."

He did not catch the drift of the last
part of the sentence, and only answered
directly her first words.

'' Ah, yes — it is the dreadful part of it.
I ought not to ask for you at all, Cicely,
because you are rich, and I have absolutely
nothing but an old name, and a
beautiful ruined tower, and an estate of
unprofitable acres, and a quaint old village,
and the sweetest and loveliest garden you

could ever see ; but no income to speak
of, dearest — the smallest, at least, I should
say, on which a young fellow like me was
ever sent up to represent his own borough
in Parliament, or on which one could be
expected to keep things going as a Member
and a landlord in any sort of way.
But, at least, I have no big, ugly debts to
stand up against me ; no wretched Jews
to worry one, and no heavy bills to-set
opposite the old name — of that I can
boast, at all events. It is clear ; — but that
is about all I can boast. Cicely, and it is
not much to bring to you. I never meant
to marry any one who was rich like you
are, only, somehow, we could not help it
could we ? — could we, dearest ? " he
added suddenly, smiling brightly round
at her through the gloom of his financial
cloud. *' We need not let that spoil everything
— need we ? We could not help it —
could we — you and I ? "

"Would you like me if I had no
money, Harry ? " she asked him suddenly
then.

My darling, I know people will say
quite the opposite of me. But, Cicely — ■
my sweet little love — your money is indeed
just the one thing, the one part of you,
which I should like you much better without.
But you have got it — dearest, and
you are your own sweet self all the same,
my darling ; and so it cannot be helped,
you see."

'' Do you know, Harry," she murmured
quite low to him, leaning close against his
shoulder as she spoke, and gliding her hand
closer into his — " do you know that there
are things about me that have not been
told to you ? — there are very important
things you do not know ! "

*' Nothing but what will make me love
you more and more," he exclaimed impetuously.
** Tell me that you love me,

my sweet one, and that Is all I care to
hear ! "

Harry," she said then In a low, determined
tone, *' do you know that I am
Garth and Browne ' ? "

He burst into a merry laugh.

'' I know you are the quaintest, sweetest
child In existence," he exclaimed ; ** but
what have you to do in your own person
with that most eminently respectable firm ?
You have nothing to do with It in your
own self, dear ? "

Nothing — at least, of course, I do
nothing. But, Harry, do you not really
mind that I am * Garth and Browne ? ' "

'' I knew it always, you dearest thing,"
he continued, laughingly, "ages and ages
ago. At that first dinner Lady RIdgeway
told me how the money had grown ; but
Cicely, darling," he continued archly, '* you
will not be any longer * Garth and Browne,'
you know, when you come home with me."

She blushed crimson, and looked away
from him down the long alley towards the
old Palace, standing dark against the
crimson of the setting sun. But then she
went on again, in a low, resolute tone —

'^ Harry, you do not know all about me
yet," she said quietly.

Do I not ? Are there any dreadful
revelations coming, my sweet one, eh ?
Well, go on, my own love, tell me everything
; and then you shall be my little
Confessor ; and, in your turn, I wonder
what you will think, when I have told you
all about me ? " he replied lightly.

But you do not know all about my
guardian," she went on ; " about his power
over my fortunes and over myself; or,
at all events, over 77te, as long as I and
the money remain united — as long as I
represent, in fact, ' Garth and Browne.' "

Which you will not do very long, my
little sweet dear ! " he exclaimed. '' How

I do like hearing you go on in that solemn
little way of yours, Cicely ; and it is too
quaint to think of your being ' Garth and
Browne.' "

And of your loving ' Garth and
Browne,' " she answered him — her gravity
of the moment lighting up with an arch
smile as she said it.

And of 'Garth and Browne' liking mee,"
he answered. " Now that I really know
you will care for me. Cicely, it seems so
settled, and so natural, that I wonder to
myself if there was ever a time when I did
not know you, and did not love you, dear."

It does seem long ago," she said,
glancing softly up at him again. "It
seems quite long ago, when I did not
know you ; and now you are to belong
to me — for ever ! I feel so glad," she
added ; '' but, Harry — Harry, dearest, we
must not be too — too sure."

Not sure ! Who on earth is to interfere

with us, I should Hke to know ? " he
exclaimed. " You love me, Cicely — you
love me ; and that is all — that is all that
can possibly concern me in the matter."

Oh no ! " she said, with eager anxiety
in her tone, *' there are all kinds of dreadful
questions, and difficult things to be
settled. And I cannot help it, Harry,
for I was born, you know, ' Garth and
Browne.' "

He laughed out again in answer to her,
and then, suddenly, he became thoughtful
and grave.

"It is the most extraordinary thing," he
said ; " I cannot account for it — but every
time you mention your guardian's name,
it recalls something to my mind that I
cannot in the least make clear to myself;
nor can I account for its arousing some
forgotten association — but it does. I am
sure I never before heard the name ; and
yet, what is it that connects it with an

VOL. ni. L

old, far-away painful memory of my
mother to me, when you repeat the name
of 'Garth!' How can we explain these
things ? I am sure I cannot ; and yet, so
firmly is some association with the name
impressed upon my mind, that I must
look up the old family papers and genealogies,
when I get home again, and see
if it comes in among us anywhere at all.
Can you account for it, Cicely, for the
inexplicable association ? "

No, indeed, I cannot."

'* Well, never mind — never mind, my
sweet little one, all these vexed questions
about your guardian and your money.
It must all come on for discussion, dear,
when I make his acquaintance, and when
I make my proposal to him in due form ;
but, now, do let us dismiss all that for
this one evening, and let us take a quiet
stroll down to the water and along the
edge. It is so very charming there. I

bring Ronald for a plunge every morning."



Harry, I am so very happy," Cicely
presently said, when they had risen, and
were walking slowly down the alley side
by side once more, her hand leaning rest-fully
on his arm. '* And I will not say
more now, if you wish it ; for indeed I am
so happy, there seems nothing I want
to say ; but — I fear many things. Do you
know, I must go back," she whispered,
and tell Belinda all about it, Harry,
before I can be quite engaged to you ;
and I must tell my guardian to-night."

*' What, this very evening ? "

'eyes. He has come back from Paris
now, and he is coming to see us after
dinner to-night. Yes, I will tell him at
once, Harry — I will."

'' Very well. And then ask the old
buffer if he will see me," said Sir Harry,
gaily. '' He may or may not consent — of

that I am well aware ; but you are engaged
to me, If you please, Miss Cicely, all the
same."

*' Yes, you know I am. Nothing can
prevent that," she answered. '' But — there
is ' Garth and Browne ' ! Oh, I shall be
glad now. If they will let me have It all,
for I may then be able to give It all to
you. I am very proud and glad, for once
in my life, Harry, glad of all the possessions,
just for your sake, but — I fear it
will be very difficult Indeed with * Garth
and Browne.' "

Hang Garth and Browne ! " exclaimed
Sir Harry. 'you know your own mind.
Cicely, and you have really only to speak
it, and you will see It will be all right.
It must be all right. Nothing could come
in now between us ; nothing could separate
us now from one another, my own love.'

I know it, Harry ; and Mr. Richard
Garth shall know It to-night."

"He won't like me, I dare say, when
you tell him I am a needy and out-elbows
M.P., with an old baronetcy and
an Impoverished estate. But you set me
upon him. Cicely, and I will bring him
round."

I am sure you could, dearest Harry.
It will be all riofht — it must be — when he
comes to know you."

"He cannot know me for a few days,
though, I fear, my darling. For — I have
not told you yet — I am going away. Only,
however, for just a day or two. I have
had a summons from Arch Aubrey, and
I have to go down to-night. There is a
meeting which I am expected to attend, and
as it is important to my little community
there, I suppose I must not shirk it. So
I have made up my mind to go down by
the night train. But I will be up again
in a few days ; and you will write to me
and tell me all the guardian says."

I will write to you from Maidenhead,
Harry, when Belinda and I get there tomorrow
night."

Yes, of course ; write everything —
everything, and say again and again that
you love me in every line."

Yes, dear Harry," she softly murmured;
if you like it, I will."

'' Is it not pretty here, dear ? " he went
on. " Look at those deep shadows in the
water, Cicely. I have often been here
quite alone during the summer, and stood
mooning about on the bank — with nothing
to contemplate but my own reflection in
the water, and thinking what a solitary
fellow in this big world I was. I never
thought I should stand here so soon —
no longer alone, but with you, my darling ;
and that I should feel so utterly happy as
I am now, — as I realize that I am to be
no more alone, my love."

I hope not, Harry," she whispered,

In her soft, tremulous tones. '' I hope not
• — not alone, never quite alone again."

They walked along the water's edge fora
few moments then In silence. It was
still and calm, and though the rain had
cleared away, not many Londoners had
come abroad.

So, in fact, they had the Gardens almost
to themselves. It was so very quiet here
In this walk they had chosen. They were
as pleasantly alone and undisturbed for
some time longer In their converse, as
they would have been If wandering by the
Arch Aubrey river instead of by the Serpentine
here ; and so still was the feeling
around them, as they moved slowly b}'
the water's edge, that they had soon almost
forgotten that they were close to the neighbourhood
of streets, and in the midst of a
huge city ; and they had lost pleasantly all
consciousness of the world beyond these
green slopes and alleys, and had forgotten

most things save the sweet satisfying sense
of each other's presence.

So far had they wandered into dreamland,
indeed, that it was with a suddenly
aroused sensation of silent astonishment,
which merged quickly, however, into
intense amusement as well, that Sir Harry
caught sight of another pair — two other
saunterers much like themselves ; two
others standing also idling leisurely at the
brink of the water, both as absorbed as
they had been in one another, both as
completely oblivious of surroundings and
as unconscious of who might be about to
approach.

He started, and uttered an exclamation
in a low voice ; and Cicely, who was
musing in a happy fit of restful abstraction
of mind, with her eyes fixed on the dewy
grass, looked suddenly up in the direction
to which he pointed as he uttered that
exclamation, and as he broke into a soft

laugh. Then they both exclaimed, and then
laughed again a low laugh of intense but
restrained amusement, as they turned
round to exchange, moreover, a mutua.
glance of intense surprise.

Just then the other pair came slowly
alone the water's edge, still unconscious of
Cicely's and Harry's appearance, still
absorbed in their conversation and in one
another. Sir Harry and Cicely, for their
parts, advanced from their side to meet
them !

Suddenly they all four paused — a few
paces apart from one another, and then
they all four broke into a merry laugh !

For there indeed were Jack and Lady
Blanche Ethridge,as reprehensibly engaged
as were the other two, promenading en
tete-astute, just as Sir Harry and Cicely
Browne were, out here, in this soft July
sunset, by the Serpentine's romantic shore !

'* I hope you are spending a pleasant

evening," said Sir Harry Wynn, raising
his hat.

*' Cicely Browne ! " murmured Lady
Blanche, in answer moving swiftly forward
towards her.

Dear Lady Blanche, I am so glad to
see you."

And I to see you," she answered, in a
low tone. '' You look, you do, dear Cicely,
very nearly as happy as I beg to say I
feel."

'' And I am happy," said Cicely, sympathetically.
'' I feel it, also, just what I
look ; and, oh, I am so very glad ! "

'* So I see, my dear. It would be difficult
for you to look more glad."

And you. Lady Blanche, you look happier
than I have seen you for many a day."

And so I am. Oh ! I did not forget
our talk, little Cicely," she answered ; " and
Jack and I have been discussing the whole
matter just now."

And have settled to go and do so likewise,"
exclaimed Jack, with an ecstatic burst
of hilarity. *'Ah, Wynn, old boy, I am
almost out of my mind with joy. We
have settled it all. I am going in for it
all with Jim Fotheringham, and Blanche
is going to chance it with me — just like
O' Brian's little plucky wife."

*' The happiest people in London, my
dear," said Lady Blanche, eagerly, to
Cicely again. '* And we are just going
to imitate them the best way we can. I
have got over the difficulty of the coats and
big boots, dear, and Jack says that nothing
on earth will ever induce him to wear a
bad hat. He has promised me that, at all
events, and — so we have settled it ; and,"
she added suddenly, " we owe all our
happiness to Sir Harry."

'' To me ? "

Yes ; it was your five o'clock tea that
did it all, for that was the very day on

which I finally made up my mind to marry
NO ONE but — my Jack !"

Very charming indeed," replied Sir
Harry. 'rand we are proud to be the
first to offer our congratulations, Lady
Blanche."

Thanks, thanks, old fellow," exclaimed
Jack, with exuberance again. 'rand now,
halloa ! eh ! what — what are we to do
in return, I should like to know, as to
congratulations. I say, Blanche, we have
been-cupid blind, and no mistake, I see,"
he continued in ecstatic tones — then adding
suddenly, " My dear fellow — my dear
Wynn, I am enchanted. Let me be the
first to congratulate you now, I beg of
you, and then you can go on again at
vie as long as ever you like."

He was wringing Sir Harry's hand with
enthusiasm now, and turned to claim a
similar expression from Blanche. But
she and Cicely were already exchanging

felicitations in a truly womanly manner, —
congratulating one another by mingled irrepressible
tears ; — gentle tears, with smiles
bright as two summer rainbows breaking
through them all. With these and with
repeated embraces — in which vows of undying
friendship were silently expressed
and interchanged — Blanche and Cicely
were mutually wishing each other all the
happiness they each expected, — wishing it
indeed with true sincerity from out the
overflowing fulness of their feelings.

That was a singularly pleasant meeting
indeed in those dewy Gardens, where the
soft evening song of the nightingale broke
out on the calm dewy air, to echo and
celebrate with a sweet jubilee the love
ringing so joyously in all their glad young
hearts.

CHAPTER VII.

*I WILL PROTECT HIS NAME.'

I DO not know how soon Lady Blanche
and Jack made their way home ; it was a
good long way across the Park to Stanhope
Street, and when she got into the carriage
at the corner of the Gardens, the sun was
low. Nor have I ever been satisfactorily
enlightened as to how Lady Ethridge
received them after that evening stroll.
They deserved to have been reprimanded
seriously, and no doubt they were. I
never heard the details. But this, at all
events, I know, that just as Belinda was
becoming gravely concerned, Sir Harry
brought Cicely safely home to the door at

Prince's Gate, and then ran (three steps at
a time) up the broad staircase, to clasp
Belinda just once and very cordially by
the hand.

Will you have me ? " he exclaimed ; —
but no response ever reached him from
Belinda, who dissolved instantly behind her
handkerchief into tears. But she returned
his clasp, with tenderness, and he fancied
that he caught at least the low broken
murmur of " God bless you," and this
satisfied him.

He turned round for one word with
Cicely, and caught her, to his satisfaction,
just at the head of the stairs. For Belinda
had turned back to enjoy her tears in
the drawing-room — like a jewel among
chaperones, as she never failed to be.

He caught Cicely for one instant.

I must go," he said. '' I must catch a
seven o'clock train, love, and it is now six.
And now. Cicely, my darling, my own love,

just once; It was too horrid being out there,
when we said it all ; for out there one
could only say it, you know ; but now,
Cicely, just once, really, really — you do love
me, my own darling, do you not ? you
never, never will give me up for any one ?
never send me from you, after I come
back from Arch Aubrey — never more
again ? Will you say you love me ? or —
well, do not mind. I do not think you need
even say it, dearest one ; this is ever so
much better instead."

And he stooped then, and she raised her
quiet demure face without hesitation to
him. Once and again his eager kiss touched
her soft lips, and then he was really
gone. —

But it was, as it were, a seal set on their
love to Cicely's mind. Her life never
could belong to any other than him now,
she thought — not to any other one save
him. She must be his for ever and forever

now, and he must always be her own
one love, her own bright Harry.

Still Mr. Garth must have something to
say to it, and of this both she and Belinda
were well aware !

After two hours spent in happy tears,
and much delightful excitement, they prepared
for that gentleman's arrival towards
eight o'clock. How would he take it all ?
How would he receive this news which
must greet him now, the first night even,
on his return from France ?

How would he conduct himself when he
was informed that — without any consultation
with him, without his permission or
without asking his advice — the head of
the house of Garth and Browne had given
herself away.

In his absence terrible things had been
doing. How would the chief ruler of the
Garth and Browne dynasty take it all ?

VOL. III. M

In a firm like theirs, it was a fixed rule
that even the hearts of its members should
not wander or turn in new and unforeseen
directions without due consultation with
the rulers in the firm. And without full
approval from them, such an important
item in the properties of the house, as was
the heart of little Cicely, ought not to have
been disposed of at all. But then hearts
are just the one bit of property of which
it is sometimes so difficult to dispose —
at will !

That Belinda should be sadly nervous
was not at all surprising, as the time drew
near. But it must be confessed, moreover
that to-night even Cicely was not without
her thrills of terror as well.

She could remember so many days gone
by when she had been called into the
dining-room after the firm had dined.
That call had always fallen with a chill
upon her heart. She had never wished

to go ; and weary had been those hours
of her childhood through which they talked
before her of all these mysterious topics
of the house, which she never could
follow, and as they had held long discussions
on shares and debentures, which
she could never understand. How wonderful
it all seemed now, looking back
upon it ; if there had been day-dreams and
bright hopes in her eager young heart
through all those years, they had been
hidden away carefully upstairs. Neither
her father nor Richard Garth had ever
cared about her private feelings, and how
could Mr. Garth be expected to understand
them now.

Cicely had had time, after her hours
sweet conversation with Belinda, to go
away, quite alone by herself, and gather
up her forces before her guardian came,
and to look the affair clearly in the face.

She loved Sir Harry — of that she had
no more doubt than that there was a sun,
which had shed its bright setting rays
upon them all through the happy evening
of that soft July day.

She loved Sir Harry, and joyfully would
she have poured out her wealth at his feet.
Poured out the whole wealth lavishly and
willingly of the house of Garth and Browne.
And more than this, he loved her, and
would have her as his wife, and would take
her away with him, down there to Arch
Aubrey, away from the stately solitary old
home.

She would be with him ; she would beloved
by him. And loved, as she knew full
well — not only because she had perhaps
that fortune of Garth and Browne to give
him, but because she was herself just the
quaint little brown-haired girl whom he
had seen and fancied and loved (as he
told her), days before he ever knew that

she was Garth and Browne indeed, or
that she had money to bring the man
whom she might marry.

They loved one another. Ah! there was
the real happiness of it all. Happiness,
sweet, bright, and dear indeed, which
could not be had by buying.' So Cicely
had been wont to put it in her quaint
analysis of her heart's wishes many and
many a time. Here was a happiness
which would abide, if all things which
could be bought with money were to pass
and vanish away.

They loved — it was enough, surely — and
for the future, for her own part, she would
never have had thought or care.

But Cicely knew her guardian.

She knew too the hard conditions of her
father's will.

She knew there would be a contest, a
fierce tempest to encounter, a fiery scene.

And she knew, likewise, that Richard

Garth's face would be stern and obdurate,
and that there would be a choice which she
would have to make at last.

No new choice on her part, however ;
for she had made it — she had made it
long ago, when first she learned the
terms on which she was to remain the
representative of the house of Garth and
Browne.

But now her choice must be made
openly, and (if need be) all her money
must be formally resigned. She would
have retained it gladly now for Sir Harry's
sake — as he had said he had so very
little. For he had said it regretfully, as
if money might be perhaps a good thing
for him to have. She would gladly have
kept it for his sake ; but there could
never be a doubt of the choice for her
part that lay between her fortune and her
feelings.

She knew full well, for she knew herself.

and she thought too that she knew Sir
Harry. She had no fear that any loss of
fortune would affect his love.

Had he not said that it was in his eyes
an obstacle ? — and she knew that he had
spoken truly indeed.

Well, it must be all gone through ; and
then, when she knew for certain how it
would all turn, she would write and tell
all to Sir Harry.

Cicely fancied that she knew for certain
how it would turn. She knew Mr. Garth
so well that she judged shrewdly Sir
Harry's claim was not one that would
stand a chance for a minute with him.

He had no reverence for an old name ;
and a baronetcy carried for him no special
weight. It was too easy among city men
to become what he called a ' Sir.'

Had Sir Harry been a peer indeed, he
might have been moved by a certain
vanity and gratification to favour him, for

like all true radicals, he was prone to
reverence ' a lord.'

But a baronet's title was as nothing in
his eyes, because, to his peculiarly narrow
mind, that old baronetcy of centuries ago
would have no more prestige than the title
of Sir Charles Snookly, who had been a
struggling shoemaker in Fleet Street for
years after Garth and Browne had arrived
at — ' money.'

Cicely knew Richard Garth well enough
to be aware of all this. And she felt
shrewdly convinced that an impoverished
young baronet from Stoneshire would
no more impress him than if he were
knight of Temple Bar of last year's
creation, and had not money enough to
keep up his gilded coach, or to boast a
pair of horses suitable for Hyde Park.
He would think no more of him than of
a city sheriff who had been knighted,
but who was so out of elbows as to

make his position but the shadow of a
name.

She felt sure Sir Harry would appear
but a needy and penniless fortune-hunter,
in the eyes of the wealthy Richard Garth.
And Cicely positively shrank from bringing
even his dear name up for her guardian's
contempt and ridicule.

She hated to think of the opprobrious
epithets that would be attached to — what
she thought — the — beloved and beautiful
title of ' Sir Harry Wynn.'

How should she manage to screen it ?

She meditated profoundly and long, and
by the time her guardian was announced,
she had resolved upon a line of action in
her own mind, by which Mr. Garth's views
could be easily elicited before the exact
condition of matters should be confided
to his unworthy ear.

A line of action by which — announcing
her own intentions, and repudiating for all

future time the continued tyranny over
her life and destiny of the firm of Garth
and Browne — she would at the same time
protect the dear name of Sir Harry Wynn
from the ignominy of Mr. Garth's certain
contempt. And this scheme was the final
result of her meditations.

CHAPTER VII.

cicely's views on — 'gold.'

Full of her scheme, down Cicely came at
last to the drawing-room just as her
guardian rung the great door-bell.

'* Now, Belinda, for the tug of war," she
said. " I wonder how he has enjoyed himself
in Paris."

Mr. Garth did not appear as if he had
enjoyed himself; he came in looking grim
and disagreeable, and an odd contrast was
his surly aspect indeed to the radiance
exhibited this evening by his young ward.

Cicely had composed her countenance,
and she had cooled her cheeks ; but (though
of course she was not in the least aware of

it) there was a bright and wonderful light
all over her face, and the sweet radiance
of happiness played on her lips and in
her eyes.

It beamed and danced not only in her
smile, but throughout all her strong efforts
at gravity it shone from every feature.
Such a sweet bright light — the fairest
ever seen on any human countenance ! and
irrepressible, as it always is, when the
happiness is real and true. For it is a
bright sweet light, that of joy spontaneous
and overflowing, and it is one never to
be forgotten and seldom seen. It gives
a wondrous beauty and a tender radiance
to the plainest face.

Cicely's little, demure, expressive countenance
was never plain, and with that sweet,
fair, unconscious light on it she looked, indeed,
quite lovely to-night. And Richard
Garth, as her eager, upturned face met his
hard, unloving eyes, stared and positively

Started, for there was something novel and
quite mysterious to him about her aspect
just then.

It did not occur to him, as it would have
done to the dullest man not immured in
such engrossing themes as the affairs of
the house of Garth and Browne, to say-emphatically
to himself and admiringly —

Why, Cicely is in love ! '

It did not occur to him, so he only
wondered and felt rather stupefied, and
said —

How do you do ? " with an odd sort of
a discontented grunt.

Then he sat down, after shaking hands
with her — or rather after shaking two of
her fingers — sat down a good way off from
where she and Belinda stood, and looked
away — as if it rather annoyed him to see
her standing there looking so bright, so
young, so lovely, and so joyous, and in
every way so utterly unlike what any

proper representative of the house of
Garth and Browne ' should be.

'' I hope you have enjoyed yourself in
Paris, Mr. Garth," she said presently.

'' Humph. I did not go there to enjoy
myself; it is a foolish place."

Oh, I am so sorry ; I wish you had enjoyed
yourself."

Matters have not been as satisfactory
as I could have wished, Miss Cicely —
business matters, I mean."

Oh, I am so sorry," she repeated again,
desirous of being very sympathetic ; but
with her face sparkling in contradiction to
her expression of sorrow, and all dimpled
over in spite of herself with that provoking
gleam of joy.

** Humph. You look very sorry," he
said sarcastically, at length, speaking out
his half-defined astonishment at her.
"You look the image of sorrow, I must
say, indeed. You seem very well, Miss

cicely ; I need scarcely ask after your
health."

Oh, I am very, very well, thank you so
very much — in fact I am quite extremely
well."

'' I never saw you look better — humph."

She turned away from his gaze, and
walking towards the window looked out
into the soft summer evening light. It
struck her that her extreme salubrity of
aspect annoyed him — for again he grunted,
and then remained absolutely silent.

They went on often something like this,
during such of their interviews as were unsuccessful
; so it was nothing new, and she
did not feel much surprised. She had expected
somehow that he would come back
rather cross from Paris.

*' Mr. Garth, will you have a cup of
coffee?" she said presently, turning suddenly
round again upon him and trying to compose
herself, and to look solemn, and

business-likes and attentive. " Will you
have a cup of coffee, or some tea, or something
else, any thing you like Mr. Garth ?
—oh ! dor

'' No, I thank ye. I have just dined,
and had a cup of coffee before I left the
hotel ; and tea I never take at this hour of
the night. You women are always injuring
yourselves with tea."

I never drink it after five o'clock," said
Cicely, demurely.

*' Well, and that is bad enough. Humph,
I remember the time when I was young —
when tea was five shillings a pound, and regarded
properly as a luxury, and now "

*' Now every one enjoys it," said Cicely,
laughing as she spoke ; " every one enjoys
the cheering cup, eh ! and one gratefully
shares its delights at five o'clock with one's
washerwoman. We have improved, I think,
since you were young, Mr. Garth ; we live
in happier times."

*' I do not see it," he replied ; and once
more there was a silence, and he went off
into an undeniable condition of ' sulks '
again.

Cicely felt they were still steering away
from the important subject on which she
wished to speak to him ; and they had
not even begun yet to enter on the topic
about which she imagined that Mr. Garth
wished to speak to her. But he gave hera
lead presently, while she was still thinking
and still uncertain how she had best begin.

"Well, have you been thinking about
your settlement ? " he asked her suddenly,
as if that was the uppermost thought of all
his remembrances of Paris.

Yes, I have," she replied, with promptness,
not a little to his surprise.

He looked up at her quickly, somewhat
taken aback.

Eh ! oh, indeed. You have — have
ye ? Well, that is sensible, at all events.

VOL. in. N

Upon my word, girls are very sensible
on these kind of matters in these days.
In my time, now, I remember "

'ein your time — not so very long ago
either," answered Cicely, laughing — 'they
were permitted to have a slight tinge
of romance in their composition, which
coloured their foolish views of these things ;
but now," she continued, with a little quiet
and demure irony — " now we have become
rational, have we not, Mr. Garth '^
We are not supposed to fall in love now.
When we think of marrying we simply
look out for a settlement, and that includes
everything else."

He suspected a touch of sarcasm in her
tone, and he answered crossly —

I shall be glad when I get you settled,
young miss, at any rate. You are no
small charge for a man of my years."

"I have not, given you much difficulty
as yet, Mr. Garth," she said gently.

No, no, I have not said ye did ; but
there is no answering for you. Young
things I know, eh ! and with all the bad
company, too, ye keep ? "

Mr. Garth, what do you mean .^ — bad
company ! "

Well, Lady Ridgeway's, and such like."

There are not many such like, I expect,"
she answered, laughing, and turning
her head away. " There are not many
Lady Edgeways, I fancy ; and she is very
kind to me."

She keeps bad company," said Mr.
Garth, calmly.

No," replied Cicely, '* she does not."

Well, well, that is according to taste,"
he answered evasively, for he was apt to
back out of a controversy when she
assumed that very quietly determined
tone. '' Well, well, all I say is that that is
a nice lot of fellows, I take it, she has got
around her there ; needy young chaps, who

are sniffing about in all directions for a
girl with a lump of money like you. They
are not going to get you, Miss Cicely; or,
at all events, they shall not any of them
touch the funds of Garth and Browne."

"They would not condescend to think
of the funds of Garth and Browne," said
the girl, indignantly. " It is the one thing
they detest and hate."

'what — money? Ha! ha!"

He laughed with cynical amusement.

That is all you know," he went on.
I take it — that the greater portion of the
aristocracy, the ' cream of the upper classes,'
as they call themselves — confound them —
the greater number of them are exceedingly
short of cash."

But they hate it, I tell you," the girl
repeated.

Hate money — ha ! ha ! ha ! "

Yes, they are not like us ; they are not
like people who have nothing cul money,

and who are for ever only thinking of
what they are going to buy or sell. Oh,
you must know, Mr. Garth, that it is quite
different. They have everything just as
we have, although they may be poor (or
what you would call poor), while we are so
horribly, so detestably rich. They have
got all they can ever want ; but then they
are not a bit like us about it. Because
you see," the girl went on gravely, and ina
quaint, regretful tone of explanation, " it
is the last thing you ever remark or think
of with regard to them — their possessions
and their incomes. You only seem to
think of themselves, and — I think, do you
know ? — it is because they are never conscious
of it. They never seem to know
that they have got all sorts of lovely,
beautiful things at all. We buy, Mr. Garth,
but they have ; they have, you see, without
buying it, because it all came to them
before they remembered anything, ages and

ages ago. So that Is it — that is why they
do not seem to care, and why they are
much better off than we are, you see, Mr.
Garth. We have perhaps money, and we
may have by money plenty of things that
are nice ; but these we have got to buy, and
they have them already without thinking
about the money at all. And then besides
this, you see, all our money cannot make
anything we buy an old family thing, for
which we might care for the sake of people
who had It and who used It before we
were born. So I do not see how we can
care for things that are for ' nobody's sake '
no one at least who ever belonged tous.
That is what I think, about It, Mr.
Garth — do not you ? "

This is a new view Indeed of your
possessions," he responded. '' I suppose
you do not care a straw then that I have
brought you a new Sevres service from
Paris. It Is a royal service, too, and came

from a king's table, and has the L of Louis
the Fifteenth right enough set on it too. It
is worth its weight in gold, I tell you, and
I picked it up on the Quai beyond the
river for a very moderate sum. Eh ! and
is that no pleasing news to you, my
dear?"

He wished to be kind to her in his
own dry way, and had certainly given a
great deal of money for her present.
Although indeed it had been a bargain ; —
and therefore the huge cheque which he
had written for it had been from his business
point of view a moderate sum. He
had hoped she would be pleased with
this present from Paris. But her heart
was full of other things.

'' We have two Sevres' sets already,"
she answered rather wearily. '' But Lady
Ridgeway has one that beats them all,
and her great-grandmother brought that
also from Paris, Mr. Garth ; but she did

not buy it, for it was a present to her from
the French Queen."

Humph ! most Hkely she had not a
penny to buy it with, if she had wanted it,"
he answered, '' so it was as well she got
a present — to bring home."

I think that is an interesting thing to
have, if you like, Mr. Garth. I think I
should value pretty china too, that one
came to possess in that kind of way, and
I like tea things," she continued, turning
to the window again, and remembering
Sir Harry's five o'clock tea, and the cups
of quaint old-fashioned Wedgwood ware
out of which they had drank, and which
he had said had been in use in his
family for so long. "I like tea cups that
one's own people have used in times gone
by. But you have been very kind to
think of me, Mr. Garth," she said presently,
relenting towards his present. " You
have been very kind, and you must not

mind If I do not care much. I know
it is very wrong ; but the china we have
now would have done very well for us,
I think, — and please do not buy any more
things like that for me, for really I only
like old pretty things that have stories or
associations connected with them, and
alas ! in our family there are not any old
stories to tell."

Humph ! no, indeed," he answered ina
surly tone, but with some grim amusement
as well ; " we cannot buy the old
stories or associations, true enough," he
added, laughing to himself again ; *' but it
is bad fun laying out a thousand pounds,
Miss Cicely, to bring you home a present
from Paris, I see. Small thanks I get for
it, my young lady."

'' I am so sorry," she answered, and
then again there was silence, for they
were still far distant from the subject
which most interested her.

Suddenly Richard Garth himself introduced
it with a quite unconscious coup
d'etat. " Miss Cicely, I have set my mind
on getting you married," he said.

And then she turned round upon him
indeed again. For all the while this conversation
had been going on she had stood
still by the window looking out, and he
had sat on a chair some distance from her.

She turned now, however, quickly, andover
her sweet bright face came one of
those quiet cynical smiles, which so often
reminded Richard Garth of her father, and
which were an evidence, if he could only
have read them, of a cool, determined will
(as immovable as his had been) behind
those soft lustrous eyes.

She turned and answered his last
remark.

You have made up your mind, indeed,
have you, to assign me with all other
goods of the firm ? "

I have set my mind on marrying you,"
he repeated roughly ; " and I have seen old
Bullion, of ' Bullion, Bullion and Specie,'
on the subject to-day."

'you HAVE, Mr. Garth !"

I have, and all my life through I have
thought the two businesses should be
united. We spoil one another," he went
on, not heeding her start of indignation and
dismay. " We move in the same grooves,
and spoil each other a good deal by competition,
and I have always been of the
opinion that we could by uniting, make a
colossal business and realize a very fine
thing of it in a few years. I take it. Miss
Cicely, that your son will be heir to as big
a lump of solid cash, as ever came from
the east of Temple Bar to take a seat
among the Peers. Eh ! ' Garth and
Browne ' have done well enough in their
own way, but ' Bullion, Bullion, Garth,
Browne and Specie' may do better."

I wish," said Cicely, quietly, " you
would tell me exactly what you are talking
about, for then I might be able to
answer you straight, Mr. Garth, and we
might arrive at some results."

I am talking of your marriage to Fred
Bullion, which I am negotiating at the
present time, as you well know."

I knew nothing, Mr. Garth, for I really
cannot bring myself to believe the implied
meaning of what you say. Do you tell
me really that you have been doing me
the great injury — inflicting upon me the
great insult I had almost said — of representing
me in such a light, and speaking of mein
such a manner, to any one whom — whom
I do not even know ? "

*' I have spoken, and I have settled the
matter pretty nearly," he answered, without
looking at her ; " and Fred Bullion
is coming here with me tomorrow. That
is, in fact, just precisely what I came to

intimate to-night. And, well, he will be
hard to please if he fights shy of his
bargain after seeing you, Miss Cicely, for
you are a wonderful likely young miss for
any man to find — backed up by so many
thousands a year. Heiresses are mostly
much more unpleasant than you are, my
dear ; you need have no fear on that score.
I can assure you, I take it, Fred Bullion
will be likely to urge on his father in this
business without much instigation from me."

Mr. Garth," said Cicely, with a firm
and dangerous determination in her voice
then, ''if you bring that person here, if I hear
that you are in the drawing-room and anyone
with you, I will 7io^ come downstairs,
if you wait, and keep him here waiting,
from lunch to dinner time, and from dinner
time till twelve o'clock at night ; that, at
all events, I can promise you."

Bless your heart alive, girl ! " exclaimed
Richard Garth, startled out of his usual

morose and obtuse manner by her sudden
fire and determined energy of tone. " But
you cannot marry a man without seeing
him at least once, at all events."

Then I will never see him, that I can
certainly assure you — not as long as I
live."

Good God ! what do you mean ? " he
exclaimed, with sudden excitement and
anger, as he rose to his feet and came near
to where she stood.

I mean that I will never marry that
person or anybody else you may like to
find for me, — not If I never touch another
farthing from the firm of Garth and
Browne, until my dying day."

She could be decidedly emphatic in a
moment of energy, as this now became,
and Richard Garth turned pale as he met
her sparkling eyes.

Was she going to give him trouble, this
young thing, whom he and Browne had

always merely regarded as a unit, amenable
like all the other properties of the firm.
Regarded as a valuable item certainly,
because she formed a central point in her
own small person, where several important
and grave transactions might be made to
meet.

As such they had always regarded her
in the calculations of the house. As
such — and, personally, in fact as nothing
more !

Now was she going to give him trouble ?

Suddenly, the thought came up upon
him then, that Browne had used him
hardly ; had gone off quite conveniently
for his own comfort in this transaction,
leaving the most difficult and subtle
question that in the whole course of their
business lives together had arisen to be
settled by him — leaving it to his solitary
judgment, and to be managed as he best
could manage it — alone. And Richard

Garth, although a tyrannical, was at the
same time a very nervous man.

He was not calculated to carry out great
coups in his administration by powers of
elaborate and delicate force; and he felt
himself scarcely equal to all this complex
business now. He had never indeed felt
quite able to manage Cicely. Her father
had been at all times his master ; and
there were certain glances recalling her
father s force and determination of character,
that constantly came flashing out upon him
through this controversy, and that frightened
him in that likeness to her father —
which seemed so irreconcilable with those
soft, lustrous eyes.

Richard Garth felt angry and irritated,
and really frightened as well, and he felt
all three as much from the sense of his
own personal impotency to rule her as
from his disappointment at her blank
refusal to be thus ruled.

His irritation indeed enabled him to display
an unseemly obstinacy, which was
unfortunate, as well as a wilful degree of
dogged resolution to try undue tyranny in
his dealings with her now. It was important,
he felt, to force down all threats of
rebellion at this point, and to assert his
autocratic government on the destiny of
her future, if not over these throbs of feeling
that might disturb her proud young heart:
He assumed this determined line with an
awkward effort.

*' I tell ye," he said angrily, " that the
firms of Bullion, Bullion and Specie and
Garth and Browne mus be united, and
that is the end of the matter for you, my
young miss."

'' And I tell you that I will never listen to
any such scheme. It is no use, Mr. Garth,
for you to look out for alliances for me ;
you may spare yourself all such unnecessary
trouble. I will have nothing to say to Mr.

VOL. III. o

Bullion, or to any one you may think
proper to propose to me in that light, or
whom you may select for me in that spirit.
I will have nothing to do with them at
all."

'' Are you mad ? " he began again ; but
she interrupted him, and went on —

I tell you, Mr. Garth, that I do not care
one single straw for the aggrandizement of
the house of Garth and Browne, or for my
own future as their representative. I have
never found happiness in the possession of
their wealth ; and as to my future I am
going to choose for myself, and I do assure
you, that what I mean to choose is real
happiness, as happiness appears to me —
such happiness as in this difficult world we
may know. T/m^ alone I think worth
one single thought, and I care nothing in
comparison for all the money of the house
of Garth and Browne."

That is a pretty speech to make to me,

miss — to me who have spent my Hfe upon
the firm, and looked upon you ever since
you were born, I may say, as our future
representative and our central point."

*' I am very, very sorry, Mr. Garth — I am
very sorry for you, and I beg your pardon
if I have said anything unfeeling or unkind ;
but I cannot do it, I cannot become a
central point,' because I am not clever at
all, Mr. Garth ; but just a girl, a simple girl,
with feelings and a heart like any other
girl ; and I wish to tell you, I know I ought
to tell you — but all you have said to me
takes the power of telling you from me
altogether. But — I have given my heart
away, Mr. Garth, to-day, and by my own
choosing. I have found — quite independent
of you — I have found, oh ! such a
worthy representative of the house of
Garth and Browne ! "

- What ! "

'' I have promised my heart and my

hand and my fortune, Mr. Garth, to one
who is well deserving of all three of them."

*' Good God !" he exclaimed ; " and I have
got ready the bonds of assignment, and in
fact we have signed them, Bullion, Bullion
and Specie, and I myself; and we have
arranged the whole settlement, and concluded
the bargain on every side. Ay, I
tell ye, the very bonds of assignment are
ready, and — and "

No, thank you," said Cicely, calmly ; for
up to this point she was much more controlled
than he was. '' No, thank you, not
the bond of assignment of me."

Are you mad, girl ? What are you
talking about — of course we cannot do it
without you."

"I am not at your disposal, nor indeed
any longer at my own. I have given myself
away in another direction, Mr. Garth,
so I am sorry I cannot fall in with your
schemes."

And what the devil am I to say to
Fred BulHon ? " he asked angrily.

*' Say you counted without your no,

not anything rude of that kind. But say
simply, Mr. Garth, that you found your
ward had engaged herself entirely to your
satisfaction, and that her time being much
occupied just now, she must decline the
honour of his visit, and must deny herself
the privilege of making his acquaintance.
Say that quite politely, Mr. Garth, do,
please ; but if you wish to see me when you
come tomorrow, do not bring him herewith
you."

But, Cicely, are you in your right
senses, girl ? I tell you I must get you
married," he said.

'rand I tell you, if you will take it in
and believe me, that I am engaged to be
married, and will save you all further
trouble in that way on my account."

And in the name of goodness — to
whom ? "

She had nearly uttered Sir Harry's name
just then in her quick, eager way ; but at
that instant i\Ir. Garth thought fit to
add, in his unpleasant, grumbling, undertone
—

I'll bet a sovereign it is one of those
penniless young vagabonds of Lady Ridgeway's
— confound her ; and I shall have the
very devil to pay."

Cicely turned away from him towards
the window once more then, and the name
refused to cross her lips.

'' Has he money ? " said Richard Garth
presently, after pausing a moment in his
grumbling, and now going back to his
seat once more.

'has he money ? "

None, I believe," answered Cicely; 'eat
least what would count in your eyes as
none, Mr. Garth."

'then he shall never have any of mine,"
he said, with a cold tone of determination

in his voice, and drawings in his breath
between his teeth as he spoke, to smother
the passionate utterance of his disappointment
and fury.

"He does not want it," the girl answered
him calmly.

Then he will do the better without it."

'' We may be all the happier by dispensing
with it," she said.

"And does he want yo7i, miss, without
Garth and Browne at your back, eh ? You
are making a pretty kettle of fish out of it,
I tell you. Your young fancy-booby will
throw you over fast enough, I warrant ye,
when he hears that he has got to take you
penniless. Eh ! that is the smartest road
out of the business, I'll be bound. By
George ! you will find out the truth of my
words : he will not want you without your
money."

The girl's face was hidden away now
from him; she put up her handkerchief and

pressed it against her eyes. Burning tears
of pride and humiliation were running
down her cheeks now, and quick sobs
heaved her slight frame ; she pressed her
forehead against the window for a moment,
and was still silent.

She was struggling violently with herself,
as she heard Mr. Garth's bitter words ;
and his cold, harsh, sarcastic voice rang
upon her heart, striking with pain to its
very depths.

And a black wave of misery came creeping
over her inmost consciousness, because
for that one brief moment she felt a dark
misgiving come upon her — creeping cold
and chill over her spirit, like a shadow
of death — a misgiving of Sir Harry's motives,
a sinister echo of her guardian's bitter
words. Did Mr. Garth know men and the
world much better than she did, she wondered
? —

And after all, were Sir Harry's sweet

assuring words that he loved her — for
herself and not for her fortune — all false ?

All false, though so sweet and dear !

Was it then impossible indeed that love
could ever reach her, save through the
cold channel of her gold ?

So Richard Garth said, at all events.

And yet, with all other women, it was
not so ! Tender and loving women, not
more pleasing than she had perhaps falsely
hoped that she was herself. Women of
all ranks and of all kinds had been loved
for their own sakes, and in response to
the warm quivering glow of their own
hearts.

But with her — no — it must be otherwise!

No one would really love her, Mr. Garth
said, if she did not possess that gold.

And the man who had, above all others,
become dear and precious to her, who had
called out all the tenderest affections of her
heart, did he care for her only — for this

wealth ? Was he but feigning that eagerness
of unselfish love for her ; and through
her loving heart, and quick young impulsive
feelings — was he but aiming at the
fortunes of Garth and Browne ?

Her guardian said so, and perhaps it
was true.

She had seen little of the world.

She loved Sir Harry, and she believed
in him ; but over all the fair garden of her
heart, where the sweet flowers of love
and faith were blossoming in rich beauty,
and rearing their tender delicate crests,
that harsh chilling voice of disenchantment
from her guardian's hard lips came sweeping
like a cold blast, and a blight for that
passing moment seemed to sweep over
her hopes and her joy.

What was she indeed that Sir Harry
could so love her — that he would marry
her with ready loyalty if she came to him
herself — only herself — in all her sweet

womanliness — of riches and fortune and
possessions quite despoiled ?

What was she but quite unworthy of
him at the best of it, after all ?

For a moment she turned to accept her
guardian's verdict, and wept bitter tears.

That is the shortest way out of it," he
said again and again to her. *' Away with
the fortune, tie up the money in some
other direction, and see if the fine lover
does not fall off in time. Well, Miss
Cicely, I think that is about it — eh ? "

The girl still hid her face, but did not
answer him.

It was getting dark now, and Richard
Garth — feeling just as if a piece of business
where going hard against him for the time
being — took up his hat.

He had managed to make a great mess
of this Interview, however, and of that he
had an uneasy, undefined feeling at heart.

He was engrossed in the business view

of It. The personality of Cicely's lover, of
this unknown needy young man who had
taken a hold on her mind, was nothing to
him. He realized but one fact, the young
man had no money ! That was the single
view which took any root In his memory,
and the only aspect In which It occurred
to him to view the affair. Who the man
might be— what he was — what might
possibly be his other recommendations, he
never stopped to Inquire, and Cicely — -
pained and tortured In all her feelings, and
hurt In her most acute sensibilities at
that moment — could not brine herself to
speak further of her lover personally, on
any consideration whatever. Her composure
had quite given way to emotion,
and she could not now bear to think of
mentioning Sir Harry's name to Mr. Garth
at all. At any rate, she could not stay to
hear him weigh and calculate the p7'os and
cons of this alliance for a moment.

'Money' was the one thing he wanted,
she thought to herself; money, and the
Increase of that contemptible fame of money
for the house of Garth and Browne,
Such an Idea as her marriage to young Sir
Harry Wynn seemed so far away from
such a scheme, that It did not even seem
possible to describe him, to a man so utterly
absorbed In sordid projects as Mr. Garth.
She could say nothing more then, and
only thought hotly, that. If Richard Garth
would only go and take the sense and
feeling of the presence of money away
with him, that that feeling might also go
which was creeping so painfully over her
own heart — the feeling that money was
after all, and In cold fact, the one sole
prize of all human happiness and of all
human good !

If he would only go, she felt she might
then raise her head again and have some
comfort in thinking once more of Sir
Harry.

And Richard Garth did go, not waiting
to see Behrida, who was ready and anxious
to fully accommodate him with her general
views.

He did not wait, because he was so
angry and disappointed about the Bullion
project as to be quite confused and unreflective
with regard to any one else ; and
because he wanted to think the matter
out by himself in his own rooms 'down
town.'

He had no regard, in his thoughts of the
whole affair, no regard to the state of
Cicely's heart, nor anxiety for anything
In the complicated matter that Indeed
personally concerned her.

His mind was full of bitterness and
anger against her, and of disappointment
and chagrin. And beyond his chagrin, now
ONE thought possessed him with a sort of
comfort. A new scheme flashed suddenly
from out the fire of his inward anger and

disappointment with her — a new scheme
arose which took instant form in his mind.
It was a scheme by which the firms of
Garth and Browne, and Bullion, BulHon
and Specie might be still united.

It came to him, even as he sat looking
at her, with a bitterness there, and it
prompted him at last to rise up and go
away — to think out his new idea, to think
it all over, in fact. So without any effort
to solicit further confidence from the girl,
he departed, making only one further and
last remark.

"When you are rid of your fortune-hunting
swain. Miss Cicely, and when you
have come back to your right mind, you
can let me know, for maybe this matter
may still be settled, and Frederick Bullion
be a free man even then perhaps. For I
should be glad enough that you should
yourself continue the heiress of Garth and
Browne. So you can let me know. Miss

Cicely, when you have got rid of him.
Perhaps there may still be time." And
with this he departed, and Cicely was left
to compose her mind as best she could
after that long and exciting day.

CHAPTER IX.

A WISTFUL 'farewell

Before Mr. Garth sought repose that
night, however, several more things occurred.


First of all, late as it was when he left
Cicely, he had not heard the last of her
decision — not even the last of it for that
night.

Because no sooner had he departed, than
Cicely, who was not of the type of those
who give much way to mournful reflections
and to the indulgence of tears, gathered
herself together without ten minutes' delay,
thought over her conversation, and came
to a resolution at once.

VOL. III. P

And the consequence of this resolution
was, that before she lay down to sleep
that night, she had written two lengthy
letters, of which one was addressed to Mr.
Garth.

And late as it was, she sent it at once
to him ; for she knew he would be certain
to sit up, and continue to ruminate over
fresh schemes for her captivity, and over
fresh projects for the moulding and forming
of the destinies of her heart and life.

To all these schemes and projects she
wished to put a stop to at once, for — it
was curious — suspense was the one thing
which Cicely had never learned yet to
brook with patience. She hated to feel
that he had left her with his ideas still
indefinite with regard to her, and she hated
too that chill misgiving with which Mr.
Garth had succeeded in filling her heart
towards Sir Harry.

Therefore the very great promptitude

with which she wrote and despatched these
letters.

Mr. Garth, when her letter reached him,
read it with curious and mingled feelings
as he sat alone in his room — quite alone,
reading it immediately the servant brought
it — laying aside all other letters in surprise.
And Cicely's letter ran something in this
way. She began : —

'' Dear Mr. Garth,

The ending of our conversation
to-night was both abrupt and unsatisfactory,
and before going to rest I have come to the
conclusion that I had better write to you at
once. That I had better write some things
which it would be difficult for me to make
you sear, and which I (being too much
pained and hurt by some of your remarks
this evening) could not bring myself composedly
to say to you.

'' I am going to write it all down, and then
perhaps, when you have read it, you may
understand a little better than you now door
than you ever have done, what I really
am, and what I really feel about things, —
and then perhaps, indeed, you will have
done with me for ever.

'' If so, I cannot help it ; I cannot feel or
bring myself to act in any way different
from what I do. All my life you know
how it has been with me. How I have
grown up in this large house almost alone,
left to develop as if I where a plant,
or left merely to exist indeed — a chattel ora
mere item in the general properties of
your firm. The one piece of education I
received, and the one thought deeply and
continually inculcated upon me, being ever
and only the fact that I was thus a mere
property of the firm — its centre, and representative,
and that I must live for its
interests, and for them alone.

For my own personal interests in heart,
feeling, or destiny, no thought was taken,
as you well know. My father never realized
my individual existence at all. I was but
an instrument of commercial enterprise, a
soulless and heartless possession of the
house of Garth and Browne. In return I
was to have truly the best — as it seemed to
you and my father — the best the house of
Garth could bestow. I was to have much
gold. I came gradually to realize all this,
to know that money was the god of your
life, as it has been the god of my father's,
and I realized that I had been brought
up simply to live, to exist, to endure, as a
sacrifice at that shrine.

But it is all no use, dear Mr. Garth, for
I cannot do it. I cannot worship such an
idol. I cannot obey it as a power entitled
to control my life. I cannot see that any
call of filial feeling, any claim that lies in
the memory of my father, or anything I

owe to you, makes it a duty for me to
sacrifice my own personality to the good
of Garth and Browne.

I do not care for money, or for what
money brings. I do not wish to repudiate
what people call my 'blessings' in life. I
know that, regarded from many points of
view, money is a good and precious thing,
but not in that respect in which we regard
it in the firm of Garth and Browne !

It is valueless as a possession for the
heart or soul of any woman, and it is unworthy
the highest faculties of a man.

'' Life is not in the abundance of possession,
and old is a mockery where the soul
is drugged by it, and when the heart is
dead. My heart is not dead, but living,
and it cannot feed on gold ; and my soul
wants more precious things — gifts of grace
and love in rich abundance, such things as
money is all powerless to buy or sell.

''No gold could ever buy them ; but, dear

Mr. Garth, they have come to me ! They
have come — they have come, so my glad
heart sang before yotc came to me this
evening. So I felt, and I triumphed ; but
you have filled me with some misgiving
and fear. I fancied, until I heard you
speak so chillingly and contemptuously tome,
that heaven's best and sweetest blessings
were securely mine. If my fancy were
a true or a false one shall soon be proved.
You have told me to mistrust my love; you
have roused me to question myself.

"Is the heart for which I have given
mine a loyal, a noble heart, as I believe it
to be, or is it mercenary, seeking in me
and through me the wealth of Garth and
Browne ?

*' I compassionate myself infinitely if this
is so. If I were like most other women,
depending for support, for care, for provision,
on the man they love, I should soon
learn if I were sought for myself alone.

Had I not had fortune, people might even
care perhaps for me, individually for little
Cicely Browne, who feels that she herself
Is hidden away, obscured and forgotten
beneath the weight of the wealth of the
firm.

I think all this In bitterness after
having heard you speak ; but I will not
believe, until I have proved it, that such
an unworthy motive actuated the man I
love. I will write to him to-night, and I
will tell him I am despoiled of my fortune
because I am resolved to be true to my
heart ; and I will tell him that he is free,
because perhaps it was unwittingly to the
heiress of Browne and Garth that he engaged
himself, and not to me ; and that,
as I am no longer heiress, he of course is
at liberty, and need not be true to his professions
or to his word. I will liberate
him, and I will free myself from the weary
golden shackles of the house of Garth and

Browne. If he accepts his freedom on
this ground, you shall never hear his name
from me. If he is true — in the face of allah
! if he is true, and I know he is — then
all that there is to know about him you too
shall know.

"He is noble and worthy, and would I
could keep my fortune, if just only for his
sake ; would it were indeed mine — mine
in reality, that I might give it him ; would
I might show him unreservedly how well
I know him to be true. However, fate
must decide all these things, and — we shall
see.

But I have something more to say.
Whatever turn this story of my love may
take under altered fortunes, I have resolved
on one thing — in any case I have resolved
to emancipate my life entirely from the
firm. I feel no action of mine could ever
be in harmony with your wishes, whether I
become the wife of the man I love or no.

ONE MAY DAY.

I could not manage to please you, I
know, even If my heart were free. I could
not sacrifice all my true Impulses — all the
impulses of my nature — to an object which
has no weight with me at all.

I have feelings and a heart, and strong
deep affections, and I am not in any way
a chattel or a tool.

And though the service of a lifelong
care, exercised by you over these affairs
which might naturally be supposed to affect
my closest interests, causes me to wish
with sincerity that it were possible forme
to marry as you desire, yet I feel that
no claims of that kind should be allowed
for a moment to have an influence on so
personal a question as the disposal of my
whole life.

I am trying to write frankly out to
you my views on whit yoii would call a
business question ' — in a business-like
manner. I feel It to be more than useless

to attempt longer to adapt myself to your
wishes and projects or to give myself upto
the schemes of the firm.

"And surely, dear Mr. Garth, you, even,
must feel that It Is quite Impossible yourself.
In your kindest and best moments
the thought must surely come that my
feelings on this one subject should be
regarded above the success of the house
of Garth and Browne.

'' You cannot have known me all these
years without having some little regard
for me, apart from my position as the representative
of the house ; and surely It
must weigh a little bit with you, when
you think of your old partner, that the
personal happiness, as well as the future
of his only child, may perhaps lie In your
hands.

'' The day will come, believe me, when
the happiness or misery, the welfare or the
ill, of a fellow-being will seem more in

your eyes than the house of Garth and
Browne ; and some day, as I often said to
you, when speaking of your own family,
the time will also come when you will wish
that you had not severed yourself from all
tenderness and affection, that you had not
left yourself quite alone — with just only
the firm.

You are yourself the firm now, dear
Mr. Garth ! There is now only you and
me ; and that abstract, formless thing — the
house. You have the power to throw
me off, and to use my father's fortune for
the greater advancement of that empty
name. And no doubt you will sever yourself
completely from me when I shall have
thrown off the trammels of Garth and
Browne.

*' And I shall be sorry, in all my gladness,
if my dearest one prove true to me. I shall
be sorry if for no other cause than this. I
would be as a daughter to you, if you

would be only as a kind-hearted father
to me — if you would be to me what my
father never was ; and I feel that you
could be. If you would but throw behind
you the dignity and aggrandizement of
Garth and Browne. What are they ?
Never mind them. Think of me only,
dear old friend — think of me, little Cicely
Browne, as my own self, and let me think
with regard and affection of you. Do you
know, I think that if you did so, that in
these two curious, colourless, dreary lives
of ours, these two lives of Garth and
Browne — of simply me and you — we
should then find a new beautiful power of
happiness, greater than all the pleasure
that ever did or ever can come from the
money of the firm. I am going to give
up all my wealth for affection, Mr. Garth.
Do you do so also—your very self. Let
the firm flourish alone in its dreary grandness,
and come you and offer a father's
love to me.

** Ah ! how he would think for you, and
love you, and act as a dear bright son for
you ! and then, oh ! Mr. Garth, dear Mr.
Garth, we should have so much for ourselves,
for our very selves, in our lives and
hearts, so much of affection and happiness
and content, that we would care little any
longer for trade fluctuations, or for the
increase of the greatness of Garth and
Browne.

'' I do not despise my father's wish, and I
know that money can obtain much that is
pleasant and fair ; but I will not give away
for it any of the living and precious things
of heart and life which it cannot, cannot
ever buy.

Therefore, if I must choose between
my wealth and my freedom — if, indeed,
it must be so — then I take the latter,
and if you zvill have it so, I must leave you
in solitude in the firm. But I do not part
with you easily ; whatever may be my

future, let me say just this to you — if you
cast me from you, that li ever you require
me I will come. I will come as a real
daughter, and I will be ready to do all
that I can to help or to serve you, if you
may ever want me in this sort of light.
Let me know if it should ever be so. I
would be all that is possible to you as a
daughter ; but, I fear (being what I am), I
can be of no use to you as representative
of Garth and Browne.

I hope that you will tell me, In answer
to all this (for you are still my guardian),
what this decision of mine may In fact
imply. Will you tell me how things will
stand with me ; what I have as mine,
independent of the fortune of the house ;
and what the ground really is on which I
will find myself when my interests have
been separated from Garth and Browne ;
I must then face life as It will come upon
me.

"One word, dear Mr. Garth, I must
still say, for I feel somehow as if I were
bidding you good-bye ; one word I would *
add — Why should you remain so desolate ?
I cannot bear to think of it for you ; I
do not like leaving you thus. And I
think to myself, why even if you cut me
off from you, why even then should you
be alone. Will you not let your mind
wander back to those early days of which
you told me once, and recall to yourself
your own family and people, your own
belongings by right and relationship, not
only by fictitious bonds of property — such
as those by which you have been bound
to me. Your own family of your old home
days ; your sister, or the child of that
sister ; or her children's children, as it now
may be. Why should we not find them.
They must be somewhere, and to be found.
You said you scarcely knew their names
when you told me of them ; but might not

their names be discovered. You said you
cared not for their regards or affections ;
but, my dear Mr. Garth, from what wealth
beyond gold have you not shut yourself
away by such feelings as these. Do think
of them. Now, new thoughts and projects
will beset you. Who knows — among them,
your real heirs and family and belongings
may be a fit centre for the firm of Garth
and Browne !

*' Let me go if you will, but ^— seek
them out to replace me — and in them
perhaps you may find a substitute for my
loss.

'' For as I cannot be your heiress such
as you want your heiress to be, once more
in farewell I urge : — seek out, and among
your own, for one who may be to you
what I can never be. Seek them out, and
my loss weill be gain to them perhaps. Or
at all events they may make up for the

VOL. HI. Q

disappointment I have brought you, — by
occupying my place in your life.

"Yours affectionately,

'' Cicely Browne."

''P.S. You may have forgotten that we
go to Maidenhead tomorrow. Perhaps
you will communicate with me there.

"C. B."

CHAPTER X.

DAYBREAK WITH MR. GARTH.

It was a grim and dull room where Richard
Garth perused this letter. His home —
and yet how unlike a home, and how
unlike the imagined dwelling-place of a
man who could so easily have decked his
rooms with every luxury and grace, and
filled them with beautiful objects, that at
least would have lent some external charm
and glow of colour to his dull life.

But it had none of these things. Articles
de luxe or de ve^'tu, such as the Sevres china
dessert services which he bought occasionally,
were simply pieces of property for the
firm. And he sent them to ' Browne's

house,' as he called Cicely's home at
Prince's Gate ; or if too valuable even for
storage there, he locked them up carefully
in an iron safe at the head office. For
such things as a valuable old jewel, a
picture by one of the ancient masters (an
intrinsically good property, as he called
them), he would now and then buy ; for
he loved the comfortable feeling that his
money procured them., and that he ' had
locked up ' many a costly article that others
might like to have and to show. He never
showed them ; and an ornament or even a
comfort for his own apartments he never
thought of buying.

Thus a high black bookcase, an old
leather chair, an ink-stained table, a faded
turkey rug, a broken coal scuttle, and a
portrait of a lord mayor, who was formerly
a young clerk in the firm of Garth and
Browne : those were the chief objects in
his room, the only articles of decoration
that ever met his cold dull eye.

Richard Garth sat at the Ink-stained
table near a lamp with a green shade,
throughout most evenings of his life, and
here he perused always his evening letters.

When he had concluded reading Cicely's
letter (on this particular one among so
many lonely evenings and nights), he
paused to meditate, folding up the sheets
of note-paper with careful precision as he
sat and thought.

He was not much given to indulgences in
abstract reflection at any time. His mind
ran like his life, In a business groove. But
to-night he did pause, for his feelings were
stirred to a new and strangely curious
degree. Thoughts came rushing over him,
arresting his actions, when he had finished
that letter, and sensations came surging up
within him which he could not suppress.
That letter seemed to call to him to halt
on the monotonous routine of his life ; to
arouse him, and to say within his heart,

Your plans are not Infallible, your will Is
not absolute, however much you may have
been deluding yourself with the Idea that
It was the case. Something Is stronger
than the power of Garth and Browne, some
other Influence can outweigh the force and
power of their gold.

Here is the whole scheme of your life
interrupted !

The union of the two houses, which has
been the aim of your existence, has become
Impossible ; and the child of yesterday, the
girl of to-day, v/ho has been all those years
the central point of your schemes, will
be tomorrow an independent, self-reliant
woman, with whose destinies you can have
nothing to do.

She existed In your calculation only the
other day, as clay which your hand was
to mould to an image you had projected —
according to your despotic will.

Now she has seemed to have become

Garth and Browne must be without a
centre ; he had no influence over her at
all ; there was no one to represent the firm,
no one who would bear on young shoulders
the weight and dignity of all their gold.

What was to be done ? How had he
been so mistaken in his schemes ? of what
had he been thinking, to imagine that Cicely
would ever act as he desired ? He saw it
all now — it was impossible. She was not
amenable to him ; the young nature was
stronger than his, for in all the traits of
her eager character was she not indeed
Browne's child !

Yes, and the child of her mother also ;
and this they had neither of them remembered,
neither he nor Browne.

That mild-eyed, bright-haired woman

whom he could recollect, to whom Browne
had presented him Once, when he went
out to Italy for consultation with his partner
on some point — during that one short
year of Browne's happiness in his married
life. He could recollect her, and he could
recall the feeling, with some bitterness, of
how impossible it had been for him, Richard
Garth, to feel at ease and at home, or independent,
or masterful, before that quiet and
composed woman, who was his partner's
wife. And this girl was their child ! The
daughter of Browne, who had always ruled
him at all times in spite of himself, and of
that grand-looking, calm, fair woman, who
had died out there in Italy, and with whom
he had never felt at ease.

And now her child had taught him that
he was not her master either. He had
been dismissed, he and all his orold aloof
with him — dismissed coldly out of her life,
beyond the circle of those who could

For thus it was : he felt 'dismissed,' and
he felt angry too, and desolate, and very
much alone. He glanced through her
letter ai2:ain, and thought of her in the old
days gone by.

The child running through the house,
the child who had found no tenderness in
her father's heart ; and the girl, just growing
up in all her beauty, when her father
died. And then the Ward left for him to
guard, to do with her as he pleased ; to dispose
of her with his business judgment like
any other belonging or property of the firm.

Poor Richard Garth ! and she had now
dismissed him !

And Garth and Browne was nothing
without its heiress. What was he to do
with it all ?

He glanced through and through her
letter, until his eye had travelled once more
quite on to the end.

How strange It was (and yet It never,
never struck him as strange) that these
constant exhortations to him In the cause
of his own kith and kin should come from
her ! It did not strike him as strange,
though the thought did come to him, ' why
should she care for those obscure people,
for whom he had no thought at all ? ' They
had a friend In her, these forgotten belongings
of his, llvlnor far down In the wilds
of some distant county, as he Imagined,
probably on the Stoneshire hills — fallen low
because he had never helped to raise them ;
or gone entirely out of that land, perhaps,
where he was once known.

This was a curious fancy of Cicely's,
and one to which she had often lately
urged him — a curious fancy that he should
seek out ' his own,' as she expressed it,

his own belongings — and make one of the
young ones from among his own old family
a participator in the wealth of Garth and
Browne.

I do not want it all ;" so she had often
said to him, even throughout all those
bygone times when he had not looked to
be altogether dismissed. '' I do not want
so much," she had been used to say.
'' Surely, if they are alive and you can
find them, half of it all ought to go, Mr.
Garth, to some one who belongs to you.
It ouo^ht not to belong all to me."

'' But it does all belong to you," he had
said to her, often hastily, in answer, for
he had hated always any recollection of
his own kith and kin. "It all belongs
to you, for the matter of that, you know.
For Browne and I always agreed together
that we would make you a central
point."

Browne and he had planned it all so

often, but now the centre was gone ! It
had sipped from out his grasp just as he
was about to accomplish the great scheme
of both their lives. There was no doubt
of it, the pivot on which the whole scheme
had turned was gone.

Thinking of all this, and slowly realizing
it, he vent on still reading over her letter
all alone there in this gaunt, bare room
of his ; in that dingy room, lit only by that
one shaded lamp, of which the light was
so dim that weird shadows flitted everywhere
on the cheerless walls, and the
distant corners of the room were in utter
darkness.

He continued to read, and as he did so
his mind curiously and very gradually
became filled with that one new idea, so
dwelt upon in her letter — the idea in
the suggestion of those forgotten relations
of his. It was a curious suggestion that,
as coming from her, a curious suggestion !

But — and this thought was borne strongly
in upon him, it fitted in exactly with a new
scheme which had occurred to his own
mind that night already.

Full of both the suggestion and his
own thoughts, at length he turned to his
large leather-covered desk. Slowly he unlocked
a drawer therein, and took out
from it a packet of yellow and faded
letters. From this he selected one — preserved,
who can tell why ? — which he
opened and read with deep and close
attention.

'' By George ! " he exclaimed at last,
after taking one long-drawn breath ; '' by
George ! and it was a boy ! "

That letter was dated some fifteen years
ago, and it was signed only by initials.
There was no address, heading, or signature,
and this was explained in one line,
which said —

*' You know — if you wish to remember it
may present name and my addi^essT

It was what the soul of Richard Garth
hated above all other earthly things. It
was a begging letter !

He had spoken of that letter, In the
dining-room window at Prince's Gate, to
Cicely only two months ago.

It was a letter from a relative whom he
had never seen, and whom he never would
see — from his niece, from his only sister's
child.

He would never see her now, for though
he at length read that letter with close
attention, with suddenly awakened Interest,
and with deep concern, he read It too late
as far as it regarded her welfare. He did
not yet know it, but the writer had been
dead for several years.

There was no use in his perusing thus
tardily her appeal for help and sympathy ;
there would be no opportunity given him

to help her now. But he did not know
this, so with keen interest he studied
eagerly her letter.

It told him that she was married ; that
her husband was a gentleman, refined and
high-born, but that they were sadly poor.
It told him of her one small son, for the
sake of whose education she went on to
ask him to assist her. Her son, his grand-nephew,
Garth's only youthful belonging —
his natural position entitled him to better
education and advantages than she could
give him. Would Richard Garth help
her, and act as a second father to the boy ?

He had been immersed in the affairs of
Garth and Browne when that letter had
reached him. (The heiress had not long
been brought home then ; Browne's wife
was just dead.) The letter had filled his
soul simply with anger, as the smallest
claim on his generosity was always apt
to do.

He had no personal feelings of any kind
at that time ; he was but a principal part
In the machine of Garth and Browne. To
be asked to pay for * schooling,' as he called
It, for ' a penniless brat,' the grandchild of
his foolish sister, whose Imprudent marriage
had filled him with unforgotten wrath,
all this made him furious Indeed when he
got that letter. He had written simply In
reply through the solicitor who had sent It.
He had written a response of fury and
insult, and had not given one shilling to
his niece towards the schoolroom of her son.
He had been angry, and extremely alarmed
as well, at this symptom of his family
coming down upon him, and he had thus
promptly suppressed them with a determined
hand.

Strange that with all this he should
have preserved that letter ! why. It was
not possible to surmise, unless It was just
as a trophy, an undeniable and unanswerable

evidence of the malignant and dangerous
character of all poor relations, — and
as a specimen of the outrageous appeals
by which men of his wealth and success
and eminence may be at any time assailed.

He had kept, but until that evening he
had almost forgotten, the letter, and had
never had the curiosity even to inquire
what was the married name of his sister's
child.

Now only by writing again to the law
agent who had forwarded the first letter,
and to whom he himself (with much personal
insult mingling with the business on
hand), had addressed his reply, could he
hope to hear anything of her. Only by
communicating with this lawyer again,
and by writing to him a second letter, ina
very different tone and with an avowedly
opposite object, could he learn anything
about the fate, the fortunes, or the present
position and condition of his niece s boy.

VOL. HI. R

It was indeed rather late, as he realized,
as regarded the education. If he began a
search for the boy, It could not now be
with the view of training him for a profession
or business.

That first correspondence was fifteen
years ago. That boy must be a man now ;
for education It was too late !

But, he thought bitterly, it was not too
late to punish Miss Cicely Browne, and to
transfer all the wealth and prestige of the
great firm from the house of Browne to
Garth. The power lay with him to do It,
If as regarded her marriage Cicely resisted
his will. He thought, he pondered, he
ruminated ; then at length he formed a
plan : He would let the Bullion alliance
stand aside for a time, while he strove to
find out his kinsman, about whom once
more he would write.

And finally he did write — coming to
resolutions then and there — he did write

a letter that revealed a soul torn with
many contradictory feelings, a letter that
was a curious and unexpected expression
of emotion from the man who wrote it, and
on which before he ended he dropped
something strangely like a tear.

The total annihilation of his life-long
projects, the disturbance of feelings that
had gone on so long and monotonously,
the dawning of new, strange schemes, the
adopting of new ideas, all were indeed
quite too much at length for Richard
Garth ; and when he penned that letter,
he was certainly scarcely his usual hardheaded,
composed, and hard-hearted self.
It had cost him an effort ; it had awakened
thrills of excitement and roused a heart-throb
of conscious, acute, physical pain that
was quite new to him.

When it was written, he perused and then
folded and closed it carefully. He looked
out with much care, too, the correct address

of the country solicitor who had sent the
original appeal to him, and wrote the
address most distinctly upon the cover.
And he then laid the letter on his desk,
thus stamped, sealed, and directed, ready
for the first post in the morning, where it
would be taken, as he knew by rule and
custom, when his servant first entered the
room.

It was nearly morning when he had
quite finished that letter. The short summer's
night was over, and soft dawn-lights
were breaking in the eastern sky.

And Richard Garth, chill and tired with
the varied excitement and the long struggle
with his own curious and entangled feelings
during the evening and night just
past, felt oppressed and weary at length,
and a strange craving suddenly possessed
him, a craving to breathe that fresh morning
air.

He had many and many a time before

now sat up far into the morning at that
old leather desk of his ; but to-night he
had been affected, he had had quick excitements
of feeling to go through. He
had realized what it was to have a living,
and an embittered and disappointed heart
a something: which he had never taken
into account till now, and that was all a
new experience to him. It had all been
more exhausting than any night of mental
labour he had known.

He drew the blind up and opened the
lattice. His room was high up ; he chose
to live there from old habit rather than
any fitness or attraction. It stood high
above the surrounding roofs and chimneys,
and from his window, now before the
smoke and mists arose to obscure and dull
the vision, he had a view of wide stretching
expanse.

The sky was faintly flushed with the
pink and golden tints of sweet early morning,

especially towards the east, where the
sun in his glory would rise ere long.

Night was past, and the deep purple
curtains were rolling majestically away,
chased by the first fair gleams of the light
of day.

Richard Garth was struck with a curious
influence which this morning had upon
him, acting, as the sweet familiar view did
for the first time, on these awakening
vibrations of his soul:

'rit is sweet," he murmured to himself,
as he watched and leant on the lattice
wearily. "It is sweet and quiet, and very
fair and restful. The sun rose so in my
young years — long ago now," he continued
to himself ; " in the times when we
watched it rise above the hills in the
morning, Emiline and I, together — so long
ago, poor thing. — Poor Emiline, she who
was my sister, my only sister — in those
days the only one for whom I cared. Eh,

why did she not come to London with
me ? Why need she have married ? Why
did she die ? Indeed she bitterly disappointed
me, and I have scarcely cared for
any one ever since. I have cared for
nothing, it seems to me, only for Garth
and Browne.

And it was her daughter, was it, who
wrote me that letter ? Her daughter —
Emiline's own daughter, is the mother of
this boy."

He felt chilled and tired and dull as he
thought all this ; and at last he returned
and crept into his bedroom, a strange
heaviness possessing his head and heart
and limbs.

He lay down quickly, for it was quite
morning now ; but the city was not
awakened yet, and everything was silent
and still. He lay down hastily, for he was
very weary — that strange heaviness seemed
to weigh his brain and heart.

He lay down — and the morning broke
softly without and the birds woke up to
sing. But he heeded nothing as he lay
down, for he was so weary indeed. He
lay quiet and still.

^ * * *

When morning really came, the old
servant who attended him, and who had
brought him the great shaded lamp at
dusk the evening before, had to enter
unbidden ; for no reply came to the knock ;
and after waiting a long while, he was
seized with sudden anxiety and alarm.

He entered unbidden, and learnt that
his fears were not without foundation
indeed, for when he had hastily crossed the
room and stood by the bed and looked
down upon it, he saw that Richard Garth
was lying in a silence, which was certainly
not sleep.

CHAPTER XL

NOT 'an engaged LETTER.'

It was mentioned that, on the eventful
night after those promenades and meetings
in Kensington Gardens, and after that
long unpleasant interview with Mr. Garth,
Cicely Browne had written two letters.
She applied herself to the second immediately
after despatching her servant to
the chambers of her guardian with the
first. The first letter we have read ; it was
addressed to Richard Garth ; the second
was penned in a widely different tone.

As she took up her pen once more and
gathered her thoughts together to indite it,
Cicely had paused.

For there rushed over her suddenly the
full realization of who it was to whom she
was about to write ; what the nature of
the letter to be written, and what his position
was (with regard to herself) who was
to receive it.

Her love ! Was this indeed to be her
first love letter ? Or, at least, would it
have been her first love letter, were it
not perhaps merely a letter to say goodbye
? For, if regarded as a love letter it
would have curious things to say !

It was to say — * I am not engaged to
you, unless indeed you wish it in spite of
all I have to tell ; ' and it was to say, * You
are not engaged to me — not betrothed and
plighted—because I write to tell you that
in my altered position I set you free ! — I
set you free, and I write at once to say it.
You are not engaged, despite all the sweet
words you spoke to-day when in the
garden — despite all your vows of devotion,



all your promises of fidelity, that were
to end with your life alone. No, we are
not engaged ; ' and if she was to say thus,
We are not engaged,' then this certainly
must not be a love letter !

And yet how she loved — poor sweet-hearted
little Cicely — how she longed to
pour out her love ; how very easily it
would have flowed in pure sweet utterance
of intense tenderness upon the pages.

She loved, and it seemed to her almost
impossible that vulgar questions of money,
or of Garth and Browne, could have anything
to say to such sweet romance as had
ran through all their intercourse, or to
such devotion as they had vowed for one
another that day. Yet such sordid things
must have to do with it, for Harry's sake,
not for her own. Yes, she must be careful ;
she must watch and weigh her words as
she wrote (for his sake) ; for the decision
lay indeed with Sir Harry now. He must

decide, and this made the position difficult
for her ; it was not easy to choose words
in which to put it safely and fairly from her
side. She must not call him 'her own,'
her dearest,' ' her one beloved,' all which
indeed were just exactly what she longed
to do. She must not do it, because she
could not feel certain that they would
belong to each other at all. The choice
must lie with him ; his must be the decision ;
and she must shackle his thoughts as he
decided with no feelings of compunction
for her. She would set him free, quite
unreservedly free, that he might choose
her again from quite a new ground, if
indeed it ml^ht be that she were still his
choice.

So she wrote : —

"My dear Harry,

We may be friends, real friends
always, at all events ; so I may call you

Harry,' for I cannot go back to think of
you In any other way.

'' It Is as I feared. My guardian does
not Hke my plan, and has another, quite a
different and horrible one of his own forme.
I will not listen to him ; but then
neither will he listen to me.

I must de the House, dear Harry, or
else I must break with the House. That
is the choice given me, as I warned you,
or tried to warn you, In the Gardens to-day.
And as I will not be anything but what I
ani (unless I could become what we also
talked of in the Garden, something concerning
yo2i- entirely), I find It is impossible
to continue to be the Firm. For I cannot
possibly de anything that my guardian
wishes me to be. So, I have broken with
the Firm, and in doing so I have given up
my Inheritance. I am no longer, nor ever
will be again, the House of Garth and
Browne ; but neither will the House any

longer In any way acknowledge me ! Dear
Harry, all this will make a great difference.
I liked to think lately (for the first time In
my life), that I might have a great deal of
money. I should like to have had it, that
I might have given it all up to you.

But now, if I have none, Harry, or next
to none, at all events, it will be quite
different ; and perhaps, dear Harry, It may
not be so nice — in fact, not in any sort of
way possible, for you.

I may not at all suit you in my
changed and shorn condition, dear, so this
is what I am writing to you to say. Even
though you did see that I was so happy in
the Gardens to-day, you must not think
yourself ' engaged.' And that is why I
do not write you an engaged letter, which
indeed, Indeed I am very sorry not to do.

But you must answer me and tell me
what you would like, and not mind anything
about me. For though I can never

be happy again as I was with your love,
never with anybody else in the whole world,
still, darling'' (no, that was effaced, and
dear, dear Harry " put in its place), " I
would not wish you to do anything that
was not quite right for you ; not anything,
whatever I might feel. It cannot keep us
altogether away from each other. You
shall always be my friend, and we may
walk in the Gardens as we did before today,
you know — with Belinda and Negro
only not ' engaged.'

'* So it must be just as you like, my ow7i
darling Harry " (this all effaced again) —
'' it must be as you like, only do not keep
me a minute waiting, but let me know,
whatever way you make up your mind.

'' I am very, very happy when I think of
all you said in the Gardens, and I shall be
quite satisfied that it is right clear, whichever
way you decide. I do not know
whether I shall like being poor, you know ;

but I am so very glad when I feel that I
am no longer ' the little nugget as I once
heard Lady Ridgeway call me. I am so
very glad that I am no longer Garth and
Browne.

Dear Harry, you made me so happy
to-day, and I am always

'' Your affectionate friend,

'' Cicely."

'' You know we go tomorrow to Maidenhead,
so write direct to the Oaks. I was
thinking of you on your journey all the
evening, my darling, and I hope God is
keeping you safe."

She forgot to erase the last-written
darling,' and let it stand where it was,
ready to receive on the following evening
the ardent pressure of Sir Harry's lips.

CHAPTER XII.

A MOST AGGRAVATING BELINDA.

On the following morning a good many
things occurred.

To begin with, just about the same hour
at which Cicely, after a restless night, was
getting up to prepare for her journey to
Maidenhead, Sir Harry reached the little
Stoneshire railway station that came nearest
to his house.

It was about five miles from the quiet
borough of Arch Aubrey, and he had driven
straight through the lovely morning, on
the top of his dog-cart — which was awaiting
in readiness to meet the young M.P.
when he arrived.

VOL. III. S

It had come In early from the old town
beyond the hills, from quiet little Arch
Aubrey, that rustic borough of his, where
the railway had not yet come.

It was about that same hour also that
Richard Garth's servant, after summoning
assistance, and rousing his master to a
state of self-consciousness, had gone out
hastily to post (as was usual with him each
morning) such letters as he found stamped
and directed on Mr. Garth's writing-desk
from the nlo^ht before.

o

There was only one letter this morning,
and this he put Into the red pillar box at
Charing Cross Station — hastily running
back. That letter caught the dally post
out of town that went off by ten o'clock,
and It reached the Stoneshire solicitor, In
that obscure country town to which It was
directed, early In the afternoon.

Richard Garth was all unconscious of

this, for he had quite forgotten for that one
day, as he lay in that dangerous condition,
all about his letter, about his business,
about the house of Garth and Browne,
about his neglected niece and sister, about
his grand nephew and his ward.

But still that letter travelled down, all
unbeknown to him, to Stoneshire, and his
last conscious deed of the night before
hastened to its results.

Whilst these sundry events were being
enacted at different points : while Mr,
Garth lay through the morning in stupor,
and while Sir Harry was arriving at Arch
Aubrey, seventy miles away, Cicely was
preparing, with a divided and disturbed
heart, for her journey to Maidenhead.

Her own small part in the preparations
were nearly complete, when there drove upto
the hall door Lady Ridgeway's pretty
pony carriage, containing that energetic
personage herself, with her little groom

perched upon the back seat. Lady Ridgeway
inquired if Cicely had yet departed.

'' Not yet ! Miss Browne not gone
yet ! I am so glad to hear it. Ah."

She starts in half an hour, my lady,"
added the footman, running down the steps ;
"the train leaves at twelve o'clock."

Well, tell her I am here, please. Say
I dare not leave the ponies ; they are fresh,
and they know my hand. But ask her to
come down one moment and say a word
to me."

The footman disappeared, and presently
Belindass bland visage and stout body
appeared at the open door.

Oh, Belinda, come down and tell me
quick ! "

But Belinda had no bonnet on, and there
was a soft south wind that unpleasantly
ruffled her fair hair. So she only smiled
and nodded, and kept her place just
within the hall. '' Cicely is coming," she
called.

*' Ah, tell me !" shouted Lady Ridgeway,
In return — "tell me instantly; never mind
the mite," she added, flourishing her whip
towards the diminutive being who, in top-boots
and lilliputian livery, clung to the
ponies' heads. ''He is a child ; he remembers
nothing ; and besides, he cannot hear ;
so quick, Belinda, out with it — tell me ! "

But Belinda took a very different view
of the diminutive individual at the ponies'
heads, and she did not think that the confidence
which Lady Ridgeway invited was
such as miorht be shouted from the hall
door to the street ; so she merely shook
her head, pursed her lips up — looked mysterious,
and was silent. At which Lady
Ridgeway was extremely cross.

"What an irritating creature you are,
Belinda ; cannot you speak out ? These
tiresome ponies ! If you had a man who
could hold them I would come in. But
that child has not the fingers to do it."

'' Shall we send round to the stable for
the coachman ?" shouted Belinda, through
the south wind. " Or will you have the
second footman ? perhaps he could do it.
Withers and Charles went off to Maidenhead
this morning. There is only Robert,
the younger one, left in the house."

Oh ! bother," exclaimed Lady Ridge-away,
as Belinda shouted these interesting
communications, with sustained effort, calling
them out in a curious, monotonously
pitched tone. '' Oh ! bother. No, no, I
have not time to get out."

What ? I don't hear you," called Belinda.


Ah ! there," exclaimed Lady Ridgeway,
'eat last — is Cicely. Come here, you
little tiresome thing."

Down the steps ran Cicely then without
hesitation, although without her parasol or
hat. Down she came attired in a fresh
little travelling dress, with her crispy bronze

hair and puzzled frlno^e tossing in the
breeze, and with a smile upon her Ipswich
said —

Yes, I am ready for anything that you
may have to say."

She was smiHng, but there was a deep
purple ring beneath her eyes, however, that
told of a sleepless night, and over the
delicate fragile tint of her fair complexion
the warm rose flush came and went with
a bright fluctuation, that revealed deep
disturbance of some inner feeling beneath
the calm brightness of her smile.

Lady Ridgeway put her whip away, and
gathered the reins in one hand. Then she
put the other on the girls shoulder, and
bent over so low as almost to touch her
cheek. Her full lips, indeed, touched for
an instant Cicely's small pink ear.

Now sell me," she whispered, "if it is
all right ? "

Cicely looked straight into her face for

one moment, then her eyes filled, and
beneath the weight of hot tears they
drooped again, and Lady RIdgeway looked
into their clear sweet depths with eager,
quick, scrutinizing gaze.

What ? " she said, and then instantly
she paused again. She started too,
and a look of surprise, almost of anger,
swept over her face.

What ! he went away without ? "

"No, no," answered Cicely, softly.

- He did ? "

Yes."

And you did ? "
'eyes, all that part is right — quite right."

Then all is right .^ " exclaimed Lady
Ridgeway, brightly.

Yes ; only Garth and Browne, you
know," the girl continued, suddenly looking
up, with a melancholy wistful gleam
coming for an instant into her eyes. "You
know."

Oh, botheration take Garth and
Browne," Lady RIdgeway interrupted her.
*' They will not surely interfere with
you."

Yes, yes, that is just it ; they will — but
I cannot tell it you all, dear Lady Ridgeway.
I will write to you from Maidenhead
tomorrow. May I tell you all about it,
Lady Ridgeway — may I ? I should like
it ; you have been so kind."

Lady Ridgeway stooped, then, with a
sudden flush rising to her face, and once
and again she softly and impulsively kissed
Cicely's warm cheek. It was a real and
true kiss ; it was full of heart and feeling.
It was not in the least like the careless,
rapid, rather affected and quite meaningless
caress with which Lady Ridgeway was
wont to brush usually the cheek of her
little favourite friend. This was a true
expression, straight from the impulse of a
genuine feeling. She bent low over the

girl's fair head, and at the same time her
fingers closed lovingly over Cicely's clasped
hands.

*' Have I been good and kind ? " said
Lady Ridgeway, with a ring of bitterness
in her voice — " Good and kind, and to a
girl in love ? Go and publish it at the
Park Corner, my dear, for it would be the
strangest bit of news Hyde Park could
hear, only they would not believe it ! But
why is it ? No friend could have acted
differently to you. Why have I done by
you. Cicely, what no one in London would
credit me with doing ? Why — because you
were not afraid of me, child ; you believed
in me, and thought me as disinterested as
yourself; you expected me to be true, and
I was true. And do you know that I do
not think that any one else dear, ever expected
it of me before. You believed me
good, and so somehow I suppose I have
managed to be good — as far as you were

concerned ! Sois bien heicreuse petite. Je
te felicity —-fame ce gentil Sir Harry!'

'' Ah ! " cried Cicely. " I do not know
about all that ; but never mind now, at all
events. I will write to you all about it
tomorrow."

Well, I will look forward to your letter.
It must be all right, dear child. By the bye,
do not let me forget to tell you, Blanche
has just informed me that she is going to
make a pretty goose of herself after all
with Jack. Well, well, I have no patience
with you all. Really, this romance and
devotion is too much for me ; all of you
going in, like the old story-books, for the
real thing. It is too much of a good thing,
Cicely — too much a great deal. But indeed
Blanche is a poor silly child. How can
she do it ? "

I am so glad," said Cicely.

Ah, yes ; but then you are romantic
too, you see, and believe in it all, as well.

However, I will try to believe In something
that is real In that Interesting case also,
if only, Cicely, for your sake."

Do, dear Lady RIdgeway — do believe
in us. It will make you much happier,"
she added, " In thinking about us all."

Well, well. However, you have not
told me much ; I came here to pry Into
your little love affair, my dear, and am only
the wiser by shrewd observation after all ;
and let me just add, I think that sufficient,
dear. If there is. Cicely, In this universe,
or at least In this bit of the universe, such
a thing as a feeling that Is not a pose or a
pretence for some purpose, or a bit of
affectation. If there Is one bit of sentiment
that will stand the daylight and not show
up false, it Is the feeling I have, dear, for
pott. So you may be certain that any good
news that comes to me about you, will

give me pleasure Indeed. Ah me ! Cicely,
I wish I could go a long way back In life.

and be a little bit like you again, dear," she
continued, with a sudden change of manner.
I am so tired of a good deal of what is
myself,' do you know. I am tired of platonic,
they are silly — and, dear me, what
a fool that big Fitzarthur is ! I am so dead
tired of him, Cicely, that I think I will
marry him right off to Kitty Littleton
when we are down at Ride."

Dear Lady Ridgeway," was all Cicely
said in reply — for no other or more direct
answer occurred to her, only she felt
sorry for her friend. She could not
exactly define to herself Lady Ridgeway's
feeling. But the strain in which her ladyship
indulged this morning, had certainly
a touch of bitterness in it, that revealed
an angry and saddened heart. Cicely's
quick tact and intuition read all this (or
rather felt all this in her tones), and she
thrilled with a soft compassion and a regretful
compunction for Lady Ridgeway,

although her experience failed to explain
to her exactly, the full cause of all this
bitterness and fatigue of life.

'' Good-bye, little dear," said Lady Ridgeway
at last, after a pause — ■" Good-bye,"
and she gathered up the reins ; then lightly
touching the ponies with her whip, she
turned once more and smiled brightly with
much unspoken congratulation in her eyes
as she glanced down into Cicely's flushed
face.

The ponies sprang forward, and Cicely
drew back. She kissed her finger tips, and
nodded and smiled her farewell. Another
instant, and Lady Ridgeway had whisked
round her spirited little steeds with a deft
light touch upon the ears ; once the lash
was swept softly, almost caressingly, over
their glossy shoulders ; then they sprang
forward at a quick pace, and she was gone.

Cicely's own carriage came round at that
moment before Lady Ridgeway was well

out of sight, and before another quarter of
an hour had passed, she and Belinda had
packed Into It, and they were driving to
the station to travel down to Maidenhead.

Cicely's first season In the gay world
was really over.

She had gone out of town !

CHAPTER XIII.

WHAT, WITH EVENING CAME !

It was towards evening on the following
day. Cicely and Belinda had reposed
from the fatigues of their move and their
journey, and had already enjoyed many
hours of the soft dolce far niente of the
country, which is so soothingly pleasant
and refreshing, especially when we first
again partake of it after a long hot imprisonment
in town.

For the little garden of The Oaks was
not only gay with flowers, and full of July
fruits, but it was deliciously fresh and cool.
The group of trees from which the little
house had taken its name, cast their

shadows from morn till evening over
the soft grass. The river glittered and
gleamed with silver light on its smooth
flowing surface as it swept with quiet
dignity by the foot of the sloping lawn ;
and the wherries and flat-bottomed boats
and laden barges that passed down with
the stream, glanced by them, making a
pleasant and cheerful variety in the scene
all the day.

Belinda had spent most of her time
during that day in the pleasantly shaded
drawing-room, with drawn curtains and
wide-opened windows, reposing on a sofa,
whilst Negro also peacefully slumbered on
a rug near her feet.

And Cicely had sat therefore quite alone
beneath the wide branching old trees. Had
sat rocking herself to and fro in a wickerwork
garden-chair, inhaling the sweet,
pleasant, scented air, and letting her eyes
wander dreamily over the woods and the

VOL. III. T

fields and across the water — enjoying the
dolce far niente as idly and indolently to
all appearances as Belinda and Negro
were doing inside. But she differed from
both of them, however, in that the whole
day long she was quite awake. There
was no dolce far niente within her heart
indeed, for all that day she alternately
hoped and feared and tortured herself all
through the sunny hours, as she awaited
the expected answer to her letter to Sir
Harry. That answer which would have,
which must have such a wonderful weight
of influence on her whole life.

The morning passed into the noon, and
the mail which came with the last train in
the afternoon all arrived however — and
all brought her nothing which in her
present mood could have any importance
or interest for her at all.

Now it was quite late in the evening,
almost dinner time, when — not the postman

(for he would come no more that
day), but a special messenger from the
little town in the neighbourhood brought
her two missives, which the officials imagined
rightly might be desirable for her to
receive.

The one was a letter — the letter, with its
Stoneshire postmark, and directed in the
free, running, boyish handwriting she knew
so well.

And the other was a telegram !

Being a woman, and most unbusinesslike,
and moreover being a girl in love —
indeed most desperately in love — she threw
the telegram aside as if scarcely worth her
notice, and opened the beloved letter first
instead.

It was but a few lines, but it sufficed
her. Hot tears of joy and indestructible
happiness rushed tumultuously to her eyes.
She could scarcely read ; she could only
sob and kiss the dear heart-gladdening

letter, and pour out in stifled accents her
thankfulness and her passionate joy.

For he was true !

He was her own true darling. He
loved as she loved ; she had not pledged
him her heart in vain. He loved, and,
nay more, his love was loyal and unchanging,
and those eager words in which he
spoke It, that dewy evening by the glistening
waters of the Serpentine, were all heartfelt
and true.

What he had said there, he now repeated
in this dear letter, and in his usual eager,
rapid way —

My darling," he wrote, " as if all ^/la^
could make a difference. I sint you — you,
my love, for yourself, for your own sweet,
dear sake ; ^ka^ want can never, never alter,
my Cicely ; whatever happens to all the
rest, I lose you. I love you, my own
heart's darling, and does not tAa^ answer
everything you say in your letter

to-night ? Will you let it be my answer ?
for I have not time for more. I am just
off to town again, and your letter was just
put this very minute into my hand. So I
can only say, will you come to me — in my
old house here — and be its rightful queen,
my sweet one, and live in the old lavender
garden which seemed always to have been
made for you ? Will you come ? Only love
me one hundredth part as well as I love
you, my own, my very own, and we shall
be happy, Cicely — happy beyond all the
mightiest dreams of Garth and Browne. I
know we shall be happy, my darling, and
with a happiness too that their biggest
coffers would scarce increase.

*' If you will have me, a pauper, am I
not blessed — more than blessed, beloved,
in having simply you ?

Now, no more, for I am writing at my
little country station, and the train is signalled,
and I am off again to town — to

within twenty miles of you. Why am I
going ? Ah ! that must keep, until we
meet again j only, it seems, ' I am wanted,'
as the policemen sometimes say — ' I am
wanted.' I have had a most extraordinary
telegram from my mother's old solicitor
at Winthrop. He telegraphs, urging
me immediately to communicate with his
partners in town ; and to communicate in
person, if by any possible means I can be
in town, tomorrow.

'' So, ' in person ' I am off. Going confidingly
; for I know nothing but that I have
had this summons, and that I am wanted
by some one, I cannot conceive by whom.
Luckily, I have a conscience which is
pretty clear. So, God bless my sweet one,
my own. And may He guard you until
such a date as may find me by your side
once more, as your own ecstatically happy

*' H. Wynn.

"Arch Aubrey, August 2nd, 1880."

CHAPTER XIV.

HIS DEAR, DEAR NAME ?

To say that Cicely was happy would be
to put it very coldly, and yet — there is no
other word !

Hearts are capable of great happiness,
greater than we can conceive in the graver
and duller moods of life. And Cicely was
really happy.

All existence wore roseate hues for
her now at that moment, and her heart
throbbed, brimful of that new and fervent
happiness.

It seemed to permeate her young being
until every corner of her heart was aglow
with its brightness.

He was indeed her Harry now — her
own, her very own for ever.

For a few moments she sat wrapped In
the soft Hight of dreamland, lost In a sense
of felicity complete and all-satisfying, and
quite oblivious of everything else In the
sublunary and work-a-day world. Then
suddenly she remembered that neglected
telegram, and she looked at It still with
half-dreaming eyes.

The yellow-tinted envelope which had
found its way to her, what might It not
contain ? Diminish — no, it could not
diminish, but It might perhaps increase, if
possible, her joy.

Perhaps it was sent to say that he was
coming. Delightful thought ! It was
with this Idea flashing quick as lightning
through her mind that she took up the
yellow envelope then, and opened it at last.
It was forwarded to her from Prince's
Gate. It had arrived there yesterday, and

it contained simply these few unexpected
words : —

Mr. Richard Garth is very ill, and has
asked for you. If possible, come soon."

Richard Garth ! — he was ill, and they had
telegraphed to her yesterday — probably
soon after she had left town ! and her
servants had neglected to forward that
telegram — had so delayed that it had not
reached her till to-night. He had been ill,
then, since yesterday morning, and it was
now late in the evening of to-day.

So many things had taken place so
quickly, so many reactions of feeling had
been gone through, that Cicely had almost
lost count of time during those last few
days, and had scarcely noticed its swift,
inevitable passing.

The two long, wearisome days through
which she had waited for Sir Harry's
letter had seemed as many weeks.

And now it was difficult for her to

realize that it was only two days ago
that she had stood with Sir Harry by the
Serpentine ; and only just the other evening
that she had had that long interview
with Mr. Garth, after Harry had left for
Arch Aubrey ; and that it was on that
same night (and to-night was only the
third night since then) that she had written
the two letters, the thrilling and decisive
one to Sir Harry, and the more terse,
equally decisive, but less heart-touching
one to Mr. Richard Garth.

Was he ill already, she wondered, even
when she had been writing to him ? Had
he received — had he read her letter ?
Richard Garth, as it happened, had done
both.

Had he read it ? Cicely wondered — as
she sat slowly realizing the contents of that
telegram, as they might ultimately affect
her guardian and herself. Had he read
it ? and the substance of the letter came

sweeping over her mind. Suddenly she
looked up and moved now, for there
came back to her one sentence that was
distinctly written in that letter. " If you
ever want me, will you send for me, and
I will come." Had he read that sentence ?
she wondered ; and had he then sent so
quickly, in answer to her very words ? or
was he very ill, and had his servant sent ?
There was no direct evidence of Mr.
Garth having had to do with the sending
of this message. It seemed all so very
strange.

What should she do ? Should she and
Belinda go back to town ? There might
yet be a train to-night ; she might reach
London even now by nine o'clock, and
drive straight to Mr. Garth's house.

But Sir Harry ! The thought of him
came very temptingly and very disconsolately
then to Cicely's mind. What if
he came down while she was away ?

What If she missed him by hurrying thus
back to London ? When he came to her,
it would be his first visit since they ' were
engaged ; ' and it was terrible to think that
she might be away, and so disappoint
him ; and yet — and yet, on the other hand,
her heart clearly told her she ought to goto
Mr. Richard Garth.

Poor Richard Garth, he was ill — perhaps
very, very ill. She was very sorry for
him indeed. Suddenly she sprang from
the chair, and ran in to tell Belinda.

To Belinda (if they had time to stop
for any confidences) she had much to tell.
For, up to this point, except the fact of her
acceptance of him, she had disclosed little
to Belinda of the state of matters between
herself and Sir Harry. She had told
nothing of the contents of her letter to him,
for she wished to have his answer first.

She could not speak of her doubts and
fears of him during the two long days that

these doubts and fears had endured. She
felt it was due to him that these letters
which had been exchanged between them
on this vital subject, should be kept private
between them until the rests of the
letters might be known. She had been
obliged to ask him if he would have his
freedom, obliged to tell him of her change
of prospects, obliged to disengage herself
if it were his will ; but she had felt ashamed
of it (all the same) that she had feared
or doubted him. And now she said to herself
that not even Belinda must ever know
the agony of those anxious and doubtful
days.

Now, however, she rushed In to the
presence of her composed friend breathlessly,
and in eager haste ; she awoke
Belinda and Negro also from their slumbers,
and she threw into Belinda's lap the
telegram, while she repeated its message
in rapid words of regret.

Belinda was at once astonished and
concerned beyond all limits, for Richard
Garth.

My dear, he is very ill," she said, with
agitation. " There may be even great
danger. He is very ill." And with that,
this feeling and forgiving woman, forgetting
many slights and many rudeness, and
many insults and neglects, melted into tears
of tenderest sympathy and solicitude — remembering
now only those long, long years
ago, when Cicely was a little child, and
knew or realized nothing, in any way, of the
sweet aspirations that had thrilled her, and
the ambitious visions that had filled her
soul, when a surly visit from Richard Garth
drew her from her upstairs' seclusion.
She became quite oblivious, moreover, of
his persistent and cruel hardness in rejecting
that tenderness and deep affection which
she would fain have given him then.

Truly, dear Belinda exemplified the

force of Owen Meredith's sweet, mournful
lines —

We love our lost loves for the love we gave them
And not for any tiling they gave our love''

Nothing but solicitude for what possibly
might be his present state filled her mind
now as she thought of Richard. And all
this welling up in Belinda's kind heart,
she urged Cicely to go back to town
immediately in answer to that emphatic
message, and to hurry to his rooms at
Westminster without delay. Cicely was
also kindhearted, but then (in quite another
direction) she also was in love ; and because
love is always selfish, in a little
peculiar way of its own, she hesitated.

But if he is better," she said, as if
demurring prudently, but really simply
demonstrating that hope to which one
clings against hope, when duty points in
one way, and feelings and desires are all
concerned in another — '' If he is better,

there would be no necessity for our
going instantly, Belinda. This was sent
yesterday, you see, dear. Do you not
think that we had best telegraph and
inquire how he is first of all, before we
start for town again ? "

And yet, no — Cicely was not hardening
her heart against Richard Garth ; only
here, down here, it was so sweet and cool
in the great green shaded garden ; and was
it not likely that Harry would come before
another day had passed over and before
the nightingales began their tomorrow s
songs ?

Fancy his being here, too, through all the
long still evening, how very pleasant — how
very perfect it would be. And up in town
it was hot, dreary, and uncomfortable.

Mr. Garth might not care to see her if
he were better ; he had so hated all he had
heard of Harry, she thought. And this she
thought was certainly unreasonable, seeing

that he knew nothing nor had been told
anything personally of Sir Harry Wynn.

However, Cicely was very tenderhearted,
and she soon gave in. If Belinda
judged that they must go to London ; then
to London they must go.

Belinda always knew what was the right
thing to do — and Cicely was easily softened
towards the memory of Richard Garth.

Half an hour saw them in the full swings
of preparations ; the carriage was ordered,
and a night bag packed.

The maid went through all the stages
of startled dismay and hysteria back to
composure again ; and the other well-trained
servants were swift in preparation
— although all wondered exceedingly
at this sudden departure of their young
mistress to town again.

In the midst of all the bustle Cicely
found time to write a letter to Sir Harry,
and she gave It with many Instructions to

VOL. III. u

her faithful factotum, Mr. Withers, with
directions to deliver It to the young baronet,
if by any chance he should come, in her
absence, to The Oaks.

And then quite heroically she departed,
more in obedience certainly to Belinda's
wishes and her concern for their old friend,
than In accordance with her own desires.
Alas ! she exceedingly feared to miss Sir
Harry. This his expected visit, his first
visit as her fiancd, as One who came because
she indeed for ever more belonged to
him — was a prospective event, naturally of
vast Importance In her sight, and a pleasure
which, even for the sake of Mr. Garth in
his sudden illness, it was hard to lose.

At the station before the train came up
there was time to send a telegram to
Prince's Gate ; and then a second one was
proposed, to reach Mr. Garth's apartments
while they would be yet en route. But
while they contemplated and discussed the

fitness of this step, up came the train with
a rush and a whistle, and they were whirled
away to town.

How dull and begrimed the London
streets appeared after the freshness of the
country to Cicely's eyes, as they drove
from the railway station in a four-wheeled
cab. For Belinda dreaded a hansom,
and there had been no time to order their
own carriage. They slowly wound their
way towards Westminster, and their surroundings
were very dreary indeed.

It was a dull grey twilight now in
London ; twilight, with a hot crimson sky
to the west.

And every house and bit of garden
looked baked and scorched again, for the
fierce sunshine of the last few days had
quite obliterated the entire effects of that
fresh wet day, on the evening of which Sir
Harry told Cicely his love.

It was a dull hour in the streets, for

everybody who chanced to be still in town,
including all the House of Commons and
the Lords, were at dinner just then. The
city was dull looking, and Cicely was
rather sad at heart, and doubtful as to
whether this journey had been wisely
undertaken or not.

At all events there was no doubt she
had lost sight of Harry for the moment,
and that depressed her inevitably in spite
of herself. Suddenly a bright thought
occurred to her as she remembered their
position now ; they were undoubtedly engaged.
How would it be, she thought, if,
when they got home to Prince's Gate, she
were to send down and make inquiries if
he were at Surrey Place ? What would
Belinda say to this, she wondered ?

She would consult Belinda about it all
by-and-by.

At length, after much and weary
driving, they arrived at Richard Garth's

obscure chambers, the cab creeping slowly
up to the door ; and they rang and brought
down the old servant, who looked astonished,
but delighted to behold them there.

Oh, he has been asking for you, miss,"
he exclaimed. ** Go up at once, miss. If
you please ; he has been so eager to see
you all day."

*' I am so sorry we have been so long,"
said Cicely, quite glad, now that she
heard the old man's delighted accents,
that she had taken Belindass advice, and
had come.

Richard Garth was very ill then ! She
felt concerned and truly sorry, and for the
moment forgot all her disappointment in
missing Sir Harry Wynn.

*' Go up, miss, please," repeated the old
man ; and Cicely ran brightly up the stairs.

'* Has he been very 111 ? " asked Belinda,
pausing; but old Ray would not stop to
give her Information.

Yes, yes ; but he is better now," the
old man answered, as he ran step after
step after Cicely, and answered Belinda
breathlessly on the way.

** He Is somewhat better now, and quite
happy since he has got his nephew ; and I
am sure when he sees Miss Browne he
will be all right, for he has been calling for
her and wanting to speak to her all day."

*' His nephew," repeated Belinda, calling
at the top of her panting voice, as she
hurried up the long stairs behind old Ray.
*' His nephew ! and pray who In the name
of wonder Is he ? "

But Ray had reached the top of the
stairs and was now quite oblivious of
Belinda, and was ushering Cicely eagerly
into Richard Garth's quiet darkened room.

Belinda paused in the ante-room, or the:
sitting-room rather, where Richard Garth
had sat and read letters new and old, and;
had ruminated until daybreak two nights

ago. And Cicely passed Into the bedroom
where the old man lay.

There was a third room that opened out
of this — a sort of dressing-room, another
private sitting-room In fact, seldom used
by Mr. Garth.

She entered the bed-room ; all seemed
wonderfully quiet and still.

She turned towards the bed, and a wave
of eager compassion and tenderness swept
over her soul.

For there lay, still and helpless, mild as
an Infant, meek and gentle-looking as a
sleeping child — the man who had raged so
angrily at her three nights ago in her own
drawn-room !

The man who had wished to make a
ruthless sacrifice of her bright young
thrilling life on the cruel altar of Mammon.

She had swept her life away — beyond
his power indeed, but there he lay helpless
and harmless now.

'' Dear Mr. Garth," she murmured, as
she drew near and bent gently over him.
He opened his eyes eagerly and wide.

He had not heard her till then, but he
roused himself now to greet her, and extended
one feeble, faltering hand.

'' I am so glad to see you, dear," he said
slowly. " I am so glad you have come.
Oh, Cicely, I want to thank you for your
pretty letter, dear."

It was not a pretty letter as she remembered
It.

She had felt hardly and bitterly towards
him nearly all the while she had been
writing It ; but If it had pleased him It was
indeed well.

"Yes, my dear. It was a very pretty
letter. Of course, I should be sorry by-and-by
If I had to neglect all my own,
all my sisters people. You were quite
right, of course. And I think now you
were quite right too, dear, in refusing to

marry Fred Bullion ; and quite right, at all
events, to tell me in your letter to look
after my own kith and kin. And so I have
done it, Cicely. I have taken your advice ;
and, do you know, I have written for him.
I have found out my own sister's grandson,
and they sent him at once to me ; and he
has come ; and, my dear, he Is such a fine
fellow, such a fine bright boy."
'' I am so glad, dear Mr. Garth."
'' I took out the letter," Richard Garth
went on ; '' the old letter from my desk
that his mother wrote to me fifteen years
ago, and I set at once about tracing her
through the solicitor who sent me long
ago her letter. And, Cicely, she is dead,
poor dear ; but she left an only son, and
he did not write nor answer the questions
I asked nor anything, but just came
here to me last night at midnight — -
the fine dear boy ! And oh, Cicely, you
naughty rebellious thing. If you could love

him now I would forgive your refusal of
Fred Bullion, my dear. I do not much
wonder that you did not care to marry
Fred Bullion. But my boy — do you think
you could care a little bit for my boy ?
And then I would leave everything, you
know, the whole concerns of Garth and
Browne — I would leave everything quite
happily to the two of you — just to you and
him."

*'Mr. Garth — dear Mr. Garth, do not
break my heart," she said. '' I cannot
please you ; no, not in this way — not In this
way. I cannot marry any one — but one."

** Eh, miss. Is that the old romance, the
old thing again ? Oh, confound that
nonsense. Cicely, and all your woman's
sentiment and romance. Give him a
chance — give my young lad a chance.
Give him time ; take you time to know
him, and then I should like to see the man
that you will prefer to him

** Mr. Garth," cried Cicely, earnestly, for
she was much affected by his state and
excitement, and his altered feelings towards
herself, towards his own kinsman, and towards
the concerns of Garth and Browne.
Mr. Garth — dear Mr. Garth, only listen
to me," she said. She was so very sorry for
him. If it had been in the power of her
heart and soul to have pleased him in this
thing now, she would gladly have promised
at least to try and do it, at least to give
this — this one, a chance. Had it been in
her power, and had there never been for
her heart — a Harry Wynn !

But it was not in her power, for there was
Harry. And all the wealth of Garth and
Browne must go to enrich this new-found
kinsman of Richard Garth, for she could
not promise any interest or participation in
it, in any way that could personally concern
this young kinsman at all. No, no.
She would go down to that old lavender

garden and the ruined tower, where, In
poverty and obscurity perhaps, her Height
be passed, far away from all the
excitements of this big city, and from all
the dignities of the wealth of Garth and
Browne. And gladly she would live forgotten
if it proved so to be — forgotten by
her friends, grave and gay ; live out her life
in oblivion perhaps, but in certain happiness,
complete and undisturbed, with her
own Sir Harry.

Ah, I wish I knew who he is that has
taken your heart away, before ever my boy
had a chance to see you," moaned Richard
Garth again, after a few minutes' pause,
as she hesitated an instant longer before
telling him.

She looked at him In curious wonder, for
it seemed so strange to her — the place
which this new-found nephew had already
taken In his thoughts.

And now, as she paused, he broke out

once more In a long harangue, pleading
the cause of his young kinsman In much
the same tone and In many of the same
arguments which he had used In trying
to win the wealth of Frederick Bullion for
the firm of Garth and Browne. Adding,
after long and repeated arguments,

"He must be a brave young man Indeed
who will stand before my boy." This he
said over and over again, with something
of the old bitterness of tone and thought.

You never asked me if he were good
and brave," replied Cicely, speaking up at
last — because, though full of compunction
for her guardian, she felt indignant. " You
knew nothing of him. You have never
asked me anything really about him, and
that is why I have never even told you
yet his name. But one thing I can tell
you now, Mr. Garth : that no one can
stand for loyalty, for truth, for goodness,
before him whom I have chosen ; and that

brave and bright as may be your young
nephew, and glad as I am Indeed that you
should think him so, he cannot possibly
surpass in these things, nor yet In anything
else, the one whom I love with my whole
heart and soul, and whose name you, my
only guardian, might have asked before
this time."

'what is his names'" he asked gloomily.
'' Not that It Is much to me, for he shall
never touch a shilling of my money, or
anything of the bulk of the fortune of the
Firm ; for all I have. Miss Cicely, shall goto
my young nephew now, I can tell you ;
and I warrant he will marry as I choose."

*' It may be so, and he may have then
the fortune," said Cicely. '' Nay, if you
are determined, then indeed It 7m^s^ be so,
for I cannot alter," she added regretfully,
in a low tone — " I cannot alter ; so if you
will so have It — you must let me go."

*' Humph," the old man sighed, and then

he turned gloomily away from her, and for
several minutes he would speak no more.

His last appeal had failed again to do
justice according to his conscience to
Browne's child and heiress ; justice that
might be compatible with his own fancy
and whims. Here was a sure scheme, and
certainly a much better one than the Fred
Bullion's Idea; but Cicely once more opposed
him In his efforts, and again he became
sullen, silent, and hard.

There was such a curious mixture of
feelings In that strange old heart.

Very well," he said presently. " Very
well then, you must take your own choice ;
you must go to the man you will have, and
leave me, and Garth and Browne, and all
the Firm and Its interests, to my nephew, to
my poor sister's boy. You must go to
your own choice. Miss Cicely ; but before
you go, perhaps you will — you will at
length perhaps — tell me his name."

Cicely raised her proud young head and
paused an instant. His dear name; how
she dreaded (even now that Mr. Garth lay
there feeble and helpless) to hear him
repeat after her Sir Harryss name in his
rough scornful tones.

'what is his name?" he repeated surlily
now. *' What is his name ? "

But he never — then or at any other time
received a direct answer to that question,
for as Cicely looked round on him again — -
and parted her lips to utter that name so
dear and so very sacred to her — the door
of the inner room was quietly and widely
opened ; and her own name in tender and
passionate accents of joy and astonishment
was uttered eagerly by — Sir Harry Wynn !

CHAPTER XV.

A REAL HEIR.

Yes, Sir Harry was old Garth's own nephew.
Or rather grand nephew ; for, that sister
from whom Richard Garth had separated
himself long ago — when she had marred
his life and her own, as he said — when she
married an impoverished fellow with a poor
estate down somewhere in the forgotten
wilds. That same sister — who had borrowed
money from him in his young days
that sister had been the mother of sweet
Dorothy Aubrey, of the heiress of the old
Tower and the scanty acres, now owned
and so dearly loved by Harry Wynn.
The Tower had been the home of sweet
VOL. ni. X

Dorothy Aubrey, Sir Harryss soft voiced
mother, whom he remembered so tenderly,
and had mourned In his loneliness so long.

The letter written fifteen years ago to
Richard Garth, and sent through the old
solicitor in the Stoneshire county town,
had been written by Dorothy Aubrey, and
that letter had pleaded for help in the
education of young Harry. The help had
been refused ; and at the time no questions
had been asked, no trouble taken by
Richard Garth to discover anything about
his poor sister's family. But the letter had
been preserved, and (through its agency) a
few hours of time, a few inquiries by post,
and a single rapid message by telegram, had
been sufficient to discover this new heir to
the house of Garth and Browne.

Frederick Wynn, Sir Harry's father, had
not yet succeeded to his home and title
when his wife had written that pleading
letter to his rich uncle in that ' long ago.'

They were still called, down on the Stone-shire
moors, the ' Wynn Aubreyss ' at that
time — because of Dorothy's old family
estate.

And so D. W. A. had been the initials
signing the gentle appeal to Richard
Garth's humanity, and to those natural
affections for his sister's descendants in
which he proved so remiss.

Under these initial letters he had last
heard of them ; for from the moment of
writing that letter (with all the attendant
humiliation and disappointment of the
deed), the name of Garth was never mentioned
at Arch Aubrey, and Harry had
scarcely heard it at all.

Thus, no notice had been given to
Richard Garth of changes in the family
rank and name ; and so it was alike a great
surprise, as well as a strange gratification,
when, as the result of the old solicitor
setting telegrams and special summonses

to work, there was found and sent to him,
as his nephew and sole heir and representative,
young Sir Harry Wynn Aubrey
Wynn.

Bright, eager, and tender-hearted as his
own sweet-voiced mother had been, the
boy entered Hke a sunbeam the dark sickroom
of that lonely and bitter-souled man ;
and a ready sympathy sprang up in the
young fellow's heart during that one day
for the solitary condition and sufferings of
his old relation. They were uncle and
nephew, so the old Stoneshire solicitor told
the younger man. This was his mother s
kinsman, lying sick here before him — his
near kinsman, although at Arch Aubrey
he had rarely heard his name.

And Sir Harry sat down by the bedside
in that darkened room (feeling bewildered
and perplexed about it all), with
a confused sense somewhere away in his
mind that Cicely might prove to have

something to do with all this, and yet with
no clear realization that he as well as
she indeed belonged to Garth and Browne !
Only one feeling was clear to him, that
this was his mother's kinsman, and that he
must do his duty. Therefore he stayed
manfully there. And so all that long hot
day, while Cicely had watched and waited,
full of impatience and anxiety, for that
letter from Sir Harry, which came at
length with cool evening-tide — there all
that day he had watched almost in silence
by his uncle's bedside, soothing simply by
his presence the sense of loneliness in the
old man's heart. Richard Garth had said
little to him, but had seemed glad to have
him there.

Only just when evening had drawn near,
had Sir Harry left at length that darkened
room, and had gone into the small adjacent
one for repose. A sudden sense of
drowsiness, the consequence of his having

been awake, and engaged in swift travelling,
for the last two nights, had come suddenly
over him. He realized that, of the two
nights just past, one had been spent in
being carried down into Stoneshire, and
that the next had brought him as rapidly
back again. He was exhausted — and the
old servant had made him comfortable in
the inner room. He had been out of his
uncle's room for about an hour perhaps,
and thus had been absent just at the time
when his sweet Cicely arrived.

He had fallen asleep, and had been in
there in quiet repose during all her prolonged
interview with her guardian ; and
there he might have remained all unknown
to her ; but something roused him suddenly,
however — and the thought flashed instantly
upon him, that he would go back and see
his uncle again.

He rose from the sofa on which he had
stretched his tired young limbs, and crossing

the little room, opened the door noiselessly,
and caught the echo of a voice that made

o

his heart thrill with quick awakening joy.

He paused; he opened wide the door;
and it was over — the denouement of all difficulty,
the solution of all mystery, the end
of all entanglement, had come.

They stood side by side by Richard
Garth, and the old man strove to clear his
brain for full understanding of these facts,
so self-evident — and so deeply satisfying
to his heart. They stood there, clasping
their two eager hands — his ward, the right
and just representative of the house of
Garth and Browne, and his own new-found
nephew, who in one brief day had unlocked
all the dead humanity within him, and
roused him to intense and to genuine life.

The nephew, who should have all his
share of the wealth of Garth and Browne,
and Cicely, that rightful heiress on her
father's side.

CHAPTER XVI.

THE PARADISE OF ROMANCE.

There is little more to say.

Richard Garth did not die, but lived to
be glad of his fair fortune, and to rejoice in
all the new-found sweetness of his life.

And so softened was he by all that had
come and gone, that during that one short
autumn time, as he lay regaining strength
through the hot weary days, many things
occurred to him. And so softened was he
indeed by the end of that season, that he
came to have different thoughts even of
Belinda !

And Rumour, who knows all things,
whispers that now Sir Harry and Cicely

have left them for good, these too may
probably devise some method by which
they may mutually defend themselves from
an old age passed in solitude.

It was the end of September, 1880, as I
took up my pen to wind up this little
history, and Sir Harry and Lady Aubrey
Wynn were just lately married. They are
done for now.

Last season — * the year of heliotrope,'
has passed into the things that have been,
and all this group of young people of
that season have entered upon new paths
of life.

The last I saw of them all was on the
Dover packet, as I was bound for the
Italian lakes.

It was a lovely autumn day; the Channel
was as smooth as a mill pond.

On board the little steamer was quite a
collection of new-looking boxes and bags

and dressing-cases, bearing, many large
initial letters, that looked also suspiciously-fresh
and new.

Seated under the awning which shaded
the upper deck of the little steamer was a
group, which, catching my interest there
and then and exciting my curiosity, gave
rise to the acquaintance and to the investigations
which have resulted indeed in this
little tale. For it was the marked and
evident denouement of much I had observed,
and of much Rumour had told me, during
all last season in Surrey Place.

That group consisted of two couples —
Cicely and Sir Harry, and Blanche and
Jack. The last-named lady in a soft
grey costume, that fitted beautifully, and
must have been impervious to dust and
heat.

There they were, and they had all four
wound up their love stories — since I had

seen them all flitting through the season
in town.

Blanche and Jack had been married
about a fortnight ago — but he had not as
yet deteriorated in the way of hats or
boots. Jack was smart and debonair as
ever.

They were not going to travel with Sir
Harry and Cicely, and had now met by
accident indeed.

Jack and Blanche had but just come
from his father's place in Hampshire, and
were going for a month's sketching to
Auvergne. They would stop at Amiens
that afternoon.

Sir Harry and Lady Wynn would go
straight on to Paris — thence on to contriving
— where Cicely had spent a dreamy
week last year.

And it is there that we lose sight of
them, under the soft blue skies of Italy,

sunny as their own bright smiles ; for as we
think of them and would fain still pursue
them there — lo ! they have vanished —
they have passed away from us — into the
veiled and mystic Paradise of Romance.

THE END.

PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND Eccles.
