OF THE

UNIVERSITY

or ILLINOIS

u

II

Defend.

Wakes Cone Hall,

5, fioHd.

BY

LADY VIOLET GREVILLE,

AUTHOR OF

*-'zoE," "faiths and fashions," etc.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

LONDON :
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

^ttbliahws in (Driinarg txr ^tv Jttaj^sts ihz (^uttn.

1883.

wall Rights Reserved']

V. I

Co

MY Sister-in-law,

THE DUCHESS OF MONTROSE,

AS A SINCERE AND LOVING TRIBUTE

TO V5,

NOBLE QUALITIES AND GENTLE SYMPATHY,
THESE VOLUMES

^ ^xz In scribe b.

H



^

I
{

i

CHAPTER PAGE

I. Dodington GOSSIP - - - - 1

II. AT THE ANGEL HOUSE - - - 14-

III. NEW ARRIVALS - - - - 29

IV. AT BLACKNESS PARK - - - 44
V. VISITORS - - - . . 61

VL A LUNCHEON PARTY - - - - 82

VII. IDLE TALK - - - - - 96

Vii IN THE PARSONAGE - - - - 110

IX. MRS. MAYNARD SPEAKS HER MIND - - 124

X. KEITH SPEAKS - - - - 138

XL RAPHAEL PALIS APPEARS ON THE SCENE - 151

Nil LOVERS - - - - - 164

Xii A Dodington COMMITTEE - - - 177

XIV. MRS. PARKINSON DOES HER DUTY - - 197

Contents.

CHAPTER

XV. MR. MAYNARD DOES HIS DUTY

XVI. A girl's resolution

XVII. ORDEAL BY TALK
Xvii AN UNEXPECTED MEETING -
XIX. AN ANONYMOUS LETTER
XX. MR. MAYNARD EXHORTS
XXL MARRIAGE SETTLEMENTS
XXII. THE WEDDING DAY -

PAGE

- 2U

- 234

- 247

- 261

- 275

- 289

- 306

- 321

^

CHAPTER I.

Dodington GOSSIP.

ON'T you come in V Mrs. Parkinson,

speaking thus, leant over the low

gate that gave admittance into the

pretty, though diminutive, grounds

of Ivy Cottage. Her friend, Sophie Maynard,

hesitated a little ; then reluctantly said :

I am *afraid I cannot. Mr. Maynard will
be expecting me ; he has a Bible-class at Rve
o'clock, and the days are still short. I must
go home.'

It is a pity.' Mrs. Parkinson smiled ; and
her smile was very sweet and attractive, though
she affected the dress of an old woman, and

VOL. I. 1

\f

persistently muffled up her head in folds
of black lace tied under her chin. She had a
youthful smile — a smile that told of hope and
faith and enthusiasm, and lit up the small
delicate features with a gleam of early beauty.
'Mrs. Strait has promised to come in to tea.'

I am really very sorry.' Mrs. Maynard
stepped a little closer. 'Did she tell you anything
about Dorothy ? I hear the last new fad
is a Cambridge examination. So unfeminine,
I think, for a woman to be a " blue-stocking ;"
and I am sure, if Dorothy did her duty, she
might find plenty of occupation at home. But
I suppose she has inherited her love of books
from her father, who called himself a literary
man, though I never heard he did more than
write for magazines." '

I don't think Dorothy is ever idle,' said
Mrs. Parkinson, ignoring the implied sarcasm.
She made poor old widow Macarthy a complete
outfit the other day — gown, petticoat,
shawl, stockings — and everything worked with
her own hands !'

Oh, she is clever enough, I don't deny !'
said Mrs. Maynard pettishly ; ' but I cannot
think clever women make their homes happy.'

'Dorothy does, I verily believe,' said Mrs.
Parkinson quietly ; ' she is a model daughter.'

Model ! — model I I don't know what you
call a " model" daughter. Dorothy does not
marry ; she dresses in a quaint sort of fashion
that, I suppose, she would call aesthetic —
and snubs all the young men of the neighbourhood.
That poor young Wigram, for instance,
as nice a boy as ever lived, and heir to a large
fortune. Well, what was the result ? He
has gone to London to become a doctor — a
loathsome, nasty profession — while Dorothy
remains at home, a burden still to her mother ;
for we all know that a widow's fortune is not,
as a rule, much of a pittance.'

Well, if you take it in that way, I have
nothing to say ; but I am sure Mrs. Strait
does not want her to marry — at least, not for
the sake of getting rid of her ; besides, she
is only nineteen or twenty !'

1 believe the Straits' family have good
blood in their veins,' said Mrs. Maynard
reflectively (her own ancestors were wrapped
in pleasing mystery) ; * and of course they
would not think every man eligible ; but no
one could say a word against young Wigram.
His father is a magistrate, and Chard Park is
a magnificent place.'

What a match-maker you are !' said Mrs.
Parkinson, with a little laugh.

1—2

Mrs. Maynard coloured. * I am sure I do
not care a bit whether Dorothy marries or
not.'

*No, my dear Mrs. Parkinson added
gravely, ' don't be a match-maker. My belief
is that all marriages are unhappy ; or if, by
chance, two people suit one another, one of
them is sure to die. Almost in every case
brought to my notice by the Society for the
Prevention of Poverty, the cause of the whole
misery is the misconduct of one or other
amongst married couples. I have a whole
list at home. First, young wife, deserted,
with baby, while the husband ran away to sea ;
second, husband broken-hearted, because his
wife tired of him and eloped with her cousin
children fallen into poverty because '

My dear Mrs. Parkinson, pray stop. If
you only knew how sick I am of the sound of
'* charity" and the words "deserving cases" !
Next to the early services, I think the
deserving cases give me the most annoyance.
You, of course, are an enthusiast. You like
dirty little children, and distressing stories,
and misery, and poverty '

I don't like these things,' said Mrs. Parkinson,
with as near an approach to a sneer asher
kindly nature permitted ; ' but if they

exist, surely it is a distinct duty not to shut
our eyes to the fact.'

That is very well for rich people, who
naturally ought to give money ; but I am not
rich (what clergyman's wife ever was ?), and I
think it is very hard I should have disagreeable
things dinned into my ears all day —
things which spoil my digestion and looks, and
make me wake up with a start in the middle
of the night at the very moment when one
ought to be sound asleep. I suppose you have
a whole heap of new proteges by this time V

Yes, indeed — a black man ; a very interesting
case !' said Mrs. Parkinson eagerly,
cjuite forgetting for the moment that her
listener had no sympathy with her enthusiasms.
He is a native prince, and in such distress, he
has been compelled to sweep a crossing ; and
an American, too — a steady young man.'

Well, Mrs. Parkinson, I must go,' said her
friend hastily, fearing to encounter a deluge
of facts, all increasingly harrowing in their
details. ' I have stayed talking an unconscionable
time, and now I really must make
haste, or Mr. Maynard will scold. Clergymen
even can scold, you know,' she added, with a
smile and a toss of her head, as she turned
quickly away.

Mrs. Parkinson remained for a minute looking
after lier, at ker neat little figure and trim
clothes, and tke wayward turn of her head.
Her eyes were tke prettiest feature of Sophie
Maynard's face ; they were large, pathetic, and
of a deep brown colour. Tkougk a clergyman's
wife, ske made great capital of those
eyes, kick pleaded, urged, reproached, and
coaxed, according to their owner's mood.
Sweet little Sophie Maynard,' people termed
ker; but Mrs. Parkinson, wko saw a little
farther than most of ker neighbours, and kad
made a study of psychological subjects, shook
ker head and said, ' Poor Mr. Maynard !' — only
to herself, however, for Mrs. Parkinson was a
charitable woman ; not only charitable in tke
accepted sense of alms-giving, but also in that
rarer reading, ^ trinkets no evil.' Consequently,
Mrs. Parkinson, during tke exercise
of ker impulsive kind-heartiness in a rough
and unsentimental world, frequently got imposed
upon, and also frequently played depart
of a cat's-paw. On suck occasions ske
would only smile incredulously, remarking,
Well, it can't be helped ; tke money kas done
somebody good.' Whether tke somebody was
tke person ske kad intended to benefit, or
another wko kad profited illegitimately by ker

benevolence, disturbed her placid nature but
slightly.

As she thus mused, leaning over her shabby
brown gate, and following Mrs. Maynard's
light and elastic step with her kind blue
eyes, she murmured gently :

Poor Sophie I I hope your little heartless
ways are all make-believe. I think they are
all make-believe.'

And then, with a sigh, she watched the red
glow of the sunset sky, and the mist rising
from the valley and shrouding the trunks of
the trees in vapoury garments, till, suddenly
remembering Mrs. Strait's promised visit and*
the necessity for ordering tea, she slowly
retired into the cottage. She had some time
to wait for her guest, however. Mrs. Strait
came late, and consequently she stayed late.
Her life was compounded of a perpetual
struggle to overtake time — the time which she
heedlessly wasted, and the loss of which she
bitterly lamented. Being always late, she was
consequently always in a hurry. Her bonnet-strings
were invariably untied, her gloves
hastily thrust on, and her cloak pinned awry.
She had scarcely recovered from the breathless
state of haste in which she arrived, before the
time approached for her departure ; but good

Mrs. Parkinson, who hated to see her friends
uncomfortable, craftily eluded her inquiries as
to the exact time (the clock on the mantelpiece,
a French ormolu gem, never having
been known to go), and prevailed upon her
to eat her tea-cake in peace, and to refrain
from scalding herself in frantic endeavours to
swallow the hot tea rapidly.

Mrs. Strait was, however, so accustomed
to a perpetual condition of nervous tremor,
that she scarcely appreciated the luxury of
blissful beatitude, seated thus by the fire,
where the large tortoiseshell cat blinked
lazily with her eyes at the imperturbable black
one opposite, whose fur was as silky as a child's
soft curls.

Mrs. Strait's conversation was of a peculiarly
disjointed character, her ideas being
seemingly propelled in rapid jerks. Most of her
friends consequently pronounced her a fatiguing
companion ; but human nature under all
its aspects especially interested Mrs. Parkinson,
and she could listen by the hour to little
dribbles of small-talk, which would have
wearied a less large-hearted woman.

Yes, it's quite true. Dorothy has got the
papers, and she is bent on passing the examination.
How good this tea-cake is ! Do

you bake with German yeast ? Margaret's
cakes are never light ; I don't know why.
But there, I ought to be going ; life is so
short

The good lady hastily collected her gloves
and umbrella, carelessly dropping the piece of
tea-cake she had been eating on the floor. The
black cat opened its eyes, looked at the tempting
morsel, stretched itself, finally thought
better of the effort, and curled itself up again
to sleep. Mrs. Parkinson's cats shared their
mistress's food, and consequently displayed a
noble indifference to eating, when this entailed
the smallest exertion.

Where is Margaret V asked Mrs. Parkinson,
having again persuaded her guest to sit down
for a further brief chat.

Margaret ? Ah, who would have daughters !
One gets no sympathy, but only endures
constant anxiety — dear, dear ! I remember
now Margaret told me particularly to meet
her at the dressmaker's. You know that little
lame Miss Clack ? I cannot imagine how she
can have any taste, always confined to the
house as she is, and never seeing anything or
anybody ; but there — Margaret is so inconsiderate.
It is past six, and quite dark. She
must have gone by this time. Dear, dear !

low do some people manage to accomplish
everything V

Eliza shall walk home with you,' said Mrs.
Parkinson encouragingly. ' It is too dark for
you to go by yourself.' She laid her hand on
the bell, and, in obedience to the summons,
an elderly pleasant-faced woman appeared.
^ Put on your bonnet, Eliza, and go home with
Mrs. Strait.'

After some apologies and excuses, Mrs.
Strait consented to avail herself of the maid's
escort, and the two set out home.

It ain't very far to the Angel House, is
it V said Eliza, who was garrulous, and glad
of an excuse for a walk ; ' but it's that dark
at night often, you cannot see your own nose,
let alone anyone else's, if so be as you bumped
up again them. The boys here have a fine time
of it ; they was letting off squibs the other
night, and the fire crackling like anything."

Mrs. Strait shuddered. She dreaded noise,
and sudden surprises, and disagreeable starts.

Oh, I hope they won't do that to-night !'
she said quickly.

No fear, ma'am. At one time,' Eliza continued,
triumphant in the glory of possessing
an interested listener, ' the boys was worse ;
then they would lay down in the road for

passers-by to trip over. Poor Miss Patten
sprained her ankle badly that way

Oh, how can they allow it said Mrs.
Strait, nervously putting her foot down, as
though expecting to step on the prostrate
body of a naughty boy. ' What is Mr. Maynard
about, and the schoolmaster — why don't they
interfere V

Bless you ! Mr. Maynard, he's too kindhearted
; he would only preach them a sermon
on forgiveness, and they don't mind that.
What's the use of talking to boys about forgiveness
? It's a good birching they want ;
and they'd get it too if I had to make the
laws instead of them soft kind of parsons.
Parsons never can keep order, not even
amongst themselves.'

Fortunately here we are !' exclaimed Mrs.
Strait, in a tone of thankfulness, as they
neared the cross-roads, in which stood the
Angel House ; * and I'm much obliged to you,
Eliza. I don't believe I should have got home
without you.'

'And the lantern, ma'am,' put in Eliza,
flourishing the little lantern with which she
had guided Mrs. Strait's steps. ' I always
think of that text when I go out at night,
Like a lantern on a hill." I wonder if the

Jews had ugly roads and mischievous boys,
too !'

Good-night, Eliza ; and thank you very
much.'

Good-night, ma* am ; and you're mighty
welcome to the trouble

Wherewith Eliza turned on her heel, and
Mrs. Strait breathlessly slipped inside her
own door.

Mamma, so late !'

A tall figure, on which the lamplight fell in
golden streams, stood waiting in the hall.

I thought you were never coming home,
and you quite forgot about the dressmaker.'

I am very sorry, my dear.' Mrs. Strait
was struggling to divest herself of her wraps.
But the fact was, I really had not time.
I was detained in the village by old Bridget,
and when I arrived at Mrs. Parkinson's I was
very late, and she would not let me go.
And so '

Oh yes, mamma,' said the tall girl, somewhat
scornfully ; ' I quite understand.'

At that instant an inner door opened softly,
and a voice said :

Do come in, dear mamma ; you must be so
tired.'

The voice had a calm and gentle sound,



and fell like welcome balm on Mrs. Strait's
irritated nerves.

Yes, Dorothy, I am tired. If I could only
get rid of these wraps I should enjoy a
rest.'

Then a white hand was silently jut forth,
which drew Mrs. Strait, still murmuring, into
the warm room.

So like Dorothy !' the other girl exclaimed,
shrugging her shoulders ; * as if dirty boots
were the correct thing in a drawing-room.
But then, of course, she never thinks of
appearances.'

AT THE ANGEL HOUSE.

HE Angel House stood at the end of
the village, at the angle whence
two cross-roads branched out from
the main highway. It was encompassed
by an old brick wall, made ruddy
by many-coloured lichens, and mellow with
the gracious marks of reverent time. At eventide
the gabled windows and latticed panes
caught the rays of the setting sun, and
twinkled like diamonds to welcome the approaching
wayfarer. Those old latticed
windows dated from the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and stood in their antique strength
and simplicity, defying the force of the elements
and the decay of years.

The entrance was on the other side of the

house, through an old twisted iron gate and
up a narrow path. To the left of the door
stretched a small smooth-shaven lawn, to the
right a primly set-out garden, where grew in
their season such homely plants as southernwood,
sunflowers, roses, bushes of lavender,
sleepy daffodils, and gay chrysanthemums.
Everything in it was simple, full of a dainty
old-fashionedness, wherein nothing was for
show, but everything for use or delight, possibly
a trifle stiff and formal in taste, yet
withal graceful and quaint. Within the house,
you passed out of the low wainscoted hall into
a good-sized dining-room, panelled with oak,
but, according to the barbarous fashion of the
last generation, painted over in a light-grey
colour, and hung with primitive hunting pictures,
and prints from Hogarth. One window
of the dining-room looked on to the high-road,
and the other two on to the green sward.
Passing out again into the hall, and through
the door to the left, you came into the drawing-room
; a long, low apartment, equally panelled,
and painted of a pale-green tint, a colour
which imparted a sensation of most delicious
coolness on a sultry summer s afternoon ;
whereas, in the winter, the flames from the
logs in the deep wide chimney, with mantel

of white stone reaching almost to the ceiling,
threw a homely and cheerful light around.

The delicate tracery of the skilfully carved
doors, window-seats, and cornices, picked out,
as well as the wainscot, in the purest white ;
the low ottomans, shrouded in faded green
chintz ; the bowls of fragrant pot-pourra
scenting the air with an intangible and delicious
odour — gave an idea of refinement and
delicacy to the apartment which reminded
you of the pale petals of a white rose set in
its frame of verdant leaves. The room was
unlike any other, and seemed to possess a
distinctive individuality — an individuality
entirely removed from the marvels of silk and
upholstery which compose the furniture of
modern houses, and convey an impression of
oppressive luxury, rather than of cosy comfort.

Mrs. Strait's chair was habitually drawn
near the fire, for spring is a chilly season in
England, and beside it was a table, on which
stood her knitting and a small duplex lamp,
the clear mellow rays of which fell partly on
the thin and fatigued features of the elderly
woman, partly on the striking and brilliant
complexion of her daughter Margaret. The
latter was very tall ; she carried herself
proudly, and knew well the value of her rich

dark hair, red lips, and sparkling eyes. On
the hearth rug, gently combing out the locks
of a small and fluffy white dog, knelt Dorothy,
Mrs. Strait's second daughter. A painter
would have loved to feast his eyes upon her
face ; yet, though fitting excellently into anaesthetic
picture, there was nothing sickly
or angular about the girl. From the proud
open brow clear as marble, shone large serious
eyes, violet, grey, or blue, according to her
mood ; on each side of the brow, gold-coloured
hair, without a tinge of auburn or copper, or
of any such crude tints, fell softly in rippling .
waves, framing the somewhat wide oval of the
face, till it was gathered in a thick knot
behind the ear ; a few rebellious hairs,
boasting a wayward curl, nestled over the
forehead, but the distinct narrow parting
dispelled all notion of a fringe. Her mouth,
was rather large, intensely flexible, and curved
at the extreme edge like that of a Greek
statue ; the nose was straight and firm, the
neck massive and finely-shaped. She was of
medium height and slim, moving with a quiet
undulating motion that induced you to think
of the rippling of the sea or the swaying rustle
of a cornfield. In fact, the predominating atmosphere
of Dorothy, the way she impressed you,
VOL. I. 2

and the feeling you carried away soothingly after
some hours of her conversation, was certainly
calm — not the indifferent calm of a soulless
being, but rather such calm as is conveyed
CO the mind in the divine voiceless hush of a
cathedral at the supreme moment of the canon
of the mass, in the quiet glow of summer afternoon
among the hills, or the moon rays in the
still and solitary churchyard. It seemed the
'-aim of contentment, of a heart at peace and
at one with itself. Her bending; finite in the
straight - falling grey drapery was instinct
with lines of exquisite grace. And yet
Dorothy had received no dancing lessons, had
never been taught to walk or to courtesy, or to
enter a room — she was simplicity itself.

Margaret spoke at that instant, in a quick,
decided tone — the tone she affected as being
the most fashionable — and Dorothy turned her
head to listen, holding the small black comb
in one hand and the little white dos; named
Snow with the other.

I am sorry, mamma, you did not come to
Miss Clack's. She had some lovely new patterns
from Paris. It seems they wear small
crinolines now, and the dresses full. How"
will you like that, Dorothy — you, with your
ridiculous love for straight folds ?'

I shall not like it at all,' answered lier
sister, resuming the occupation of combing ;
folds are the most beautiful things in the
world, and full of character.'

I heard the other day,' mused Margaret,
*that half Mille. Rachel, the great actress's
success was due to the plain fact that she
studied every fold of her drapery artistically,
even to the details of a pocket-handkerchief,
before appearing on the stage. Ah, mamma,'
she added quickly, ' how I should like to go to
a play ! It is so dull here ; never anything
more lively than an amateur concert, at which,
people are too shy to sing in tune. Wouldn't
you like to go to London, Dorothy V

I am not sure. I think I should dislike all
the noise and bustle.'

Nonsense ! You would soon get accustomed
to that. Mamma, when did you say
you lived in London V

When I was a girl. Of course, that is long
ago. When I married, we came to live here.'

And here my father wrote and worked, and
died. Well, you certainly led a quiet life.'

It was a very happy one,' said Mrs. Strait,
with a sigh. ' Your father used to say the
quiet of this place was like heaven, and that
the very name of the house reminded him

2—2

of it ; he always wished to call one of the
children Angela, but I would not allow it.'

It is very dull, though,' yawned Margaret,
stretching; out her foot and lazily contemplating
the rosette on her shoe. * Oh, I forgot !
there is a chance of something a little more
lively happening. We shall be able to feast
our eyes on a young man, which we have not
been able to do for a long time — not since
young Wigram went away.'

Here she looked towards her sister reproachfully.
Dorothy coloured slightly, and drooped
her eyes.

Who is the young man V asked Mrs. Strait
with an air of indifference.

The lord of the manor, Keith Chester. He
and a friend are coming down to stay for a
time at Blackness Park.'

Keith Chester !' repeated Dorothy, with a
puzzled look.

Ah, you are too young to remember,' resumed
Margaret, with importance. ' You were
a child when he lived here ; and then he went
away suddenly, and has been a diploma or
something, and now he has come back. I
hope he will stay a long time. They say he is
handsome.'

I forget. I can't remember what it was

they said about him.' Mrs. Strait knitted her
brows in an effort of memory. * Something I
know — that he was engaged or married, and
his wife died, or his cousin — I can't think
which ; but there was something odd or wrong
about him. He has not been here for seven or
eight years.'

How delightful a romance !' cried Margaret,
laughing. ' That will be better than a three-year-old
novel from the circulating library,
which is all one ever can get here. You never
told me this, mamma,' she added, in a tone of
reproach.

'Well, my dear you were too young.'
Before Mrs. Strait's confused brain there
began to dance a vision of some lapse in
morals, or social delinquency, of Keith's,
scarcely proper to discuss with young girls.

What was it, mamma ? — do think,' urged
Margaret. ' Now gather up your brains and
try to remember — do now, I ask you.'

Margaret put on her most fascinating look
the look which served to captivate a young
curate or a stray tourist, or even an officer
from the neighbouring garrison attracted by
the trout-fishing sufficiently to pass a day or
two in the village inn ; but Mrs. Strait would
not be captivated.

I really can't remember,' she said. ' I
don't think I ever heard correctly, and I am
sure it was nothing edifying.'

Nothing edifying ! — of course not. We are
not listening to a sermon, but to a real story,'
Margaret cried gaily ; ' something thrilling —
a crime perhaps. Wouldn't it be nice to hear
about that, Dorothy V

^ Yes, perhaps.'

Dorothy was staring straight before her into
the fire.

Ah, you have no soul !' said Margaret, with
whom this was a favourite phrase of blame
addressed to anyone who refused to share her
opinions.

*Now, my dear, pray don't go troubling
your head about matters that don't concern
you,' urged Mrs. Strait nervously, to whom
all this curiosity and liveliness of her elder
daughter seemed incomprehensible. ' You
had much better read aloud about Madame
de Pompadour, as you did last night.'

Madame de Seine, mamma,' said Margaret
scornfully ; ' Madame de Pompadour
wasn't proper.'

Oh, indeed ! — ah, well, it was a slip of the
tongue ; but I dare say, poor thing, Madame
de Pompadour was much to be pitied, and

didn't know any better. They did not read
the Bible in those days, I believe.'

They must have been rather jolly days,
however — court-balls and masquerades and
torch-light fetes!' said Margaret.

And a scaffold for Marie Antoinette at the
end !' added Dorothy quietly.

What a damper you are, Dorothy ! They
had their fling, anyhow ; and I dare say the
guillotine did not hurt much. A little excitement
and anxiety, even, would be a relief here,
instead of the tiresome butcher calling regularly
to know if we want ribs or a fillet of beef, or.
if the chops were tender ; and, for an amusement,
tea at the Vicarage or at Mrs. Parkinson's,
with the eternal adjuncts of muffins
and the company of her two cats, which really
make me sick, staring and blinking at one
like Christians out of their horrid green eyes,
and seeming to disapprove of one from head
to toe !'

^ I can't think where you get your restlessness
from, Margaret !' said Mrs. Strait, in a
tone of wonder, laying down her knitting and
peering at her daughter through watery grey
eyes.

Don't know, I'm sure,' cried Margaret,
shrugging her shoulders, and crossing to the

piano, which she opened with a bang. Sitting
down, she began to play Germaine's song from
Les Cloches de Corneille.'

There's a ghostly watchman who the bell will toll,
Ding-cloiiL,% ding-dong bell ;
When the heir returned, he will clang the bell.'

That would do for Keith Chester, wouldn't
it V she asked, abruptly breaking off and turning
round on the music-stool to call to her
mother : * Mamma, is he rich ? What is he
heir to V

I'm sure I don't know, dear. Blackness is
only a small place.'

Oh, how disappointing ! Who ever heard
of a poor heir returning ? That would be flat
indeed. Even the prodigal son had a rich
father, who welcomed him and put a chain of
gold about his neck. At least, if he is good-looking,
that will be something. I am sure if
he has been a diplomat, and knocked about
the world, he won't care for you, Dorothy, even
though you are a walking dictionary of history.
He might take a fancy to me, however. Mrs.
Keith Chester — that would sound nice,
wouldn't it ? And then, mamma, you should
have a pony carriage. It will be my first present
to you.'

Margaret !'

Mrs. Strait's words of reproach were stifled
in a kiss ; for Margaret, unsettled as usual,
had abandoned her music and leant over her
mother's chair.

What shall I be married in ? I should
prefer white velvet for the winter, and white
silver tissue in summer, like a frosted doll on
the top of a Christmas-cake,' she rattled on.
Very pretty, isn't it, Dorothy ? poetical enough
even to please you. But, of course, a crino-
lisette — I insist on the crinolinette. What
say you, Dolly, my bridesmaid T

Dorothy had laid the little dog gently upon
the hearth rug, and was now seated at the
table, making notes with a pencil in her
pocket-book, while a fat volume reposed open
at her elbow.

I think you talk a great deal of nonsense,'
she answered absently — 'but oh, do you
remember the name of the man who wrote the
Polyolbion ?" '

Of course not, dear ; never heard the gentleman's
name. Mamma, isn't it time for
supper? it's past eight.'

So it is, Margaret. Being the bell, please.
Sarah gets more unpunctual every day.'

The evening meal and leisurely gossip concluded,
little Snow taught to beg and go through

his diurnal tricks in anticipation of his dinner,
Mrs. Strait was escorted to her room by her
daughters, who interspersed their good-nights
with kisses and affectionate recommendations.
Margaret, singing snatches of her favourite
ding-dong bell,' finally slammed-to the door
of her own room, and Dorothy, carrying a
volume of Stubbs's ' Constitutional History'
inter one arm, and a candle in her hand,
sought the quiet of her bed-chamber. There
she first locked the door, an unnecessary precaution,
for no one was likely to invade her
sanctum ; but the action inspired her with an
additional sense of privacy. Then, depositing
candle and book, she walked to the window.
Habitually Dorothy read for some time in one
of her big volumes, but never, however late
the hour, did she omit the ceremony of
approaching the window and looking out
upon the prospect. On this occasion, the air
had become considerably warmer since the afternoon,
and the night had an Italian brilliancy.
On the moonlit road the figure of a man was
distinctly visible, the sound of his careless
whistle heard ; and in a field near might be
recognised the dark shadowy forms of sheep.

Dorothy lifted the sash of the window, and
leant out. Life was very peaceful, very

pleasant to lier, with the assistance of her sister's
bright society, the steady companionship of
her books, and the engrossing nature of her
serious studies. Yet sometimes on these quiet
nights, hushed with a cain deeper than
Dorothy's own, her breast seemed to fill with a
hungry longing for the unknown, with a faint
sense of unhappiness, of a vague and voiceless
sadness. She was so depressingly alone — alone
in her aspirations, in her devotion to work, and
the acquiring of knowledge.

And is this all V she seemed to ask herself;
is this unexciting round of occupation life ?— »
just a season of toil and effort, and then nothing
more — no sensible result V

Her still, reserved nature held no space
for the frivolities of girls' thoughts, for the
love of dress and display, or the temptations
of foolish vanity ; she could only experience
silent wonder at people who cared for such
things. Indeed, she would have been sorely
puzzled to explain the existence of her unquiet
sensations in the lonely watches of these starry
nights, for the sensations seemed more like the
revelation of some other self, as her heart
expanded with a wealth of new and strange
emotions. It was for this that she locked
her door, in order to secure perfect privacy.

for a kind of felicitous spiritual communion,
which eluded all definition. There is an
awfulness in the very stillness and the
shadows of the night, and to Dorothy it
seemed as though she breathed a more
rarefied air than that of the common workaday
world on these occasions. The mystery
of nature, the secret of man's sin and
suffering, to the contemplation of which her
historical studies predisposed her, received a
new significance. There was a meaning in all
things, an answer to her questionings, a
reason for her yearnings ; she knew, though as
yet she groped darkly, life was not mere
existence only, and the true perfect life must
come to her in the far - away future.
Strengthened and comforted, she presently returned
to her candle and her big book, and
read on diligently.

NEW ARRIVALS.

sere we are !'

A Two young men drove uj) to the

ig^ door of Blackness Park in an open

fly, on the day following, which

proved fine ; and the speaker, the taller and

darker of the two, stepped out as he uttered

this remark.

It is an awfully nice place,' said his friend,
looking critically around at the park with the
wide-spreading trees, and the sheep grazing
peacefully on the short-cropped grass. ' What
is the house like ? If it is equal to the park,
I don't pity you.'

His companion shrugged his shoulders with
a foreign gesture, and said carelessly :

'That depends upon tastes. I don't care
for English landscapes ; they are too flat and

deadly green and humdrum — just like thei
people themselves, so eminently respectable.
I hate the word " respectable " ; it is another
name for dulness and stupidity ^^

Is that a river, that light streak down therein
the distance V said the other, unheeding this
attempt at cynicism. ' It seems to me as if
there ought to be trout-fishing.'

Oh yes, that's the Few, a very fair-sized
river ; and there are some fish in it, too, I
believe. What a sportsman's scent for game
you have, Johnnie ! Come in now, and let's
explore.'

They walked up the long shallow flight of
steps, and rang at the bell. A servant hurried
out to meet them, and an old housekeeper
courtesies within.

Ah !' said Keith, ' arrived all right, le
Goui. How d'ye do, Mrs. Nutmeg ? are our
rooms ready '?'

'Everything is prepared, sir.' The housekeeper
courtesies again. ' I thought you
would prefer the small blue sitting-room, so I
have got that ready.'

Quite right, Mrs. Nutmeg. I hate fine
apartments that are kept for show ; and in
the blue-room one can smoke comfortably
What are you looking at, Johnnie V

Just a picture, a pencil-drawing of a
woman. She has such a sweet expression.'

Ah, I see !' A sad look passed over
Keith's handsome face. ' That was my
mother, poor soul. She was a beauty in her
day, hut she has been dead these many years.
Now, come along and see my rooms.'

Blackness was comfortable and old-fashioned,
not in the least smart or modern ; though there
was some good furniture, and in one or two
of the bedrooms tapestry, and old silk hangings.
The large drawing-room, which had not
lately been used, bore the stiff and lugubrious
aspect of a company-apartment; but the hall
was homelike and pleasant. Portraits of bluff-looking
old gentlemen gazed benignly from
the walls, where trophies of sport and memories
of youthful days were also exhibited in
the shape of a gigantic stuffed perch, a bow
and arrow, and a glass-case filled with stuffed
birds. A large space was occupied by the
picture of a boy in a blouse and frilled trousers,
seated on a white pony, while beside him
stood a lady in a large poke-bonnet and scanty
flounced white dress, whose honest maternal
pride shone plainly from her countenance.

My grandmother,' said Keith, as they
ascended the stairs.

Johnnie Coote soon felt quite at home,
especially when he had partaken of an excellent
dinner, in which a well-roasted leg of
mutton played a prominent part. When the
dessert was placed on the table, the two men
by common consent drew their chairs near the
fire, and lit cigars.

Keith, this is a very nice house, and you Ve
a capital cook,' said Johnnie, stretching himself
out comfortably.

He was young and fresh still, and did not
disdain to admire. Keith Chester, who was
older, and had rubbed off his prejudices, lost
his illusions, and earned his experiences, smiled
sarcastically.

Glad you think so, old fellow. It's comfortable,
certainly ; but I should fancy dull.'

Dull ! Why, you've a pack of hounds
near, and very good shooting in your own
coverts, and trout in the river.'

Don't forget the trout, Johnnie, old man ;
it's extraordinary the keenness you have about
them. Yes, there is all that ; but, unfortunately,
I don't much care for sport. It seems
such waste of energy.'

Don't run yourself down, Keith. Why,
you're a splendid shot; they all told me so at
Monte Carlo, where you won the prize ;, and

I've seen you ride — you ride as if you liked it,
too. I don't believe in a fellow doing anything
well, unless he likes it.'

No ; I dare say you're right, Johnnie.
There's a fair amount of worldly wisdom contained
in that square close-cut head of yours.'

I hate men with long hair,' broke in
Johnnie impetuously.

So do I. Yet why ? If you come to think
of it, nature intended us to have long hair ;
and it used to be worn long. (there is really
no fundamental difference after all in most 1
things ; it depends on our way of looking at j»
them. The faith of one age is the superstition
of another ; the vices of one country are the i
virtues of another: it's as broad as it's long ; ^
and nothing matters provided one has a good
cigar and a good dinner — eh, Johnnie ?' U f —

I can't quite follow you, Keith, when you
get into metaphysics about vices and superstitions,
and all that, because I never learnt
it at Eton ; besides, I'm not clever : but I
am sure there is such a think; as right and
wrong. I mean, there are things a man who
isn't a cad wouldn't do.'

Poor Johnnie ! you're a good fellow, but a
little narrow ; you have not marched with the
times, as they say.'

VOL. I. 3

Johnnie looked somewhat puzzled, while
Keith leant back and laughed. He had a
half - contemptuous, half - indifferent way of
talking, and setting down other people's arguments
as though they were not worthy of a
serious answer, which was galling to many,
but not to Johnnie, whose simple mind and
genuine humility never permitted him to feel
crushed.

Shall you live here now, Keith V
I don't know ; for a little I shall, I think.
I've knocked about so much, that I feel as if
I should almost prefer stagnation for a while.
You can't think how tired one gets of fresh
faces and new people — all equally uninteresting
and indifferent ; generally people who
wouldn't go out of their way a yard to serve
you ; for the matter of that, I reciprocate
the feeling. But I like you, Johnnie, though
you're just only a mere slayer of beasts ; for
I feel you are honest, and really might shed a
tear — metaphorically, of course ; I shouldn't
think of your behaving like a woman — over
my misfortunes or my demise.'

Of course I should. Why, Keith, we're
'^ pals," ain't we ? I mean, I hope we are.'

" Pals" ? that's a word taken from the
thief-language, I believe ? Strange that we

should 2:0 to thieves for the definition of
a friend. Well, I accept the word '' paW
if you like — you wouldn't iDctray me, 1
think ?'

I ? — good God, no ! — of course.'
Don't swear, Johnnie ; the occasion isn't
worth it. You think me a fortunate man,
don't you ? and yet there's not a soul in the
world cares genuinely for me — except perhaps
you (yes, I knew you would put that in) —
and le Goui, as long as I pay him good
wages ; certainly no woman. Women have
always bored and worried me ; got all they ,
could — except one. Yes, just that one ; and
to be sure, though she was fond of me, she
worried me too.'

'And she ?' Johnnie took the cigar out of
his mouth, and stared expectantly.
She — is dead !'

Poor fellow 1' ejaculated Johnnie.
Why ? She left me a fortune.'
Oh V

An idea had suddenly come to Johnnie,
a remembrance of some gossip he had heard at
his aunt's, a fashionable London lady, of a
story repeated about Keith Chester. It was
only a confused medley of reports and ill-natured
remarks ; but he distinctly recollected

3-2

that some one had talked of a woman, very
beautiful and rich, who had unaccountably
left all her fortune to him.

Do you think a man ought to take a
fortune from a woman ? AYould you, for
instance, Johnnie V

Certainly, if she loved me

Well, Ida (her name was Ida) did love me,
I believe. We were engaged to be married.'

Then, I can perfectly understand, Keith,
why this place seems dull and lonely to you.
I spoke without thought, believe me. I had
no idea of your — sorrow.'

Johnnie said * sorrow ' because it seemed
the most appropriate word to use, yet he
scarcely believed in his friend's grief.

Keith talked bitterly, disappointedly, but
not like a man who has suffered, who has been
struck down on the very threshold of life,
whose beloved, the heart of his heart, has
gone from him. In fact, love was the last
thing to be associated with Keith — passion,
trifling, love-making, but not love.

Never mind,' said Keith, a scold settling;
about his brow as he bit the corner of his
slender moustache. ' I can bear it ; it's a good
while ago now — three years.'

Has it — will it alter your life ?'

Has it spoilt my life, do you mean ?
Hardly. I was poor then, I am rich now.
People may cavil at sentiment, but they
cannot sneer at money. I am rich ; women
have told me I am good-looking, and I am
free to do as I like. Does that sound conceited
? I don't intend it so. I simply state
facts. Let me see : I'm thirty-one. That
seems no doubt a great age to you, Johnnie.
You're what f

Twenty-two.'

^ Ah, twenty-two. That was just about
my age when I first went abroad. One can ,
feel strongly then, can't one ? one is all heart,
and chivalry, and honour — at least, you are.'

It is awfully jolly to be young,' said
Johnnie fervently.

Awfully jolly, yes,' repeated his friend ;
but I'm afraid the rapture soon passes off.
I'm not awfully jolly now. I feel old and
indifferent and — bored. Society I find dull,
solitude I can't stand, champagne I abhor,
claret I scarcely drink. What is to be done,
Johnnie V

Marry !' said Johnnie quickly.

True ; that's an idea. I've tried everything
but that. But then, the woman — she
would have to be perfection. I've become so

exceedingly particular. She must be beautiful,
for ugliness makes me ill ; she must be
young, of course ; she must adore me, and she
must never sicken me bv her adoration :
above all, she must be clever, and understand
exactly what to say and how to say it.
Do you know of such a paragon, Johnnie V

No, I can't say I do.'

Johnnie shook his head sadly.
A * I never thought you would. All the
women you know are dolls of fashion who
wear crimped fringes, and pinch in their
waists, and have a flavour of rouge and slang
about them.'

'My sisters are not that,' stammered out
y Johnnie.

Keith laughed heartily.

Your sisters, my dear fellow ; they are
excellent good souls, and would suit a country
parson or a homely squire admirably ; but I
must have something different. Do you
know the meaning of cliic f

It's a French word V added Johnnie doubtfully.


Yes, it's the most expressive word in the
dictionary of French slang. It means that
when a woman has that, she has everything.
She may be ugly, short, stupid, but if she has

chic she can see every man at her feet, and
defy every woman's hatred ; because when she
has gained a man's love, she will never lose it
he is hers for ever. Th tis g Aig. ' ^

An exceedingly unpleasant thing, I think,'
said Johnnie decisively ; ' fancy being obliged
to love an ugly woman!'

Beauty is a matter of taste, as I have
already told you. I once knew a woman for
whom three men had died, and two had fought
a duel. She was not particularly handsome.'

How strange !'

Yes, the extraordinary influence of certain ^
women is to me a very curious problem. I
fancy they learnt the secret of charming from
the serpent in the Garden of Eden.'

Well, I suppose you don't want to marry
a serpent V

Not exactly, but I shan't marry a fool.
Fools cost too much — in expenditure of
patience, brains, etc. No ; better be hated by
a clever woman than beloved by a fool.'

You seem in a bad way, Keith.'

*Do you think so? Well now, hitherto I
really believed I was an object of envy. See
how one is deceived. Any way, I shall not
marry till I find a woman to suit me exactly ;
and that, I expect, won't be just yet.'

The two men relapsed into silence, Johnnie
resting his head, with the short fair hair,
against the high-backed armchair, and letting
his blue eyes wander thoughtfully up to the
ceiling. One well-shaped hand with square-tipped
fingers — the hand of a man of action
rather than of thought — held his cigar, the
other lay aimlessly on the elbow of his chair ;
his straight, somewhat thick nose, his pleasant,
good-humoured mouth, his frank and manly
smile and clear complexion, proclaimed him
what he was — a straightforward, pure-hearted,
well-born young Englishman. Keith Chester
was a remarkable contrast to him in all things.
He was tall, and more lithe in build than i&
usually the case with the Saxon type. A
restless, irritable expression somewhat marred
the beauty of his handsome features, and
caused people who did not know him to think
him ill-tempered. His silky black hair curled
in tiny waves over his head ; his skin, very
pale by nature, seemed mellowed, in the
warmth of foreign suns, till it had attained an
almost Oriental glow ; his eyes, though really
blue, with black lashes, were placed in such a
depth of shadow that they appeared black.

His hands, refined and delicate as carved
ivory, could yet stiffen upon an obnoxious

object. His strength was the strength of
nerve and will-power rather than heaviness
of bulk. As you looked at him you were
first impressed by his beauty, which was out
of the common, and yet of so intellectual a
type that he never reminded you of a mere
pretty fellow. As you studied his face you
read in it lines of thought, traces of passion,
flashes of temper and determination, utterly
at variance with the somewhat languid poses
he affected, and the nonchalance he indulged,
with regard to most things. He attracted
you in the first instance ; he interested you
in the second ; finally, somewhat inexplicably,
he repelled you. But few ever reached the
stage of intimacy in which they were repelled ;
and Johnnie, as yet, was completely under
the spelt] of his fascination. For Keith was
remarkable in this respect, that men were
even more enthusiastic partisans of his than
women, who, as a rule, while they courted and
flattered, yet mistrusted him.

Johnnie, you've remained silent an uncommonly
long time,' presently said Mr. Chester.
What are you thinking about V

Johnnie coloured ; a trick which procured for
him from his comrades frequent mockery. He
dared not say that he had been thinking of

Ida,' the woman who loved and died, and
left a fortune, and the story of her strange
blighted life — that he was wondering what she
was like, and how much she had loved Keith.

Do you know, old fellow, we ought to
go to the little blue-room and have our coffee.
It's getting unconscionably late.'

So the two friends rose and went to the
little blue-room, Keith's own sanctum, where
the walls were coloured a deep blue, and gold
mottoes decorated the doors and panelling,
the divans and couches, luxuriously covered in
quaint Eastern stuffs, inviting to repose.

*' There is no place like home," ' hummed
Keith, lighting a , fresh cigar. * It's eight
years since I was here — a whole lifetime.
To-morrow we'll wander about and look at
the rustics. I suppose not one of them I
knew is alive still. Let me see : there's the
clergyman ; he is a new-comer, and has married
since his arrival. Mrs. Strait, the widow of a
literary man who died here : she had some
pretty children ; they may have grown up
nice-looking. And — and Mrs. Parkinson, the
female Don Quixote who was always riding
some charitable hobby to death ; she must
have grown elderly, but she invariably knew
all the gossip in the village. Then besides,

there are, of course, the county people — Lord
and Lady Darlington, for instance — but they
none of them live near, and I have no doubt
they would not remember me

I shall be happy fishing,' said Johnnie
meekly ; * don't trouble about society for me.'

Oh well, now that I've come back, it does
not do to shut one's self up. We may as well
make the best of it. I'll run over in my
memory the names of any other people I
know.'

CHAPTER lY.

AT BLACKNESS Park.

Precisely at half-past nine the
next morning the two young men
met in the dinner-room. The hour
had been arranged as a compromise
between Keith's early foreign habits and
Johnnie's idle English ones. And the morning
sun, as it shone on the spotless cloth, the
brilliant silver, and the gold-coloured marmalade
in a quaint glass dish, rarely lighted
a more pleasant scene. Johnnie appeared
spotlessly fresh, clean, and glowing. Keith
looked remarkably handsome ; the bright light
suited his delicately carved, classical features,
and the pale tints of his complexion did not
suffer. His eyes rested now with pleasure on
his friend.

Johnnie, there's no doubt about it he said
with a smile ; ' the English are the cleanest,
smartest men in the universe : your freshness
this morning is positively overpowering.'

I have an overpowering appetite,' the other
answered, as he poured himself out a cup of
tea, and filled his plate with hot sausages. ' I
feel as if I could eat a house. It's this stunning
country air. I slept like a top, too.'

You may pass muster for looks, Johnnie,
but your language is slang. Why make use
of all those unclassical expressions V

Slang ! What do you mean ? I only said,
*' I slept like a top !" '

Just so. I grant there is a great amount
of expression in the terms you adopt ; but
they are not elegant.'

No. Who wants elegance V said Johnnie,
with his mouth full of sausage ; ' that's only
for girls !'

And girls themselves don't care for it
nowadays. I declare they sometimes set my
teeth on edge with their horsey, loud, and masculine
ways. I expect ulsters and billycock
hats are at the bottom of that, however. How
can a woman look a woman, or anything buta
coarse knock-about kind of creature, in an
ulster V

I think they are lovely,' said Johnnie ;
show off a girl's figure to perfection T

Don't you prefer something to be left to
the imagination — just a trifle, if it be only
the suggestion of a curve or the idea of a line
that is not unduly displayed V

My dear fellow, I'm no good at that kind
of thing. I have no imagination ; though I
flatter myself I am an excellent judge of a
good fissure when I see one.'

Well, talking of that, I fancy we are rather
in luck ; for I had a long talk with Mrs.
Nutmeg this morning while you were steadily
snoring, and she says the parson's wife is a
very pretty woman, with fine eyes ; and that
Mrs. Strait's two daughters are exceedingly
handsome — " regular beauties," she called
them ; but one must take all that mm
grand. I don't suppose housekeepers know
much about the orthodox type of beauty, nor
of what constitutes it. Your village helle is
generally common-looking, with round red
cheeks, like the apples in her own orchard.
Mrs. Strait was a pretty woman once, I believe,
though she must always have been
characterless ; reminding one of the flabby,
woolly-tasting peaches which are all gardeners
can produce in their hothouses in a wet

season. The father was very well-bred looking,
but delicate. He died before I left England,
ten years ago ; so I suppose Mrs. Strait
has consoled herself for his loss by this time.
We will go down and call this afternoon.'

But you won't keep me all clay paying
afternoon calls,' remonstrated Johnnie piteously
; ' because, my clear fellow, I did not
come to the country for that.'

No — no ; you shall fish this morning till
lunch-time. We are going to be thoroughly
English now, and indulge in no more dejeuners
a la fourchette ! Do you remember our last at
the Cafe Voisin, in Paris, when that handsome
Mrs. Steer was with us ? She has runaway
from her husband now, I hear, with some
rascal of a Russian attache. The husband was nota
bad fellow either ; a capital judge of horses.
But I have long ago found out that women never
know what they want, or when they are well
off ; the handsomer the woman, the greater fool
she makes of herself in her rage for admiration.'

So she ran away, did she V said Johnnie
meditatively. ' I wonder why V

Never wonder thy a woman does anything
said Keith ; * it is complete waste of time. •
Women are queer creatures, the only beings
in creation whose laws of motion you cannot i \

codify ; the nicest ones behave so strangely as
to dispel all idea that they can reason from
false sentiment, they generally prefer a scamp,
and usually deceive an honest fool. The
highly moral man is unattractive, I presume.'
You have a very low opinion of women 1'
My own experience has not been entirely
satisfactory, you see. When a man has been
tricked and fooled and flattered during his life,
and has perhaps tricked and fooled a bit in
return, he must be a ninny if he does not
profit by the lessons he has received. I have
]Profited. I adore women, and admire them
extremely, but I never trust them more than
I can avoid.'

Would you not trust your wife, then V
That is quite another thing. I might, or
I mio^ht not. I should not be so blind, as to
trust her because she is my wife ; I might
trust her in spite of her being my wife. You
perceive it entirely depends on the class of

woman V

I could not marry on those terms.' Johnnie
put down his napkin, pushed away his plate,
and lay back in his chair, with his legs crossed,
while he felt for his cigarette-case. ' If I did
not believe in my wife, I should be the most
miserable of men I'

'Probably.' Keith had risen, and stood
leaning against the mantelshelf ; the graceful
easy pose of his head resembling that of some
antique figure. ' You will be the regular
uxorious husband, I imagine ; and I dare say
you will be monstrous happy. Nature occasionally
gives us a revanche.'

At that instant the door opened to admit le
Goui. ' If you please, sir, Mr. Flint would like
to see you, and the keeper is here for Mr. Coote.'

'Johnnie, my boy,' said his friend lightly,
there you are ; go to your trout, and enjoy
perfect bliss, while I — go to my agent and
succeed in getting my pocket emptied and
my head racked !'

Johnnie lost no time in doing as he was
bid, leaving Keith alone to meditate.

It seemed to the latter very strange, this
return to the home of his father — to the cradle
of his childhood, full of numberless insignificant,
yet none the less sweet memories — to
the quiet country life, the occupations and
amusements that had continued unchanged
ever since his last sojourn, each event happening
with mechanical accuracy : the agent
calling to discuss business, the smiling important
housekeeper, the daily ordering of
dinner. He knew exactly what Mr. Flint

VOL. I. 4

would say. He would remark that the day
was fine, but there had been a slight frost last
night ; that the pheasants were not so plentiful
as might have been expected from the
number turned out last year, and the quantity
of money they cost, for which he begged leave
to produce the bills ; that the tenants were
mostly behindhand in their rents, but that,
judging from the mild winter and the present
satisfactory state of the country, better
things might be expected at Midsummer. All
these and kindred topics pursued Keith with
a strong and persistent familiarity. Had he
been wise in absenting himself all these years ?
was he wise in returning now ?

Such questions he conned over in his mind,
as he stood in front of the bright wood-fire
and looked out to his left upon the smooth
lawn and the tidy terraces and the corner view
of the orangery.

To a man who loved home, Blackness would
have seemed a paradise ; to a man who had been
a Bohemian by training and was one by nature,
it spoke only of heavy responsibilities, of unwelcome
ties, and of doubtful pleasure. ' I
shall not stay here long, at any rate,' thought
Keith ; ' and meanwhile, it is as well to mix a
bit with one's equals, with the country gentlemen

and landowners, and try to understand
their prejudices and obstinate old-fashioned
ways. I wonder what they will think of me ?
Yet, why should I ask ? They know I have
this — the golden key With an unpleasant
smile he chinked the few golden sovereigns he
carried in his trousers-pocket together with
his hand, taking them out, letting them run
through his fingers into the palm of his other
hand, then replacing them in his pocket with
a sharp jingle of metal. * It is all right ; and
now for Flint and his jeremiads about the rents.'

An easy master Keith proved himself, on
that morning, to the practical and matter-of-fact
agent. While the latter sat painfully
upright at the writing-table, his hat, riding-whip,
and gloves carefully placed on the
nearest chair, making notes on loose sheets of
foolscap-paper, Keith lolled, smoking, in an
armchair. Occasionally he threw in little
cynical remarks, or some sharp piece of worldly
wisdom, but for the most part he permitted
the agent to do all the talking, and merely
bowed his head to endorse special views.
^ ' On the whole then, Flint, I may conclude
affairs look promising. Jackson, you say, has
not paid his rent for the last two quarters V

No ; and indeed he pleads utter incapacity

4—2

LIBRARY

to do so. I know the hay-harvest was bad, and
several of his cows died of pleura-pneumonia ;
but I am sure he could pay if he was pressed.
Besides, there is the bad example. Shall I
give him notice to quit V

Stop) a bit — he's a lazy fellow, you say V

Very lazy, with a long head and a sharp
tongue.'

And has a good, hardworking-wife and four
children V

Yes, his wife is as good a manager as any
hereabouts.'

^ Then '

Then I have your permission to get rid of
him V put in the agent promptly.

Then let him stay. Poor wretch, he's
married — he has given hostages to fortune.'

The ao;ent stared. Gentlemen who had
lived much in foreign countries indulged in a
queer way of transacting business.

But, Mr. Chester, I told you he was lazy ;
he is a Radical, too, bitten with some of these
new-fangled ideas about land.'

^ Exactly ; I should like to study the genus.
No, no, Flint, let him stay on, and turnout
anyone else you like.'

At present,' Mr. Flint began, ' I confess I
cannot see the exact drift of your policy.'

Nor can I. The fact is, I have no policy ;
I don't understand anything about the management
of estates, and, what is more, I never
shall. I can't imagine why people are so excessively
keen to possess land ; the three percents
or a snug little affair in railways, is a far
pleasant and more profitable speculation.'

*But land is not a speculation ; it is property,
vested rights, a much-valued possession — at
least, that is how lue look upon it.'

'In England, of course. Well, you see, I
have lived abroad a good deal ; I have been in
Russia — have you ever been in Russia ? — no ;^
most interesting country, I assure you — and
my ideas about land have, in consequence of
much and varied experience, received some
modification. I am not at all sure that land
ought not practically to be the possession of
the occupier to do as he likes with, so long ashe
pays rent.'

But that is rank Socialism,' gasped out Mr.
Flint, his red, weather-beaten face lengthening
exceedingly.

Is it ? then possibly there may be more in
Socialism than I thought — anyway, leave Jackson
alone.'

Mr. Flint bowed. He could not speak.
His employer's extraordinarily lax theories

about land had fairly bewildered and confused
him. When gentlemen, landowners themselves,
spoke like this, what was to be expected
or hoped in the future V

'By-the-bye/ Mr. Chester continued, not
heeding the confusion into which he had
thrown his man of business, ' what kind of
a person is the clergyman ? He is a newcomer
since my time, and he is married, I
hear. Is she — presentable?'

Mrs. Maynard is charming,' answered Mr.
Flint with alacrity ; ' a most ladylike person.'

Ladylike — ah — and he V

Well-meaning ; a little infatuated, but
well-meaning.'

In what sense do you intend both these
adjectives V

'Well, really '

Mr. Flint's mind, though excellent at accounts,
was not quite so ready with definitions,
and the sharp fusillade of Keith's deliberate
questions somewhat overpowered him.

Is he an earnest man ? Does he preach
well V

Oh yes, he is all that ; and he is an
excellent visitor among the poor — does his
parish work well, you know. But he's queer
decidedly queer.'

Mr. Chester's keen eyes demanded further
information.

Well, I mean resumed the agent, having
felicitously succeeded in remembering some
special point, / has early services — no one
attends but a few old women. And — and
candles on the altar.'

Indeed ; that constitutes his queerness.
I have a great deal to learn yet about English
ways. They have changed somewhat — shall
I say improved ? — since I went abroad.'

Are you High Church then T demanded
Mr. Flint. ' Your family have hitherto been
very moderate in their ecclesiastical views.'

My views are — well, I really don't know
what they are. I learnt the Lord's prayer at
my mother's knee, and I have read the Bible ;
I have also read Strauss's and Kean's criticisms
upon it, and as much as I could assimilate
of Ewald's and Bar's works. How does
that strike you V

I am sure Mr. Maynard and yourself will
never agree.'

Perhaps ; who knows ? The unlikely is
always the most probable — at least, in diplomacy.
In religion it may be different.
A propos, I thought of calling on Mrs. Strait
this afternoon. She has daughters V

'Yes, and they are good-looking girls.'

This was the second time in one day Keith
had heard them spoken of with approval,
and between the housekeeper's admiring expression
of * regular beauties sind the agent's
good-looking girls he fancied he could strike
the just balance ; they must be moderately
handsome, probably countrified women. ' No
chance of chic here,' he thought to himself
with a yawn.

Shall we walk round the garden, Flint ?
I want to see what improvements have taken
place there, and also if you wish for any trees
to be cut down in the shrubbery. I never
knew an Englishman yet who was not keen
to cut down a tree — " lest it cumber the
ground," as Scripture says. You see I have
retained some knowledge of the Bible.'

The two now sallied forth on to the terrace,
Keith walking with a slow and deliberate
step, learnt in the course of his flatteries
abroad ; Mr. Flint moving with quick and
inelastic gait, seemingly constructed in one
pointless mass, ill-natured people were wont to
remark. He was a keen observer, however,
of such points as his profession had familiarized
him with ; he noted at once the tree that
obstructed a view, or the spreading branches

of which were impeded by the growth of an
evergreen, or a pine with a long name. He
suggested changes in the flower-beds, and
urged the necessity for new gravel paths.

We did not like to do all this, sir, you see,
in your absence. You might not have liked
it.'

I assure you,' said Keith languidly, ' I
never object to your meddling with inanimate
objects ; it is only the human animal I
demur about. What is this ? By Jove ! it is
as pretty as the lake with the Temple of Diana
in the Villa Pallavicini,' he added with animation.


Ah, that,' Mr. Flint smiled consciously, * is
a little idea of my own. You see, this large
pond was always here ; but I have improved it.'

You have indeed ; it is a perfect poem.'

Mr. Flint felt that Keith meant to imply
unbounded approval of his design, but he
would have preferred a more workmanlike
comment than that of ' perfect poem ' upon its
execution.

The ground sloped from the terrace gently
towards the lake, round whose edges, in their
season, yellow irises, bulrushes and water-lilies
formed an enchanting garland. In the
middle, rising sheer from the still water, was a

cone-shaped island, crowned with a weeping-willow,
the sides of which were a tangled
mass of ferns, flowering shrubs, drooping ivy,
and feathery pampas-grass. A rustic bridge
spanned the space from island to shore, and
beside it was moored a tempting little boat.
Curious and lively water-fowl, black ducks
with red beaks, little grey moriens, bright-plumage
quakers with their sombre-vested
wives, a couple of snowy-white swans swimming
in luxurious elegance and pride, holding
their arched necks in the air with all the
conscious dignity of aristocrats, made a stir
and animation around the silent and transparent
pool.

It is beautiful in summer,' said Mr. Flint,
when the foxgloves and honeysuckle are in
flower.'

It is beautiful now !' said Keith, with a
sigh.

It caused him a strange sensation, to whom
all kinds of loveliness spoke in no indifferent
strain, to know that this simple and exquisite
beauty was his. The very luxuriant verdure,
the twining, creeping grace of the semi wildflowers
and shrubs, with their curved tendrils
and caressing wreaths, their upward plumes
and airy lightness, formed a complete contrast

to the hardly cultivated herbage and dried-up
soil of the foreign climes with which his senses
had grown familiar. The view possessed all
the peculiar charm of England — its modest,
fertile, dewy beauty ; and to Keith's practised
eye it appealed eloquently. He stood a long
while rapt and gazing.

I thank you, Flint, for having arranged
this lovely spot,' he said, at last turning
away.

Mr. Flint found the nut hard to crack. A
patron who permitted impecunious tenants
to keep on their farms ; who held the most
Socialistic notions about such fundamental
institutions as the rights of property ; who
read the Bible, and said he did not know if
he had any religion ; finally, who went into
rhapsodies about a leafy island in the middle
of a pond — was decidedly, to say the least of
it, an exceptional character.

Keith presently took a short leave of his
agent, remarking it was nearly luncheon-time,
and turned slowly towards the house. Near
the corner of the orangery he met Johnnie,
with radiant face.

I've caught some beauties, Keith ; we'll
have them for dinner. I have a particular
receipt for a sauce, which I'll concoct my-kettles

Wife.

self. You could eat your own grandfather
with it.'

Very well, Johnnie. I dare say it's excellent
; only don't make me eat anything
so objectionable as a grandfather, that's
all.'

%

VISITORS.

[Luncheon over, the two young men
walked briskly down the avenue,
the light of youthful gladness and
successfully concluded sport in
Johnnie's eyes, a half-saddened, half-doubtful
expression in those of Keith. The day was
very lovely, full of the peculiar crispness and
tonic qualities of the English air, succeeding a
slight frost. Keith's artistic perception realized
that the soft cloudy outline bathed in a bluish-green
haze of the distant woods, and the warm
tints of the tree-stems, or the shadows of
fleecy brooding clouds, were as beautiful as
the clearly defined colouring of hill and valley
in his beloved Italy, and that they possessed
the charm of mysterious softness which no

crystalline angularity could compensate for.
They turned immediately to the right on
passing through the lodge-gates of Blackness
the road to the left led to the station — and
pursued their way down a winding road edged
by holly-bushes, and oak-trees whose trunks
were smothered in glossy ivy-wreaths. At
the bottom of a steep hill, a heavy laden
cart and horses toiled painfully upward.
It was a homely pastoral scene, like one of
those Birket Foster or Constable loved to
paint.

Johnnie did not trouble himself about
the picturesque, but talked gaily on all subjects.
English scenery seemed commonplace
enough to him. Like Dr. Johnson,
he held that 'when you have seen one
green field, you have seen all green fields ;'
caring as he did only for the sport, not for
the country itself. Naturally one could not
hunt in Cheapside, therefore one must go to
the country if one wanted hunting. Keith,
on the other hand, liked Cheapside well
enough, for the study of men had been the
study of his life ; but yet, when surrounded
by lovely scenery, he could surrender himself
heart and soul to the enjoyment of the
beauties of nature. It resulted that Keith,

during the short walk, remained silent. He was
thinking of the Winter Exhibition of Watercolours
he had but lately seen in London, and
comparing the tints in the pictures there with
the colouring of the landscape before him.
He could paint a little, just as he could play
the violin a little ; he had dabbled in almost
everything, and the result was, in consequence
of his own efforts, a supreme contempt on his
part for any work in the least degree amateurish.
A good deal is to be gained from the
knowledge of the technique of an art ; but
again, the capacity for being easily pleased is
lost, leaving in its stead frequently only an
irritable dissatisfaction with most things. On
this pleasant exhilarating day, however — a day
to blow cobwebs out of the brain and blue
devils from whatever may be their distinctive
abode — Keith felt tolerably well pleased. He
had done some good work in the morning,
a fact which always indues people with a
delightful sense of contentment, and he was
about to pay a visit to two pretty girls.
This was enough to satisfy even a jaded man
of the world for a few hours.

Aren't we getting there V said Johnnie,
who was young enough to be impatient.

In a moment,' Keith answered, perversely

stanclino; still and looking; round him. ' Isn't
England fresh ? I never noticed its remarkable
freshness before. I suppose it is the
damp.'

Of course ; that's what gives the women
good complexions,' said Johnnie carelessly.
What are you staring at V

Nothing, my dear fellow. A cow under a
tree, flicking off the flies with its tail ; and a
pond — look at the grass behind it, of a deep rich
green, then the vivid verdigris of that clump
of duckweed against it, the clear dark brown of
the water, and the distinct reflections in a paler
tint of brown of each leaf and grass and bending
bulrush. It reminds me of Paul Potter.'

^ Paul Potter !' Johnnie appeared relieved.
^ Does he keep a great many cows V

Keith laughed aloud.

My dear fellow, he was a painter.'

Johnnie was a little crestfallen at his
mistake, and tried to remember a shorthorn-breeder
of the name, so as to vindicate his
accuracy.

By this time they had entered the long
straggling village of Dodington.

We had better call at the Vicarage first,'
Keith remarked. ^ It is here.'

They stopped in front of a small white

house shadowed by a green, creeper-covered
veranda. Keith walked through the little
gate and across the garden, and rang the
bell loudly.

Is Mr. Maynard at home V he asked of the
trim maid-servant, who first hesitated, but
finally, seeing the visitor well dressed and
determined, answered :

'Yes.'

Johnnie followed his friend, and the two
were presently shown into a small, neatly furnished
drawing-room. The furniture was of
that new pseudo-antique description so much
affected by persons of moderate incomes, but
the colours were tastefully chosen, and the
forms of the chairs correct. On the walls
hung several old prints and miniatures, while
some evidently valuable china was disposed
on brackets. A cottage-piano stood in one
corner. Keith glanced at the loose music
lying carelessly upon it : he noticed bits of the
oratorio of ' Saul' and a motett of Palestrina's.
Ah, I forgot,' murmured Keith softly. * Flint
said he was High Church.'

They had not long to wait before Mr.
Maynard made his appearance. He was tall
and dark, had massive features and a blackbeard,
and wore the orthodox ecclesiastical

VOL. I. 5

garb tightly buttoned round his throat. He
spoke in quick, decided, vibrating tones, as if
his voice were accustomed to the echoing
space of a hire church.

Very glad to see you, Mr. Chester. It is
a long time since you have been here, I understand
; but I have often wished you could
come home. It seems a pity to leave a
number of distinct duties deliberately undone.'


Do you think so f said Keith, now quite
at his ease, having introduced his friend by
a word and a wave of the hand. ' Duties are
like mosquitoes — they have a maddening
power of persistency.'

The only way to get rid of them then,'
said the priest, smiling, ^ is to kill them, like
the mosquitoes, by leaving none to worry
you.'

'Everyone is not capable of such self-denial,'
Keith answered.

Sto, or else there would be no further
need of sermons.'

Mrs. Maynard appeared at this moment,
pushing the door gently open, and entering
with a half-shy modesty that became her
admirably. Johnnie decided at once that she
had beautiful eyes, and was altogether far too

pretty to be a clergyman's wife, and immured
in a country parsonage. The ceremony
of presentation over, they all four talked
amicably. Keith explained that he had only
arrived a day ago, and was on his way to visit
the Straits.

Ah, the Straits !' said Mrs. Maynard, with
a slight lifting of her eyebrows ; ' you are sure
to find them at home.'

The daughters are pretty V interrogated
Keith, remembering the German proverb, ' All
good things are three ;' he had already
asked the question twice in twenty-four hours.

Oh yes — pretty !' said Mrs. Maynard, with
some perceptible hesitation. * Dorothy has
no style, and Margaret is noisy.'

Keith at once set down these observations
to woman's envy, and felt convinced that the
Miss Straits must be better-looking than he
had believed.

Delightful girls, both !' broke in Mr.
Maynard; 'Dorothy, especially, is so fresh.'

Now, there I don't agree with you, Charles.
Dorothy is always up in the clouds or else deep
in musty old books.'

Well, what can be fresher than a young
lady who comes straight from the clouds V

Mrs. Maynard shrugged her shoulders

5—2

pettishly, but the action became her ; and
Johnnie noticed again that the dark-blue
serge fitted to perfection, and showed off her
exceptionally graceful figure.

Charles is infatuated she said, after a
pause, ' because they were the first girls that
came to early service. There was nothing
surprising in that, for of course there is very
little excitement here ; but they don't come
now — you know they don't, Charles.'

Charles put up a finger daringly. Evidently
the husband and wife had an occasional
argument; but the clergyman had no idea of
exposing the weaknesses of his own household,
and quickly chose a new subject.

Do you find Blackness changed ?' he asked
of Mr. Chester.

Not much, except that Flint has become
poetical, and enlarged the lake and designed a
fairy island.'

Yes, that was a sweet bit of art in nature ;
for the first two weeks all my parishioners
were wild to see it. The gardener had boasted
so of its wonders, that I had to persuade Flint
to admit them, a few at a time, to stare. I
called it " the People's Park." It actually
kept some of the men from the public-house
for two consecutive Sundays. The walk there

and the walk back took up all the time they
usually spent in drinking beer.'

That seems a conclusive argument against
iSabbatarianism, doesn't it V said Keith pleasantly,
though he feared the remark might lead
to a religious discussion.

There is a good deal to be urged on both
sides answered the clergyman, who apparently
did not consider the moment propitious for
argument.

Presently Keith rose, and Mr Maynard
accompanied his visitors to the gate.

I hope you will come again soon,' he said
heartily ; ' you seem to bring a whiff of the
London air with you, which is pleasant. Weare
a humdrum lot here.'

Shall you call to see me, even though I do
not attend early services V asked Keith, with
intention.

Certainly ; they that are whole do not
need a physician, but they that are sick,' said
Mr. Maynard, with a cordial shake of the hand.

Then you do believe I am sick V

You led me to think so by your remark.
At present I have no means of judging.'

Well answered,' thought Keith ; she will not
commit himself.' He then again said good-bye,
lifting his hat politely to pretty Mrs. Maynard.

^ Not half a bad fellow that, for a parson
remarked Mr. Chester, when he and Johnnie
were out of earshot ; ' a more manly specimen
than you find generally. I feel like Diogenes
with his lantern, when I am among priests, asa
rule. I should like to look for a man amongst
them : their cloth and their creed seems to
take all their backbone away.'

She's very pretty,' ejaculated Johnnie irrelevantly,
pulling his hat over his eyes.

Who V asked Keith innocently.
That parson's wife !'

Yes ; there's a mystery about her, I'll be
bound. Like Mrs. Siddons, "I marvel how she
gat there." A parsonage is certainly not her
normal sphere. Johnnie, my boy, you must
not look so admiringly at every woman you
meet with those clear blue orbs of yours. I
felt quite embarrassed for her.'

Did you ? She was not embarrassed.'
No ; women never avoid admiration. Why,
this must be the Angel House — yes, of course
I remember the old wall, but it is a good deal
more tumble-down than it was ten years ago.
I wonder if they keep a page or a maid-servant,
and whether they are at home.'

The answer to their ring was deferred sometime,
till Johnnie, shuffling first on one foot.

then on another, began to whistle, and finally
rang again. This time the bell was promptly
answered, and a maid, quietly obeying the
summons with an air of innocence as though
she had never before heard the bell ring, soon
ushered them into the drawings-room. It was
empty (as a rule on these occasions drawing-rooms
always are empty). Keith was at once
impressed with its individuality.

What a charming room, Johnnie ! So
cool and green — a room to dream in. I had
quite forgotten it was so pretty. What say
you T

I wish the girls would come said the
practical Johnnie, who did not care for
furniture and carvings.

Meanwhile, there was a flutter among the
doves in the Angel House. Margaret, on the
alert as usual, had spied the two young men
from afar.

Mamma, I declare,' she said, in agitated
tones, ' they are coming here ! Quick — put on
another cap ; that one is so shabby. And
you, Sarah, don't answer the bell for a minute.
Make haste, mamma !'

Oh, my dear,' said Mrs. Strait breathlessly,
standing on the stairs, while Margaret, who
had flown up triumphantly, hauled a cap out

c\

of a bonnet-box, and rushing down again, now
pinned the said appendage firmly on her
mother's head, * what a day for visitors I
I feel I am all awry. I was in such
a hurry this morning. Sarah brought in
her books ; and it's the day for me to look
over the linen. I declare I'm all in a
flutter.'

Never mind, mamma,' said Margaret briskly,
pulling her collar straight, arranging the folds,
and giving a quiet determined pat and tug to
the various portions of her mother's raiment.
It's all right. There were two young men —

just fancy, two I Where is Dorothy ? She
must leave her books and come down. Sarah,
go and tell Miss Dorothy.'

The two women descended to receive their
visitors ; Mrs. Strait looking a lady, and more
composed in her manner than might have
been expected from her previous flurry and
excitement ; Margaret, as usual, strikingly
beautiful.

Keith had not expected such good looks.
He could see at a glance that she was not
countrified. He did not even think her
noisy, as Mrs. Maynard had said; but he
thought her wonderfully bright and amiable.
As for Johnnie, he was already, according to

his own later description, * struck all of a
heap.'

It is so pleasant to have visitors,' Margaret
said, smiling impartially towards both the
young men, ' and I am so glad we were at
home. It would have been dreadful to miss
you.'

Keith thought this show of delight immensely
natural and attractive.

Don't you see many people, then V

Nobody !' emphatically announced Margaret.


Oh, my dear !'

The mother looked meekly perturbed at her
daughter's bold assertion.

Well, nobody worth speaking of. Just the
village people and an occasional call from the
county folks ; but they always look down upon
us, though they honour us with a quantity of
pretty speeches, because we're not county
people ; and that is a bore. I do love
society.'

Of course you do,' said Keith. ' We always
like the particular set of circumstances in
which we feel that we shine most. I should
think you might easily gratify your desires.
Society would be very happy to have yoit.^

But unless I were rich it would be no o;ood.

One can't go to a ball every night in the same
gown, and I should like lots of dresses, and
very nice ones.*

Naturally.'

Keith spoke seriously, but Margaret had a
kind of intuition that he was laughing at her.
She turned to Johnnie.

Shall you stay here long, and do you play
lawn-tennis V

Johnnie's face brightened.

I shall be very happy to play with you''

I suppose you are a first-rate player ?
Dorothy plays better than I do.'

Dorothy is V

My sister. Here she comes.'

As the youngest Miss Strait glided towards
the speakers, Keith thought for an instant
that he was the victim of some illusion, and
that a figure from one of Fra Angelico's pictures
had stepped out of its frame. She was
dressed in a closely clinging, straight-cut robe
of grey stuff", full about the breast and sleeves,
and gathered in by a band at her waist. Some
soft kind of rushing surrounded her neck, and
in its folds, just at the birth of the throat,
there nestled a bunch of golden daffodils.
Her large serene eyes were full of quiet interest
; her hair, like that of the pictured

angels, fell in waves round her smooth white
brow.

By Jove !' Keith thought to himself ; * she
is a regular beauty !'

For a while he allowed Johnnie, who was
never at a loss with ladies, to do all the talking,
while he himself sat still and looked on,
returning the vaguest answers to Mrs. Strait's
disjointed remarks. Keith had often seen
beauty like that of Dorothy's in pictures.
Of course, he had not fruitlessly been an
habitue of galleries. The type was perfectly
familiar to him, but the human embodiment of
it was not so. ^

He ran over in his mind all the handsome
women he had met at Eome, Paris, and
Vienna. Not one had such exquisite repose,
such perfection of feature, such serene unconsciousness.


Where did they rear such a paragon V he
thought wonderingly, Thatching the veins in
her eyelids, which she frequently kept bent
down, and listening to the sweet and marvellously
clear intonation of her speech. Lawn-tennis
altogether seemed quite too prosaic an
affair to discuss with her, though, to be • sure
she would look splendid, with arm uplifted like
a Diana.

Johnnie made no end of appointments and
projects of appointments with the girls, before
he took his leave, but Keith only spoke once,
when he succeeded in attracting Dorothy's
attention, and asked her if she was fond of
pictures.

No ; more fond of books,* promptly answered
Margaret. * She is always poring over
some dull old book or another.'

Dorothy, at this unexpected revelation,
could but look imploring. Keith gallantly
came to her rescue.

We must not intrude on Miss Strait's
.secrets, but I am sure she likes pictures.
You have imagination. Miss Strait, and pictures
are a kind of embodied imagination.'

This speech, and some succeeding ones,
which were merely the clap-trap utterances of
a connoisseur expected to propound mysterious
aphorisms, seemed to Dorothy the proof of
exceeding culture and cleverness.

I never see any pictures,' she said, * but I
dare say I should be fond of them.'

Surely in the neighbourhood there must
be collections. I myself have a few.'

I was never at Blackness — in the house, I
mean.'

Never ? Mrs. Strait, will you come and

Sep. my house, pray give me the pleasure of
your company, and fix the day

To-morrow promptly suggested the ever-ready
Johnnie.

Yes, tomorrow ; mamma, do let us go !'
pleaded Margaret.

Dorothy said nothing, but Keith fancied she
inwardly reiterated the prayer.

Shall we not intrude on Mr. Chester V
Mrs. Strait began, nervously pleating at her
apron — for a decision quickly to be taken invariably
tried her. ' So many ladies, and
you are only two young men.'

The greater the pleasure, then,' said Keith,
with his finest diplomatic politeness.

Mamma will come,' asserted Margaret.
'Leave it to me, I'll settle it. "What time
shall we fix V

My dear, you are very presumptuous *

protested her mother feebly.

Two o'clock, luncheon,' interrupted Johnnie.

'Yes, to luncheon, please,' said Keith.
One can talk better after luncheon, and I
can show you the fairy island and all the
pictures. I have a very good Hogarth, a
Murillo, a Gainsborough, and perhaps I maybe
so fortunate as to own some pictures you
will like.'

Dorothy's eyes glistened with pleasure.
Keith gazed long into her face as he pressed
her hand at parting, while a delicate rose-fish
mounted to her cheeks.

Susceptible as a sensitive-plants ran his
mental comment.

Keith pleaded fatigue, and retired early to
rest that evening, much to Johnnie's annoyance,
who loved to sit smoking and talking,
and airing his impressions. He had just
received some worthy of consideration. First
there was Mrs. Maynard ; he was still true in
his admiration of her, though prone to confess
that Margaret eclipsed her on all points. She
had finer eyes, a more glowing complexion, a
more symmetrical figure, and, above all, five
or six more years of youth in her favour.
Still, Mrs. Maynard had a peculiarly insinuating
manner, of which the guileless Johnnie had
felt the influence.

I believe her to be a spiteful little puss,
with the velvet paw and the long claws of the
conventional cat,' Keith made answer to his
declamations.

That is just like you ; pouring cold water
on a fellow's feelings. A diplomat always
believes people want to outwit him ; he is

suspicious by nature. Now I think Mrs. maynard
is truth itself.'

Perhaps.'

^ That means you don't think so. I call
that very unfair on a nice little woman.'

Perspicacity always does seem unfair, to
others.'

Well, what have you to say about the
girls ? — are they truthful V

Perfectly so — I should say remarkably so ;
a little too much for ordinary occasions. Miss
Margaret is very plain-spoken.'

That's just what I like. I do like girls to
be natural and say what they mean. And the
other, what did you think of her ? for you area
capital judge, though sometimes a little hardin
your criticisms.'

The other ! Well, isn't she a little too pale V

I never thought of that. Perhaps it is
owing to the contrast with her sister's brilliancy
; for you will allow that Margaret is
brilliant V

Yes ; I allow it. Like an illumination of
wax-candles that makes one's eyes ache !'

Johnnie was piqued. Where he admired he
would not bear qualified praise.

And the other he retorted, ' is like the
candles when they are unlighted.'

Yes ; lie does not make your eyes ache.
Goocl-niglit, Johnnie ; I'm going to bed.'

Keith did not retire to rest immediately,
however. He sat for a long time thinking,
seated in front of his bedroom fire, like a girl
the night after her first ball ; but his thoughts
differed from a young girl's thoughts : they were
serious, and somewhat sad. Presently he rose,
took a key from his watch that lay on the
dressings-table, and went to an old-fashioned
bureau that stood in one corner of the room.
This he carefully unlocked, and drew from an
inner drawer a small writing-desk. Another
key fitted this lock, a tiny key-ring which he
wore on the little finger of his left hand. He
brought the writing-desk towards the light of
the candles, and opened it on the table. It
contained a bundle of letters tied up with a
blue ribbon, and beneath the letters was a
small leather-case. He pressed the snap of the
case, and disclosed a miniature. For some
considerable time he contemplated the features
of the portrait, while his own face took a hard
and critical expression.

As I thought, she is far more beautiful,' he
muttered. ' It was sure to be some day, why
not now '? — haven't I done with regrets V

He carelessly took up the packet of letters,

rustling their edges, then let it fall again almost
immediately. He quietly closed the miniature-case,
put it and the letters into an inner drawer
of the bureau, and locked it. ' It is a new experience
; I may never find another I like so
well. Fate is my mistress ; I have hitherto
served her devotedly — she owes me a guerdon
now.'

Thus thinking, he took up ' Les Maximes de
la Eochefoucauld,' a book he studied assiduously,
and which invariably accompanied him
on his travels, and settled himself to an
attentive perusal of its pages.

VOL. I. 6

A LUNCHEON Party.

>F the effect of Dorothy's apparition
on Keith had induced a mysterious
silence, she, on her part, maintained
an extreme reserve with regard to
her opinion of him.

But now do say,' teased Margaret, when
the curtains were drawn and the family sat
over the cosy tea-table, ' which did you think
the best-looking ? For my part, I incline to
Mr. Chester ; he is so interesting, and interesting
men are quite the ones.'

The what ones?' asked Dorothy composedly.

Well, the too awfully utter ones. You
ought to know what that means, after all the
Punch caricatures — I mean the men who give
one thrills and tremors, and remind one of
delightful Dick Turpin, and Byron, and all the
rest.'

Mr. Chester does not remind me of Dick
Turpin.'

No, naturally, you goose ; I never saw
Dick Turpin, but I can quite believe he has a
history. Oh, mamma, please try to remember
what it was — perhaps we shall find out tomorrow
whether there is a ghost or a family
secret

I trust there are no ghosts,' said Mrs. Strait
nervously.

Of course not. Now, mamma, what have
you lost ? — your thimble ? Oh, here it is.
Really, you were quite presentable to-day; your
collar was nearly straight, and that cap is very
becoming. I was quite proud of you.'

And I was quite ashamed of you, Margaret,'
said her mother, smiling and colouring like a
girl; * how you did run on 1'

Well, wasn't it necessary ? Dorothy sat as
if in a dream, and you, poor dear, were quite
flustered. I did not want them to think we
had no manners. People in London always
talk, I know, when visitors come ; and if they
can't think of any sensible remarks, they just
talk nonsense, so you see I was doing quite
the right thing.'

Mamma, do you think it is quite doing
the right thing," as Margaret would say,'

6—2

interposed Dorothy, in her calm voice, ' for us
to go and lunch with those young men tomorrow
? — doesn't it seem a little forward 1'

Why, Dorothy,' broke in her sister, ' what
a sneak you are ! You know you asked to
go !'

Not I ! I never said a word.'
No ; but your eyes did — volumes.'
I should not for an instant countenance
anything undignified or ill-judged on your
part, you may be sure,' said Mrs. Strait, with
dignity.

Being a woman of a singularly vacillating
and timid temperament, she was subject to
these fits of moral straightening, at which
times she occasionally asserted herself with
even outrageously violent determination.
Dorothy was silent. She was well acquainted
with these phases of reaction. They had been
frequent from the time of the girl's childhood,
when one day her mother would give her a
doll to play with, and a month afterwards take
it away again, while she chid her sharply for
wasting her time.

Whatever anyone may say,' Margaret
began, seeing that a silence had fallen over
the trio, 'I intend to enjoy myself tomorrow.
It isn't often, indeed, we get an outing, and I

strongly advise you, Dorothy, to do the same.
Even if you succeed in passing that Cambridge
examination you are so full of, what will it
avail you ? Only enable you to take a governess's
situation — a rather worse fate than that
of a maid of all work.'

I might attain to something pleasant
than a governess's life — I mean something
that would satisfy me better. And, besides?
there is always the charm of the pursuit of
knowledge for its own sake.'

^ Bah ! that won't do you much good. You
will only get wrinkled and ugly. All woman
who write are ugly — at least, most of them.'

I don't want to write — I don't think I could*
write ; but there are other things. However,
we had better not discuss it,' she added
despairingly, ' for we shall never agree.'

No ; I am happy to say we never shall,'
and Margaret burst into a lively snatch of song.

The next morning Margaret rose betimes.
She was generally somewhat idle, and fond of
her ease, so that her mother and sister had
frequently finished breakfast before she appeared
; but this was an occasion of excitement
well worth the trouble of surrendering a little
comfort. She ran to the window and pushed
aside the blind. The sun was shining brightly.

She clapped her hands in an ecstasy of thankfulness
fervent as that of the true and devout
sun-worshipper, and flew into the next room
to awake her sister.

Oh, Dorothy, it is fine ! I was sure it
would be fine. Wake up — do !'

For Dorothy, her golden hair unbound and
streaming over the pillow, lay with the rosy
light flushing her face, and her white arms
crossed over a book.

Just imagine reading, when there is such a
day in store for us !'

Dorothy smiled. Perhaps the unturned
pages of the book before her might have told
a different tale, and given the denial to. her
sister's suppositions. She had not been studying,
though she tried hard and conscientiously
to grasp the nature of the royal prerogative,
and parliamentary authority, about which she
vainly puzzled her brains ; she had not been
studying, and she had been dreaming. Her
dreams were not of rank and wealth, nor of
good-lookingyoung men and pleasant luncheon-parties
; but rather of a rounded, completed
life — of a sympathetic communion of intellectual
delights. At this period of her life
intellect entered largely into Dorothy's conception
of happiness. A clever man seemed to

her almost synonymous with a good man ; for
was not intellect something kingly, a possession
and gift worthy of worship, an attribute
of the ' All-knowing One V And it was precisely
this solitude of the intellect that she
felt most deeply in the companionship of her
mother and sister, who dismissed with a wave
of the hand or an idle laugh the fancies and
speculations which formed the very food of her
existence. She never put her feelings into
words ; she felt an entire incapacity for so
doing. She was somewhat slow of speech, not
from lack of ideas, but rather from superabundance.
She therefore rose obediently at
her sister's summons, and prepared to make*
her simple toilette.

What shall we wear V sighed Margaret. * I
have only that black serge with the scarlet I
wore yesterday — my spring gown won't be
finished for a week — and you, I suppose, will
go in your eternal grey V

It is all I have,' said Dorothy simply,
brushing out her long hair as she spoke.

Well, good-bye ; I must go and dress.
Hake yourself look as nice as you can,
Dorothy.'

The recommendation was somewhat unnecessary,
for two lovelier girls could scarcely

be imagined than the sisters, as a few hours
later, laughing and talking, they reached the
door of Blackness Park. The black and
scarlet serge, though it was not new, suited
Margaret capitally ; indeed, the value of red
as a decorative colour, in our gloomy climate,
is as yet not sufficiently recognised. It transforms
dull skies and intensifies bright ones,
producing an agreeable warmth and vivid
sparkle, enhancing the most ordinary beauty.
Dorothy, in her grey dress, looked very sweet
and subdued ; there was something dovelike
and innocent in her appearance, yet when you
looked into her steady eyes, their light half
veiled beneath a far-away expression, you felt
that it needed but one tiny spark to set them
glowing and burning with the fire of passion
that lay slumbering in their depths.

The Straits, contrary to custom, were
ushered into no empty drawing-room, but the
servant, in conformity with orders received,
led them at once into the blue sitting-room,
where sat the two young men.

Johnnie rose quickly from the writing-table
— he had been busily entering items
in his game-book. Mr. Chester occupied
an armchair, and held a French novel open
on his lap.

Welcome !' he said, rising, with the mixture
of foreign manner and English cordiality
which made his address so attractive to most
people. ' We were bored to death, hoping
for your coming.'

Are we late V asked Margaret, with an air
of indifference, pretending utter ignorance,
though she knew that they had carefully
timed their walk so as to arrive precisely five
minutes after the luncheon-hour. Margaret
had heard that it was countrified to be early,
so she elaborately avoided all appearance of
punctuality.

I think not,' Keith answered politely ;
but the time of waiting for anything pleasant
always appears long.'

^ Is this your own special room ?' said Mrs,
Strait, who was examining the whip-racks
and hunting-pictures on the wall. ' My
husband was very fond of that kind of
picture ; he had some curious old prints.'

Those pictures are of no value,' said Keith
carelessly. ' They are only reminiscences of
my college days. You see, I have not lived
here for many years. In my palace at Venice
I keep all that I really value.'

A palace at Venice — how splendid !' whispered
Margaret to Dorothy.

A palace at Venice !' thought Dorothy ;
how romantic !'

A palace at Venice !' said Mrs. Strait ;
isn't that a little clamp V

Keith smiled :

No, but it's rather gloomy.'

After luncheon, Keith, turning to Dorothy,
who during the meal had sat at his right
hand, said :

Now I want you to come with me ; I have
something to show you.'

And the others V Dorothy looked across
to her sister, who sat by Mr. Coote; they
were pulling crackers, and Margaret was
laughing heartily. Keith understood now
why Mrs. Maynard had called her noisy.

They would not care for it,' he said to
Dorothy. Then, in a louder voice, to her
mother : ' Mrs. Strait, I am going to show
your daughter some books ; will you spare us
for a moment V

Mrs. Strait nodded assent. She had lunched
well and enjoyed the port wine, so that she
felt exceedingly amiable.

Keith led the way. They paused a moment
in the hall before the large picture of a boy on
i\ pony.

That was my father,' he briefly explained.

I do not think you are very like him,'
Dorothy remarked critically.

No ; I am much more foreign-looking. My
mother was dark too, but not so dark as I am.'

They then proceeded upstairs and along the
gallery, where he pointed out the Gainsborough,
a charming rural figure ; mounted a few
steps, then winding suddenly round a corner,
they entered a moderate-sized apartment.

^'How do you like this room?' he asked,
turning to catch a view of the expression on
her face.

The deep bay - window commanded an
extensive view of the velvety lawn, the
terraces adorned with plants and statues, and
the lake with the fairy island in the distance.
The sides of the room were furnished with
book-shelves, occasionally broken by panels
lined with velvet and looking-glass, and filled
with china. The whole of the decorations consisted
of books or china ; they climbed to the
ceiling, they touched the very ground. In the
centre of the apartment stood a large round
table, on which were piled more books, and
albums full of pictures. Beside it stood a
comfortable lounge, and in the window a
writing-table and desk and a low armchair
found their allotted place.

It is Paradise T said the girl, looking
round longingly. 'No wonder you are clever.'

You mean, if I have read all these
books ? Oh, but I haven't read half of them.
Remember, I told you I believed I could show
you something you would like.'

Is this decoration your own idea V she
asked slowly, after a little.

I designed the arrangement — yes. It was
my mother's favourite room.'

And yours V she added quickly.

Well, no. I don't often come up here ; I
generally sit in the blue-room. But then I
am seldom at Blackness at all.'

I don't remember your ever being here.
Why don't you come more often, possessing, as
you do, such a beautiful place V

Why ?'

Keith's face grew grave, and Dorothy
thought she had made a mistake.

I mean — of course, I have no business to
ask why — but you do love this place, don't
you ?'

By this time they were standing at the
window, and he motioned her to sit down in
the easy-chair. He himself leant against the
writing-table.

" Love' Miss Strait ? That is a word I

never permit in my vocabulary. It is a misused
word— a word for novelists. In the first
place, one can't love a place. It is an inanimate
object, and does not allow itself to be
dissociated from its memories, its surroundings,
its climate, and conditions. I am much
afraid inclination, or convenience, or selfishness,
sum up all our loves, if we choose to
analyze them thoroughly. The man of the
world soon learns to tolerate a great many
things, and to love very few.'

Are you a man of the world ?' said the girl
quietly. ' I suppose, as you have been a diplomat,
you must be.'

I am, emphatically. Do you approve
of me less now that I have made this confession
V

No ; only I am sorry.'

Why V

Oh, because a man of the world ' — Dorothy
breathed more quickly as she proceeded —
I think sometimes loses all the qualities
that are best in a man.'

What qualities V

Keith bent a little nearer, and his voice had
a keen, searching tone in it.

A man who can't love must be bitter, he
must be selfish — I am sure you are not.'

Just my condition. Go on, Miss Strait. I
have seldom heard a more appropriate diagnosis
of my case '

Oh, Mr. Chester,' said Dorothy, in much
confusion, * don't laugh at me. I have let my
tongue run on ; forgive me, pray.'

I forgive you, but, my fair confessor, when
a man is a man of the world, he cannot unman
himself — it sounds like a riddle, doesn't
it ? I mean, he can't sophisticate himself — he
can't plunge his soul into a new atmosphere,
like hair into a dye, and make it of a different
colour.'

He cannot, but God can surely '

Are you superstitious ? because if you are, I
feel almost as if the feeling; were infectious.'

To believe in God is not superstitious,
surely,' she said, a trifle pained.

Well, women believe in a God ; men believe
in themselves, or in the woman they love pro
tern. That is the creed of a man of the world,
unless perhaps he has even a broader creed, and
believes in nothing at all. What would you
do for a man then. Miss Strait?'

I should pity him ; but that is not your
case, I am sure.'

At that instant lauo;hino; voices on the stairs
reached their ears, and Mrs. Strait, Margaret,

and Johnnie presently intruded their society
upon them.

What a nice room said Margaret, 'and what
a quantity of looking-glasses and china ! I can
actually see how my gown fits at the back. I
should like a room as full of glasses as this.'

I knew we should find you here said
Johnnie, proud of his perspicacity ; ' the ladies
are dying to go out and see the island. Will
you come V

Yes, let us go,^ Keith rejoined, in his old
listless manner, making room for Dorothy to
pass.

IDLE TALK.

HE whole party then adjourned to

the garden and strolled towards the

island, which received its due meed

of admiration from the ladies.

I should have tea here in the summer,'

Margaret decided ; ' and that rustic bench

would do very well for the purpose.'

I don't think it is a place for tea ; but I
should bring my books here,' Dorothy said.

Yes ; and you could dodge any visitors
that way nicely, couldn't you V put in Johnnie
eagerly. 'Don't you hate afternoon visitors,
Miss Strait V

Not always,' said Margaret, laughing.
^ We did not hate you yesterday ; but then,
you know, we live rather like princesses in an
enchanted castle, who sleep away their lives
in perfect solitude.'

What a horrid bore that must have
been for the princess !' remarked Johnnie
meditatively.

The waking up was always induced by
a kiss, wasn't it V Keith said, in a quiet tone.
Some people might like that — what is your
opinion V he added, walking a few steps away
to where Dorothy stood in silence.

I don't know,' she said, blushing a little.
Dorothy's blushes were like the delicate
tinting of a white flower by the rays of the
setting sun. You looked, the blush was there ;
you looked again a moment after, and the
blush was gone, and it only seemed as if the
blood had flowed a little faster for a moment
beneath the transparent skin. ' I don't know.
Do you mean about the kiss, or the princess V

Both. Of course there could be no doubt
about the princess's feelings — they were unmixed
felicity.'

I suppose the kiss was merely the symbol.
It means that love could bring one back to
life, could wake all the sleeping faculties of
one's nature.'

Exactly so.'

If the princess loved, she must have been
happy r

You think, then, that love could do all

VOL. I. 7

that — could unlock the floodgates of happiness
and transform a whole life "?'

Why not, if it is love V

You are sanguine, Miss Strait. I have
never met with love like that !'

Nor have I, for the matter of that,' she
said, smiling. The others had walked on in
their tour of admiration to inspect the boathouse.
' But I am sure there must be such a
thing.'

o

You see the prince gave the princess life ;
she had nothing to do with it. Perhaps all
women — you, for instance — would not be so
easily satisfied.'

This remark seemed to imply that an answer
was expected, but none came. Dorothy was
silent. It had occurred to her that Keith
meant something more personal than the
words in themselves conveyed ; that he was
in some subtle fashion seeking for her real
sentiments under the guise of a hackneyed
fairy-tale. Dorothy felt disinclined to reveal
her real sentiments. She was flattered that
Keith should try to elicit her opinion and
seem to care about it ; but, again, woman-like,
she hesitated to gratify his curiosity.

*You don't answer. Miss Strait,' Keith
again began, in a slightly more eager tone.

Would you find happiness as the princess
did V

A woman must accept what is offered her,
I suppose V Dorothy answered slowly ; ' she
is generally the recipient, not the giver. I
should prefer to be the giver.'

Which means that you have woman's
rights propensities, and are reading for a
Cambridge examination. You see, I know.'

How V Dorothy looked dismayed.

Never mind. You forget that I have
been a diplomat, and it is his business to find
out everything. You are ambitious. Miss
Strait.' n

Yes,' briefly replied Dorothy, to whom
petty prevarication was a science unknown.

Could you be ambitious for another V

I don't know.' Dorothy reflected. * Under
exceptional circumstances, perhaps.'

'And what would constitute exceptional
circumstances V

Why, of course, a great love, like that of
the princess in question.'

Could you feel that love V

I don't know.'

Miss Strait, have you never noticed what
a large part those words, " I don't know," play
in the English vocabulary ? From high to

7—2

low, it is the answer you get everywhere ; no
Englishman ever commits himself, and the
I don't know," which means everything and
nothing, is capable of driving a foreigner to
distraction.'

*But if you persist in asking questions
people can't answer, they must say " I don't
know." '

'Which means that I have been impertinent.'


No, but a little indiscreet.'

The same thing. Miss Strait, I do not
intend to make a long stay here.' Dorothy
winced a little at these words. 'And there
are many subjects I should like to talk to you
about. I have not been in the habit of
associating much with English girls — certainly
not with girls like yourself, and I would give a
great deal to hear your opinions on some things.'

In short, you would like to study me and
laugh at me said Dorothy, with unaccountable
bitterness.

adieu men garde! — I mean rather to learn to
appreciate you. Can't you believe that there
is some kind of respect for goodness left in me,
even though I am a man of the world V

Oh yes ! indeed, Mr. Chester, I beg your
pardon.'

'Not at all. We are talking freely, unconventionally,
on this occasion, and I like
you to say just what you think. You interest
me strangely, Miss Strait.'

Dorothy was silent. She did not know
exactly what a remark of this sort, coming
from a man of the world, meant. Keith
interested her, too, but she supposed the expression
of interest to him meant only a vague
compliment.

Her silence seemed to pique him. He
quickly began again.

A fashionable o;irl would have taken that
as a pretty speech. Miss Strait.'

Would she ? I have never been used 'to
pretty speeches ; so you see I am at a loss how
to recognise them.'

You must let me see a great deal of you
while I am here,' Keith added impetuously.
Do, for my sake.'

His accent was unmistakable now ; he
evidently meant to convey eagerness. Dorothy
could not exactly have defined her sensations.
Her vanity was gratified, but the presence of
the strange, handsome man beside her seemed
in some fashion to benumb her thoughts ; she
felt paralyzed and fascinated, like the small
bird that cowers in the corner of the drowsy

serpent's cage, and without a struggle submits
to the fate it fears.

May I come and see you tomorrow V

Dorothy nodded ; she dared not trust herself
to speak, but hastened on to join her mother,
who just then approached, primed with a
small battery of customary civilities.

We must thank you for your hospitality,'
said Mrs. Strait gracefully — she could be
graceful when she was not in a hurry — ' and
for the glimpse of your beautiful garden. We
have enjoyed it all exceedingly : it has been a
great treat — quite an event ; but it is getting
late, and we must, I fear, now say good-bye.'

I am sorry you must go already. We will
walk as far as the gate with you,' said Keith,
the proposal being immediately seconded by
Johnnie, who was now on excellently familiar
terms with Margaret.

The afternoon's adventures seemed like a
dream to the girls when, once more at home,
they gathered round the supper-table.

Cold mutton I' said Margaret, gazing discontentedly
at the joint before her. ' No,
I can't eat any to-night. I have the
reminiscence of those lamb-cutlets still before
me. I think it is almost worse to go out and
see what lovely things there are in the world,

and then come home to cold mutton. Those
young men, now — there is paradise if you
like — they need never do anything but what
they please.'

Is Mr. Coote rich then V asked Mrs. Strait,
putting down her knife and fork, and looking
across at her daughter with a puzzled, anxious
expression.

Gracious, mamma ! I don't know. He is
in the Guards, I believe.'

He seemed smitten with you, Margaret.
Give me the pickles, dear.'

Mamma, you always spoil one's fun. Your
mind runs on marriage, while mine runs on
pleasure. I want to enjoy and amuse myself
and for that purpose Mr. Coote is as good as
another. He talks charmingly ; he told me
all about his hunting, and how many head of
game he shot at Christmas, and described all
the balls he went to last season. That's
better, at least, than crewel-work and Mrs.
Parkinson's tea.'

Margaret, if you are so flippant you will
never marry.'

I don't want to marry at present. Why,
you talk as if I were a man with a profession.'


Marriage is a woman's profession, my dear.'

Then, mamma, all I can say is, you did
not draw a prize in the profession : a poor
literary man and an old house in a village,
that's a nice sort of result.'

You must marry, for my sake, Margaret.'

The girl paused a moment in her idle
chatter.

Visions of genteel poverty, of the mother
sitting; darning; through the watches of
the wintry night by the child's bedside,
and the fitful glimpses the child, warm and
cosy in her blankets, had caught of a bending
weary figure stitching industriously, of her
father's worn coat and long illness, of the
faded drawing-room chintz, rose before her
and filled her heart with an unwonted tenderness
for the much-tried if querulous woman,
who in her old age said to her daughter,
*You must marry, for my sake The hasty
words dropped from her lips, and she said
quietly :

But you don't even know if Mr. Coote is
a good sort of person.'

I can see it in his countenance. As for
riches, why,' she added sadly, carefully folding
up her napkin and passing it through an
ivory ring, ' why — there — widows mustn't be
choosers.' ' •

Beggars, mamma corrected Margaret,
laughing.

It s all the same, my dear. Widows and
beggars are both called blessed in the Bible.'

Am I like my father in looks V asked
Margaret, who had risen, and now amused
herself by swaying her slender neck to and
fro arid catching side glimpses of herself in the
looking-glass.

Yes ; indeed,' said Mrs. Strait, as her
faded eyes took a brighter lustre, ' you
resemble him most.'

Then my father must have been a very
handsome man,' cried Margaret, continuing
her manoeuvres in front of the glass, and
thereby rousing the usually placid Dorothy
to say :

Margaret, you behave like a monkey.'

Ah, it's very well for you to do the
Puritan.' Here Margaret sat down in order
to continue her diatribe more conveniently.
*But I have discovered that you are just as
vain as I am, miss, though you are quieter
and less demonstrative. You contrived to
monopolize Mr. Chester to-day entirely. I
saw your by-play, and really thought it did
a simple bookworm like you infinite credit.
I am not sure I shall not pose as the shy ingenue

next time. It seems to be successful ; but no,
the Diana Vernon style of beauty is my line.
Don't you think so, mamma V

Diana of the Ephesians, my dear ? I am
sure she wasn't proper.'

'Diana Vernon, I said. As if I should
wish to resemble a brass goddess ! After all,
I don't care for Mr. Chester, Dorothy. You
are quite welcome to his attentions ; he is too
pale, and I think he is a humbug, though he
certainly has a lovely profile. Honestly, I
congratulate you. You played the part of
a flirt to-day to perfection — quite in the
orthodox style — downcast eyes and pretty
propriety.'

Margaret, you are insupportable.'

Dorothy coloured violently.

Why do you blush, if I have not hit
the right nail on the head ? That is the
worst of transparent skins like yours. One
can read all your thoughts in your cheeks.
Mine, I am happy to say, are not such
tell-tales.'

Are you tired, mamma V

Dorothy moved round to where her mother
sat, looking wan and weary, and laid her hand
on her shoulder.

No, my child ; not more tired than usual.'

And when are those two charmers coming
again, do you know?' asked Margaret, languidly
examining the tips of her nails.

There was a silence. Then Dorothy, in a
timid, quick voice, said, addressing the remark
to her mother :

Mr. Chester said he would call here tomorrow.'


Well, I must say' — Margaret crumbled her
bread into little balls, and began to set them
up pyramidal, like a bulwark, in front of heron
the table-cloth — * I must say you do not
lose time ; that will be three days running
we shall have had the happiness of seeing
Mr. Chester. Mamma, Dorothy at least has
profited by your matrimonial lessons.'

Oh, Margaret !' Dorothy's quick voice had
a tone of pain in it, and her eyes filled with
tears.

Don't be a goose, Dorothy ! I'm delighted.
When the heir returned, then the bell will
toll." Is it not extraordinary how music
always seems to fit in exactly with one's mood ?
Now, my dear Dorothy, for goodness sake
don't take up that big book' — for her sister
had seized a volume of history, and retired to
another part of the room. ' Please don't read
You should not be cross, dear. I didn't mean

anything, only it is so extremely nice to have
something to make fun about.'

Pray go on, if it amuses you,' said her
sister resignedly, ' though I think you might
find some more interesting topic of conversation.'


Margaret perceived that she had tried
Dorothy's patience sufficiently, and even ' fun'
ceases to afford amusement when the person
ridiculed neither retaliates nor shows anger ;
so she amiably began to read aloud little
extracts from the newspaper which lay near
her, the result of which was that Mrs. Strait
soon fell asleep, and dreamed of burglaries,
dynamite explosions, and girls committing
suicide for love — the mental food on which in
her waking; state she had been regaled —
while Dorothy quietly drifted away into
dreams and ima2:inino:s. She wove for herself
quite a pretty romance, of which Keith was
the hero. Who else indeed could be the hero,
seeing he was almost the first young man she
had seen and conversed with familiarly, and
quite the first, except young Wigram (he
was only a boy), who had deferentially inquired
for her views, and informed her, that she
interested him extremely ? In addition, he
was versed in the ways of diplomacy — presumably

also in woman's ways — and had a
kind of possessive personality about him,
which seemed to claim and appropriate for
himself any young girl on whom he deigned
to bestow his attention. Dorothy even
ventured to think there might be a charm in
the awakening of the princess, about which
her opinion had been asked, especially if the
kiss came from two expressive lips shaded by
a dark moustache.

Dorothy, what are you dreaming about ?
Mamma has gone fast asleep, and the fire is
out.'

Dorothy, thus suddenly admonished, jumped
up rapidly with a sense of extreme guilt, and
busied herself with the coal-scuttle, while
Margaret, laying down the newspaper, laughed
immoderately.

IN THE Parsonage.

ses. MAYNARD was considerably
exercised in lier mind, about this
period. At first lie had felt a
trifle annoyed when she heard (as
of course in so small a village was the inevitable
result) that the Miss Straits had been
invited to lunch at Blackness, in preference to
herself. Her vanity was hurt at the implied
disparagement of her personal charms, besides
which, she was acutely disappointed at losing
a rare pleasure ; for Sophie Maynard loved
luxury above all things. Her life was a daily
penance of small duties — early rising, teaching
in the school, assisting at children's teas, and
visits to wretched cottages — from all of which,
including as they did the accessories of dirt,
discomfort, and poverty, Sophie shrank as a

white cat does from wetting; her feet on a
muddy road. The advent of two independent,
rich, and agreeable young men seemed to
promise a vista of pleasures and indulgences, of
which poor Sophie, as a rule, only received a
small share ; and she could not resist a
momentary impulse of envy and dislike for
the more highly favoured Strait girls. Under
the influence of this deception, she sat down
and wrote a letter to her dearest friend, Miss
Alicia Twyne, whom she had met at a ,
explaining, complaining, and
prattling about her neighbours' affairs, in a
truly feminine spirit.

Some days subsequently, Mrs. Maynard
received an answer to her outpourings.
Miss Alicia wrote a full-fledged lady-like
hand, with straggling tails and interminably
crossed f s, and she affected very thin roseate
paper, which she crossed and recrossed, thereby
doubling the excitement and labour of her
readers ; for Miss Alicia had a vein of rippling,
biting gossip, which resembled the piquant
effect of currie-powder delicately introduced
into a dish of broiled chicken.

When Mrs. Maynard, after breakfast, unfolded
the precious epistle (her husband was
out on parish matters, and having given the

cook lier orders, Sophie was free to indulge
herself as she pleased for half an hour), she
saw at once that it was longer than usual, and
most entrancingly crossed and written over,
up and down and round the corners. After
glancing over numerous topics of more or less
interest to her correspondent. Miss Alicia thus
continued :

With regard to your disappointment, dear,
for which I feel as every true woman must
naturally feel for her friend's disappointment
(but is not life made up of disappointments ? —
a mere web of deceitfulness, as a clever man
once said to me), it is, perhaps, not so great
a one as you might think. I hove heard —
mind, you I only say I have heard, for asa
woman it is not my business to retail gossip
about men, and after all it may really be
scandal, and not only harmless gossip — but
I have heard, and on very good authority too,
that Mr. Chester is a monster. Well, dear,
I knew you would start. But listen a little
further. He is beautiful, I believe, fascinating,
as monsters always are (did not Faust
betray Marguerite, and leave her — as we know
from having seen it at the opera — in a grey
dress, with all her hair down, to lie on a
bundle of dirty straw ? — for my part, I

wonder how Nilsson and Patti can bear to
lie on that horrid straw, and wear so unbecoming
and dingy a dress), and women stick
Tip for him as well as men ; but there is an
awful story about him. It seems that Blackness
was heavily mortgaged, and he was very
poor in the days when he lived abroad asa
young diplomat. In society at Eome he
met a beautiful American with a great deal of
money. Miss Ida E. Phaer (you know Americans
always seem to have two Christian
names), and they were engaged to be married.
It was thought he did not care much for her,
though she was passionately attached to him
(girls with money invariably are fools — thank
goodness / have nothing but my brains and
my looks, and both are rather exceptionally
good), when suddenly, without warning, she
died. It was a mysterious kind of death —
people talked of heart disease, and what not.
Suffice it the poor thing died, and there was
a whisper (such a whisper that the diplomat
left Eome pretty quickly) that Mr. Chester
had used unfair means to possess himself of
her money. It seems that abroad people
fight rather shy of him, but in England,
of course, he is scarcely known, though I
have no doubt that in a little while his story

VOL. I. 8

will be quite familiar here. Of course, my
dear, that is no reason why you should not
go to his house ; only I would, in your case,
be careful about chocolate creams, as one
never knows what such a man may be up to.'
When Mrs. Maynard had read this letter,
she folded it again carefully, and sat with
it on her lap for some moments, plunged
in thought. She was sore and angry at Keith's
apparent neglect, and here was an opportunity
for revenge of a most satisfactory kind given
into her very hand. It would be sweet to
have an entirely new piece of gossip to retail
amongst her cronies ; it would be sweet to
annoy Keith, and, above all, to injure him in
the eyes and opinion of Dorothy, who she felt
quite sure was the cause of his indifference.
Dorothy, whom she most unnecessarily envied
because she was so beautiful and so simple — a
kind of stinging commentary upon Mrs. Maynard's
own discontented, restless spirit. Sophie
was not positively unkind. She would have
cried had she really caused a twinge of moral
or physical pain to anyone, though she would
best have understood the physical pain ; but
the gratifying of a piece of spite, when that
gratification was so pleasantly prepared for
her, was really too delightful an exercise to be

foregone. How should she open her batteries ?
What was to be her first offensive attack ?
Sophie poised her little head on one side and
pondered deeply. Her husband ? What a
nuisance dreadfully religious people were,
whose minds were for ever balancing their
heavenly debit and credit account, and who
could rarely force themselves to take any
interest in more unimportant and mundane
matters !

Sophie respected her husband most devoutly;
she loved him too, partly out of gratitude
because he had taken her from a very miserable
position and given her the whole affection
of a strong nature and the cultured elegance of
a pleasant home ; but she could not resist
playing her own little game of intrigue and
cunning whenever she had the opportunity,
even though she was fully aware that in so
doing she risked, in case of discovery, the loss
of his esteem.

As we have seen, Mrs. Parkinson believed in
her innate goodness ; Mr. Maynard saw in her
little whims nothing but a childish ebullition
of high spirits ; and Sophie considered her
own nature as eminently good and amiable,
though not perhaps so tiresome and watery
as that of people who set up to be saints.

8—2

Yet the little woman, with her cat-like love of
mischief and carelessness of consequences, was
fully capable of organizing a very pretty
scheme of ruin to any of her friends against
whom she bore a grudge. On this occasion
Sophie determined to act very warily, and to
gain over her husband to her views.

The clergyman scarcely repressed a sigh of
relief that afternoon when, after a weary round
of visits, he neared the white house with the
little green veranda, and felt with satisfaction
that, in the absence of any special saints-day
service, he might spend a quiet evening, his
feet encased in slippers, by his own fireside, in
the company of his pretty wife. There was a
volume of the * Hampton Lectures,' to the
digesting ol which he had been looking forward,
and his recreations were, as a rule, so
thoroughly well earned by a fair amount of
hard work, that he could enjoy them with a
double zest. He paused at the entrance to
his gate, and looked back down the winding
village street. The horizon was tinged with
ruddy light, which threw a bright reflection
into every petty roadside pool ; above, the tiny M
crescent moon showed like a silver streak, and
the voices of the children were borne gently
towards him on the lightly stirring air.

Peace ruled the world at this sunset hour,
and the worthy clergyman felt his own soul at
rest. Within, Sophie herself was waiting — his
own dear little wife. The note of rejoicing was
checked by his fear of inordinate love and
human idolatry, which offends the heavenly
Father by offering to a weak woman the worship
only rightly to be rendered to Him. Mr.
Maynard was a very good man, and, like all
good men, he had a very tender conscience —
a conscience that pricked him incessantly,
and made him perform a million penances
which remained hidden mysteriously from the
eyes of the outer world, who only knew him
as an excellent and devoted priest, with a
black beard and a deep sonorous voice.

Sophie had made a little toilette this evening,
in anticipation of her husband's return.
It was not much of a toilette, regarded from
the aspect of a fashionable lady, whose practice
it is, two or three times a day, to change
sone splendid Parisian dress for another splendid
Parisian dress ; but Charles Maynard's quick eye
caught the difference at once, and he loved his
wife even more fondly for her intention to please.
Sophie wore only a plain black silk gown,
,such a gown as might be worn by a governess
or a housekeeper in a grand house ; but she

wore it with an air. The upper part of the
dress was heart-shaped, and from amidst ample
folds of black lace gleamed her white neck,
and from amidst similar folds gleamed two
bare white arms, and in her bosom reposed
a deep red camellia. Her bright eyes were
brighter than ever, and full of smiles as she
hastened towards her husband.

Are you cold, Charles ? Let me help you
off with your coat.'

Kiss me first, Sophie. How good it is to
be at home again !'

Charles, I have a surprise for you.'

It would have astonished people who thought
Mr. Maynard unsentimental, had they beheld
how the fascinating Sophie, twining her arms
round her husband's neck, pressed him down
on to a low chair and settled on his lap,
stretching her neat little feet on to the understood.


What do you like very much ? Come
now, think.'

Something for dinner V said the clergyman,
his deep voice turning quite mellow.
Let's see — it isn't a saint's day — oh, could
it be '

Yes, it is — pancakes !'

And pancakes it was ; for Mrs. Maynard

knew that lier husband's proclivities lay in
the direction of so harmless and monastic
a dish as pancakes, and meaning to keep him
in a good temper, had ordered it for his dinner.

Now run away, dear, and wash your hands
and be quick.'

The pancakes had been eaten and duly
pronounced excellent. Mr. Maynard smoked
his pipe, and his wife placidly worked crochet
by his side. Externally, she was the image of
repose and contentment, but inwardly she was
fuming and fussing and wildly turning over in
her mind the best way to introduce the all-absorbing
topic, when Charles assisted her
(men occasionally have a trick of doing this as
though by some mysterious second-sight they
could read thoughts), by saying somewhat
suddenly :

'I met Mr. Chester and his friend to-day.
They were walking with the Miss Straits.'

Oh !' — Sophie laid her hand coaxingly on
her husband's arm — ' that reminds me. What
do you think of Mr. Chester V

He is a nice young fellow, I think ; I am
very glad he is going to take his proper
position in the county.'

His proper position ? What is that V

Really, Sophie, you look as if you did not

know that he was a landed proprietor, with a
considerable income. That surely constitute
a position.'

How did he make his money, Charles V

Mrs. Maynard had slipped on to the fur rug,
and sat now at her husband's feet, with her
arm resting on his knee, so that she could
look straight into his face. When you are
playing a game of brag or acute word-fencing,
it is always well to look your antagonist in
the face — so diplomats say. You can read
there, unless he is a great adept, exactly what
is the next most desirable move.

Make his money ?' echoed the clergyman,
somewhat puzzled. ^ He inherited it, I suppose.'


When a pretty young lady, who is in love
with a man, leaves him a fortune, is that called
inheriting it V

No. What do you mean V

Well, dear ' — here Mrs. Maynard pulled
out of her pocket the trump-card, Miss
Alicia's letter — * I heard all about Mr.
Chester to-day. If it interests you, I will
read it.'

Who is your correspondent, Sophie V

Alicia — dear Alicia Twyne. You are aware
that she always knows everything.'

Humph !' said Mr. Maynard ; ' she is a
gossip.'

Alicia is a most trustworthy woman said
Sophie severely, ' a very clever woman. Lady
Stratford said so, and she is an excellent
judge ; for her daughter married an Archbishop's
son, so she has every opportunity of
conversing with remarkable people.'

Well, what does Alicia say V

Then Mrs. Maynard, with great gusto,
poured forth her little budget of scandal.
Mr. Maynard listened, but offered no remark.
When she had concluded, she said, ' Well,
Charles V interrogatively.

Well V he answered.

What shall we do V

Do ! — what should we do V

Charles, are you — an upright clergyman, a
man of principle — going to allow Dorothy
Strait to run her head into a noose ? Do you
not see that this man, this adventurer, is
simply making up to her ? I noticed it at
once.'

It is not my business, Sophie. Dorothy
has her mother, and she has no money ; therefore
Mr. Chester's designs need not necessarily
be mercenary. Besides, we are not his
judges, nor can we verify Alicia's accusations.'

They are not accusations, they are facts

It is possible ; but we should be careful of
hastily condemning our neighbours. Remember
the text, " First cast out the beam that ism


Now, Charles, if you are going to knock me
on the head with a text, there is no more to
be said ; but I fancied you had a grain
of Christian sympathy for Dorothy, and
would not like her to go straight to destruction.'


My clear,' quietly said her husband, laying
one hand tenderly on her head, and with the
other lifting her face to his as he spoke, ' are
we not rather making mountains out of molehills
? We have barely spoken to Mr.
Chester ; he behaved with great propriety in
calling on me immediately after his arrival,
and he has visited the Straits a couple of
times. Now there comes a letter from a
young lady, who, like other young ladies, maybe
given to slight exaggeration, and we begin
to speculate, and talk of marriage and destruction
at once. Is it not, to say the least of ita
little premature V

Charles, you are always arguing one down
as if you were preaching a sermon ; but I still
think it is your duty (and you know you

always talk of not shirking duties) — your distinct
and positive duty — to enlighten Mrs,
Strait as to the character of her daughter's
lover.'

Little lecturer ! Is that the whole duty of
man V

Mr. Maynard tried smilingly to draw
his wife down on to his knee. But her
blood was up and her patience was exhausted
she had shot her little arrow, and it had
fallen short of the mark. She would permit
no more caresses. Caresses were a bait ora
reward ; they were not to be lightly treated
as an ordinary luxury. So Mr. Maynard
presently sat somewhat sadly alone, and
finished his pipe, with the reflection that
Solomon's verdict was the true one, and
that women's ways were decidedly inscrutable
and shifty. Upstairs, charming Sophie, with
a pout, took ofl" her finery and shook down
her wavy hair in front of her dressing-glass,
wishing heartily that her husband were not
so truly calm, clear-judging, and righteous
a man, careful to avoid the smallest piece of
injustice or want of charity, for in that case
the management of a husband would prove a
more easy task.

MRS. MAYNAED SPEAKS HER MIND.

;July enough, as Mrs. Maynard lead
enviously observed, the fortunate
Strait girls had for the past few
days enjoyed the uninterrupted
companionship of the two young men from
Blackness. Scarcely four-and-twenty hours
elapsed without some communication passing
between the respective households. ' Mr.
Chester had observed that Mrs. Strait was
fond of flowers, would she accept some 
valley from the Blackness hot-house ?'
or, ' Mr. Chester had the honour to send a book
of references about which Miss Dorothy had
inquired ;' or, ' Perhaps Miss Margaret might
like to try the new song, brought by bearer.'
These and similar messages were perpetually

being carried backwards and forwards by a
groom on horseback or a servant on foot.
The distance of a mile is a mere trifle in the
country, though the same mile traversed
every day is apt to prove wearisome, as
the Blackness servants often grumblingly
declared. Sometimes the answer was delayed,
and then Keith usually called for it himself.
He had fallen into a fashion of dropping in
about the mystic hour of fiYQ o'clock, for a
cup of tea and a chat. The little maid,
Sarah, now received him with a smile and
a familiarity bred of constant use, and showed
him into the drawing-room at once, without
hesitation, or the formality of inquiring his
name. And then, in the green-panelled room,
with the scent of the lilies-of-the-valley from
his own hot-house making the air fragrant,
he would find Mrs. Strait knitting by the
fireside, and Dorothy coming forward with
a lovely blush, and bent inclination of the
lashes, to give him her hand and a shy
welcome. Occasionally Margaret was present,
but she already seemed to recognise her
sister's superior right to Mr. Chester's attentions,
and she therefore commonly absented
herself, remarking with a laugh, that ' Two are
company, but three are none.'

Dorothy was very happy. In the midst of
her morning's reading there would come before
her, now, the look of two deep black-fringed
eyes, or the sound of a clear, half-mocking
voice would rise to her ears, and fill
her with a blissful tremor. She did not permit
the interruption to her serious task to be
of long duration, but while it lasted it brought
the brightest dream of quiet happiness.

The studies themselves seemed gilded with
a new glory, and their difficulties became less
arduous as she reflected each day that fresh
happiness, her new happiness, would come in
the afternoon, in the person of the handsome
man who held entire possession of her thoughts.
Gradually she learned to listen for his ring at
the door. Gradually she longed for it ; presently
she felt as if it were a part of her life.
And with this sensation there ensued no wild
throbs of passion, no dark troublesome moods,
but the most heavenly sensation of peace and
contentment and satisfaction. And the experience
lent new charms to her beauty. She
had always been perfect in form and features,
but there came now to her eyes a serene glow
as from the soul within, to her lips a readier
smile, to all her motions a fuller grace and
more exquisite softness. She had formerly

looked like a beautiful statue, now she was
a beautiful woman.

Needless to say that so experienced a man
as Keith noticed this also, and that the transformation
in Dorothy increased his sense of
power. He knew so exactly where and when
to strike the right chord, how to preserve the
exact balance of feeling, how to increase,
without over exciting, feelings of attraction and
emotion, how to maintain his influence while
appearing only humble and adoring.

Dorothy had never seen anyone in the least
resembling him. He had taken her imagination
and intellect captive at once, and he was
now on the high-road to take her heart captive.*
Unconsciously she felt that once he possessed
her heart, she must drift rudderless into his
power.

It is the fashion to sneer at young love, at
girls' love, and to compare it unfavourably
with the more mature and sedate love of a
later period ; but the pain is as acute, the
longing as intense, the disappointment as
grievous, the joy as exhilarating, in the fair
young soul, still fresh from the hand of God
and more finely attuned for suffering or happiness,
as in the heart of one who has gone
through the furnace, who has loved and lost

and outlived hope, till it can only snatch,
wildly and despairingly at the last shred of
happiness that life seems to offer. The young
may forget more quickly, and fortunately for
their future prospects they do forget ; but depend
upon it, they suffer as grievously as their
elders. At present, however, Dorothy was
but turning over the leaves of the prologue of
her life. She enjoyed, but she did not suffer.
Margaret had ceased to tease her about Mr.
Chester. Indeed, Margaret herself was too
deeply engrossed with her own endeavours to
captivate Mr. Coote, or rather, as he was already
captivated, to draw the chains tighter, and to
bind the prisoner more securely.

Thus there did not seem a single drawback
to Dorothy's happiness. She was full of an
airy lightness of heart which set her singing
softly to herself, when, on the day following
Mrs. Maynard's reception of the letter from
Miss Alicia Twyne, Dorothy walked down to
call, by her mother's request, at the Vicarage.
There was nothing much in common between
the two women. Dorothy had a fashion, most
people called it a fault, of keeping aloof from
people unless she felt drawn towards them by
a strong bond of sympathy ; and the only
thing she and Mrs. Maynard possessed in unison

was their beauty. A young lady whose head
ran on culture, and the respective merits of a
Whig or Tory Government, was not likely to
take much interest in the pretty, frivolous
Sophie, with her small aims and her chattering
correspondents. Dorothy did not express her
feelings in so many words ; she was always
gentle and courteous, saying precisely the right
thing, and bringing her mind down to the
fal-lals of dress and the rival modes of trimming
a skirt, yet by a subtle intuition Mrs.
Maynard felt that she did not succeed in
arresting the mind of her listener. It was
bad enough when clergymen preached, for the
exercise was naturally a part of their work;
but when young girls sat silently, a kind of
meek protest against vanity, it became truly
irritating. The sentiments entertained by
Mrs. Maynard towards Dorothy were therefore
strictly only those of a careful toleration which
might at any moment degenerate into enmity.
She received her, however, most graciously.
Mrs. Maynard professed a great contempt for
people who had not good manners.

*Ah, Dorothy, my dear,' she exclaimed,
stretching out both her hands as she came
into the room (after keeping her visitor waiting
for some minutes), with a rustle and rush of

VOL. I. 9

garments. ' I am very glad to see you. I
hope you did not mind waiting.'

Oh no, indeed said Dorothy, taking her
place beside her on the tiny sofa. ' I suppose
you were busy.'

I was washing my hands my dear, and
making use of some eau de Cologne to get rid
of the smell of those school-children I have
been teaching. Pah ! the schoolroom was
suffer than ever to-day. I am sure I ought
to go straight to heaven, for I have endured
enough purgatory here, looking after all those
horrid brats. You are lucky ; you never do it.'

No, mamma will not let me ; she is afraid
of infection.'

The thought crossed Dorothy's mind, as she-glanced
down at the folds of her spotless
grey gown, that perhaps she might be shirking
a duty. Dorothy was a great stickler for
duty, though not exactly what is called a
religious enthusiast. She had attended the
Vicar's early service because it seemed to hera
fitting beginning of the day, and because
she felt a kind of respectful pleasure in
helping the good man by her countenance
and support ; yet she had dutifully given up
the practice without a murmur at her mother's
request, when Mrs. Strait said she dreaded

the chill morning air for her, and did not
like to wait breakfast. Nevertheless, Dorothy
sometimes fancied that her life was a trifle
too self-centred, and that some kind of safety-valve
in the shape of charity might not be
amiss. On this occasion she looked admiringly
at Mrs. Maynard.

It is very good of you to do these disagreeable
things, as you do not like them,'
she said.

Charles likes it,' Mrs. Maynard answered,
with a little gush of sentiment. 'And if it
pleases him, I suppose it is right. Charles
is very fond of you,' she added, with a keen
glance at the young girl beside her. i

Is he V Dorothy responded, somewhat surprised.


'He always speaks so kindly of you. In
fact, we had almost a little quarrel about you
last night.'

About me ?' Dorothy suddenly felt uneasy.
She dreaded lest anything should
happen to disturb her present condition of
felicity.

About you. We were agreed in the main,
but men have such strange ideas, you know —
Charles especially ; he is not like other people.
He shrinks from paining anyone until he

9—2

really sometimes almost does harm by his
timidity

It is better to be silent on occasions than
to speak too much,' said Dorothy, feeling
a conviction that whatever Mr. Maynard
thought must be right and kind.

Ah ! my dear Mrs. Maynard laughed
softly, ' no one can accuse you of being a talker.
You are as shy and quiet as a mouse. But I
am different. I am staunch and loyal to my
friends ; and if I see that there is some calamity
threatening them, I must try and avert it by
speaking out. Charles wanted me to keep
silence, but I have determined to do my duty.
Dorothy dear, you are in love !'

Dorothy Strait's large eyes fastened with a
kind of wonder on the countenance of the
speaker.

I see you are surprised,' Sophie continued,
unabashed, ' that I should have read you so
clearly. My dear, affection is very sharp-sighted.
Don't be ashamed ; all girls fall in
love, and out again too, pretty quickly, sometimes.'


Oh ! Mrs. Maynard,' Dorothy at last succeeded
in saying with a gasp, ' you do exceed
the privileges of acquaintance.'

^ Dorothy, if I say this ' — Sophie grasped

the girl's hand with a caressing movement,
one of those feline impulses which she had
never known to fail in their effect — ' it is
because, child, I know what it is. I also
have been in love — it is an involuntary
condition.'

I am not in love,' Dorothy said ; but she said
the words feebly, and Sophie knew the victory
was hers.

No, dear, of course not ; people never confess
those things. All I wished to impress upon
you was, that it is wise to be careful Jiow one
falls in love. Men are deceitful, Dorothy.'

What do you mean V Dorothy blanched
visibly. ^

Don't be frightened, child ; but I would
mistrust, if I were you, good-looking young men
with romantic histories and large fortunes —
like Mr. Chester, for instance.'

Mr. Chester is nothing to me.' Dorothy's
heart sank down, down, and she felt sick.

He may be, though. Dorothy, don't prevaricate
— he is paying you attention, and you
like him.'

Is it a crime to like the society of friends V
No, indeed — and you are young, therefore

unsuspicious, but '

Mrs. Maynard, you have some motive in

all this ; what is it V Dorothy had recovered
her composure, and now drew herself up
proudly.

I have heard terrible things of Mr. Chester.
Any woman who marries him must do it with
her eyes open.*

I don't believe it broke in Dorothy, with
impetuosity. Her heart was speaking now,
and she had ceased to care whether Mrs.
Maynard guessed her secret or not. * Why do
you slander him V

I never slander. I have a letter here,' and
Mrs. Maynard gently tapped her pocket,
which contains the facts : he obtained his
money by dishonest practices from a young
lady who died.'

A woman loved him and left him her
money — I can see no fault in that.' But even
as she spoke, an unreasoning jealousy of the
woman who had had the happiness to render
him a vital service passed through her soul.
She herself had no money, nothing to give,
nothing to sacrifice — it must be all acceptance
on her part.

Mrs. Maynard gave her a searching look.
The poisoned barb had, she believed, done its
work ; further meddling on her part could
not improve matters — yeast must be given

time to ferment — but the result of her pungent
speeches was certain.

^ I cannot dispute, clear, about your friends,'
she said lightly. ' I only hope you will not
suffer — at any rate, you are warned. Mr.
Chester is no doubt very fascinating, and
that is just what constitutes the danger. If
he were less fascinating, a nice, clever girl
like you would never waste a thought on
him.'

I am not aware that I have wasted any
thoughts on him,' said Dorothy drily. She
was no longer angry, but the subject wearied
her ; it sounded such idle nonsense.

No, dear, you are too wise for foolish
thoughts remarked Mrs. Maynard with gentle
sarcasm, the kind of aggravating pin-pricking
process which easy-tempered people use to
lash more fiery natures into passion, and
generally with exceeding satisfactory results.
Dorothy was not fiery, however ; though she
felt deeply, she could not retort quickly.

You know I am not wise, Mrs. Maynard,'
she replied. * Why do you sneer at me V

Sneer at you, my beauty !' and Sophie
now nudged her amiably. She was in a good
temper, for she was getting all she wanted.
^ Sneer at you — oh no ! Forget all I have said,

dear, if it annoys you. Only don't be rash with
that man, and keep to your books ; they are
perfectly satisfactory — don't you think so ?
Books are a great solace.'

I thought you were not fond of reading V

Oh yes, poetry and novels ; novels are
capital for the spirits. I recommend you a
course of Dickens.'

The conversation then dropped to more
ordinary topics, and Dorothy withdrew as
rapidly as was consistent with politeness ; for
Sophie's caresses seemed utterly hateful and
false to her, and her most innocent words and
childlike graces to be impregnated with acid
bitterness when viewed through the medium of
Dorothy's distorted vision. As soon as she had
shaken herself free from last words and affectionate
embraces, she fled quickly down the street
into the country beyond. Her usually composed
countenance was disturbed, her pulses
were beating;. Was it indeed so, that a few words
of blame applied to Mr. Chester — perfectly
causeless blame, as she believed — had power
to cause her acute misery ? If she had faith
(Dorothy tried to think of Keith as unworthy,
and was proud to recognise her inability to do
so) — if she had faith, why feel annoyance ?
she reasoned with herself. He was not, never

could be, anything else but a friend, a pleasant
sympathetic companion. Of course, some day
he would go away again, would leave her.
Well — in that case there was the Cambridge
examination. Suddenly she realized vividly
that the prospect of distinction and intellectual
honours paled into insignificance when regarded
in the cold light of Keith's departure.
Dorothy sighed. Had she overrated the advantages
of intellect ?

KEITH SPEAKS.

'HE walked on unconsciously between
the bright green hedges just
bursting into leaf; the air had
the sweet smell of upturned earth,
tiny white clouds chased one another across
the clear blue sky, and a million strange
phantasies traversed her brain. The lane
along which her footsteps led her was one of
those numerous narrow roads, both silent and
unfrequented, that abound in England. As
far as the eye could reach, there was nothing
to be seen but fields, some green with grass,
some mown and newly ploughed, their boundaries
here and there more clearly defined by
hedgerow-trees, or by woods whence the cluck
of pheasants resounded. At her feet violets
turned their meek heads towards the sun, and

golden primroses twinkled in the leafy banks.
She gradually slackened her rapid pace, feeling
her habitual placidity and calm restored,
when at the turn of the road, with a suddenness
that almost took away her breath, she
encountered Mr. Chester. He bowed and
looked pleased.

Where are you going to, Miss Strait? May
I turn and walk a little way with you ?'

The temptation was irresistible. Dorothy
wished keenly to prove for herself that he was
incapable of unworthy actions.

I am going nowhere. Does such a prospect
appeal to you f

Under the circumstances, I avail myself,
gratefully of your permission.'

Where is Mr. Coote V asked Dorothy,
feeling silence awkward and dangerous.

Johnnie? oh, I really don't know. I believe
he is engaged in some mysterious sport —
rook-shooting, I think. We are capital friends,
but we never share one another's pursuits.'

Is that a test of friendship V

Certainly. It keeps up the freshness of the
relationship ; for it is the constant contact of
two natures which induces friction.

Are you then of a quarrelsome nature V
demanded Dorothy.

Yes, occasionally ; not often though, for I
am too indolent. Indolence is a great help
towards possessing no vices. If one has no
brilliant virtues, one suffers at least from no
considerable defects.'

Surely you are not without character ? that
is the description of a, colourless person.'

Why should one have character ? I, for instance
— who have everything I can wish for, and
nothing particular to do. I have capacity for
enjoyment, and I indulge it in a quiet fashion,
feeling that after all there is nothing really
worth having, no aspiration that does not
crumble into dust as soon as anticipation has
passed into reality. Have you ever felt like
that ? A kind of wearied acquiescence in life,
and a considerable indifference to its cessation.'

Never till to-day,' she replied, bending her
head lower.

And to-day you felt V

An indifference and a weariness such as
you describe.'

And the cause V

I don't know — no,' and she checked herself,
' that is not true ; but I can't tell it.'

Shall I guess — may I guess V
Dorothy's feelings resembled those of the
child dancing on the edge of a steep incline,

and trying to see how near he can approach
without falling. A delicious sense of giddiness
urges him on nearer and ever nearer, and
the sense of danger itself is almost a recommendation
in favour of the exercise.

Keith, seeing he had received tacit permission
to continue, said :

You had built up for yourself a kind of
dreamland, and to-day some one has rudely
shattered it. In vulgar language, thrown cold
water on your hopes. Is that it V

How do you know — are you a wizard V ,
asked Dorothy, with undisguised surprise.

It is not necessary to be a wizard to know
this — experience of the world is sufficient. I .
have met other girls.'

To be sure.' And again the spasm of pain
returned to Dorothy as she thought of the
fortunate woman who had made her death
his gain. There are ardent natures who think
that to suffer with the beloved is a greater
height of felicity than to enjoy with him.
Dorothy was one of these ; the key-note of her
love, when she loved, would most certainly be
self-surrender.

Keith smiled a little consciously. He was
so sure of himself, so decided in his mind as
to his own line of action, that he could afford

to regard the pretty fluttering of a maidenly
heart with no inconsiderable interest.

To be sure — of course you have met other
girls she repeated slowly, as though one
should say, ' You have solved the problems of
science ; cube-roots are nothing to you.'

'When I say I have met other girls, I
make no comparisons,* Keith murmured softly,
as he fixed his expressive eyes, with their
swift sidelong gaze, upon her face. ' I never
met a girl like you.'

Not even in Italy T

Not even in Italy. Italians are dark-complexioned.'


But not all of them. Beatrice Cenci was
fair.'

The type, however, is dark ; and their
nature is jealous, suspicious, and self-concentrated.
Your English temperament is a far
pleasant er one.'

Because it gives you less trouble V

Because it is more really loving. I do
believe in English girls.'

English girls ought to be much obliged to
you,' Dorothy said, plucking up a spirit.

Well, I am not easily roused into enthusiasm
— ask Coote. He says I am cynical.'
I suppose clever people generally are

cynical ; they know so much, and can judge so
severely.'

I am not always cynical — not, for instance,
when I walk in green lanes with an English
girl.'

I am glad you have your good moments,'
Dorothy laughed pleasantly. She had recovered
her equanimity, and with it her faith
increased in fervour. It was absurd to think
that such a man could ever be dishonourable
or wicked. Cynicism in itself denoted a kind
of rugged earnestness, whether manifested in
neglect of creature comforts, or in contempt of
others' weaknesses.

I have my good moments and my bad
moments. I believe in angels, Miss Strait,
spirits of good and evil that surround us with
their influences and incline us in one direction
or the contrary. You are my good angel, I am
sure. When I am with you I feel at peace,
soothed, almost as if I were really good, which of
course I am not. It is a condition men of the
world don't aspire to.'

^ And at other times V Dorothy's lips
quivered. Was he really going to make a
confession? had she indeed hitherto been
credulous and foolish ?

At other times — I am reckless, careless.

what you would call bad. Now tell me, what
remedy can you prescribe V

*The remedy is in your own hands,' she
answered gravely, not quite confident of her
own powers of preaching, and half afraid lest
he should pretend to peccadilloes in order that
she might promise absolution.

You must drive out the bad angel.'

'I cannot. I am not even sure that my
wishes point in that direction.'

It is not a new bait, that of painting oneself
in the blackest of colours, in order to raise
pity and interest in a pure breast, but it served
Keith's purpose well. The girl was so innocent,
she was like the wild bird who has never seen
a lure.

But you must wish.'

I can only do that in the presence of my
good angel. Do you reject the post I offer
you ? Will you be my influence, the influence
that may make or mar my life V

^ I mar your life ! you are dreaming now,
Mr. Chester.'

I was never less near to dreaming in my
life. I am perfectly sober and serious, for
I have gradually acquired the conviction
that in you resides a power for good which is
capable of transforming me. Women like

power. You do, I know. Then why not see
what you can make of your power V

Dorothy's heart almost stopped beating, when
she heard the slow dropping of his deliberate
words following each other softly in a kind of
chastened fervour, the fervour of a man who,
while feeling deeply, dreaded to alarm her with
any violent display of emotion. She was grateful
to him for this. In the novels she had read
people sobbed, and cried, and talked of misery
and despair and rapture ; and for such things,
and anything approaching uncontrollable passion,
Dorothy felt the most profound distaste.
And the vista of a benign influence to be
exerted over so intellectually promising ai
subject filled her soul with a tremor of
delight.

In what way do you mean this V Dorothy
said presently, longing for some more definite
explanation, longing to hear Keith expound
his views and talk about himself, while she
enjoyed the sense of being somewhat of a
divine monitor, to whom actions and sentiments
must in the final result be referred.

^ Have you ever thought of a life merged
in that of another, of the concentrated energy
radiating from two persons, one in aim and
desires ? I have longed for it myself, but I

VOL. I. 10

have never been able to realize it. I fancy I
have realized it now.'

Do you think such ideal happiness possible
V she asked timidly, joining her two
hands together as if in prayer.

I believe everything is possible to those
who will firmly.'

Ah ! if one could believe that ! How it
would simplify matters.'

Believe it, then.'

On your assurance ? That would be abdicating
my right to private judgment.'

'Then don't believe, but make the essay.
Dorothy, be my good angel, as you are already
the object of my deep devotion.'

Dorothy listened, and the sweetest of happy
feelings thrilled her heart. She saw herself a
kind of Beatrice to a new Dante, the inspiration
and quickening spirit of a man's life. She was
troubled by no mundane thoughts of marriage,
a desirable position, and money-bags. Her
soul soared far above such things to a kind of
Elysian height where spiritual communion
alone obtained. To the earth, however, she
was soon brought back again by Keith's next
question.

Are you hesitating because of our slight
acquaintance ? Are you afraid to trust yourself

to me as my wife ? I think you like
me a little

Then it was a proposal of marriage after
all, just such an event as happened to
hundreds of commonplace girls ! The influence
he spoke of only meant perhaps
presiding at a dinner-table, and skilfully
organizing the due arrangement of guests'
bedrooms. A little more or a little less money
was not the question ; she must inevitably lead
a negative existence, suited to the capacity
of ordinary women. A complete revulsion of
feeling passed over her, and in a firm voice
she answered :

I have no wish to marry, at present.'

But some day — you do not take away all
hope, surely? Tell me, am I distasteful to
you V

Dorothy looked quickly up at her companion.
The sentiment she entertained for him was
certainly not that of distaste ; indeed, she
almost feared lest imagination and the sense
of beauty had taken her reason captive. She
knew that she was unable to calmly argue so
long as pleading looks were darted at her
from between drooping lashes ; so long as
the sweet voice rich in inflections rocked her
senses into a delicious kind of torpor. All

10—2

thought seemed to be magnetized out of her,
but yet with a strong effort to right herself
she sought to keep the control of her own
heart.

May I hope V Keith pleaded.

Give me a little time ; I cannot answer at
once,' she murmured, all the while conscious
that the tiniest concession meant final defeat.

How long V
Three days.'

No, I cannot wait so long. Dorothy, my
dear Dorothy, be merciful 1'

To-morrow then,' she said, quickening her
steps as though to crush further hesitation.

So be it, then — tomorrow will seal my fate.
I am glad you were merciful, for the day after
tomorrow I shall not be alone, and company
at such a time would have been intolerable.'

Whom do you expect V inquired Dorothy,
relieved as the conversation lost some of the
intensity of its tone.

A friend of mine — Eaphael Palis — whom I
knew in Italy.'

What kind of man is he V

He reminds me of an amusing book,' Keith
said with a smile. *You will certainly like
him, but I shall not be jealous. He is such a
good fellow.'

I suppose he is original V

Very much so ; a mixture of the sublime
and the ridiculous ; the kind of creature that
adores sweets and bonbons while he wields the
most bitter of pens, never was known to be
really in love, but talks a great deal about it,
and writes sonnets and verses which he sets
to music'

I like original people,' cried Dorothy,
brightening. ' I am so glad he is coming.'

You are original, Miss Strait.'

Oh no ; only a pure provincial girl ;
something like the women in Madame Eey-
baud's stories.'

Yes, something like Mise Brun — she was
charming.'

I did not mean to imply I was charming,'
said Dorothy, reddening slightly. ' I only
meant that I am, as it were, unworldly, because
I have seen so little.'

You are charming,' he said tenderly.

Don't pay me compliments, please. I
long to see more of the world ; then I shall
not feel so insignificant.'

You shall see the world — when we are
married.'

Dorothy flushed again, but this time with
a warm sense of undeserved happiness. They

had now reached the entrance to the village,
and Keith deemed it advisable to take his
leave. As he did so, he pressed Dorothy's
hand, causing her another lively thrill, and said,
dwelling on the words :

To-morrow, at five o'clock, I shall come to
be made happy or unhappy for the rest of my
days. Try and think pleasantly of me ; try
your best, dear.'

Dorothy did not answer directly ; she only
said ' Good-bye.' But there was that in her
face which made Keith's bosom glow, and
caused a smile of satisfaction to curve his
somewhat firmly compressed lips.

RAPHAEL PALIS APPEARS ON THE SCENE.

^f^^^HE friend of whom Keith had spoken,
^ Raphael Palis, according to his usual
habit, disappointed all prevision, and
appeared suddenly on the following
day, having walked over from the station with
his carpet-bag in his hand. The day was mild
and the road dusty, and Palis's appearance (he
was stout and short, of a rubicund blond
complexion, and never at the best of times
remarkable for neatness) presented to Keith's
fastidious eyes an aspect both dishevelled and
weary.

Raphael !' he exclaimed, when his friend
entered the cosy little blue-room, wearing a
shabby black alpaca coat, boots white with dust,
and carefully carrying a carpet-bag tied up with
string. ' I did not expect you till tomorrow,

and I had intended to send the carriage for
you and thus save you an unpleasant walk. I
believe there is a dogcart here and an old
horse — but my stables are not by any means
in apple-pie order.'

*Well, you see, Keith said Palis, sinking
wearily into a chair, but pertinaciously keeping
his bag beside him, * I happened to be in
London, with nothing to do — diabolical
weather — they call that spring, do they ? it is
much more like an atmosphere of ground-glass.
I had been hustled and hunted from pillar
to post, like a mad dog in Italy ; I was
thoroughly weary, so I just started off, with
my loins girded and my staff in my hand — a
reviewer's staff, you understand — the pen — and
here I am.'

Well, I'm very glad to see you. Have you
brought any new verses ; and what precious
article is in that well-remembered bag f

Palis glanced with a sly smile at the fat
sides of his precious companion, and said,
Jam !'

Jam ? why, Eaphael, you are worse than
ever.'

Ah I mon cher,' answered the other, shrugging
his shoulders, ' que voulez-vous ? I get
older, but I don't lose mv love of sweets. Do

you like " marrons glaces" ? I have some with
me

'No,' said Keith, with a laugh. 'I don't
care for sweets. I wonder why you are so
partial to them.'

Why,' remarked Palis, throwing himself in
his chair and smacking his lips, * sweets are
the food of the gods. When I feel very low-spirited,
life not worth having — you know,
Keith, those trials come to us all — then I goto
a confectioner and I buy myself a box of
bonbons. . I generally eat them straight
through, it is always best not to economize
one's enjoyment ; and when the box is empty
I feel better, and more reconciled to fate. .It
is a wonderful plan ; I wonder you have never
employed it.'

Because I am not half a woman, like you,
Raphael. I find ease and enjoyment in something
less surfeit than sugar.'

True, Keith, I always feel like an old aunt.
I suppose it is my nature ; I was brought up
by women. But, do you know, you are wonderfully
well instil here — you look quite the
little gentleman.*

Yes,' answered Keith, in an indolently
pleased tone ; with all his indifference to the
position of an English landowners did not

dislike to receive the half envious congratulations
of his friends.

Palis was not envious, nothing could be
farther from his character ; but he looked
about him critically, observing objects with
the admiring wonder of a child that longs,
but dares not touch. ' And this is your own
sanctum — it is very nice. I would have a
piano here, however — a cottage, of course,
there is no room for a grand.'

Yes ; but then, unfortunately, I don't play.'

^ You used to play the violin V

So I do now sometimes, at least I scrape.
One cannot live in Italy for many years without
trying in some fashion one's hand at music,
where the very air seems full of melody, and
I think my scraping on the violin in romantic
moods is productive of about the same result
as your eating of bonbons. By the law of
contraries it soothes.'

You are never romantic, Keith.'

Not often, I confess. One can't deceive an

old friend like you, before whom one has bared

one's weaknesses.'

Ah yes, an old aunt,' softly added Palis.

Yet, do you know, I have had an attack of
romance lately — quite a bad one. I am still,
in fact, in the middle of my crise.'

Merciful Providence! you Keith!'

Yes, I. I think I am going to make a

fool of myself.'
^ Marry?'
Keith nodded.

Surely 1 you don't say so ! And the lady ?'
Eaphael, there we shall agree; she is simply

perfect.

" Meet queen for any kingly king,
With gold dust on her hair." '

I know — an insipid blonde. They abound
in England.'

^ Not at all Raphael. I am quite sure you
will be of my opinion when you see her; anyone
of your artistic nature must be. She is a
dream of pure cinque-cento conception.'

Bah ! do they exist ? I prefer a good
cook, who can make fondants a la creme and
petits choux au chocolat. I had some in Paris
last week,' he continued meditatively, slowly
licking his lips, as if seeking to revive in
his memory the sense of departed gastronomic
enjoyments.

Raphael ! listen to me. I am tired of amourettes.
I want to settle. This girl is an angel.'

Haven't I always told you one must get
tired of amourettes ? friendship is the only
thing worth having. By-the-bye, do you

know Aleck Duncan 1 He and I travelled
home from Italy. I found him wonderfully
sympathetic; we have sworn eternal friendship.'

'Which will last V

Well, perhaps six months. After all, Keith,
six months is a long time — it is half a year.'

Under those circumstances I don't see much
difference between amourettes and friendship ;
they are both equally unsatisfactory. I thought,
at least, the superior excellence of friendship
was exemplified in its duration.'

My dear fellow, the great charm of existence
is variety. The finest violinist cannot
always play on the same string.'

I suppose I shall have to do so when I am
married. I expect my answer this afternoon,
and I think — I have every reason to hope —
it will be a favourable one.'

Then, Keith, I can only say, " Vogue
la galere." I suppose you will be very happy
for six months.'

Eaphael, I beg of you not to sneer.'
I ? I never sneer. Is there anyone else
staying here, or are we alone V

Coote, Johnnie Coote is here. No one else.'

Coote, the man who shoots ? He won't
care for me.'

You don't know him ; he is the most good-natured

of mortals. Besides, lie is mucH
engrossed by the sister of the young lady in
question.'

But, my dear fellow, how many more young
ladies must I hear about ? This country
seems to be a garden of Venus. Tell me
everything. What a world it is !'

Palis complacently crossed his little fat legs,
and settled himself in an attitude of attention.

There are two sisters. You will see them
this afternoon, if you will come with me when
I call there at tea-time.'

That will be very soon then, for it is now
already four o'clock. Let me go upstairs and
have a wash, Keith. I cannot present myself
before strange ladies, thus !'

Come along, then, and bring the bag.'

Palis was soon installed in a pleasant bedroom
looking out over the entrance and across
the gravel sweep, to the big cedar that stood in
lonely majesty in the round grass-plot. He
gazed for a moment at the prospect, then turning,
began an inspection of the quaint pictures
in their faded gold frames hanging on the
walls. One was that of a lady in hunting
dress, clad in the scanty drapery affected
by the painters of that period ; a large greyhound
leapt up beside her, while a huge

bunch of painted roses occupied the corner
of the picture. The lady was very decoUetee,
and had alluring eyes and a dimple in her
chin. On the other side of the fireplace glared
a grim-visaged man in armour, and above the
bed hung a print of the Christian martyr.
Palis laughed to himself, and presently a
violent splashing of water, and the sound of
a rich voice trolling out the song * C'est Marie,
soyez ma vie, soyez ma mie !' could be distinctly
heard by anyone who at that moment had
chanced to walk down the passage.

While Palis was thus agreeably employed,
Dorothy trembled as the hour of tea approached.
During the night she had lain awake
in a state of rapturous torpor, thinking deeply.
Was the happiness of her future life dependent
upon her own free will and young unpractised
judgment, or upon love and Destiny, which now
presided immutably? If she decided to marry,
howwouldit fare with her pursuit of knowledge,
with the career of serious study, perhaps ending
in fame, which she had imagined for herself ? If,
on the contrary, she declined, was she not putting
away from her chances of happiness that
might never again recur ? Was it possible for
her to meet another man like Keith ? could
she feel for anyone else as she did for him ?

could she indeed bear to let him go ? here

her thoughts ended in a kind of tremulous sob.
It was difficult to decide for herself in solitude,
yet again it seemed impossible to confide so
tender a secret to her mother and sister.

When morning broke, the only conviction
Dorothy had come to was that she dared
not bind herself yet, that she must beg for
further time to be given her for deliberation,
and trust, like a true gambler, to chance.

At the bottom of all her irresolution, however,
she nourished a lurking kind of conviction
that it was impossible to let Keith go ;
that the power of a stronger will was upon her,
and that her destiny had unconsciously already
shaped itself. Dorothy was no manoeuvrer ;
she had formed no idea as to the mode in which
Keith must be acquainted with her decision —
or indecision, as it must more fairly be called ;
and she knew that Mrs. Strait always sat in
the room during his visits. A tete-astute
seemed therefore impossible, and Dorothy
recognised this fact without much regret.
Everything happened, however, differently, as
things generally do in real life : instead of
Keith by himself, the maid-servant ushered in
also his two friends. Margaret was present
on this occasion in the black dress with its

brilliant flashes of scarlet ; and the trio that
met Palis' s observant blue eyes was certainly
no ordinary one. Mrs. Strait, subdued by the
more frequent advent of visitors into a less
fidgety and nervous condition, sat placidly by
her everlasting work-basket ; lilies of the valley
in a vase behind her twinkled from a background
of dim shadow, where Dorothy stood
with gold-gleaming hair and quiet modest
movements. The scene was attractive, and
domestic enough to please the eyes of a spoilt
bachelor accustomed to every luxury, and
to the gratification of artistic tastes. Margaret
and her admirer soon paired off, and
retired happily into a corner, away from the
steaming tea-table, to play cat's-cradle, leaving
Palis to listen to Mrs. Strait's talk, and by his
quaint remarks introduce greater confusion and
incoherence into the good lady's observations.
Keith and Dorothy spoke in an undertone
love is partial to whispers.

What is my answer ?' he said, bending as if
to notice the roses of the crewel-work she held
on her lap. Dorothy looked at him pleadingly.

Do not ask me to give it yet, please.*

The longer I wait the more favourable
must be the answer then — is it so V

I think we neither of us know the other — *

What do you want to know ? I know all
I wish

Our tastes differ,' she faltered, her eyes
wandering; round the room in search of some
valid reason for a demurrer ; but naturally,
having once introduced a possibility of escape,
finding none.

Two people who are perfectly alike, never

agree.'

Then again, I am still very young *

A fault that mends itself every day. I am
not so young. That strikes the just balance,
you see.'

Dorothy stopped arguing, and stuck her
needle vaguely into her work as she cast about
for an answer.

But Keith was not a man who had uselessly
gained experience. Indecision, the apparent
difficulty of his suit, fevered his blood and
increased his determination.

The little golden head beside him tempted
him like the apple of the Hesperides, the
sweet chiselled features were beautiful to him
as an illuminated missal, the tender curving
lips quivering with emotion surely waited but
the kiss of love to ripen into rosier bloom.
Keith was a man of sluggish passions, yet of
exquisite taste, and a seeker after subtle

VOL. I. 11

sensations. Dorothy had procured him new
sensations. Her very simplicity irritated his
nerves with an intimation of unknown delights,
like some powerful Eastern perfume that resembles
no scent of plant or flower, and yet
contains the essences of all scents, a perfume
which you cannot recognise distinctively as
rose, or heliotrope, or jessamine, but which
sets you sweetly dreaming of the' deep-hearted
lotus flowers, of frankincense, or starry clusters
of stephanotis. Was it, perhaps, the flower
of perfect innocence that made Dorothy so
attractive ?

Keith resolved that this tender-hued flower
should be his, and he resolved that she should
love him also. The task he set himself was
not difficult. Imagination plays the chief
part in a girl's love, and Keith had already,
by his beauty and his charm, appealed vividly
to her imagination.

Palis watched the couple out of the corner
of his pale blue eyes, while apparently engaged
in conversation with Mrs. Strait. To him it
seemed like the game of serpent-charming.
He knew well on whose side the victory must
lie, but he was deeply interested in the gentle,
winsome maiden, who resembled Marguerite,
listening to her Faust.

Don't answer Keith was saying — ' don't
speak if it is hard to you. There are some
thoughts one cannot attempt to put into words.
Let me take your hand — so — no one is looking.
How cold your fingers are, dear ! Don't draw
it away. Let it lie there — and as it lies thereof
your own free will, like a little bird in its
warm nest, let that he your answer.'

Dorothy's little hand trembled ; she felt that
she had really surrendered herself, that the gift
meant an almost terrible reality, a taking for
better, for worse, a loving through life unto
eternity, a glimpse of heaven and a possibility
of hell, an inspiration of life and a foretaste of
death.

11—2

Chapter XII.

LOVERS.

HE bride ! let's look at her !' Margaret
cried, in the fresh ringing
tones that struck on the vibrating
air like the shrill clang of a bell,
while she held her sister at arm's-length, and
ran her laughing eyes over her appearance.

Dorothy, with a blush and a smile, tried to
extricate herself ; but Margaret was the
stronger of the two, and madly mischievously
inclined.

How dare you, Dorothy, with your five
feet four and your ashen-coloured hair, steal a
march on my raven locks and five feet six and
three-quarter inches ? I believe Mr. Chester is
afraid of a tall woman. He thinks you will be
more easily cowed, perhaps beaten, with your

slight figure and your pale face, than I should.
I am convinced he is a tyrant.'

Margaret, don't !' reproved her sister, in a
pained voice. ' He thinks you beautiful ; he
has told me so. Of course, you are far more
beautiful than I am. Who ever doubted it?
But he likes me — I really can't tell why ;*
here a lovely expression of timid happiness
passed over her face. ' It is so good of him —
is it not V

You are a fool, Dorothy !' said Margaret
sharply. ' He likes you because you are
lovely, and some people prefer blondes. But
I don't envy you. I mistrust that man.'

Margaret released her as she spoke, and
Dorothy, still tingling with rosy red and
shyness at the banter of her sharp-tongued
sister, drew a low footstool towards her, and
now sat, her head leaning against the lintel of
the white chimney-piece and her two hands
clasped in her lap.

'You look like Cinderella,' said Margaret,
lolling back on the sofa, ' in that grey dress.
Tell me, shall you always wear those Puritan
colours and common stuffs when you are
married V

You know, Margaret, I wear them, now
because they are cheap and we are poor.'

Fie, Dorothy ! Scarlet and blue are as
cheap. You have your own peculiar vanity.'

'As you please.' Dorothy shrugged her
shoulders. ' When I am married, I shall wear
what Keith likes.'

Keith ! Oh, you have learnt already to
call him by his name. Let's see — you have
been engaged twenty-four hours. You must
indeed feel like an old married woman 1'

Margaret !' called Mrs. Strait querulously
from her armchair, ' don't tease the child.
Your turn may come next, possibly.'

I am sure I hope it will, mamma ; and
when it does, you are welcome to tease me as
much as you like. One can bear a little inconvenience
when one has just landed twenty
thousand a year. That is Mr. Chester's income
I believe.'

Margaret, you are horrid !' broke in
Dorothy. * I am sure I never thought about
his money.'

Of course not, you little innocent ! You
would not have married him without it,
though ; you know that right well.'

Don't cry, Dorothy,' warned Mrs. Strait,
seeing the tears gathering in her eyes.
Your sister is envious of your superior
happiness.'

'Mamma, I declare you are too bad. I,
never in the world ! — jealous of poor dear old
Dorothy ! You don't believe it, do you, dear ?
I declare, if this marriage is to bring about
quarrelling, even between sisters, I wish to
goodness it may never take place.'

Dorothy's gentle heart was touched. She
stretched out her hands to Margaret, and the
two girls embraced one another with renewed
affection.

Mrs. Strait had received the news of
Dorothy's engagement in her usually vague
and flurried manner.

Asked you to marry him ? — Very good of
him, I am sure, my dear — you, the penniless
daughter of a literary man. But I hope his
principles are good — Church principles, of course
we know so little of him. But there, men
attend church after they are married, and I
suppose their souls are more easily saved
than one's own soul, and that's why they don't
care so much. They have far more to do — they
could t spare the time. But goodness, what's
to be done about the trousseau 1 I never could
afford one suitable to Mrs. Chester.'

Never mind the trousseau, mamma ; I will
be married in a bonnet,' whispered Dorothy,
taking her mother's limp hand and pressing it

against her own soft cheek. She yearned fora
more motherly speech. What did the cut
or fashion of clothes signify, when the happiness
of a whole life was at stake ? She would
have liked Mrs. Strait to have laid her hands
on her head maternally, and blessed her as
Isaac blessed Jacob, or she would have preferred
a few heartfelt words of approval :

You have done well, my child ; you will be
happy !'

Never till this instant had Mrs. Strait's
parental insufficiency displayed itself so clearly
in the cold and naked light of truth, and it was
an inward shock to Dorothy's loving nature
to find the smallest flaw in one who, previous
to this discovery, had not only given her life but
comfort. Dorothy was careful not to betray the
disparaging remarks made by Mrs. Maynard
upon her betrothed, and Mrs. Strait having
given a somewhat contradictory assent, the
lovers met the following day by appointment in
the little green drawing-room. The first interview
after the acceptance of a marriage proposal
between two people proves usually somewhat
embarrassing. The man is apt to shock feminine
sensitiveness by a too prompt assumption of
possessionem, by a sudden dropping of the
veil of diffidence, and by an undisguised assurance

of triumph ; the element of capture
having been nowise eliminated from modern
ideas of marriage, though now treated in a more
refined and elegant fashion.

The girl in her turn is pleased to bear an
aspect of pride and cold reserve, coquetting in
true female fashion with a show of coy indifference.
Dorothy did not assume this, for she
really felt the most overpowering shyness.
What did she know of this man, her
master, advancing, hat in hand, with
smiling assurance to greet her ? She had promised
herself to him certainly, but what did
she know of him, save that in his presence she
felt rest and a sense of exquisite well-being ?
She stood there thinking, in her straight-falling
gown, with a composed tender timidity, clasping
her slight fingers resolutely on the back
of the black ebony chair on which they rested
as she waited. Keith thought she had never
looked so lovely.

Alone ! Dorothy, this is indeed unexpected
happiness ! Alone with my bride !'
And he pressed forward eagerly to clasp her
in his arms. But Dorothy waved her hand ;
something in his eyes frightened her, and she
pointed with her finger to a seat not far from
where she stood.

Sit down there too, dear he said, the
tinge of passion obliterated, as he obeyed.
Sit down and talk to me.'

Who does not know that lovers' talk — so
sweet, so silly, and so never-to-be-forgotten,
full of the delicious novelty of a sensation never
before experienced — the sensation Plato defines
as friendship, ' Two souls in one body ' ? Keith
was an admirable lover. He possessed all the
deftness and sensitiveness necessary for the
art of charming ; he knew how to say sweet
things so that they never surfeited, and trite
things as if they sprang fresh from his brain ;
he could win confidence and inspire love ; he
could induce respect and command admiration.
His education had been that of a finished scholar
and diplomatist. He could read women's weaknesses
like a book, and he could, though in a
lesser degree, appreciate their qualities. The
result of the first lovers' meeting, was to
impress Keith with the thorough conviction
that Dorothy's heart lay innocently before him,
its fair white pages folded open like the petals
of a full-blown rose, o^lowino; with an ardent
and unselfish love for him, a love that would
defy all obstacles and smile at all difficulties,
and which would remain steadily pure and
uncalculating. For the first time perhaps in

his life, he knew that a guileless girl-nature
was his, to mould, develop or ruin, as he
pleased. There did not seem much chance of
ruin at the present time, however, while they sat
hand in hand, the man's dark head bent protecting
over the lily-white girl-face, transfigured
with love, but steadfastly, as with some
recondite idea of procrastinated and more
precious bliss, refusing him all caresses but
the gentle pressure of her hand.

After half an hour spent thus, Keith rose to
go, with a strange new sense of quiet happiness
filling his breast, a sensation differing con -
miserably from the turbulent and passionate
emotion which heretofore had formed the experience
of his love. Perhaps, he thought, these
might exist something sacred in marriage
which purified a man's feelings, and, as it were,
in narrowing and bounding, also ennobled them.

When he left the Angel House the night had
arrived ; a myriad stars quivered and glittered
in the dark blue canopy overhead ; the moon
threw slanting gashes of light across the road,
and invested each hedge and bush with a look
of unaccustomed gloom. Moonlight carries
with it a special sense of eternity, of the still
brooding spirit moving in solitude and silence
over the face of the waters, and filling men's

minds with awe. Pascal knew it, when he said,
Le silence eternal de ces espaces infinite
m'efFraie/ The light has an unearthly vividness,
the shadows lie in more portentously black
and tangible masses, the world and its petty
worries lapse into distance, the soul expands
in freedom, the mind rises to ethereal heights ;
it is a moment of entrancing self-abandonment
for hearts that love, a moment of spiritual
illumination for the absorbed devotee, an hour
of self introspection even to the man of the
world.

Keith, as he paced along smoking a cigarette,
moving quickly, now across a patch of road
illuminated brightly by the moonbeams, now
almost disappearing in a mysterious depth of
sombre shadow, reviewed his past life with a
sigh, registering a mental vow that he would
turn over a new leaf and try to be worthy of
the trusting woman who had given herself
into his keeping. The lightest of men have
their pious moments, their earnest resolutions,
their well-meaning aspirations ; but the
intentions are short-lived, evaporating with
the moonlight that gave them birth, a very
midsummer night's dream. Dorothy, so ran
his reflections, was very beautiful ; she would
make a lovely chatelaine. They would keep

open house for the admiration of the county,
he would take her to London, give balls,
stand for Parliament, perhaps be made a peer.

Who could tell what rung of the ladder of
success he could not mount ? A clever mana
beautiful wife, a large fortune, were advantages
not lightly to be despised. Keith carried
his head higher. He should know how to
make the best possible use of these advantages.
Hitherto all had been success in his
life ; all must continue to be success for the
future — legitimate, honourable success.

When a man was rich, he felt no temptation
to be dishonest. Generous, charitable, even, he
would be, beloved possibly. Poor dependents,
he knew, were gained by small kindnesses ;
his tenants should be kindly treated. He was
glad that already Jackson had been forgiven
his rent. Example was everything. Mr.
Chester's generosity could not fail to be discussed
and praised. Intellectual enjoyment,
too — Dorothy should have her books, the
society of clever people, musicians, and artists.
Fame and genius might worship at his shrine.
He would surround himself with the rarest
objects of beauty, for he adored beauty ; he
adored exquisite forms, statuary, pictures, and
luxurious furniture. Then, again, there would

be the satisfaction of knowing that he was
leading a good life, and was entitled to the
respect and admiration of his equals and his
inferiors.

Keith had lived a bad life ; he did not seek
to palliate his faults. He knew they were
faults, but circumstances had forced them on
■ him ; in some cases it was impossible always
to act according to the highest principle.
Success was the test of merit. He did not
speak of these things to Dorothy ; there was
no need to sully her pure mind and sadden
her glad heart with stories of a man's weaknesses
or follies. All men did wrong before
marriage, and not every man did right afterwards.
He, however, intended to incur no
further blot or stain on his reputation, and
Dorothy, his good angel, must lead him by
the hand in the paths of propriety and virtue.
That was woman's mission, and a truly noble
mission. Men sinned lightly and indulged
their vices for a few years, repenting in the
arms of a loving wife. Repentance — no ; that
was for monks and fanatic priests. Men of the
world became serious — yes, that was the word,
serious — and took to politics or philanthropy,
and the women prayed for their success.
Women always prayed, he believed. He had

no doubt that this very evening Dorothy would
fall on her knees by her snowy bed, and offer
up fervent petitions for him, commending him
to the care of Heaven. It was a pretty idea —
a sentimental idea, one quite in unison with
the purity of a girl's thoughts and the flutter
of ministering angels' wings. It pleased
Keith's intuitively artistic perceptions, fed on
the pictured Madonnas of Italy. He himself
did not believe in the efficacy or necessity
of prayer, though of course, when he was
married, he should attend the parish church
and periodically ask the parson to dine.
People who had a good position, and respected
themselves, always paid proper attention to the
ministers of religion ; but devout sentiments
were pretty and eminently correct — in a woman.

He would not have liked Dorothy to be
irreligious or a scoffer ; he preferred her just
as she was — simple, trusting, and pious. Then
it occurred to him that they had never discussed
theology, and that really, on the whole,
he scarcely knew what religious views she
held. That was but a trifle, however. She
had once said that God could change a man's
soul, and the Vicar had mentioned her attendance
at early services.

Certainly Keith had done well for himself.

The moonlight, usually suggestive of melancholy
reflections, stimulated and cheered him
instead. When night brought no troublesome
spectres and conscience bore no present reproaches,
a man could well be content. Keith
tossed away the end of his cigarette and turned
blithely in at his lodge-gate. He had seldom
hoped that the prospect of matrimony could
be so eminently reassuring and calculated to
promote sound sleep.

A Bennington COMMITTEE.

HE parish of Dronington was a progressive
23arisli. Ever since Mr.
Maynard had entered the Vicarage,
three years ago, he had organized
and encouraged every species of plan for the
mental and bodily welfare of his flock. Fresh
from a fashionable seaside resort where Rituals
had, after a bitter period of opposition
and controversy, finally attained exuberant
proportions, he sought to imbue the country
parishioners now under his care with the
peculiar tenets he held. At first novelty alone
proved a potent factor, and after an anxious
time of slackened effort he gained over a
considerable majority to his opinions. On his
arrival at Dronington he had discovered that
VOL. I. 12

only a few old women attended the Church
services, and that, partly from indifference,
partly from dislike, the remainder of the congregation
frequented the adjacent Dissenting
Chapel, or, on the other hand, dispensed with
any religious services at all. The dull old
Yicar had droned sleepily to the high-backed
pews and the fidgety knot of school-children
Sunday after Sunday, awakening the echoes
but certainly not the souls of the worshippers,
until the well-to-do who could afford to drive
some distance had quietly forsaken the parish
church and attended a fashionable temple in
the town of Slouch ester.

The report of Mr. Maynard's decidedly High
Church views had preceded him, and at the
announcement of his appointment after the
old Vicar's death, most of the people declared
that nothing should induce them to go and
hear a whole set of new-fangled doctrines
which had never been considered necessary
for the salvation of their fathers' souls. The
first sermon that Mr. Maynard preached was
naturally the crucial test. Vases of flowers and
a pair of candlesticks stood on the altar, contrary
to all precedent ; and on the wall, over
the hideous box-like affair that sheltered the
preacher and served as a pulpit, was fixed the

text, ' I am the true Vine.' The school-children
amused themselves by spelling out
the quaint Gothic letters of the text or by
counting the flowers in the vases during the
sermon, conducting themselves consequently
with unusual propriety, and the small congregation
listened attentively as the new clergyman
read himself in. The sermon was short,
true, and earnest. Mr. Maynard's clear
ringing tones, full of manly energy and deep
conviction, contrasted favourably with the late
Vicar's nasal sing-song, the defective vision
which caused him perpetually to stop and
repeat himself till he succeeded in deciphering
the words before him, or the painful trembling,
of his thin hands while he turned the leaves
of his manuscript. Mr. Maynard preached
without a book, he used considerable action in
the pulpit, and he looked right before him
with a resolute piercing eye that seemed to
search and drag to light the secret of all
hearts.

I declare if I didn't think the Vicar must
have heard about our quarrel last night said
one old woman to her husband. ' He gave it
to us so strong about living in unity. It's
well enough for the clergy to talk, but they
can't know how aggravating it is when a man

12—2

stumbles in dead drunk o'niglit, having spent
the Saturday's wages, wi' nothing to show for
em.

Or how bad it is for a man when the
dinner ain't ready and he comes home hungry,
as tired as a dog,' retorted the husband.

On this occasion at least the sermon bore no
fruits, for the worthy Mrs. Seeker and her
husband continued to heap recriminations on
one another until they reached the door of
their cottage, when the old lady started off
in search of the pie that had been left at
the baker's to be cooked.

Mr. Maynard, however, said a few words at
the conclusion of his sermon which created
considerable hubbub among the rural population.


My friends,' he observed, in a quiet tone,
you have been told that my views differ in
many respects from those held by your late
Yicar. You had the benefit of his ministrations
for many years, and you do not seem to
have availed yourselves of them very largely,
for I hear that the church has never been
filled. Yet if all the parishioners attended,
the church would be too small for their needs.
Well, you gave the late Yicar a fair trial ; now
I wish you to give me a fair trial. I want

you all to come to church and hear what I
have to say ; and if after a few months you
don't like my ways, and don't approve of my
doctrines, then I will revert to the fashions
that have prevailed hitherto. I think that is
fair speaking from man to man. Let me see
that you agree by coming in large numbers to
the evening service to-night.'

This exhortation pleased the people by its
straightforwardness and simplicity. They
came, and, what is more, they listened to the
new A^icar. The early celebrations at five in
the morning, on Christmas and other great
feasts, were attended ; the services developed
an ornate ceremonial without one murmur
from any grumblers ; the music ceased to be
discordant and horrible ; a surpliced choir satin
their proper place, and sang instead of the
wheezy children in the gallery ; and while
drunkenness diminished, civility increased
among the villagers.

He's a good man, he is,' public opinion
averred, and goodness, to those simple folks,
seemed to cover a multitude of sins in the
shape of candles, crucifixes, and vestments,
until by degrees Dronington earned the reputation
of a model parish. It was still rough
in a degree. Men and boys still lounged and

swore and loitered about the cross-roads,
though they had ceased to perpetrate practical
jokes and horse-play, and to indulge their
powers of mischief in tripping up old ladies in
the dark as they returned sedately, prayer-book
in hand, from evening church.

One of the most valuable organizations in
the village — at least, in Mrs. Parkinson's
opinion — was the Benevolent Society for the
Prevention of Poverty, which met once a
month in committee, and of which Mr. Maynard
was the chairman. The Vicar did not
exactly approve of the working of the society,
and he was decidedly averse to committees,
much preferring to manage matters himself in
true autocratic fashion, without appeal to
numberless other interests. He advocated the
supreme sway of the Church, and, in a lesser
degree, he would have liked the clergy to rule
despotically ; but his calm good sense taught
him that before you can rule men, you must
influence them strongly, and for that purpose
you must interest yourself in their pursuits
and project your mind into their grooves of
thought.

The Vicar did not always attend the ,
and on those occasions Mr.
Horsfall, the Slowchester distiller, presided.

It would then sometimes happen that, after a
course of tedious arguing among the committee,
Mr. Maynard suddenly walked in, and with
clear and trenchant logic snapped the thread
of discussion in twain, and in the course of a
few moments satisfactorily settled the point in
dispute. Of course, Mrs. Parkinson was a
great personage at these committee-meetings.
Dorothy also attended them, but rarely took
any* part beyond giving a silent attention and
holding up her hand when a vote was requested.


Some days after her interview with her
betrothed, described in the last chapter,
occurred one of these monthly meetings.
Mrs. Parkinson always fetched Dorothy, and
walked home with her subsequently, cheering
the short walk by enthusiastic accounts of
the work done, or of the wonderful results
which she anticipated from her charitable
schemes. The Benevolent Society was a kind
of co-operative almsgiving on a large scale. It
was a mixture of blanket club, maternity
charity, nursing society, and servants' registry
office. It professed to do everything for everybody,
to sympathize with and to assist every
kind of distress. It was indeed a magnificent
conception, or, as Mrs. Parkinson expressed ita

heavenly cord of brotherhood binding the
rich to the poor.' Mrs. Parkinson had probably
never heard of St. Simon's writings, but her
schemes were a mixture of lady-like communistic
sentiment, carried into practical
execution by the authority of a dignified
parental authority. The poor, she thought,
were certainly abominably ill-treated, and
much to be pitied, though they afforded an
agreeable occupation and a never - ending
source of interest to the rich, for whose own
advantage they seemed somehow to be bountifully
destined by Providence.

^ At this moment, my dear,' Mrs. Parkinson
dilated to the listening Dorothy as they walked
along, ' I have such a case — something terribly
sad ; a young man — so good-looking, so interesting
'

An Ethiopian 1' asked Dorothy, with a faint
touch of sarcasm ; ' nobody will be interested
in a negro.'

No, an American, a Southerner from those
aristocratic and beautiful climes. You may
say what you will, and of course it was very
bad of them to keep slaves and all that ; still,
they were brought up in the notion it was
right, and there's no knowing what you or I
might have done in the same case ; but it is

certain they are the true gentlemen of America.
I will tell you all about the case presently, for
here we are

The meeting was held in the people's
reading-room, one of the numerous institutions
inaugurated during the Vicar s pastoral
government. A large table, at which Mr.
Goldie, the curate, stood busily engaged writing
papers, occupied one corner of the bare
whitewashed apartment. Only Miss Patten,
the old maid of the parish (what would
parishes do without their old maid — energetic,
benevolent, and tolerably well off), who was
taking off her galoches and hanging out her
waterproof over a chair-back (it did not rain,
but Miss Patten never neglected these precautions),
and Mr. and Mrs. Horsfall had as
yet arrived. Dorothy, having shaken hands
with them, withdrew quietly to a chair in the
corner ; but Mrs. Parkinson bustled anxiously
from one to the other, favouring each with
a mysterious whisper.

Mr. Maynard is not going to take the
chair,' said Mrs. Horsfall ponderously. She
was very fat, had small eyes, heavy hanging
cheeks, and a large gold watch-chain laid
carefully across her ample bosom. * What
a pity, for we have the annual report to-day !'

It is a very good report said Mr. Hors-fall
briskly, his good-humoured face and short
square nose enshrined comfortably between
close-cut grey whiskers.

Good report ! well, I don't know what you
call a good report,' Miss Patten remarked
snappishly. ^ If my opinion had been taken,
and that silly grant to Mrs. Willing who keeps
the club, for the provisions supplied to the men,
been refused, we should have had a far larger
balance.'

Miss Patten's remarks fell flat, for the remainder
of the committee now entered, and
Mr. Horsfall took his place at the head of the
table as chairman.

*We are here,' he said somewhat hesitatingly,
looking at the papers he held in his
hands as though he were not quite sure in
what language they were written, 'to consider
the annual report of the Benevolent
Society, a society which affords help to the
destitute who are not destitute by their own
fault, and encouragement to the well-doer, as
in the case of the maternity charity ' — (' The
people have far too many children already,'
mildly muttered to himself the sandy-haired
and freckled-faced curate) — ' or of instruction
and amusement to toilers in the enjoyment of

the club, in the convenient precincts of which
it is permitted us to sit to-days

Had you not better go on with the report
V audibly remarked Miss Patten. ' We
ought to spend only an hour at the committee,
and at this rate we shall spend four.'

'Ladies and gentlemen' — Mr. Horsfall,
checked in his well-balanced discourse, resumed
the purely practical part of the subject
* we have but a small balance in hand, viz.,
£20; not a large sum certainly, but which, by
the blessing of Providence, I hope will soon increase
largely. I now proceed to read the items
of expenditure, subscriptions and donations.'

This ceremony being concluded, and i;he
budget unanimously approved of —

I wish to make a suggestion,' said Mrs.
Parkinson.

Certainly.'

The chairman bowed politely :

You remember Burns's lines :

" Her 'prentice hand she tried on man,
And then she made the lasses, !"

We are always glad of ladies' suggestions.'

I should think so indeed,' remarked Miss
Patten. *Why, the committee is nearly all
composed of ladies.'

My suggestion is that we should really,
now that the society has existed for the space
of two years at least, form ourselves into an
order, say, of deaconesses.'

Oh, Mrs. Parkinson T reproachfully exclaimed
the fat distiller's wife, ' we are not
members of the Evangelical persuasion.'

In that case we should have to wear a
dress. And how about the gentlemen V plaintively
urged Mrs. Flint, whose husband was
Keith's agent, but would have nothing to do
with the society. * It only encourages a lot
of useless beggars,' was his sharp and not
entirely undeserved verdict.

No, no ; don't let us become sectarian,' said
the chairman. ^ The great beauty of the
society lies in its Catholicism — that it is hroacL'

Mr. Goldie has taken a. great deal of
trouble in preparing a report of the various
deaconess institutions '

Hang the report !' said Mr. Horsfall
coarsely. He was a self-made man, and occasionally
reverted to his originally rough speech.
^ I beg your pardon, madam. I mean, don't
you think it a pity to introduce a new element
into the untroubled waters on which the
society has hitherto floated securely f

My own idea is,' began Miss Patten, clearing

her throat as if preparing to address
a jury — 'my own idea is that we should
thank Mr. Goldie for his trouble.'

Oh yes, by all means, thank him for his
trouble came from a chorus of voices.

And bearing in mind that the good wee dois
illimitable, and cannot be bounded by the
rules of a sect, or narrowed by the peculiar
dress or customs of any other society, simply
ignore the motion.'

But there is as yet no motion,' said the
chairman sweetly.

I thought Mrs. Parkinson '

Mrs. Parkinson has moved nothing ; she
only made a suggestion.' •

She only made a suggestion,' again came
borne on the air in a rippling echo from the
voices of the other ladies.

Then, of course, you must embody a motion
in the words that I have ventured to adopt.'

Indeed, Miss Patten, there is nothing to
be embodied in a motion. The matter must
just drop.'

Miss Patten tapped her foot on the stone
floor impatiently. She had nob much belief
in any business that she did not herself control
and suggest.

I see on the minute,' continued Mr. Hors-fall,

when silence had been restored, ^ that it
is proposed for a sub-committee to be formed
to consider specially the case of Widow Daly,
who has appealed to the society.'

It is a very sad case,' said Mrs. Parkinson.

None of the other ladies spoke.

Who is to be on the sub-committee — will
you. Miss Strait V asked the chairman, turning
kindly to Dorothy, whose pretty face and soft
voice caused him to look favourably upon
her.

Oh no ; not me, please !' she said ungrammatically,
in her confusion.

You know why V whispered Mrs. Maynard
to her neighbour, Mrs. Horsfall. ' She is being
courted by Mr. Chester. I believe they are
engaged. Indeed, I almost wonder she is here
to-day.'

He is very rich, is he not V

Mrs. Horsfall opened her small eyes as wide
as she could, and put up her eye-glass to have
a look at Dorothy.

Very rich ; but it won't be a success, that
marriage.' Mrs. Maynard shook her head
dolefully.

Why not ? Do tell me. Is it a secret ?'

Now, ladies, I really must beg for your
attention,' said Mr. Horsfall, rapping on the

table. ' The question before the committee is
one of great importance. Who is to form the
sub-committee ? Mrs. Parkinson, of course.
You, Miss Patten V

No, really.' Miss Patten put up her hands
deprecatingly. ' Indeed, I had much rather
not. I disapprove of the project, and 1 really
know nothing whatever about it.'

All the more reason for you to be on the
subcommittee, and then your adverse opinion
will carry weight.'

Well, if you put it in that way '

I should like to know,' asked Mrs. Flint
apologetically, who always spoke with a
nervous twitter, but nevertheless contrived to
put skilfully embarrassing questions, ' I should
like to know who drew up the appeal that
was published in the Slowchester Beacon, and
why we ladies of the committee did not
see it V

Mr. Goldie drew it up. I, for one, saw it,'
answered Miss Patten, with dignity.

Oh, indeed ; then I beg pardon for the
interruption. Of course, it was very well
worded ; only I did think, as a member '

The rest of Mrs. Flint's speech was lost in
the depths of her muff, over which she now
bent her head.

The Yicar !'

A rustle of expectation ran round the room ;
the ladies straightened the folds of their dresses
and looked up expectantly. Mr. Horsfall
made a movement as though to cede his
place.

^ No, no !' the Vicar said, approaching the
table. 'I only came for one moment to ask
what you have decided about Widow Daly's
case.'

That is precisely the question before us
now murmured Mr. Horsfall, with his habitual
hesitation, which gave him the air of a respectable
old hen considering on her perch. ' AVe
wish to form a sub-committee, and the ladies
are not quite agreed.'

Please decide for us, Mr. Maynard !' several
feminine voices cried in unison, with an intense
sense of relieved responsibility in their
tones.

The Vicar glanced round, looking tall and
manly as he stood by the table, resting one
hand upon it, while an amused twinkle lurked
in his eyes.

Miss Patten, Mrs. Parkinson, Mrs. Horsfall,
Mrs. Goldie, Mrs. Flint— will that do ? he
asked, running over the names glibly. The
ladies bowed. Somehow Mr. Maynard's presence

rendered objections impossible. He had
the faculty of inducing conviction as well as
obedience, which stamped him at once as a
leader of men. The committee soon after
broke up, and the ladies streamed out in
knots of twos and threes, the most favoured
remaining behind for a short consultation
with the Vicar. On this occasion Miss Patten
was the favoured lady, and received with
stolid pride the glances of envy that were
darted at her.

I am glad that is settled,' quietly observed
Mrs. Parkinson to Dorothy, as they turned out
of the square plot of ground in which stood
the people's reading-room, into the long straggling
street of red-brick houses. ' Poor Widow
Daly, I hope I shall have my own way with
the sub committee — ah, there comes my case,
my young American, and I have never told you
his story. Never mind, I must introduce you.
Now remember, you are to feel interested.'

I will try to be so,' smiled back Dorothy,
looking with a certain curiosity at the young
man now advancing towards them. He wore
a small moustache, but was otherwise carefully
shaven. The yellow hue of his complexion, the
expression of his eyes — small, bright and furtive
the closely cropped condition of his black

VOL. I. 13

hair, the sleekness and smoothness of hair and
face, gave him the air of a recently discharged
prisoner; though his clothes were neat
and gentlemanly, and, as Dorothy's careful eye
noticed, his hands white and well shaped.
He bowed low as the ladies approached, tossing
off his hat with a neat turn of his elbow,
savouring of the stilted politeness of an actor
of the past generation. Mrs. Parkinson immediately
whispered to her companion :

What manners ! Did you notice him ?
Princely, simply princely !'

The man, who seemed about thirty, having
bowed, still remained standing hat in hand in
the cool east wind.

^ Pray put on your hat said the elder
lady. ' Where have you been, Mr. Joynte — fora
walk ? Allow me to present to you my
young friend Miss Dorothy Strait.'

'* A dream of beauty'" he murmured, in a
voice intended only to reach Mrs. Parkinson,
as he bowed again.

Dorothy heard it, however, and it made her
feel uncomfortable.

May I be permitted to walk a few paces
with you V continued Mr. Joynte. ' I have
been breathing the air, and enjoying the
beautiful scenery ' — he waved his hand around

as if to call attention to it — ' thinking of my
misfortunes, of my blighted life, and of course
of your kindness, madam.* He turned at
these words respectfully towards Mrs. Parkinson,
who could scarcely conceal her satisfaction.
* This young lady knows your kindness,
of course, knows the immense beneficence
which you exert on behalf of all kinds and
classes of men — myself, for instance, who at
your amiable request have left my home in
the miserable garret which is all I can call my
own, in order to enjoy your hospitality.*

Don't !' murmured Mrs. Parkinson humbly.
I can do very little, and your story is indeed
a thrilling one.' «

By this time they had reached the Angel
House, and Miss Strait shook hands with her
friend, while she stood on the grey old step that
led into the garden exchanging a parting word.

Mr. Joynte scrutinized her closely, and
appeared to be much struck with her beauty.

Handsome as one of my own countrywomen,'
he said to Mrs. Parkinson, as the two
strolled homewards.

Yes, she is a great favourite of mine,' the
good lady responded with eagerness — ' a great
favourite of mine. I am so glad she is about
to make a great marriage.'

13—2

'Ah, indeed,' said Mr. Joynte — carelessly,
stroking his bristly moustache ; * a local
personage, I suppose — a lord, perhaps ? There
are a good many lords in this country, I perceive.'


No ; a rich landowner — a Mr. Keith
Chester.'

Keith — Keith Chester !' said the American,
turning suddenly pale ; ' a dark man, who was
at Eome V

Yes, the same ; he was a diplomat, I
believe.'

I know. So the scoundrel is here, and
marries that pretty girl — damnation !'

Mrs. Parkinson looked shocked, and edged a
little away from her protege.

Excuse me, ma'am. I knew the man once,
and the fact is — you astonished me — we Americans
have a habit of using bad language. I
beg your pardon again. You are so good a
lady, it is very wrong in me to shock your
sense of propriety.'

MRS. PARKINSON DOES HER DUTY.

ES. Parkinson was not very clear-sighted
; nevertheless, lie was considerably
moved at the strange
excitation displayed by Mr. Joynte
at the mere mention of Keith Chester's
name. She endeavoured to obtain further
information from the American, but he contented
himself by remarking that it was no
affair of his, that Keith was a priggish puppy,
and other words to the same effect ; but that,
nevertheless, he supposed it might be a very
good marriage for a young lady. Mrs. Parkinson,
puzzled but unconvinced, was forced to give
up her questioning.

That something more lay beneath Mr.
Joynte's half-careless, half flippant manner,
she realized intuitively — so much so, that,

feeling disturbed in her mind, she determined
to call on Mrs. Strait, and confide to her the
vexation she had experienced. The American's
habits were somewhat unconventional.
He rose early, drank a cup of tea, and sallied
out of the house with a big cigar in his mouth,
returning only at dinner-time ; again walking
out after that meal, which he appeared to
enjoy heartily, until tea-time. Where he went,
or what he did, Mrs. Parkinson had no idea of ;
and, hampered by her kind and timid nature,
she dared not ask. In one respect this was
convenient. She could thus pay visits unnoticed
and unaccompanied by her strange
guest.

The day after the committee-meeting was
Thursday. Mrs. Strait, methodical even in
her vagueness, which was rather the vagueness
of a mind unable to grasp more than one
detail at a time, than a natural dislike to order
and method, generally stayed at home on
Thursday and looked over the linen. She was
a beautiful gentlewoman, and prided herself on
the way she kept it. Mrs. Parkinson could
therefore count on her presence at home, and,
in addition, on the probable absence of her
daughters — the latter an important clause in
the success of her little plan.

The kindly widow, neatly dressed, and with
the black lace scarf as usual tied under her
chin, giving her the appearance of some dowdy
Spanish woman who had forgotten the crimson
flower for her hair — having kissed the cats
and commended them specially to the faithful
Eliza's care — proceeded briskly on her way
to Mrs. Strait's house. She found all the conditions
favourable — the girls out and Mrs.
Strait alone, sitting upstairs in the spare
bedroom, where the afternoon sun streamed
brightly in, engaged in mending a quantity
of fine linen that was spread out before
her.

Busy as usual V said Mrs. Parkinson
brightly, sitting down on a pile of freshly-mended
towels.

Needlework is the proper occupation for
women, my dear,' placidly answered Mrs.
Strait. * My girls won't take to it. Dear,
dear ! What is coming to the world ? What is
the good of a woman who can't darn her own
stockings, or make a shirt ? My girls can't
make a shirt — never could. Dorothy reads
and Margaret plays the piano ; but, I say,
what's the use of it all ? Darn, mend, sew —
then a woman knows she is doing her duty,
and feels happy.'

Dorothy is, I hear, satisfactorily provided
for said Mrs. Parkinson, plunging boldly into
her subject. ' She is going to be married — •
that's nice.*

Going to be married — yes, I believe so !'
Mrs. Strait rested her head on her hands
meditatively. * Who told you so 1 But I
suppose it's all over the parish by this time.
She's been engaged some days ; and what I
am to do about the trousseau I am sure I
don't know. They say undermine has to be
edged with Valenciennes lace now, top and
bottom, even flannel petticoats. And then
the gowns — oh dear ! And Dorothy so improvident
and clever !'

Don't trouble yourself about the gowns ;
I am sure Dorothy is very sensible. But just
think of the comfort you will have in your
son-in-law — a good, steady, high-principled
man. For, of course, you are certain he is all
that V

Well, I don't know, I'm sure.' Poor Mrs.
Strait looked puzzled. * I asked Dorothy if
he was a Churchman, and she said he was.
And he visited Mr. Maynard, I remember, the
first thing when he. arrived.'

But you know he bears a good character ?
You have inquired after his antecedents V

No, indeed ; he is a gentleman, not a
servant. He is very ricci — has a position.'

But, Mrs. Strait, his character — that is the
chief point to be considered.'

I can't write for it, can I, and find out if
he is sober, honest and respectable V

No ; but you can make inquiries. He
seems to have dropped from the skies. Where
has he been, what has he done, for the last
eight years — do you know ? No one I know
here has seen him for years — not since his
mother s death.'

Mrs. Strait reflected. What did she know
of him beyond that he was rich and good-looking,
and that the young people loved one
another ? It seemed as if a careful mother
could require no more.

Do you happen to know anything against
him then V she asked a little pettishly, the
grievance of the trousseau fading into insignificance
beside the possibility of her daughter's
losing the chance of so brilliant a
marriage.

Yes ; I think I do.'

Mrs. Parkinson's kindly lips hesitated to
speak the words, but she loved Dorothy
dearly. The child must be saved at any cost
if she were in danger.

Then say it out, please, at once, and don't
make mysteries. I hate mysteries. I always
tell the girls, " Whatever you do, my dears,
don't let us have mysteries. They invariably
bring on my palpitations." If you know anything
against Mr. Chester — which, I must
say, seems most unlikely — let me hear it.'

It is very difficult, for the stories are only
hearsay ; but I should advise you to find out
for yourself.'

Find out for myself, indeed. Not I !
Besides, the Bible says we ought not to tattle
about our neighbours, and Blackness has been
in his family for years.'

Well then, ask Mr. Chester boldly whether
he knows a man called Elias F. Joynte, and
see what he says.'

And suppose I insult him by the question,
and he breaks off the marriage then and there
who will find me another husband for my
girl, my foolish, dreamy Dorothy V

^ Better anything than that dear sweet
Dorothy should be made unhappy.'

Really, Mrs. Parkinson,' said her friend a
little tartly, continuing to stitch vigorously at
a table-cloth, * I don't quite see how you,
never having been a mother, can know what a
mother's behaviour ought to be. But then.

the world's always against a poor widow with
pretty daughters; " From him that hath
little, shall be taken away even that he hath."
It is the old story of Cain and Abel — envy
and hatred, and nobody caring for the poor
and helpless.'

/ care very much. I only want you to do
nothing in a hurry — to make inquiries — to
be prudent. You are careful of your linen.'

Mrs. Parkinson took up the corner of a towel
gingerly between her finger and thumb, and
appeared to admire the exquisitely neat marking
upon it.

Girls are not linen, Mrs. Parkinson ; they
have their feelings.' Mrs. Strait stitched eve
more determinedly.

So have we all, my dear friend. Ah ! I
know of such sad cases — such ill-assorted
marriages — where the husbands took to drinking
and the wives to worse.'

Now, Mrs. Parkinson, I won't have my
girls compared to your pauper objects of
charity ; they may not be very handy at their
needle, but they are ladies to the backbone,
not beggars.' Mrs. Strait pulled her cap,
which was already awry, still further towards
a right angle with her forehead as she spoke.
They have been brought up as well as I could

afford ; and what with my lonely position and
the heavy taxes, and no society to speak of,
I think it very indelicate of you to taunt meas
you have done about my not caring for
them — a mother's feelings, " Rachel weeping
for her children," Mrs. Parkinson, that's how
I understand it

Mrs. Strait's usually plaintive voice now
broke into sobs, and she flung her work on
the table with energetic despair.

Don't take on so, dear ; we all have our
troubles,' said Mrs. Parkinson soothingly. ' Even
that interesting young man down at my house,
who has been misunderstood and persecuted
all his life — a man whom I look on as a hero
and a martyr — even he has had his crosses.
Ah yes ! Life is indeed sad for us all ; but now
cheer up, and see what is best to be done about
your girl's marriage. There is never a cloud
without a silver lining, you know ; and all maybe
well yet.'

The silver lining is a good marriage ; if
you take that away, and with it all my hopes
of a happy peaceful old age, what is to become
of me ? Dorothy will fret herself into a
consumption. Mr. Chester will abuse me,
and the neighbours will laugh.' At this melancholy
vision Mrs. Strait, vividly contemplating

her own misfortunes, covered her face with her
hands and cried quietly.

Mrs. Parkinson sat aghast. She regretted
having caused her friend sorrow (though,
knowing; that she had done so in a righteous
cause, and with the very best intentions, she
could not repent of her action) ; but the exceeding
convolutions of Mrs. Strait's mind,
which rejoiced in involved reasoning, rendered
it very difficult to offer advice or assistance.

^ Will you authorize me to make inquiries
about Mr. Chester, and abide by my advice V
she asked presently, the pause, during which
Mrs. Strait's tears fell regularly, having given
her time to think.

*No, I will not. I will not have my
daughter's happiness tampered with. I will
not have her the tally of the town. The match
shall be broken off — she will die. It will not
matter, however, nothing matters ; even the
linen can be given up. I will sacrifice
myself, sacrifice is the widow's portion.'

Mrs. Parkinson rose. Further argument
seemed hopeless. Turning on the threshold
she said kindly, * Do let me help you in
any way that I can. I love Dorothy as a
daughter.'

As if you could do so, when you are not

even her stepmother Mrs. Strait said angrily,
beginning to wipe away her tears. The vexation
she experienced at the interference of
others always bore fruit in some petty show
of tyranny, the revenge of a weak person
upon her dependents ; so that when, a few
moments after Mrs. Parkinson's departure,
Dorothy, radiant, with a touch of spring-like
happiness, pushed the door open, and stealing
pleasantly up to her mother's side, dropped a
kiss upon her forehead, her doom was quickly
decided — lie must be the scapegoat.

Mamma, have you been crying *?' Dorothy
asked in a tone of surprise, when, patting
Mrs. Strait's faded cheek, she found that her
fingers had become moist. ^ What has
happened f

Oh ! you don't love me, child — you can't
love me, or you would not have set your
affections on a bad man.'

A bad man, mamma ! whom do you mean V
Your lover, Mr. Chester ; everyone says he
is bad.'

Who says so, mamma ? it is not true.'
Now, that is so like you, Dorothy, to set
yourself up to be wiser than your elders.
What do you know of him ? — nothing —
positively nothing 1'

I know that I love him, and that he loves
me said Dorothy simply, putting both her
hands endearingly on her mother s arm, as she
knelt beside her.

Stuff and nonsense ! Love is nothing. I
don't believe you can love him ve7^y much.
Why, you have only known him a month.'

I can't argue, mother, but please let me
marry him ; please try to like him, for my
sake.'

I grant you, Dorothy, he is very rich' —
Mrs. Strait was a little mollified as she remembered
what riches meant — pleasures for the
young, comforts for the old, and a kind of
sunshiny transformation of life, in which new
linen could be bought whenever necessary, and
subtly increasing rents need not cause intense
and abiding consternation. ' He is rich, but
there end his merits. He may have a bad
temper '

Mr. Coote said that Keith was very good-humoured.'


Then he may have led a fast life. You
have no conception of the wickedness of towns.
The stories your papa used to tell me about
them were horrifying. What can we know?
Humour is always right.'

Oh, mother ! Why should we torture

ourselves with doubts ? Why not believe ?
It is so much happier for us all.'

Happier — happier, perhaps, but foolish too,
and I never was a fool. The upshot of it is,
I refuse my consent, Dorothy, till I know all
Mr. Chester's antecedents — and that he is
above suspicion, like Caesar's wife. I have
no doubt Caesar was a business-like man, and
knew what he was about.'

If you are determined that there shall be
some cause to blame him,' Dorothy said sadly,
it may perhaps be found. But why try ?
It will only make me miserable.'

There is my duty as a mother.' Mrs.
Strait glanced round on the scattered linen,
and the pile of towels that on Mrs. Parkinson's
departure had fallen in confusion to the
ground, and her tone increased in dignity.
There is my duty as a mother I'

Dorothy still continued to hope ; youth is
so sanguine ; besides, she was well acquainted
with her mother's swiftly changing moods ; the
next new-comer might produce an entirely
different result.

Mother, you will do nothing,' she said
at fasti.

Nothing ; except forbid Mr. Chester the
house till further notice

Oh, mother !'

Dorothy, you must be obedient. It is for
your good.'

I may see him once ?' The girl's face lost
its sunny brightness, and looked piteously sad.
Her clear blue eyes gazed out through a veil of
tears.

*Yes, once.' Mrs. Strait felt perfectly
satisfied now that she had amply done her
duty. She had vindicated her authority,
proved her wisdom, and given evidence of her
maternal anxiety. It was very unselfish
indeed of a woman to hesitate on the verge of
so excellent a marriage for her daughter. It
proved conclusively that she was not of the.
stuff of mercenary mothers, who place the
acquisition of fortune as the aim of their
ambitions. Her neighbours might be astonished,
but there would be no occasion given
for sneers or laughter. Mrs. Strait firmly
believed that the sacrifice of inclination to
principle was all on her side ; Dorothy's feelings
naturally counted as of secondary importance.
Girls, in her opinion, were always
in love — in and out again, like the turns of a
weathercock ; but they did not get the option
of a rich marriage every day.

Mrs. Strait, like many other persons, believed

VOL. I. 14

herself to be eminently unworldly, but yet
the opinion of the world, as exemplified in the
person of Mrs. Parkinson, was the motive-power
of her conduct. Unworthiness does
not always mean ^ other worldliness.' It maybe
either an imperfect vision of social
wisdom or an ignorance of the accepted trifles
that make up conventional life.

Dorothy, disheartened, walked to the window.
She could see the tradespeople's carts hurrying
by, the drivers whipping up their swiftly
tripping ponies, and hear them loudly whistling
the last popular airs. The milkman
with his bright cans stood at the gate gossiping
with the servant-maid, while he poured
the frothing liquid into the brown stone jug
she held ; in the meadow beyond the road
cows lowed patiently, waiting to be driven
home ; and the trill of a lark's song, faraway
in the blue distance, seemed to mock
her with its throbbing burst of ecstatic joy.
The familiar sights and sounds made the girl's
heart ache. A few moments before she too
could have sung for joy like the lark ; but
now her mood was that of keenest disappointment.


She turned her head and looked back again
into the room : the neat paper, across whose

snowy surface trailed bunches of blue
violets, and the white dimity bed-curtains,
gave it a pleasant aspect. Her mother sat
sewing again placidly. Soon Margaret would
come in, and then there would arise fresh
questions, surprise, explanations. Dorothy,
thinking thus, leant her hot head against the
cool window-pane, full of listless desire to see
how long the milkman's talk with the maidservant
would continue. The jug was full
at last ; it needed steadying carefully with both
hands. The milkman jumped into his little
donkey-cart and drove off with a jingle of
bells.

Was it possible, Dorothy mused to herself
that her marriage could be broken off ; that her
future could lack the dear presence which now
made the sunshine of each passing hour ; that
the slow lagging days should go by empty of
happiness and everything but memory, the
bitter aching memory which, like that of some
grieving pain that never ceases, alone would
remain to canker her life — a life, as in the past,
monotonous and quiet ; Margaret singing the
Cloches de Corneille,' Mrs. Strait working,
Dorothy herself reading history or literature,
questions innumerable rising to her lips which
none of her companions could answer ; and so

14—2

time slipping by, miserable time slowly
drifting into eternity. Could this be so ? There
certainly seemed the possibility. Miss Patten
herself perhaps, acidulated and tedious as she
was now, might have had her romance once,
something to do with a young man whose miniature,
with high stock, and velvet-collared coat,
hung over the old maid's writing-table — might
also have stood as Dorothy did on some quiet
afternoon in the ruddy setting sun, and bid
a silent farewell to hope and happiness, and
the delight of whispered sympathy ; and then,
having locked up a drawer containing a letter,
and a wisp of hair or a faded flower, have turned
to face the world again — an old maid. Dorothy
shuddered. Give up Keith ; never again hear
the music of his slow, liquid, ultra-refined
tones ; never again read her own thoughts
in his concentrated reflective eyes ; never
again thrill to the sound of passion in his
earnest words, words that sent the blood
throbbing up from her heart into her cheeks ;
have nothing of all this but a remnant of poor
pallid memory — never !'

Dorothy slipped out of the room and fled to
her own little bed-chamber. There, on her
knees, pressing Keith's photograph to her lips,
she registered as solemn a vow as ever escaped

from a maiden's breast, that nothing — neither
pressure, entreaties, nor menaces — should
induce her to give up her lover, and, with him,
all distinct prospects of happiness.

MR. MAY^'APvD DOES HIS DUTY.

'R. Comte and Palis remained at
Blackness, urged by their friend,
who declared that love-making and
business occupied but a small portion
of the day, and that the evening hours
especially would be intolerable if he were left
in solitude. Since Mr. Chester's return, April
had slowly drifted into May ; the country lanes
were sweet with the breath of hawthorn, the
cottage-gardens blooming with wallflowers and
daffodils ; village lovers lingered near the stiles,
while gentle winds fanned their hot cheeks.
Johnnie pursued such field-sports as the season
warranted, and Keith read La Rochefou-
could by the open window, while Palis chanted
in a loud voice, pacing bareheaded up and
down, the passionate Provencal ballads in
which his soul delighted.

For almost the first time in this busy life,
Keith in these days felt a quiet content steal
over him, a sense as if some one had mesmerized
him into pleasant repose. The knowledge
of Dorothy's love delighted him, but the
delight was calm, unemotional, and grateful —
as unruffled as the waving curves of her glossy
golden hair.

This is the true dolce far niente,^ he said,
stretching himself lazily, to Palis, who stood
in the window-frame, a volume of poems in
his hand. ' It is really as enjoyable as the life
in Italy — more so than the summer season
there, when one is broiled. I begin to feel as
if I should settle down into a patriarchal existence,
breed flocks and herds, and cultivate
grand-children. This is really a pretty
place.'

He was right. The spring and autumn are
delightful in England, when the spring is
genial and the autumn a kind of tardy
summer. The lawn was of a deep rich green,
the flower-beds gemmed with spring flowers, the
air full of languor and of that kind of potent
earth-smell which is so characteristically
British.

Love makes all things pretty,' Palis answered,
a trifle sententiously, between the

whifFs of his cigarette. * I never knew you so
completely infatuated by a woman as you are
on this occasion. Is it true she is exceptionally
handsome V

'And good, Eaphael. The goodness of
women never appealed to me before.'

Well, I like a bit of diablerie in a woman,
a touch of spice — black sparkling eyes, a neck
just gilded by the sun's warm rays, lips that
are red as cherries.'

That comes of the poetry of your nature.
That is the kind of thing you put into
your verses ; but depend upon it, Eaphael, the
woman we love pro tern, is always the type we
believe most admirable. Show me your last
effusion.'

Ah bah ! it's all rubbish, about some
flowers.' He drew from his pocket a crumpled
bit of paper and handed it to his friend.
Probably you would not appreciate it.
These things come to me at all times, sometimes
at dinner, sometimes in dreams, sometimes
in the fields. This one came to me in
my old aunt's ear-trumpet. It is a buzzing
kind of affair — one never hears the real words ;
and then other fancies enter my brain instead
but yoii^ of course, are not sentimental.'

Keith took the paper and read :

Oh night, last night of first caress !

Oh night of close unloved adieu !
Oh night of first sweet given flower,
Warm with your wearing, full of you !

Forget-me-not, a little rose,

And some strange blossom, fleshly white,
A tropic thing that, as we sat,

Blew like a hot breath in the night.

To-day I walk as in my sleep,

I totter and I catch my breath ;
Your flowers are here, for ever here,
Broken with kisses, loved to death.

■"J

'forget-me-not." Can I forget —

I, in my aching want of you ?
A rose — ah me, the thorns are set

Thick in my heart and sting me through !'

I never can understand you, Eaphael,' he
said, when he had finished reading it aloud,
looking at Palis, who beat time with his foot
to the metre of the verse, ' you are so extraordinarily
romantic and so intensely practical.
You always get on in the world, and make a success
of everything you touch. You're a capital
journalist ; you seize the exact gist of a subject
as it appears to the public. You speak well ;
you might be in Parliament if you chose.'

That would bore me to death,' his friend
interrupted. * The routine of the House of
Commons is too sleepy for me.' He stretched
out his arms and made the joints of his fingers
crack. * I must have excitement, agitation,

variety ; that is the secret of my character —
change. I really feel the passionate enthusiasm
for a cause I take up — I become the
most ardent patriot for the time being and a
cosmopolitan. I really suffer with the criminal
I am writing about, I understand all the agony
of the condemned wretch in his cell ; I share
his remorse, his despair, his misery, and almost
feel the halter, and then the next day I have
forgotten all about it. I really am the most
earnest man in the world, only I can't keep up
the sensation ; it passes like sea-sickness. Now
you are not earnest.'

That's true,' said Keith. ' I always agree
with La Eochefoucauld : '' Dans Adversity
de nos malheurs amis nous trouvons toujours
quelque chose qui ne nous depart pas ;" and
on hearing of their misfortunes, I turn my
mind to a contemplation of my own good
fortune. Some people would call that gratitude
to Providence, eh V

Of course they would ; the world is so
narrow-minded. Truth is so disagreeable. I
maintain, if you have anything unpleasant to
relate, it is necessary to embroider. " Gases,
gases toujours, avec de la gaze on pent tout
faire." '

*Yes, that's it — lime-lights and distance.

It is the naked realities of life that are
objectionable.'

I can't imagine you a married man, Keith.'
Palis removed the cigarette from his mouth
and gave a long stare at Mr. Chester's recumbent
figure. * You are too self-conscious. You

o

will never be content with the admiration of
one woman, however hearty that may be;
and women can admire, that's certain, when
they love.'

" Le plus grand miracle de I'amour c'est de
guerir de la coquettes," ' murmured Keith
between his teeth. 'How wonderfully you
and I have always agreed!'

Yes ; because we are so utterly different
laughed Eaphael, the sun dancing on his
auburn beard and catching into relief the
bright gold threads among the brown. * I,
who am not even an Englishman — only a
naturalized one.'

What are you, Eaphael ? I never thought
of asking you before.'

*Well, my mother was a German — that
accounts for my blond head ; my father a
Provencal — that accounts for my nature, which
is southern ; and I have always lived in
England, which is the key to my practical
conduct ; and this climate, dull, dreary, and

treacherous, accounts quite naturally for my
yearning for bonbons and sunshine ; the latter
is a disease with me. England is a very
good country to amass your money, attain to
fame, or make a career ; but the south is the
only place to live in.'

I shall live there too, some day.'

Never ; you will live where your wife
chooses. She has the true English character —
quiet, self controlled, '^ un peu triste," with a
strong will and an enormous capacity for
loving. They have that, those English girls ;
it is a sign of health with them, like a good
appetite.'

Don't you think her beautiful V said Keith ;
for, next to talking about one's self, there is
no pleasure like that of hearing praise of the
beloved. ' Resembles a Era Angelico angel,
doesn't she V

Yes ; a Era Angelico angel with a will.
That young lady won't be contented with
singing psalms and spreading out graceful
drapery on a fleecy cloud. I hope to goodness
she will go on believing in you, Keith, or
there will be the devil to pay.'

No fear !' said Mr. Chester, throwing back
his head with a touch of conscious vanity.

Why shouldn't she ? I am going to be a
paragon.'

As you were with Ida V

Leave Ida alone, please ! By-the-bye,
Eaphael, a man doesn't always want every
little item of his bachelor life ransacked and
brought to light. You are a staunch friend,
are you not? I mean, no gossiping with old
women.'

Of course not, mon cher. In an extreme
case I should lie, and lie delicately and effectually
; there should be no blundering about
it. Why, who is this ? The parson ! Looks
important, too, as if he were coming to beg fora
subscription. Your genteel beggars reall])^
are assommants.''

Mr. Maynard now approached, stepping
firmly across the velvety lawn, his long black
garment fluttering open as he walked. Keith
rose slowly from his luxurious rocking-chair,
pushed aside the glass of brandy and soda-water
that stood at his elbow, and hastily
covered the yellow-backed French novels, whose
titles and contents could scarcely be considered
edifying, with the sheets of the Times newspaper.
Appearances were to Keith what
principles are to other men, a necessary part
of conduct. He stepped out of the French

window, and advanced with outstretched hand
towards the priest.

I am glad to see you, Mr. Maynard. This
is the first visit you have paid me.'

*Not the first visit, but the first time I
have found you at home.'

Ah, yes, precisely ; almost the same thing.
Will you come into my room ? I must
apologize for the confusion of a bachelor's
abode.'

^ I think I should prefer to remain out of
doors,' said the priest gravely, while Palis
stood apart with an air of humility, as though
to mark his complete indifference to other
people's private conversation.

^As you please. You have not seen the
garden yet. Will you take any refreshment
'?'

Thank you, no ; it is still early in the
afternoon. And the fact is, I have a message
for you — something a little unpleasant.'

Indeed 1' Keith elevated his brows and
threw a knowing glance at Palis, as though to
say, ' You see these priests are always birds of
ill-omen.' Then he courteously added : ' Let
us walk down the garden.*

They paced, at first in silence, under the
shelter of the old elm-trees, in which rooks

were cawing. Then Mr. Maynard, seeing his
task was in no way to be lightened for him,
observed :

I come from Mrs. Strait, as her ambassador.'


Keith twitched together a little with an
almost imperceptible movement.

Of course ; then I need not ask if it is as an
ambassador of peace. I was intending to call
on Mrs. Strait myself in about half an hour.
Your business is not very pressing, I suppose V

^ Mrs. Strait has begged me to speak to you
on a very delicate matter. She fears to
entrust her daughter's happiness to anyone
who is not entirely worthy of her. She
believes you to be worthy, but she feels that
circumspection before taking so serious a step
is necessary.'

Of course. Does Mrs. Strait wish to know
the amount of my fortune ? My man of
business will attend to that ; I mean to make
an ample settlement on my wife.'

It is not that — no one doubts your generosity.
But unpleasant rumours have reached
Mrs. Strait's ears, and she would like you
to contradict them.'

Unpleasant rumours,' echoed Keith, twisting
his moustache ; ' of what kind V

There is a man here named Elias F. Joynte,
who has let fall hints against your character,
and who, it seems, is prepared to substantiate
them.'

Joynte ! Impossible T

If the priest's eyes had not been fixed on
the soft grass he was treading he must inevitably
have noticed Keith's sudden and
ghastly change of colour.

He says,' pursued Mr. Maynard, ' nothing
definite ; but other coinciding circumstances
point to some blot or stain — some occurrence
at Eome connected with your rapid increase
of fortune. Can you explain it V

'Perfectly. I was engaged to a young
American lady. She died and left me her
fortune.'

Died suddenly, did she not V

Yes, very suddenly — of heart disease.'

People talked '

'Yes ; as they always do. Now, Mr.
Maynard,' Keith spoke with an almost jaunty
frankness, ' you are a good man and a clergyman
; you have no doubt constantly seen
instances of envy and malice among your
parishioners at the sight of their neighbours'
superior good fortune. You surely would
not be so unjust as to accuse a man solely

because he happened to be fortunate and to
have drawn a prize in life V

Keith played a good card in this apparent
impulsive frankness of his. The priest
wavered in his suspicions.

It is no affair of my opinion he said ; ' I
know nothing, and of course can accuse you of
nothing. But it seems easy to clear up the
matter ; a little frankness, Mr. Chester, is a
valuable possession. I fear men of the world
scarcely attach enough importance to it — I
mean the transparent sincerity of intentions as
well as of actions.'

Well, certainly,' said Keith, still more
frankly, ' I do not profess the simplicity — the
purity, shall we say ? — of a girl of eighteen.
Life leaves a few rough traces on all of us, and
I never aspired to be a saint ; still, that is no
reason why I should be accused of crimes, for
I suppose you mean to insinuate something
grave.'

I fear the accusations are grave,' the
priest answered in a low faint voice. Sin,
notwithstanding his experience, always appeared
to him on each new occasion as something
astonishingly awful, which even the
grace of God and a life of tears and repentance
scarcely availed to wipe away.

VOL. I. 15

May I ask what is the definite crime of
which you charge me ? Of course I need not
add that you have no power or right whatsoever
to ask these questions, and that if I answer
them it is only because I choose, or rather
because I love Dorothy.'

And you will lose her if you do not answer
them — Mrs. Strait has irrevocably decided this.
The charges then are : obtaining money under
false pretences ; and in some way of being
answerable for the mysterious death of your
intended, in consequence of which it is supposed
that you left the diplomatic service very
suddenly.'

Ah !' Keith breathed a sigh of relief.
No one can prove a tittle of this, except that
I left the diplomatic service, certainly, because
I was sick of it, and because I was rich. Do
you know who Joynte is ? — have you any
idea V

He says he is a cousin of the deceased
lady, who has fallen on evil days.'

Yes. What kind of evil days ? He is
a spendthrift, a prodigal, an adventurer, a
lunatic, for he was once locked up as insane.
I believe he thought his cousin's money
should by rights have been left to him, and
that is why he naturally loathes me. He

wrote a scurrilous article against me in one
of the Roman papers, which, however, no one
believed ; and there you have the origin of the
ugly rumours that have so disturbed you

Keith paused, his speech had somewhat
excited him, his eyes sparkled, and there was
a suspicion of trembling in his hands. The
clergyman stopped and looked him full in the
face, tracing little circles on the gravel-path,
on which they now stood, with the tip of his
square-toed boot, as he did so.

You have spoken well, Mr. Chester, and
there seems a true ring in your words. Will
you meet Mr. Joynte at my house and decide
the matter at once, that your bride's suspense,
may not continue V

Yes, and besides,' continued Keith, warming
with his subject, * I have another friend
here who can speak for me — a journalist, a very
able, intelligent man — you saw him there just
now by the window — a stout, fair man, wearing
a soft wide awake. He will speak for me.
He will give me a character if — I require one,
as it seems,' he added bitterly.

The two men now turned towards the house,
outside which, among the enervating odours of
the orangery, whose doors stood wide open,
filling the air with narcotic sweetness, Palis

15—2

still walked slowly backwards and forwards,
his book in his hand.

Here, Eaphael, come here !' Keith cried, as
they drew near. Palis closed his book, keeping
his finger and thumb between the leaves
to mark the place, and advanced towards them,
a pleasant smile lightening his broad contented
face.

Speak for me, Eaphael !' Keith said in
quick, hurried tones that vibrated with
emotion — ' am I a murderer, am I a scoundrel,
a forger, an " escroc " 1 This gentleman accuses
me of these things. Speak for me.'

^ Mr. Chester accused of all this V Palis
looked with dignity at the quiet clergyman,
who was beginning to doubt the evidence of
his own senses. * Never ! I have known
Keith — how long, seven — eight years, isn't
it ? We have never had a word, a quarrel, a
misunderstanding in all that time. Keith is
a perfect gentleman, a little too dainty in his
tastes, possibly not quite so cosmopolitan as I
am, fastidious — certainly fastidiousness carried
to an excess is a fault, perhaps — but he is
musical, artistic to the core, a man incapable
of a meanness — a true friend, a charming companion.
Ah, if you had seen, as I have, the
fine ladies in Paris running after him, one

insisting on his coming to her supper, the
other begging and praying him to arrange her
private theatricals ; and then men of science, of
considerable position, talking to him with respect,
asking him for his views on politics, on literature,
on art — he is well read, is Keith. It is
quite a pity for him to bury himself here in
this little out-of-the-way nook. It is all very
beautiful, of course. Look at that orangery :
for a moment, one could imagine one's self in
the back-garden of an Italian villa ; but yet
it is all narrow, very narrow. A man of
society, that is what Keith is par excellence —
society adores him.'

As soon as a pause for breath on the part of
the speaker enabled Mr. Maynard to interrupt
him, he said decisively :

That is not the question. I honour you, sir,
for so warmly defending your friend. Everyone
is aware of his talents and his charm of
conversation ; his career as a diplomat has
amply proved that. What troubles the lady
whose daughter he wishes to marry is his
moral character. Can you speak to that ? the
-other qualities are but dross compared to integrity
and straightforward dealing.'

Certainly,' Palis resumed, while Keith
stood by silently, feeling his character safe in

the hands of his friend. ' Certainly. A high
standard of morality is the great requisite fora
public man. You, as the minister of religion,
cannot do otherwise than lay stress upon it ;
but Keith is moral. You are moral, are you
not, Keith V

Did you never hear anything against Mr.
Chester's character with reference to the
money left him by a young American lady ?'

Never,' said Palis, glancing at Keith to
see if he had taken the right cue.

^ You never knew anything, either V

Never,' again emphasized Palis.

Then, sir, I must wish you good-morning.
All that you have had the goodness to tell
me shall be duly repeated to Mrs. Strait, and
receive all attention from her — that I promise
you. And you, Mr. Chester, will kindly consent
to meet Mr. Joynte at my house tomorrow, at
twelve o'clock ? Will that suit you ?'

Perfectly ! You believe that I am terribly
pained at the imputations that have been cast
upon me. You will plead my cause with Mrs.
Strait, will you not ? You will deal with my fair
fame as a clergyman and a Christian, will you
not?'

Mr. Maynard was touched at Keith's
humility, and at the emotion portrayed in
his sad and persuasive voice.

Remember, Mr. Chester, that we are told to
*' keep ourselves unspotted from the world." It
is a precept we are too apt to forget in our
vehement pursuit of happiness or success, till
the day when our pride is humbled in the
dust ; but never fear, justice will and must prevail.
I trust I shall have good news for you
tomorrow.'

Thus saying, the clergyman bowed and
departed, walking with his usual rapid and
determined stride. Keith and Palis looked
after the disappearing black figure till the
corner of the house hid him from sight ; then,
as they returned to Keith's sitting-room, Palis
said in a tone of vehement curiosity : »

What is it, Keith ? For the life of me I
could not understand a syllable of what he
wished to find out ; but I thought a wordy
panegyric, with a few hints of fine ladies and
great men thrown in, would be the most beneficial
line to take for you. But what has happened?
— You look worried.'

Keith had thrown himself again into his
favourite rocking-chair, and thrust his hands
back under his head, in an attitude of listless
depression.

The whole annoyance is due to that money.
Upon my word, sometimes Pm sorry I ever

cot it. The envious brutes can't leave me in
peace about it. Some one has been telling my
future mother-in-law all manner of scandal,
and she sent the parson to say the marriage
must be broken off unless I am able to
explain. Confound it ! How can one convince
people by a negative ? It's the fellow who
swears black is white who always get the best
of it.'

Les femmes, il n'y que 9a/ muttered
Palis.

Yes, indeed women are the worry of one's
existence. And the worst of it is, that I want
this one, just only this one, and then I vow
I'll never look at a woman again.'

But how did you behave to Ida Phaer ?'
asked Palis thoughtfully. ' Had you anything
to do with her death ? I can't myself understand
how it could profit you, for she was very
nice and very handsome.'

Yes ; but she had green eyes.'

Like me. Did you never notice the colour
of mine V

^ Rubbish ! Have a cigarette V

Just for form's sake, Keith, tell me, please,
are you quite innocent of all that parson
accused you of V

Of course. You are as bad as the rest,' he

said impatiently. Then, pulling out his watch,
Five o'clock, I declare ! I must go down and
see my little Dorothy. She will be breaking
her poor heart !'

A Girls Resolution.

;HE clergyman had certainly informed
Keith that Mrs. Maynard had forbidden
him the house for the
present, but the young man had no
intention whatever of receiving his dismissal
in such cavalier fashion. From Dorothy's lips
alone would he hear his doom, and her lips, he
knew, would never pronounce it. So he set
off to the Angel House with pretty nearly his
usual joyful anticipations, and was scarcely
surprised when the door opened almost before
he had rung the bell, and Dorothy herself
welcomed him.

Come in here,' she said in a low whisper,
her eyes shining wonderfully. ' I did not
want the maid to see you, but mamma knows ;
she has permitted me to receive you. I am so

glad you have come. I have been waiting and
watching for the last hour

Darling !' he said, with a grateful impulse,
as he lovingly stroked her head. They had
now come out of the decaying daylight and
sat side by side on the deep, low sofa in
the green drawing-room. The room was full
of shadow. The fire was not kindled, and only
the mellow rays of one small lamp, that had
been prematurely lit, threw a halo of light
round the two figures, and played at hide-and-seek
in the ripples of Dorothy's hair. After
the emotions of the day — the anger, the bitterness,
the wounded vanity that had tortured
him for some hours, the peace of these quiet
moments was inexpressible. The low-toned
dusky surroundings, the half-subdued light,
the silence, the delicate scented atmosphere,
gratified his artistic sense, soothed him into
ease, and increased the ardour of his love ten
thousand-fold. Keith could not love vulgarly.
His correct eye, his perfect taste, must always
be satisfied.

I am so glad you have come,' Dorothy
murmured in cooing tones. He thought her
manner held a softness and ardour that it had
never before possessed. ' I did not know how I

should have endured another night of misery.
Keith, they want to separate us.'

^ I know ; but it must not be.'

No, it must not be,' she said, pressing
closer up to him and throwing her head back
on his shoulder ; ' because — oh, Keith, I love
you so !'

The thrill of passion that passed through
her communicated itself to Keith. He did not
speak. Words were unnecessary ; caresses,
the close contact of their hands, more eloquent.


Do you love me too T she said presently.
Yes ? Then listen.' The part of stern
decision seemed to be left to the girl to play
to-day. ' They will accuse you heaven knows
of what ; I shall not believe them. They will
part us ; I shall not care. And when the
time arrives, Keith, that you want me, I will
come to you always !'

Always,' he repeated half stupidly.

Is it so — a pact, a bond ? Then seal it.'

Setting aside her usual coyness, her reserve,
the natural coldness that had made
Margaret say of her, 'Dorothy has no soul,' she
put her lips daintily up to his. He pressed
them tenderly, gently, and kept his arm firmly
round the golden head that had fallen on his

A Girls Resolution. 23/

breast. There was no passion in Mm now,
however ; only the tenderest love and reverence,
and a feeling of quiet satisfaction.

Dorothy, I must tell you,' he said presently,
when he felt a tear drop on his hand ; ' perhaps
I am not worthy of you. I ought to say '

'No, don't tell me anything,' she said,
putting U23 her hands to her ears ; ' don't
explain. I don't want to know anything but
that I love you. I believe in you, and I am
yours. Why should we spoil this happy hour
by horrid words that may haunt me when weare
apart ? You and I have no need of explanations
— have we, Keith V

No, dear.' And then Keith realized what
is meant by ' the love that casteth out fear.'

You will clear yourself, Keith. People
will see how mistaken they were in their
judgment. But if not '

Then V he said, wondering how far this
young maiden's love would take her in the
thorny paths of doubt.

Then I will marry you just the same.'

And I will never cease to adore you, and
repay you for your goodness and your faith,'
he exclaimed, fervently pressing her in his
arms.

In that embrace Dorothy forgot her dreams

of fame and ambition, and gave herself up forever
to be the willing slave of love. How many
such women's lives are there in the world —
women who live in and for a man, as Milton
has represented Eve, ^ He for God only ; she
for God in him ;' women whose vital energies
are absorbed in another's career, whose heart
never beats for themselves or their own hopes
and desires, but who fling the whole force of
passionate devotion into the incense they offer
up to their sole idol — like Heloise obstinately
declining marriage, lest she should mar her
dear one's prospects ; or Heloise obediently
retiring into the shades of a dreary convent,
taking with her a prematurely blighted life
and the wreck of all her hopes ; or Heloise
caring only for her lover's prosperity and
humbly learning of him, notably her inferior
as a Latin and Greek scholar, the arid study of
barren dialectics. Women such as these seem
endowed with every gift of nature and art
solely in order that they may resign them all
in one supreme effort of self-sacrifice.

So Dorothy felt at this instant as the bands
of love tightened round her heart, and she
remembered that those bands, once firmly riven
by the Church, were, in her opinion, indissoluble.
The very action of lifting her lips to

his bore with it no light, frivolous caress, buta
deep signification, the consecration of a
heart's offering to him whom she deemed best
and wisest in the world. A few more tender
words passed between them, a few more low-whispered
expressions and gentle breathing,
and then Keith rose, half dazed, from a state of
dreamful felicity, to leave the woman he loved,
now verily, and indeed, and of her own consent
and free-will, his bride. They made no
future appointments ; the girl, at least, was
beckoned on by no vain words of hope : but
she parted from him silently and solemnly, as
on the eve of some heart-searching trial, supported
by a quiet faith that defied disappointment.
She let him out at the door, as she
had admitted him, with a parting grasp of the
hand, and stood shading her eyes as she
watched him tread the narrow path where the
gravel crumbled beneath his feet, and pass
through the low gate into the road beyond.
Away out into the damp rising mists of evening,
that curled in vaporous clouds about his
head, he went alone. Yet not alone, for her
heart went with him.

Keith walked at first somewhat slowly.
Little lights began to glimmer in casement-windows,
the shutters of shops were gradually

closed with a bang ; belated children hurried
home laughing and talking in the dusk. He
passed the smithy where glowed tongues of fire,
and the strokes of the heavy falling hammer
resounded ; he passed the chemist's shop, its
blue and red lamp, speaking of comfort and
hope, shining out like a beacon, and stopped
at the little white house in which Mr. Maynard
lived. Something in its trim appearance
reminded him of the calm, benignant nature
of the man, of his large well-ordered mind,
slow to believe evil. Why should Keith not
go in and talk to him, seek his advice, and tell
him how Dorothy loved him, and how they
had vowed never to part ? Why wait till tomorrow,
and pass a night of sleepless misery ?
He paused to think, but the tramp of a
footstep in the distance startled him, and he
moved on. The person to whom the footstep
belonged was approaching rapidly. Keith
looked up lazily to see if it were an acquaintance.
As the two pedestrians neared one
another, the man's eyes met his, and he recognised
Joynte, his accuser. An impulse ran
through his nervous well-knit frame, and
tingled in the tips of his fingers. The road
was solitary, the ditch deep. In self defence —
who said it was a crime ? Merely a grip, a

clutch, and the unwelcome accuser would be
silent for ever. The impulse died away in a
moment, but Keith felt mad with rage at the
idea of an obstacle interposing itself between
him and the woman whose love he was determined
never to forego. However, he commanded
himself, and in the quiet casual way
one gentleman greets another whom he meets
unexpectedly, he said, ' You here, Joynte !'

Joynte looked uneasily first at the ditch,
then at the lithe and supple figure fronting
him, for he was slight and weakly himself.
Finally, in a tone of friendly deprecation, ' Ah,
it's you, Mr. Chester ! I hope you are well'

Well enough, but not thanks to you.
What do you mean, you pale-livered sneak,
by coming down here tale-bearing ? Isn't
Europe wide enough for you and me ?
Haven't I shown you that I am to be
feared ? How dare you ! I'll hunt you down
again if you venture to annoy me !'

Mr. Chester, I have said nothing.'

The narrow gleam of intense hatred that
darted from the corners of Joynte' s half shut
eyes denoted plainly that no motives of love
had deterred him from the unpleasant disclosure,
whatever it might be.

VOL. I. 16

Then say nothing !' Keith cried threateningly.


Will you make it worth my while V
No ; but I'll hunt you down, expose, and
ruin you.'

Two can play at that game,' the other
answered. ' You have as much to fear from
me as I have from you, I think.'

I have nothing to fear.' Keith drew himself
up to his full height, and looked at his
foe with cool and cutting contempt. * No one
will believe you, whatever you say.'

I have suffered enough through you
already,' said Joynte, with a kind of shuffling
humility. ' I might like to pay you out a
bit.'

By all means,' answered Keith haughtily.
You were always a coward and a bully. I
see experience has not improved you.'

When a man has lost everything, you
ought to know well enough that he gets reckless.'


Once a fool, always a fool, I suppose,
retorted Keith bitterly ; ' but I strongly
advise you to drop your present line of
conduct.'

*Are you coming to the parson's tomorrow
V asked Joynte, beating indefinitely about

the bush in the hope of finding some loophole
that would afford him a hold over the gibing
Chester, cool and assured.

Yes — to proclaim that you are an escaped
lunatic'

For a moment Joynte cowered.

You can't.'

I can. Where did you get those clothes ?
Did you steal them ? How do you live ? Why
are you idle and well-dressed ? Answer me all
this!'

Keith spoke harshly and in a tone of command.


They were given me. Oh ! I have known
bitter poverty, Mr. Chester. I have begged '
for a crust and slept under arches. God knows
how low I have sunk since I escaped from
that madhouse — and I wasn't mad. You know
I only said what was true — what I saw. I've
done all I could to earn money ; there's nothing
I haven't tried, and now '

Now you think to earn money by turning
common informer. Pray do so, if you think
that a more gentlemanly occupation ; only
not a sixpence do you get out of me, but
board and lodging gratis — you know where 1'

Keith's eyes flamed ; all his late softness
of manner had given place to condensed

16—2

rage. He approached Joynte with uplifted
stick.

Mercy !' cried the wretch, his knees sinking
under him.

Ah ! that's right, that's your proper position.'
Keith breathed more freely. ' Listen !
you will leave this place to-night. There is a
train at nine o'clock. You will take it. You
will go back to America at once, and you will
never let me see or hear anything of you
again. I suppose you have some relations
there. My banker will pay you £200 — I will
write him to that effect ; and six months hence,
if I am not molested, I will pay you £200
more. Now go, and never let me set eyes
on your cursed face again. You were a precious
fool to stay in Europe at all.'

Joynte stumbled up on to his legs. The sum
offered dazzled the miserable creature whose
sole ambition it had lately been to earn ten
shillings a week. Yes; on the whole, there was
more to be gained from this man than from
the parson : besides which, he did not particularly
relish the close proximity of a determined
athlete with an uplifted stick.

I will go,' he said hoarsely, and pushing
rapidly past Keith, he struck off into the shades
of night.

Keith, waited motionless for a few moments,
that he might be quite sure the fellow was
not shamming or stealing on him unawares
from behind. Then he heaved a deep sigh,
and walked briskly on. What a piece of good
fortune had fallen to his lot ! He had rid
himself of the only person in the world whose
presence just at this moment was peculiarly
hateful to him, and that for the very moderate
price of £200. About the other £200 it was
scarcely necessary to think : the man might
die before six months elapsed, and never
claim it. This was a more than probable
contingency, for his appearance was that of a
delicate worn-out person. Two hundred
pounds, only the price of a hunter, not the
price of a picture, or of a diamond ornament
to clasp round the neck of his bride ; and with
that price he had bought peace for ever, his
own happiness and that of Dorothy.

Did this not prove clearly that courage was
the only requisite for a man — courage and that
coolness which enabled him to face danger
calmly and decide rapidly in an emergency ?
Some people would have feared Joynte's
malevolence, have trembled and despaired at
the idea of averting it. But he, Keith, knew
what he was about. Thank heaven he was

not superstitious ; yet lie rejoiced to think that
perhaps his birth had occurred in a fortunate
conjunction of planets — that his star was a
lucky one — that what might mean danger to
others, for him only meant success. Arrived at
home, he went straight into the blue-room,
where Coote and Palis awaited him ; Coote
reading the Field, Palis with fat white fingers
trying over on the piano some airs from the
last new opera.

How goes it, Keith V Coote asked
cheerily.

Splendidly,' Keith threw himself into a
chair, and proceeded to light a cigarette. ' It
is all right ; I shall marry her.'

But how about the awkward interview
tomorrow V said Palis.

You'll see. I have managed it rather
neatly, I think. You two fellows will
witness the utter discomfiture of the parson,
and CO - surprise of Mrs. Strait, delight
of Dorothy. We'll have an extra bottle of
champagne to-night, and drink to my success,
and the perdition of every rogue who dares
to obstruct my plans and thrust his miserable
head into business that does not concern him.'

ORDEAL BY TALK.

f ES. MAYNAED, Mrs. Strait, and her
daughter Margaret assembled in
the parson's drawing-room on the
morrow. Margaret had accompanied
her mother in order to restrain her
feelings and support her if necessary ; but
Dorothy declined to make one of the party.

I put my trust in Keith she said ; ' and I
should not like him to think I wished for the
smallest explanation.*

But you had better at least come and hear
what happens,' urged Margaret ; ' you can sit
in the next room and be quite unobserved.'

And be tantalized by the sound of voices,
and excited by curiosity till I eventually come
in. No thank you. I shall stay at home and
read.'

So Dorothy had her way, and Mrs. Strait
and Margaret went alone. Mrs. Maynard
flitted gracefully in and out of the drawing-room,
where sat this species of family council ;
a light of triumph gleamed in her soft brown
eyes, which she strove in vain to hide by an
assumption of bustle and anxiety. The whole
morning she had been thinking to herself,

I am going to teach him to despise the
parson's wife, and think her not good enough
for his prodigal feasts and bachelor entertainments.'
Poor Mrs. Maynard ! A dish of cutlets,
a basket of grapes, and an hour's merriment
offered to two pretty girls seemed scarcely
worthy fuel to have lighted such a fire ; but
envy and anger are quickly burning stuff, and
need little nursing; of their flames.

It is getting late,' she said, sitting down by
Mrs. Strait, who filled a low armchair near
the window, but had not hitherto spoken.

They ought to be here. I wonder what
detains them. My husband is waiting at the
door to receive them, and everything is
ready.'

I trust they are not coming in here,' Mrs.
Strait said, in a tone of peevish alarm. * I
don't want a scene from that young man.'

I don't think Mr. Chester is likely to make

a scene observed Margaret, with a smile.
Dorothy said he was perfectly quiet and self-possessed
when he bade her good-bye at their
last interview.'

Mrs. Maynard elevated her eyebrows.

A last interview — and they were alone, I
suppose ? Was it not a trifle imprudent, Mrs.
Strait V

My girl knows how to conduct herself,' said
the lady addressed, severely, ' even though she
was alone with her intended — which was more,
certainly, than my blessed mother would have
permitted me ; but there — girls are different
now, and everything is changed, too. I never
thought, when I was young and happy alit
Mr. Strait alive, that I should have to pass
through such an ordeal as this ; but there —
God's ways are inexplicable.'

Here they come !' Margaret cried with a
blush, shrinking back into the shelter of the
tapestry curtain.

Keith came first, and behind him, like two
attendant spirits, Palis and Coote. Palis had
a white hat, an orange-coloured tie, and a
light grey suit, and carried in his hand a
cotton umbrella. The other two wore the plain
dress of ordinary English gentlemen, relieved
in Keith's case by the ornam went of a Mareschal

Noel rosebud in this button-hole, which he had
begged from Dorothy the day before. Mr.
Maynard welcomed the three men cordially,
but with gravity, and they presently took
their places in the dining-room. Just across
the narrow passage, only a few yards off, the
beating hearts of the three women were almost
audible. Mrs. Maynard was agitated for herself,
Mrs. Strait for her daughter, Margaret for
her mother and her sister. The weary moments
passed but slowly. By way of breaking the
painful silence, Mr. Chester admired a very old
print that hung over the chimney-piece — an
engraving from a picture of Titian.

There are only two like it in Great
Britain,' the Vicar said, pointing out some
curious scroll-work at the corner, 'and the
frame too is supposed to be very fine.'

I can't bear old frames,' said Coote. ' Why
should carving be more valuable because it is
old, and gilding when it is dingy ?'

It is not the antiquity only, but the art of
dainty and careful fashioning, of which our
work people seem to have lost the secret.'

I know that when I go into a bric-a-brac
shop with Keith,' said his friend, ' and see
something specially ugly, or dirty, or mouldy
looking, I may be c[uite sure that will be the one

thing lie values in the whole collection. *' Perfectly
unique, my dear fellow," he says ; and I
wish heartily it were unique, and that no
more could be found like it

Respect for antiquity is the development
of the religious instinct,' said Palis, twisting
his white hat between his fingers and thinking
to please the parson. He would have said or
done anything at this moment to propitiate
the man whose verdict must decide Keith's
fate. Palis was a sincere friend, though
occasionally an indiscreet one.

Ah, here comes Mrs. Parkinson !' the
clergyman said, in a tone of relief (the strained
silence and embarrassment of the gentlemen
having become every moment more and more
unpleasant) : ' but she is alone. What does it
mean V

He hurried out to receive the little widow,
who presently entered, looking as neat as a
new pin, draped in her black lace, but flustered
out of all ordinary conditions.

Mr. Maynard, the most extraordinary
thing has occurred !' she broke out. Then,
suddenly perceiving the strangers, she gracefully
dropped an old-fashioned courtesy towards
the company. ' I have been waiting and

hoping, and I am very late, and so sorry ;

but '

What has happened ?' asked the clergyman
gravely.

Yes, what V said everybody.

Mr. Joynte went out for a walk yesterday
'

And he lost his way,' suggested the Vicar.
He got drunk,' said Palis.

He has sprained his ankle V asked Coote.

Keith alone remained silent.

He has not returned,' said Mrs. Parkinson
emphatically. 'Eliza took him up some hot
water to wash his hands last night before supper,
as usual ; but he never used it. We waited
supper ; then, at last, I began mine — about
nine o'clock, you know, one is hungry. I
went to bed, leaving the front door on the
latch, and Eliza with orders to get up at once
if she heard a noise ; no one came. This
morning I breakfasted alone. I waited till the
last moment, and the cook had made such
good ham-toast, it was a pity — Mr. Joynte
had praised it before so particularly — and I
thought on this occasion it might keep up his
spirits. But no ! — What can have happened ?
Such a nice, quiet young man, too. And
I had just heard of a clerkship for him likely

to suit him. Oh dear !' the little woman
stopped with a gasp.

It is very strange said the Vicar gravely.
Had you any suspicion that he was going
away ? Had you talked of it at all ? Did he
receive any letters V

Not a line — not a letter. We had never
talked of it.' Here Mrs. Parkinson sank into
the chair offered her by Mr. Chester, who
alone, of all the party, appeared to have his
wits about him. ' He did not seem particularly
inclined to accuse Mr. Chester of anything ;
and when he heard you wished to see him
here to-day, he said of course he would oblige
you, being, you perceive, at least as he thought,
a little indebted to me.*

Mrs. Parkinson hesitated like a schoolgirl.
She never could be got to see that, with her
philanthropic schemes and exertions, she did
more than other people, and deserved to receive
a larger meed of gratitude. Not that
she often received it ; few do. If we get our
deserts, they are mostly the righteous punishment
for our misdeeds.

He was a little indebted to me, and so, of
course, anxious to please the Vicar,' she continued
apologetically ; ' but he said he might
have been mistaken — that perhaps Mr. Chester's

faults were the follies of youth — that he
did not like to condemn a friend, and suchlike.'


The lying humbug !' muttered Keith between
his teeth.

*And I'm sure something has happened
summed up the good lady, with a sigh.

Does not this appear very much like a
withdrawal of the imputations cast on Mr.
Chester, gentlemen V asked the Vicar, looking
round.

Certainly it does ; but I wish the cowardly
sneak were here !' said Coote warmly, nursing
his knee with his clasped hands. ' Fellows
have no right to say things they can't substantiate.'


I presume we may consider the investigation
as terminated — in an unsatisfactory
fashion certainly, but still it seems difficult
to see what else can be done,' said the Vicar
slowly. ' I will tell my wife what has occurred,
and she will ask Mrs. Strait whether
she is content, or if she wishes for further
information.'

The Vicar then left the room, and a whispered
conversation ensued between him and
his wife in the passage. Presently he returned,
with the announcement that Mrs. Strait was

considerably discomposed by the strange news,
and that she would write to Mr. Chester, not
feeling inclined to see him at present. Then
the Vicar, taking Mr. Chester warmly by the
hand, said :

I trust this wretched affair may have no
further unpleasant results. You must rejoice
that you bravely and honestly submitted to
meet the painful allegations of this man, for
the mysterious disappearance of your accuser
tells considerably in your favour. You have
my warmest sympathy, and may be assured of
all the help that, as a minister of God, I can
give you.'

Thank you,' Keith answered, looking mainland
modest. ' I have an aunt in London,
Lady Puddicombe, and a cousin. Sir Wykeham
Whiteface. I will write to them, if you
approve, to bear testimony in my favour.'

Yes, that would be very wise,' the priest
said kindly. * Relations — powerful relations,
always carry weight with the public'

Keith did not add that Lady Puddicombe
had not set eyes on him for ten years, and
that, as he had belonged to the impoverished
branch of the family, she had comparatively
ignored him ; nor that, from having been an
arrant flirt in her youth, she was now become

a narrow-minded zealot, who never troubled
about her relations except when it was possible
to extract large subscriptions for charitable
objects from their purses. Sir Wykeham
Whiteface, on the other hand, was a sporting
squire, who had married a cousin of Keith's
father and lived among horses and dogs,
knowing nothing whatever about gay young
gentlemen or the scandals of foreign towns.
They were both relations, however, and would
serve his purpose as well as any others.

I suppose Mrs. Strait will relent V

Probably ; but, my dear young friend, it is
well to be prepared for trials. Women's
natures are more delicate and sensitive than
our own ; they are sometimes difficult to
deal with. I will do my best.'

Of that I am convinced,' answered Keith,
feeling that he desired no better advocate
than this honest, high-minded servant of God.

The gentlemen then severally made their
farewells and departed.

Where is Mrs. Strait V demanded the little
widow, when she was alone with the Vicar.

In the next room. Come in and talk to
her.'

Mrs. Parkinson stepped across the narrow
passage into the drawing-room, where Mrs.

Strait sat rocking herself to and fro in
her chair, while Margaret vainly strove to
comfort her.

I don't call that clearing himself Mrs.
Strait said. * I believe they are all in league
against me. Where is that man, that Joynte,
gone to ? That's what I should like to know.
How can we tell they are not all in a conspiracy
:'

You don't accuse me, surely ?' said Mrs.
Parkinson, advancing, with a flush on her
face.

I accuse no one. You have seen what
comes of that ; but I am not satisfied. You
yourself sowed the seeds of suspicion in my
mind, and I wish to be satisfied. I shall not
give my consent at present.'

What is your opinion V Mrs. Parkinson
turned anxiously to the Vicar. * Is he worthy,
do you think V

I don't find any fault in him, and I cannot
from my own slight knowledge say he
is unworthy ; but it will perhaps be more
prudent for us to await the letters of
his relations, Lady Puddicombe and Sir
Wykeham Whiteface, to whom he is going
to write.'

Yes ; they are titled relations, you know,

VOL. I. 17

Mrs. Strait, and can have no object in deceiving
us.'

Mrs. Strait vouchsafed no answer. She
rose wearily, with the aid of Margaret's arm.
^ I am going home now, Mr. Maynard ; your
plan does not seem to have answered, and I
must think for myself. I fancied that, being
a clergyman, your suggestions might contain
wisdom, but I have not derived much benefit
from them. I must think for myself. Comfort
the widows in their affliction indeed ! — No one
has comforted me. Come, Margaret ; it's
dinner-time. I dare say you are hungry,
and the joint is sure to be as black as a
cinder ; but there — we must be resigned.'

Mr. Maynard carefully attended her to the
door, and watched her somewhat totteringly
walk down the street, leaning on her tall
daughters arm. He sighed deeply. The
troubles of his parishioners affected him unnecessarily.
He blamed himself for carelessness
or inattention if evil consequences resulted
from his interference ; and in the case of unexpected
success, he never forgot to thank
his Father in Heaven humbly on his knees.
He might truly be said to ' walk with God,'
for He was with him like a mighty presence,
even in the quarrels of old women or the

ravings of a drunkard by whose ribald bed
he watched. Thus broke up the famous family
council, composed of so many heterogeneous
elements, which had met to decide the fate of
Keith.

For my part, I am more convinced than
ever that there is something queer about Mr.
Chester,' confided the playfully affectionate
Sophie to her husband, when Mrs. Parkinson,
after much lamentation, had departed, and
husband and wife were once more alone.

My dear, why are you suspicious of human
nature ? Why not hope for the best V

Because I have seen the truth of the French
proverb, " II n'y a pas de fumes sans feu ;"
and because, if Mr. Chester had not done
something of which he is ashamed, these stories
would never have been whispered about. I
wonder how much he paid that snivelling
creature Joynte to take his departure ? I am
convinced it was all arranged.'

Oh, my dear — my dear !' said her husband
reprovingly, ' do not give way to malice ; and
remember not to be late for the service this
afternoon.'

At which we shall all confess that we are
*' miserable sinners," all except Mr. Chester,'
she said aggravating. ' I am sure he

17—2

doesn't look upon himself as a 'miserable
sumner.

But Mr. Maynard, believing that occasionally
even for a clergyman silence is golden,
hereupon, without a retort, took up his hat and
departed.

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING.

ND that's exactly what took place,'
said Margaret, terminating the
description of the scene at the
clergyman's house which she hac
been giving her sister with these words.

The three women sat together at luncheon,
having dismissed the maid so as to be free to
discuss affairs, harassed by the fear of a
servant's ear acquiring unpleasant knowledge,
forthwith to be conveyed as a welcome sop to
the greedy curiosity of the cook in her kitchen.
What are your intentions now, mamma ?'
Dorothy, making no reply to her sister's
long speech, turned to her mother, occupied
in idly fingering her knife and fork, and
sought to read in her face the presence of hope
.and comfort.

I cannot see what there is to be done,' said
Mrs. Strait thoughtfully. ' You can't marryat
present — everything is just as vague as it
was. I never believed much in a kind of
ordeal by talk, as the Yicar did — men do lie
so ; and in fact one can't blame them, if it is
in self-defence. I remember your poor father
used to say there wasn't a great man in history
who always told the truth : Napoleon, Marlborough
— I think he excepted the Duke of
Wellington, but then he was a contemporary,
and had just been buried with a big funeral
and a great fuss, so he didn't count.'

But, mamma, remember the letters Mr.
Chester has promised to write to his relations,'
said Margaret ; ' I really don't see how any
gentleman could have shown himself more
anxious to court inquiry, or more open in his
conduct — I really don't.'

Dorothy looked with glistening eyes at her
sister as she uttered these words ; her fond
heart overflowed with gratitude for the least
modicum of praise dealt out to the man she
loved.

Naturally we will wait for the letters,'
decided Mrs. Strait, glad to find some definite
condition of which she could take hold as an
excuse for delaying her decision.

May Keith not come here till then ?'

Certainly not. I don't wish people to say
you were engaged to a man, and spent hours
in his society, and then never married him
after all ; those kind of affairs only hurt a
girl's reputation. You are very young still ;
you will soon learn to like some one else.'

'Never!' cried Dorothy impatiently.

It is impossible for youth to realize the bitter
law of change. When young girls love, they
imagine it is for ever ; yet frequently, after the
lapse of a few years they have married another
man, and settled down into placid and comfortable
mothers of families.

Mrs. Strait, dreading her daughter's persistence,
and feeling equally persistent herself,
hastily swallowed the last morsel of a ^g that
lay on her plate, and rose to go. The two
girls now drew their chairs nearer together,
and talked in an undertone.

Mamma looks worried,' said Dorothy
sadly. ' I am so sorry to be the cause of it ;
for she is far from strong.'

She will be all right when you are married.
Take my advice, Dorothy — if you care for Mr.
Chester, stick to him ; never be persuaded to
give him up. It will, after all, only be a
momentary fuss ; and one can't quarrel forever
with a rich and prosperous woman.'

'You mean?' Dorothy opened her eyes
wide.

I mean I'm sorry the days of Gretna Green
are past; they were very convenient, to be sure,
but still there are always friends who can
assist one. Mrs. Parkinson, for instance, and
that Lady Darlington who wrote to you.'

Yes,' said Dorothy, feeling in her pocket,
hers was a very nice letter ] but I never could
do such a dreadful thing as that. You know
we are told to obey our father and mother, and
marriage would brine; no blessings if one commenced
it with a sin.'

Oh, well, if you are so very punctilious
there is no more to be said. Mr. Maynard has
drilled you well — you will be taking the veil
in a sisterhood next. All I know is, if I loved
I wouldn't meanly forsake a man. " All is fair
in love and war," and I would soon bring
mamma round.'

'No, I can't do that, Margaret. I can't indeed !'

What on earth then is the use of all your
reading, if you are as squeamish as a baby
that does not know black from white !'

I shall wait — I can wait always.'

And wait till your face is wrinkled and
your hair grey, or else till he marries some one
else, which is far more likely.'

Dorothy, at these words, felt a pang, for she
remembered Christina Rossetti's sweet poem,
and wondered in her heart whether, when Keith
came to claim her, the same bride song would
be raised :

Too late for love — too late for joy !
Too late — too late !'

But she smiled almost haughtily at the hint
of his preferring another woman. He had
stooped to pick her out, a lowly, simple girl.
He loved her; 'twas not likely now that he
would forget her ! And so she comforted herself
easily, and refused to listen to the sound
of her sister's tempting.

In due time the answers to the letters Keith
had addressed to his relations arrived, and
were conveyed by special messenger in a
carefully sealed envelope to Mrs. Strait.
She was alone. Dorothy had gone to church,
Margaret to tea with Mrs. Parkinson, and she
had therefore full leisure to digest their contents.
The first one she opened was from
Lady Puddicombe, and ran as follows :

200, Montague Square, London,
May 10th.

My dear Nephew,

Though by the wise dispensations of
Providence we have been separated for many

years, so that I have only been able to yearn
after your soul, yet not to pluck it as a brand
from the fire, I am glad to think you remember
me, and seek for my advice in so
momentous a question as that of marriage.
St. Paul says, " It is better to marry than to
burn," and " I would that the younger
women marry;" so it is plain that you have
the authority of Scripture for your intentions.
I know nothing of Miss Dorothy Strait, but
trust she is as good as you believe; though I do
not approve of human beings, who are but
miserable worms, making idols of each other.
I have heard that you were an ornament to
your profession, though I grieve to say it is a
worldly one, and I can but imagine that any
respectable family will feel honoured at your
wishing to ally yourself with them. The
Chesterss, though you are of the younger
branch, are a fine old family; and the only
drawback to your taking your position in the
county, viz. poverty, is by the blessing of
God now removed. I wish you all happiness,
and send you, as a wedding gift, Blair's
Sermons, which are the finest I ever read.
Should you be in our neighbourhood, I trust
you will come and present to me your
bride.

— — — — — — — -^

Praying always, my dear nephew, for your
instant conversion,

I remain, your affectionate aunt,

Maria Puddicombe.'

Sir Wykeham Wliiteface's epistle was considerably
more brief:

Wbiteface Hall,
May 9th.

Dear Chester,

Glad to hear you're going to be
married. Hope she's a good sort. I have
always heard the best account of you, and
that you ride capitally to hounds. Strap, «f
the Carabineers, told us he met you at Eome.
We've had capital short this year; actually
killed a May fox. Come down and see us
some day. They tell me you've no end of
tin now.

Yours truly,

'W. Whiteface.'

Mrs. Strait thoughtfully folded up the two
documents. They seemed admirably worded
to convey no information whatever. The
dowager's note was written on best glazed
paper, with coronet and monogram, and gilt

edges ; the baronet's on a cheaper quality,
of grey paper, but with the address, ' Whiteface
Hall,' printed as clear as a pike staff on the
note and the envelope. There was certainly
no doubt but that both the letters were
genuine, and yet Mrs. Strait felt more than
ever puzzled how to decide. A pond-side
countess, and a real baronet — here were
surely sufficient guarantees of respectability,
especially when they wrote hearty and pressing
invitations; yet the dowager confessed
that she had not seen her nephew for years,
and the baronet implied that he had only
heard of his doings through a stranger, probably
some fast, horsey man, who would be
unlikely to prove fastidious on his own account,
or in the judgment he passed on
others.

Mrs. Strait was really anxious to do her
duty by her daughter, even though a kind of
weak vacillating obstinacy caused her to
seem rather unfeeling. She therefore put
both the letters into her writing-desk,
locked them up, and determined to say no
more on the subject to her daughters until
she had again found an opportunity to consult
the Vicar.

Dorothy, meanwhile, happily unconscious of

what was passing in her mother's vague mind,
calmly attended church, it being a saint's
day. Though not superstitiously devout —
indeed owning considerable admiration for
Dean Stanley's works, and others reputed
somewhat too broad for young ladies' reading
she instinctively, with the longing of a
troubled soul for a sure refuge in this epoch of
weary misery and suspense, felt attracted towards
the teachings of Him who has said,
*Come unto Me, and I will give you rest
Humbly kneeling, in a quiet nook of the half-empty
church, with the grave earnest voice of
the Vicar sounding in her ears, and his calm
strong face before her eyes whenever she chose
to draw away her sheltering hands, it seemed to
her that Heaven was nearer and more pitying,
and that the strength she drew in from her
petitions supported her during the ensuing
days. Differently constituted from her sister,
unable to sing a tune or play a note, yet when
the organ poured out its silvery stream of
mellow sound or filled the vibrating air with
a grand burst of praise, she felt the tones
penetrate to the core of her being and thrill
her with a sacred fervour. Long and earnestly
had she prayed this day, kneeling where the
sun-rays threw a golden gleam upon her hair,

slanting across till they lightly touched the
priest's white surplice.

Two little children, sleepily blinking in the
seats of the mid-aisle which now replaced the
unsightly gallery wherein, before Mr. Maynard's
advent, they had been penned up,
thought they traced a likeness in her to the
Saint Elizabeth whose life, with a frontispiece,
had been given them as a prize at Christmas,
and beofan to dream of cakes and golden
pieces which the saint, it was said, had a habit
of impartially distributing.

The sermon to-day had borne a special
meaning to Dorothy, the text being taken
from Isaiah xl., ' Ye shall not faint and be
weary;' and, with the words still fresh in her
memory, Dorothy left the church among the
stream of straggling worshippers that poured
into the dazzling sunlight. The day was so
bright and balmy, the hour was still so early,
that she determined to make a longer circuit
instead of at once returning home. Carrying
her prayer-book in her hand, she enjoyed the
pleasant air and strolled slowly along. A
narrow path led up through a small plantation,
across some wheat-fields, and by a green lane
back again to the Angel House. This path she
took, and sauntered on in soothed content.

When well across the field she became aware
that a man was also traversing it in an opposite
direction, whose easy swinging gait and
slight tall figure too plainly revealed to her
that it was Keith. She had never met him
in any of her walks since their engagement,
and she shrank from meeting him now. The
path was so narrow that unless she stooped
among the wheat there was no outlet possible:
if she turned, it would appear like running
away; and while she meditated and debated
the question within her mind, he gradually
approached and greeted her kindly.

My little Dorothy, with her prayer-book,
looking like a saint from heaven ! where are
you going to?'

He turned and drew her arm into his.

Now, dear, whatever may be your destination,
we will go together.'

Keith,' she said, speaking low, and keeping
her eyes bent on the ground, ' I ought
not to meet you ; my mother has forbidden
it.'

But this is only an accidental meeting —
it does not count; and we should be fools to
throw away so excellent an opportunity.'

^ I am very glad to see you,' she said simply,
with a little gush of affection, which caused

him to squeeze lier arm tighter. ' I dislike
being parted from you dreadfully.'

So do I, my little one; but all will soon
be arranged. I have sent the letters to your
mother.'

From your relations ? She has not told
me about it. Are they gooch she added, in a
whisper, fearing lest she should even seem to
suspect or doubt.

Yes, I think they will serve their purpose.
They have not been tormenting you, little
one, have they ? — you look pale.'

Oh no ! no one torments me. I am quite
well.' And therewith she flushed up the
rosiest red.

You little saint ! I believe you would never
complain of anything you endured for me.'

Oh ! I am not such a saint as you think,'
she answered, With a toss of her pretty head.

" Love ! no habitant of earth thou art —
An unseen seraph, we believe in thee —
A faith whose martyrs are the broken heart," '

he repeated softly.

How well you quote !' she said, with a look
of admiring love. ' I often learn poetry by
heart, but I have not the gift of remembering
it long; and yet I enjoy reading it.'

It is said that memory is the least of all
the mental qualities. However, my acquirements
are of a low order. I used to read a
great deal of Byron, in a lazy way, floating
about in a gondola on the Venice lagoons.
Byron is a little out of fashion now, I think ;
but parts of his poetry are splendid, so full of
Are, and passion, and colour. I suppose he
has been supplanted by Tennyson as a young
lady's favourite.'

How lovely it must be to float in a gondola
and read poetry ! The mere idea makes
me imagine an enchanted life of which we commonplace
country-folk have no conception
at all.'

The life at Venice is a little enchanted, I
think,' he said, smiling to himself as he remembered
that on that occasion he had not
been alone, but in company, a dark-eyed
Italian reclining at his side, one deep-red carnation
peeping from beneath her lace mantilla,
while the twin carnation adorned his
button-hole. As they flirted and talked, and
spouted poetry, or listened to the gondolier's
melodious song, the time had passed quickly,
and the poetry learnt under such favourable
conditions remained graven in his quick memory.
But this was one of the frivolities of the past

VOL. I. 18

which he had decided to keep secret from his
future wife ; the sacred innocence of a bride's
heart must be respected at any cost.

I will take you to Venice, dear, and you
shall taste its peculiar charm yourself one
day.'

Ah, Keith, that would be indeed something
to live for, and we could read Ruskin, and
Byron, and Symonds together.'

She leant a little more heavily on his arm
as she spoke, as though the thought intensified
her mental clinging to him. They walked a
while in silence, till the sudden twist of the
green lane brought them in view of the village.
Here they stopped, and he made as though he
would detain her; but Dorothy disengaged her
arm from his, blew him a coquettish kiss
through the tips of her fingers, and crying
brightly, ' I shall soon have good neivs for
you, I hope,' hurried off with happy haste.

AN ANONYMOUS LETTER,

[HE bright flush of hope and happiness
still on her cheeks, and the
illumination of love still in her
dove-like eyes, Dorothy hastened to seek her
mother directly she reached the Angel House.
A pleasant smell of tea and muffins greeted
her at the drawing-room door; and within she
found Mr. Maynard, who had been closeted
with Mrs. Strait, and who was now in the act
of departing.

Are you not going to stay a little and talk
to me ?' Dorothy said brightly ; * you know I
heard that excellent sermon of yours this
afternoon. What a pity to waste such splendid
addresses on a few villagers.'

Miss Dorothy, you were there !' he answered
reprovingly. ^ If my sermon did good even

18—2

to one poor aching heart, it has not been
delivered in vain.'

As soon as the door closed upon the clergyman
Dorothy went up to her mother's chair,
and kneeling down beside her, put her hands
over the embroidery at which she worked.

Mother,' she said, looking up with those
calm blue eyes of hers into the troubled faded
face, ' have you no news for me — no good
news, I mean ? Some little bird whispered tome
that you had.'

Mrs. Strait started, and shook ois her
daughter's gentle hands.

You have met Keith Chester, in spite of
my commands : don't deny it ! I see you have !'

Pain was written on Dorothy's face. She
had risen from her knees, and now stood
straight and still, with her hands clasped
behind her.

I met Mr. Chester quite by accident,' she
said in a low quiet voice; ' and he said he had
sent you some letters that were satisfactory, so
that I hoped — that is, I thought '

You thought me a weak fool, who would
be flattered by the prospect of a rich marriage
for my daughter!'

Mother P she could not trust herself to say
more.

I have had enough unpleasant things
said to me already ! There was Mrs. Parkinson,
the author of all the disturbance, with her
hypocritical assumption of affection for you,
pretending she felt like a mother, though her
family only consists of two cats. Then Mrs.
Maynard, I always distrusted her sleek
slippery manner — and, indeed, people say she
was only a poor governess when the Yicar
met her and fell in love with her, at Bath —
she, of course, throws out innuendoes, and
says some people prefer money to character —
though, for her part, no one can accuse her of
such a thing, having married a poor clergyman
— and that her great friends don't think*
much of Mr. Chester, and so on. And then
Margaret declares she mistrusts the man, and
cannot even give a reason for it ; after which
comes the Yicar himself, with his righteous
don't-talk-to-me air. I wonder if it's because
they wear " cossacks " and "canticles," or whatever
those new-sanded vestments are called
that the clergy now give themselves such airs
of superiority? To conclude, I take up the
Bible and find a text I can't get out of my head,
"It is more difficult for a rich man to enter
into heaven than for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle." Ail these things worry

me so, that 1 declare I wish Mr. Chester had
never come here to destroy the peace of this
quiet place; while, to crown all, you stand
there perversely smiling, and ask if I have not
good news for you! It's enough to try a
saint!'

'Well, I am not a saint,' Dorothy thus
saying remembered that for the second time
to-day she had asserted so self-evident a fact,
and I am not smiling now. Mother, won't
you listen to me?'

Mrs. Strait averted her head, and the urn,
as if in derision, began to fizz so wildly that
Dorothy was forced to interrupt her speech to
extinguish the light.

Why, mother, you have often told me yourself
that marriage is such a sacred thing — that
you and father, who were poor, were very
happy — that people must not lightly undertake
it, but that once they have chosen a partner
they must be loving and constant for ever. I
can scarcely remember my father, but I am
sure he was very good.'

So he was, very good,' said Mrs. Strait
passionately, wiping her eyes; 'and why, oh!
why was he ever taken from me? His advice
was so excellent, so wise.'

I know. I know, dear,' and Dorothy ventured

now to kneel down again and take lier
mother's hand. ' Then you can understand
me when I say, " As you felt for him, so I
feel for Keith." I beg of you to let me be
happy in my own way. Yoa know I will
never marry against your wishes, you have
been too kind a mother for me to do
that; but give me your consent, just the
consent of my own dear mammy ' — here
Dorothy leant her soft velvet cheek against
her mother's hand — ' and pay no attention to
what anyone says. What is the world to us,
who have always lived in this little sleepy
village? The county don't care about us;
we are too poor, too insignificant. Only Lady
Darlington sent me a kind word of congratulation,
and she, you know, has always been
partial to me ever since the first day I met
her at Mrs. Maynard's. Mother, you, who are
so unworldly, why mind gossip?'

I am right to mind gossip, child,' Mrs.
Strait said, bridling. ' I can't bear my girls
to be ill-spoken of.'

'Xo one can speak ill of me, and Mr. Chester's
father lived here all his life. His mother was
a good woman. He himself has been honourably
employed in diplomacy. His relations
have written to congratulate him; he has not

many relations, of course, as he was an only
child. Mother, you are a little unreasonable,
surely.'

Mrs. Maynard said I was marrying you to
gratify my own ambition.'

*But if you are not?' Dorothy, reflecting,
perceived that it was not so much the fear of
her daughter's future unhappiness as the
virtuous dislike to being accused of mercenary
ambition that had animated Mrs. Strait's
opposition. Why or wherefore Mrs. Maynard
should be averse to Dorothy's happiness the
latter could only faintly conjecture, the dog
in the manger temperament being a complete
antithesis to our heroine's own nature, which
was quixotic in its good impulses and slow
to believe evil.

Dorothy, you are very tiresome; do cease
arguing,' said Mrs. Strait irritably. ' I think
it quite immodest of you to be so set on
marrying a man against the advice of all your
friends.'

Mother, you say cruel things. But this I
do declare — if I may not marry Keith, I will
marry no one else. You know I am not
changeable like Margaret, who is infatuated
with every agreeable person she meets. I
never cared to talk to any man before, and I

am not likely to change now; I have made up
my mind.'

It was an unusual proceeding for Dorothy
to assert her opinions thus decisively. She
generally acquiesced so meekly in whatever
arrangements her mother and sister agreed
upon, that she represented the burden-bearing
portion of the family, the one who would
always be pleased, and whose wishes need
therefore never be consulted. The sudden
fiery spark opposition had kindled made
Mrs. Strait pause and look at her critically.
Dorothy's breast was heaving, her red lips
were firmly pressed together, and with her
hands she twisted and untwisted her pockets
into a thousand creases. Like
other weak persons, Mrs. Strait was as quickly
turned from her purpose as she had been
drawn into it.

'Of course, I suppose if you are determined
and mean to be an undutiful child I cannot
prevent it,' she said sulkily. * Parents nowadays
must obey their children.'

Does that mean that you consent, mother ?
Oh, let me thank you!' Dorothy, her gentle
beauty heightened by a spark of happiness,
seized her mother's hand and kissed it fervently.


Don't thank me, child her mother said
awkwardly, ' for there, I declare I don't know
if I am acting for the best. But at any rate,
you will have twenty thousand a year and a
home; and if my heart is broken, why, that
cannot signify.'

Mother, your heart is not to break, and
we are all going to be so happy, and you
must have a room at Blackness always. What
colour would you like the wall? I think pale
blue, or red — red is such a warm colour. And
we will all love you so '

Margaret entered in the middle of this
tirade, and stared to see Mrs. Strait lying
back in her chair pale and exhausted, while
Dorothy, gay and flushed, talked to her more
merrily and briskly than was her wont.

We are all to be happy,' Dorothy said as
she caught sight of her sister, and running
up, gave her a great hug.

Who is to be happy ? Don't disarrange
my collar, for I'm not aesthetic and I don't
like to be untidy. Oh, it's settled, is it — and
you are to marry Mr. Chester? Well, I always
thought mamma would come round. And who
is to marry me, I wonder, now?' Margaret
spoke with aggravating coldness, and Mrs.
Strait, whom Dorothy had infected with some

of her own enthusiasm, immediately relapsed
into lier former dolefulness.

Yes ; Dorothy insists on being miserable
in her own way, so there is nothing more to
be said

Of course not. I, at least, am perfectly satisfied,'
said Margaret, proceeding leisurely to take
off her hat and arrange her glistening black hair.
Privately she scarcely agreed with her mother,
that to be the wife of a rich man and have
numerous carriages and horses at one's disposal,
and as many new gowns as the heart
of woman could desire, implied being miserable.


At first sight, Mrs. Strait might indeed
seem to exhibit an almost sublime amount
of indifference to wealth with regard to her
daughter's marriage; but we know her motives
were of a mixed order — this is always the
case where conduct is not founded on principle
— they were composed of fear, worldly
prudence, and a desire to escape annoyance.

Mrs. Strait, from the aspect of other
people's criticisms, inclined to leave the matter
alone and dismiss an inconvenient bridegroom.
Dorothy, on the contrary, tinged with youthful
love and the ardent enthusiasm which
suffuses all the future in one rosy glow, felt

that she could not even endure the thought of
such a contingency. The happiness of the
whole family, being thus tugged asunder by
conflicting wishes, reposed on very precarious
foundations; for the following morning Dorothy,
refreshed by the sleep of a joyous nature at
peace with itself, found her mother seated at
the matutinal breakfast-table, an open letter
spread out on the cloth, and her face disfigured
by an expression of helpless terror. Dorothy
flew to her side and beheld the object of her
consternation. It was an anonymous letter
of the vilest and most cowardly description,
sarcastically congratulating the recipient on
her worldly wisdom, and stating, from the
author's own personal knowledge, that Mr.
Chester was a knave, a liar, and a rake. It
denied him honour, integrity or heart, and
hinted at all kinds of foul imputations which
would be even more likely to rankle in a
woman's mind than the plain unvarnished
statement of a truth. There was no date, no
signature, no clue to the writer ; but there the
foul thing lay, doing its best to poison the
unsuspicious belief of the two women.

Dorothy recovered herself first.

Mamma, it is anonymous ; we must pay
no attention to it.'

And this — this, Dorothy, is what j^ou
entail upon me if I ■ permit so hateful a
marriage,' said her mother bitterly, looking
almost with aversion at the lovely face beside
her.

When Margaret appeared, the letter was
handed to her for her opinion.

My own idea is, that creature Joynte wrote
it out of spite,' was her remark, when, having
read it, she began to chip and open a new-laid

What is to be done — oh, what is to be done !'
sighed Mrs. Strait, who felt that under such
circumstances breakfast and worldly comforts
were not for her. ' Dorothy will be miserable
if she marries.'

Dorothy will be miserable anyway, it seems;
but for my part, I would rather repent in a
coach-and-four — you get some compensation
for your misery, at least.'

'Advise me — help me, Margaret!' her
mother wailed. ' Dorothy, poor child, is of
no use, and you are actually able to sit there
and eat quite comfortably.'

My not eating won't make any difference,'
answered Margaret calmly, buttering a piece of
toast with intelligent care. ' If I am to advise
you, I must keep up my strength.'

If only we had a man — a husband, or
brother '

the husband happens to coincide with
Dorothy's unspoken wish,' Margaret said with a
laugh; sand you won't let her have him. Send
for the Yicar ; he is a man — though somewhat
womanish in his love for Church millinery.'

Margaret ! you are really irreverent.'

Am I, mamma ? I did not know it was
irreverent to talk of Church millinery — now,
please, don't fret, dear. Shall I go for Mr.
Maynard? I will do anything you like.'

1^0 — let Sarah run ; and bring me my red
lavender.'

Dorothy, meanwhile, had quitted the room
to hide her tears; and her knife and fork lay
undisturbed by her plate.

Margaret, noticing this, poured out a cup) of
tea, and hastily arranging some toast and an
Egg on a tray, gave it to the maid who answered
her summons, and bade her take it to
Miss Dorothy.

Hunger is bad for the complexion,' she
said, turning to her mother; ' if Dorothy does
not eat, she will lose her beauty, and that
will be the worst calamity of all.'

It was really unselfish of Margaret, at this
juncture, to take so much care upon herself; for

she hated fuss, and despised people who fell into
hysterics and could not control their feelings.
She loved only the indolent and sunshiny side
of nature, though her easy, perhaps also obtuse
good sense invariably suggested to her the
most practical mode of administering consolation.
A tolerably rough and ready mode,
indeed, somewhat on the lines of the homoeopathic
treatment, which is the law of contraries,
but effectual, nevertheless, in curing the
real and fancied ailments of sick women.

Smelling-bottles and red lavender soon restored
Mrs. Strait to her usual state of comparative
good health, while sarcastic allusions,
laughter, and a course of downright scolding-speedily
gave tone to her mind.

Margaret governed her mother capitally,
while seeming to let her have her own way;
Dorothy, obverse, by her yielding gentleness
and low expostulations, as a rule, only increased
the obstinacy of Mrs. Strait's character.
So that while mere outsiders imagined
that Dorothy ruled, because she seemed so
quiet and self-possessed, in reality Margaret
laughingly held the reins of government, doing
as she pleased in quick, petulant, careless
fashion, ridiculing her sister for her pertinacious
adhesion to the slightest maternal wish, and, as

in the case of this marriage, taking extreme
trouble to incite her to overt rebellion.

'Poor Dorothy!' she thought; 'opposition
kills her, while I ' (and she sniffed the air like
a young war-horse) ' simply enjoy the excitement
of it.'

ME. MAYNARD EXHORTS.

Shortly afterwards, Mr. Maynard
arrived. He had been on his way
to a rich parishioner, but hearing
from Mrs. Strait's little maid, whom
he met on his own doorstep, that her mistress
needed him urgently, he promptly obeyed the
messenger. Rich or poor, it mattered not to
him whence the summons came ; as the-servant
of God, he was at the beck and call of
all who were in distress. His grave, kind face,
full of that divine light which made it possible
to say of him — as Novalis did of Spinoza —
he was a God-intoxicated man, calmed and
soothed Mrs. Strait at once ; and the tears
that dropped in his presence grew considerably
more peaceful and less bitter.

My good friend,' he said, taking her hand
VOL. I. 19

and seating himself beside her, as is the habit
both of physicians of the soul and of the body,
are you in trouble?'

In great trouble,' she said, sighing. ' See
what I received this morning I' She held out
for his inspection the anonymous letter which
had so scared the inmates of the Angel House.
Leave me now, dear Margaret,' she added.
I think I can talk better to the Vicar
alone.'

Margaret skipped out of the room lightly
enough, for she had spied a fashion-plate in
the Queen, lent her by Mrs. Maynard, which
she was desirous to study at her leisure.
Margaret, you see, was not troubled about
marriage, and felt it still to be imperative upon
her to dress and look her very best.

Half an hour elapsed, and the priest and
Mrs. Strait still talked on. Her ill-regulated
mind flitted from one aspect of affairs to the
other, at one time sighing and lamenting that
she had a daughter at all ; at another, bewailing
her hard fate in being obliged to thwart her
child's wishes ; anon saying the latter might
ruin herself if she pleased — the girl was old
enough to judge; then with a sudden swoop
round, like the veer of a weather-cock, weeping,
and praying the Yicar to reason with her

refractory daughter, who so cruelly disregarded
the feelings and the honour of the family.

Mr. Maynard advised, pleaded, and discussed,
till at last, for lack of a better suggestion, he
proposed to see and talk to Dorothy herself.


Yes, do. Your words — the words of a
gentleman, her vicar and her friend — must
carry weight. Do see her at once — and
alone!'

Dorothy presently walked in, sad and quiet
with a red rim bordering her eyes and telling
of tears shed in secret.

Here is the Yicar, my dear,' her mother
said excitedly ; * he will talk to you — will
reason with you. You must listen to him
mind every word he says. Why, you've
been crying ! I can't think what girls are
coming to, spoiling their looks for their
sweethearts !'

Dear child, this is a sad affair,' said the
Vicar kindly, when they were alone ; his
voice bore an especially tender inflection when
he addressed children or young people. ' A
very sad affair.'

Dorothy stood patiently : her hands crossed
before her like a schoolgirl waiting for a

scolding.

19—2

Don't stand like that, my dear ; sit down
here, and tell me what is in your mind.'

He pushed a low chair towards her.

What has mamma been telling you ?' she
said, as she took it.

She tells me how terribly trying the
thought of this marriage is to her : and of
the dastardly communication she received this
morning.'

Yes — the anonymous letter. Neo one
believes that.'

Dorothy, you are a good girl. I know it ;
for I have noticed you frequently in church
lately.'

Ah ! but, Mr. Maynard,' she interposed
quickly, ' I do not hold all your views. I
must tell you honestly I do not come to
church because I am good and love God ;
but, you see, I can pray there more easily — •
that is to say, I can wish more earnestly ;
and wishes are prayers, are they not ?'

Certainly ; good thoughts and good desires
come from God, and come to us especially
in God's house, and when our minds are full
of His goodness and mercy.'

But, Mr. Maynard, I have not got to that
stage yet. Mercy is for the unhappy. I am
still waiting to be happy.'

Happiness is to be sought in doing our
duty. It is a duty to obey your parents, and
not to rebel.'

But there is a higher duty still, else why
does the Bible say, "For this cause doth a
man leave his father and mother, and cleave
unto his wife " ? I have plighted my troth,
Mr. Maynard, and that is to me a sacred
act.'

Dorothy spoke simply enough, without exaggeration
or excitement, clearly and straightforwardly
as she felt. In her mind there was
no doubt ; she did not conceive the possibility
of any. She did not feel like a heroine ; yet
she had no notion of flinching from any
severity of trial.

Here plainly was an uncommon case, the
Yicar felt, which must be dealt with exceptionally.
It was the business of a good
priest to study human nature in all its aspects
even to try to understand silly girls.

My child, happiness is the ignis fatuus that
misleads us all. It is far more blessed to
surrender than to claim every tittle of one's
due. I see in you much firmness and enthusiasm,
and you possess capacities for great
things. Like the needle, which is nevertheless
true, sou quiver a little before you

point securely to your real pole. You were
ravished with the desire of learning a short
time ago ; now you are ravished with the
thought of human love. That will pass
too.'

Dorothy blushed at the truth of this attack,
and remembered how far her thoughts had
strayed already from Stubbs's ' History and
the Cambridge examination.

These things are sent to try us ; they are
phases of our life — temptations destined to
lead us on to the one inestimable good — the
service of God. Ah, if you would but serve
God, Dorothy, with your innocent heart, and
your youthful energy, and your gifts of
tenderness and devotion, which are worth
offering to Him ! Did you never hear what
Montalembert's little child once said to her
father ? " It is you who have taught me that
withered hearts and weary souls are not the
things we ought to offer to God." That little
child, as she gave Him her pure life, had
already penetrated to the divine core. Dorothy,
give your heart to God ; and, as an earnest of
that gift, please your mother in this matter.'

But Dorothy could stand no more ; she
broke out passionately :

Oh, I can't, Mr. Maynard — I can't be

good yet ! Let me have a little while of love
and happiness. Poets say they are divine
things; then why should God grudge us the
feelings He has implanted in our nature ? I
know God is there, waiting for my heart, but
I can't give it yet — not just yet. Pity me — •
lecture me, if you will ; but don't try to
change my nature. I love mother more than
I can say — I will never, never vex her again
I will do anything to please her ; but don't
ask me to give up Keith.'

Dorothy was sobbing ; her pretty hair fell
in golden waves over her burning eyes. The
Yicar touched her shoulder gently :

Be calm, child — be calm. Listen: shall* I
tell you the story of my life ? Perhaps it may
help you.'

Dorothy nodded acquiescence, and wiped
her eyes. Almost any kind of narrative
would have been gladly welcomed by her at
that instant, as a distraction from her own
woes.

My father was not a parson : he had,
indeed, the greatest aversion to my calling.
I and my brothers were taught to shoot, hunt,
and fish ; and think of nothing but sport and
games. I was a capital hand at billiards, and
very fond of cricket ; a good shot, and by no

means «i despicable rider. I have now given
up every one of these amusements ; and yet
I assure you, Dorothy, I am happier than I
ever was. Spite of difficulties, doubts, and
opposition — spite of the grievous want of a
classical education, for my father would not
even send me to the university lest I should
find inducements there for the career I longed
to embrace — spite of these things, I eventually
became a priest ; and I gladly made the sacrifice
of all life's fading pleasures to serve Him.
It is not hard, Dorothy ; on the contrary, it
is very easy when once you have taken the
plunge, and, tossed on the troubled waters of
sorrow and sin, cling boldly to the Rock for
refuge.'

But why need you have given up all those
pleasures? surely men may be good, and yet
shoot and hunt ?'

Not priests. Their office is so high and
holy a one, that they must shun the smallest
inclination of the flesh likely to offend
others, or lead themselves astray. God's
ministers, set apart by Him, living always
especially in His presence, and under the
sheltering shadow of His face, are not
ordinary men. Some maintain that marriage
is unfitting. I do not hold that view ; but

even in matrimony, though I love my wife
very dearly, it was not only my own satisfaction
that I thought of, but rather the privilege
of rescuing a young woman from a sadly
dependent and disagreeable position, and of
making her happy ^'

'I am sure she ought to be happy,' said
Dorothy, fixing her eyes admiringly on the
priest's countenance.

Happiness, as I have said, is relative.
Perfect happiness means perfect goodness ;
and few of us can attain to it here. But we
can all strive to do our level best, and tune
our souls to the harmony of God's love.'

Dorothy listened silently : the rhythm •of.
Mr. Maynard' s powerfully intense voice lulled
her pleasantly, but his words only touched her
outer senses; her heart rested quietly far from
the hum of priestly persuasion. An unswerving
conviction in the reality of a truth upheld
by the speaker must necessarily carry
conviction to the listener; but though Dorothy
believed that all that the Yicar said was
possible, nay, even desirable for some people,
she yet made a mental reservation in favour of
herself. Others might love God fervently and
overpoweringly ; but to her God was a mere
vague abstraction, beneficent and omnipotent,

yet not distinctly lovable, even though a blind
assent of the will must be rendered to Him.

When the good priest imagined he had
convinced her — for, as a rule, people listened
to him attentively — he said encouragingly :

Dorothy, will you decide to give up this
struggle for worldly happiness, resign your
will to that of God, and do your mother's
bidding ? You will find peace and joy in this,
I promise you

To his surprise she answered slowly, and
with perfect steadiness :

I am sorry to grieve my mother, but I
cannot give up Keith.'

The priest sighed. How great was the
innate depravity of our nature ! How hard it
was for some people to resign their will simply
into God's keeping, a keeping so sure and
steadfast ! He had not credited Dorothy with
such a force of passive resistance. This gentle
golden-haired girl, with her meek ways, dared
to measure herself against his wisdom and his
spiritual fervour.

'Dorothy,' he said, 'my dear child, you
will repent this determined stiff wickedness.
God grant you may not suffer, and need to
pass through trials innumerable till you are
brought to a knowledge of God's love! I

suppose I must tell your mother this decision
of yours, but it Saddens me deeply. I grieve
both for you and for her.'

He rose, and stood drawn to his full height
in the straight black garb, that seemed to
Dorothy like a harbinger of misfortune, waiting
sorrowfully for her to detain him by one
word; but she merely put out her hand, and
said : ' Thank you, Mr. Maynard ; you have
been very good to me, but I cannot change
my mind.'

He left her then, despairing at that instant
of further success, while she continued to sit
on the little low chair where he had placed her,
motionless, and feeling the stillness a relief;
for mad ideas whirled through her head,
leaving only the one thought uppermost, Tor
Keith — for Keith.'

Margaret found her so when she came in,
summoned by the sound of the luncheon-bell.

Dorothy, how pale you look ; and your
hand is so cold ! Are you ill, child ? Do
speak — you frighten me!'

I am not ill,' she answered languidly, lifting
her hand to her brow; 'but I think my
head aches.'

Then Margaret, prompted by her own
decision, took it upon herself to precipitate

matters : so unpleasant a state of things she
was determined should not continue. She
went to the Yicar, and told him that he must
persuade Mrs. Strait to give her consent ; she
went to her mother, and told her misery was
killing Dorothy, and that the child would
never give in ; she went to Dorothy, and
besought her to be patient, and, with her own
hands, carried up some chicken and a glass of
claret to the wayward girl, who sat at her
window like Mariana, looking; down the road
with wide-open tearless eyes; and Margaret
succeeded where everyone else had failed.

One morning she sent for Keith ; and, pushing
him into the drawing-room on his arrival,
she bade him say good-morning to his bride;
Margaret meanwhile sitting by her mother in
the dining-room, like a watch-dog, till the
3^oung man, after a brief and emotional interview,
again emerged. Then she brought him
herself into her mother's presence, and the two
shook hands silently; while with quivering lips
and watery eyes the widow accepted his pretensions
to her daughter's hand.

Send for the lawyer soon ; the more quickly
you are married the better,' whispered Margaret
to him in the hall, as they exchanged farewells.
This house won't be particularly pleasant

for any of us till you have taken your bride
away.'

Keith promised to agree to all her suggestions,
vowing that he would settle splendid
pin-money on his intended.

And don't forget me /' added Margaret,
with a smile ; ' I have been your best friend.
We shall not indulge in any fuss of bridesmaids
and that sort of thing; I shall come
with my sister as her attendant. You are
marrying into a poor family, you know —
genteel poverty and all its accessories, pride
and narrow-mindedness; but / am not one
of that sort. You may give me as handsome
a present as you like — a pearl daisy with
diamond leaves would not be inappropriate.'

You shall choose what you like, sister-in-law
mine, and general privy-councillor,' he
answered : ' your kindness and cleverness cannot
be too highly rewarded;' saying which
he lifted his hat courteously, smiled, and
bounded down the steps.

One fellow-creature happy, at least said
Margaret to herself, as she carefully shut the
door after him. ' Now for the others. I don't
know myself in this new part of the kind
Samaritan. Let's see, which needs me most
mamma or Dorothy? Oh, I think mamma

poor dear! she'll be having hysterics or a
faint next! I am so glad I have a capital
digestion, and no nerves.'

Well, mamma, it's all over, and most
successfully I should say,' said Margaret, reentering,
to Mrs. Strait, who sat in her armchair
staring gloomily before her, with her
knitting lying unnoticed in her lap. ' Now,
do talk 1 Isn't he good-looking, just ? I
never noticed his beauty before so distinctly.'

Yes, it's all over, and your doing,
Margaret!' said Mrs. Strait ruefully; 'and a
pretty kettle of fish it will all be !'

Mamma, the wedding must be soon : shall
we say in a fortnight — May 28th? We must
see to all the arrangements. Will you have a
luncheon here ?'

Listen to me, Margaret;' Mrs. Strait roused
herself to speak with some decision. ' I have
been forced to consent to this marriage, and
of course I will accompany my daughter to
church, but more I absolutely refuse to do !
I'll have no breakfast, no rejoicing, no calling
together of friends ! People may accuse me of
stinginess ; they are welcome to do so. I
know that little vixen, Mrs. Maynard, will
-say unpleasant things; but, remember, I am
firm on this point — there must be no merrymaking.

Dorotliy will walk to church in her
bonnet and be married, and then I wash my
hands of her. I'll see her made an honest
respectable wife, but that is all I will do !'

Yery well, mother. It shall be as you
wish.'

Mrs. Strait had expected violent opposition.
Girls, she knew, loved the ceremony of a wedding,
and she thought by her commands to
thwart and punish Dorothy, and publicly express
her displeasure at the marriage, thus
leaving herself a loophole for future conduct,
whatever the result — of distinct disapproval if
Keith were really worthless, or of condescending
forgiveness should her previsions not be
realized.

Margaret's calmness considerably discomfited
her ; so she said no more, and lay pettishly
back in her chair, with her eyes shut.

Margaret looked at her for a minute or two,
then, noiselessly departing, proceeded to mount
the stairs to her sister's bedroom. She found
Dorothy, as on other occasions, sitting at the
window, a volume of the ' Imitation ' in her
lap. Her face was transfigured with happiness.

'Well, Dorothy, are you glad?'

Glad !' She put her arms round her sister's
neck, and hugged her in affectionate silence.

Margaret, how good you have been to fine I
I was just thinking how sad everything-seemed
only yesterday, and now to-day, as
by magic, all is changed. I felt as if I could
not be grateful enough to God ; and I remembered
that Mr. Maynard had said I ought to
give up my own will, and not try for happiness;
but still, you see, after all, the happiness
has come to me. So I read a little in the
Imitation," about resignation and all that.
Listen.'

Dorothy read these words in her sweet clear
voice :

" Son, it behoves thee still to learn many things, which
thou hast not yet well learned.

" What are these, Lord 1

" That thou conform in all things thy desire to My
good pleasure ; and that thou be not a lover of thyself,.
but earnestly zealous that My Will may be done."

I cannot feel that, Margaret ; my whole
heart just seems to be singing out for joy.'

Since you left oiF your books of study,
Dorothy, it appears to me you are rapidly becoming
a mystic'

What were the doctrines of the mystics,
dear?'

Dorothy put the book down, and slid her
arm affectionately round her sister's slim
waist.

I don't know myself, exactly ; but I believe
it is a term of opprobrium applied to all religious
people whose sayings are difficult to
under stared.'

Everything that is lovely in one's life seems
difficult to understand. Perhaps the mystics
were right

Perhaps — except when they wore hair-shirts
and avoided cleanliness.'

The two sisters prattled on gaily, in far
greater freedom and unanimity than they had
enjoyed for many a day. A load was lifted
from Dorothy's heart ] duty and pleasure had
become once more synonymous, and the vision
of a noble, harmonious life, with perhaps little
self-denial in it owing to the fact of love being
the domestic ruler, yet containing a number of
agreeable responsibilities, spread itself out before
her raptured imagination. Margaret had
less imagination, but she also could realize the
pleasant facts of pearl brooches and an amiable
generous brother-in-law, under decided obligations
to herself, and consequently morally
bound to civility and consideration for her
wishes.

VOL. I. 20

Marriage SETTLEMENTS.

R. CHESTER, on being duly informed
of Mrs. Strait's decision
with regard to the marriage, made
no objection. Under the circumstances,
he said he should invite no friends but
the two who were staying with him. Perhaps
in his own heart he was not sorry to be dispensed
from the trouble of entertaining such
strangers as Lady Puddicombe and Sir Wykeham
Whiteface — who must in their respective
capacities have proved very unwelcome guests.
'How good of Keith!' said Dorothy, when
she heard that he had quietly acquiesced in her
mother's somewhat tyrannical commands.

You find everything admirable in that
individual,' Margaret answered coolly. ' Of
course all men hate the trouble and fuss of
a wedding, and are only too glad to be saved

from it. Women like the marriage festivities,
but men only tolerate them because they are
the price they must pay for their wives.'

Dorothy did not answer, but she realized
even more profoundly the rapture of belonging
to one who was evidently raised above the petty
and conventional interests of the world. Personally,
she attached no importance to fine
clothes, or jewels, or an admiring crowd, and
therefore was considerably relieved to find
that it was ordained for her to walk quietly to
church with her mother and sister.

There was, indeed, no meanness in Mr.
Chester's composition. His lawyer appeared
at the Angel House without delay, armed
with all manner of generous suggestions — one
of which was the settlement of £500 a year
pin-money upon his intended.

It is far, far too much V Dorothy, seized with
positive fright, waved her hand as though to
dismiss all further mention of such munificence.
What should I do with all that money ?'

Mr. Chester,' said the lawyer pompously,
wishes his future wife to have such a provision
made for her, as will enable her to dress
and live according to her station. These were
his express desires.'

Margaret and Mrs. Strait looked at one

20—2

another. This, then, was the man whom they
were letting into their family under protest,
through a kind of moral back-door. Evidently
he meant to do his best to create a good impression.


The lawyer, who had come from London
with the settlements ready for signature, and
who was a brisk little man with sandy hair,
looked at his watch, and hoped the ladies would
soon make up their minds, as he must catch
the five p.m. express, and was previously desired
to call on Mr. Chester. So the ladies, notwithstanding
Dorothy's passive opposition, made
up their minds that such splendid offers were
not to be despised; indeed, their own lawyer,
who sat by, had several times hummed and
hawed, and lifted his eyebrows with astonishment.


When the legal formalities were concluded,
and the men of business had taken their departure,
Dorothy, oppressed with the sense of
her future magnificence, ran upstairs to put on
her hat and go for a walk. At that instant a
loud ring at the front door echoed through the
house, promptly followed by the maid's announcement
of Lady Darlington's presence in
the drawing-room. She was the lady who, it
may be remembered, had written Dorothy a

kind letter of congratulation, and who had
invariably, during their slight acquaintance,
shown her exceptional favour.

Lady Darlington was a great lady ; but
she was also a good woman, and a happy
wife. She loved seeing others happy, and she
adored beauty — two excellent reasons for
feeling attracted towards Dorothy, who was
the loveliest girl of her acquaintance, and who
was on the verge of a good marriage. The
unpleasant rumours concerning Mr. Chester
had not reached Lady Darlington's ears ; nor,
indeed, had they done so, would she have paid
much attention to them. She prided herself
on her own judgment, and would accept
none at second-hand regarding the people she
liked ; as for the others, they simply had no
place in her thoughts. She was standing
now in the middle of the green drawing-room,
an utterly incongruous nineteenth-century
figure, among the faded chintz and old
china and delicate carving, dressed in a 
costume of velvet and cloth, made in
the latest Parisian mode, and completed by a
dainty little velvet hat, poised jauntily on her
head. She was impatiently tapping her
parasol against her skirts as she waited, looking
like a fragment of Dresden china, with her

sunny hair, her upturned impertinent nose,
and her red and white complexion.

Ah, there you are, dear !' she said affectionately,
as Dorothy appeared. ' I came to
have a good long talk with you. I have sent
away the ponies and the coachman to the
public-house, so they will be quite happy.
You have nothing to do, have you ? You
can spare me quite a long half-hour V

Oh yes !' said Dorothy eagerly, making
room for her friend on the sofa, and taking
her place beside her.

The seat was the same that she and Keith
had generally occupied during their lovers'
talks ; and it seemed to her that his presence
still lingered and hovered around.

Let's look at you !' Lady Darlington cried.
Her brisk, clear voice was full of energy and
life ; filled, as are the voices of so few people,
neither with regret, nor pain, nor bitterness.
It was a voice that held no story — not even a
hope or a memory, but only the living fact of
perfect contentment. ' Let's look at you !
How lucky that Mr. Chester is, I declare!
you are such a dear, pretty little thing ! I
was so glad when I heard the good news.
You got my letter of congratulation ? — that's
all right. And now tell me all about it.

Where did you meet him ? how long have
you known him ? when are you to be
married ? and are you going to have a grand
wedding ? Buffie said I was not to ask you
all these questions, as you would think them
impertinent ; but I know better. Girls like
to tell the whole of their affairs to their
friends, don't they ?'

Lady Darlington patted Dorothea's hand
amiably between her two palms, and looked
so kindly interested, that, overcome by the
varied phases of emotion through which she
had been lately passing, Dorothy laid her head
on her Mend's shoulder, and sobbed.

^ Nonsense ! Dorothy, my dear, what *is
the matter ? Are you unhappy ? don't you
like him ? Please don't cry ; it makes me
miserable.'

The loving words sorely tested Dorothy's
composure ; for, during the last fortnight,
almost everyone had scolded, lectured, or
reproved her. Though Mrs. Strait had reluctantly
yielded her consent, she yet lost no
opportunity of impressing upon her that she
was in disgrace. Girls who married in spite
of their parents' wishes could not be otherwise
than in disgrace ; so that tormented,
anxious, trembling even as with a sense of

guilt at the prospect of her dawning happiness,
she felt an indescribable amount
of expansion in the genial atmosphere of
Lady Darlington's hearty and loving sympathy.


The little woman's influence was so bracing :
she inspired one with such a healthy view of
life, in which duties seemed so simple and
plain, everybody, including herself, so kind
and straightforward, happiness so easy of
acquirement, that the sanguine nature of the
girl beside her revived, as drooping flowers
lift their heads after a shower of rain, until
she soon laughed as brightly and joyfully
as the most orthodox of brides.

And so they said nasty things of your
intended, did they ?' Lady Darlington observed,
in a half-mocking, half-tender tone.
Never mind, dear ; if only you love him —
that is the great thing. I never realized what
happiness was till I married Darlington ; and
my two little girls — Hetty and Letty — and,
best of all. Baby John, were born. You
know how fond they are of you ? I laughed
so much, and was so happy, the first years of
my marriage, that the very babies chuckled
instead of crying, as most babies do. Make
your husband happy, Dorothy — that is the

seat think;. Men do love comfort — no
scenes, no reproaches. See that lie has what
he likes for dinner; never contradict him, and
never let him learn to do without you.
Buffie and I used to go everywhere together
at first ; and when the babies came, and I
couldn't knock about so much, he became
more and more domestic — that is to say, he
never slept away from home. What are Mr.
Chester's tastes?'

^I scarcely know,' said Dorothy hesitatingly,
thinking how strangely maternal was
the influence of this bright young woman
upon her ; and wondering why, in the reverse
case of her own mother, the guiding and
helping seemed to be shifted to the child. ' I
scarcely knoAv. He likes living abroad ;
though he says that if I care for it, we may
make our home at Blackness ; but, just at
first, we are to travel. He has a palace at
Venice, you know ; and we are to go there for
our honeymoon. It is really kindness on his
part ; for he knows I long to travel.'

I see ; he is going to begin the spoiling at
once !'

Oh no !' — the flush deepened a little on
Dorothy's cheek — ' only the loving ; for I
shall spoil him too!'

I see you think that it will counteract the
effect of the spoiling if it is mutual.'

'Lady Darlington!' broke out the girl
passionately, gently stroking the velvet and
silk sleeve of her visitor as she spoke, ^ is it
possible to love too much ? You see, I love
Keith so that I can't even realize it; my heart
seems to stand quite still sometimes when I
think of all he is to me, and of the wonderful
treasures life seems to hold for me now. The
past has become blotted out: all my childhood,
and Margaret's teasing, and even my
longing for books. The future is before me, like
a blurred golden haze round the setting sun,
into which you cannot look without being
dazzled. And the present only, this feeling
for Keith, my gratitude to him for loving me,
my worship of the sound of his very footstep,
my sometimes awful dread lest he should betaken
from me — these things are all I seem
conscious of Is love always like this ?'

Neo ' — Lady Darlington looked as grave
and thoughtful as her piquant features and
dimpled mouth permitted — ' love is not always
like this. I think you are too highly strung,
Dorothy ; I suppose that comes of having
lived so long in a dull country home. You
ought to think more of your dress, and your

wedding, and your presents, and less of your
own feelings — believe me, that is a mistake.
Think how rich you will be, and how much
you can enjoy yourself — by-the-bye, have you
engaged a maid yet? — and don't trouble to
fuss yourself as to whether anything is likely
to happen to Mr. Chester. Why, when Darlington
goes out hunting I never fret myself
into a fever, but I order tea and poached eggs
for him on his return, and take care that
there is a fire in his dressing-room; these are
the ways in which a woman can show her
love, and which husbands truly appreciate.
Once, I remember, I did get a little frightened.
Darlington stayed out so late — it was past
nine o'clock — the fox had run right away into
the neighbouring county ; and, feeling utterly
miserable, I sent out men and lanterns to look
for him. When he arrived, covered with mud
and looking so tired, and his horse as if it
could scarcely stand, I flew down to the door
and fell into his arms in hysterics, while all
the servants stood by. Just think ! How he
did scold me ! and he said I was never to be
frightened or send out for him again, and I never
did. But then I was very young, and could
not really understand things in those days.'
Dorothy sighed. Love seemed to have as

many phases as there are gradations of colour
in the solar spectrum. Lady Darlington
herself, after all, could not understand it.

You have not sent me an invitation to the
wedding yet,' Lady Darlington resumed; ' but
I have brought you my present. Do you like
it ? I hope so.'

She pulled from her pocket, after some
considerable tugging — for modern skirts seem
specially designed to be inconvenient for
almost all the purposes for which they are
required — a small velvet case, and handed it
to Dorothy, who quickly opened it.

'A plain gold-band bracelet; just what I
have always longed for ! Oh, thank you, dear
Lady Darlington !' Dorothy hugged her
friend affectionately. ' I did so wish for a
bracelet I could wear every day, and that
would not be too grand or too smart for
ordinary use.'

That is why I thought of this.'

Lady Darlington unfastened the clasp, and
closed it with a snap round the white wrist
held up towards her.

^ You will be sure to have all kids of
lovely jewels given you by your intended,
but this one you can always wear; and when
you wear it, think of me.'

I shall not fail to do so,' said Dorothy,
looking fondly at her bracelet.

And what has he given you ?'

This.'

Dorothy showed a large sapphire ring.
The stone was simply let' into a broad gold
setting; but the colour of the gem, as it flashed
in the sunlight, was exquisite. She did not
add that he had said, as he slid it on her
finger, ' Let the dark-blue of this stone mean
to you the depth of my true love,' words
which she had repeated to herself ever since,
each evening as she lay down in bed, kissing
the smooth round ring, and stroking it
lovingly as though it were some sentient
creature.

'A very pretty ring. I suppose he is
reserving the sentimental trio, with their
charming meaning — the ruby, diamond, and
emerald hoops — for your marriage day ? Everyone
gets those. And have you had other
presents ?'

Lady Puddicombe sent me a Bible, and
Sir Wykeham Whiteface a hunting-crop — they
are his relations, you know — and Margaret
gave me a writing-desk, and Mrs. Parkinson
an inlaid ivory box — I imagine her Indian
protege sent it her,' she added, smiling ; ' and

and I think that is all. You know, dear
Lady Darlington, we have told no one about
the marriage. Nobody in the county cares
much for us; we have only just a few intimate
friends. And it is all to be quite private —
mamma will not ask anyone ; and I am to be
married in a bonnet.'

Poor darling — how cruel V said the other
lady, with an expressive shudder. ' Oh, you
must really have a veil; you must insist upon
it! It is like a widow to be married in a
bonnet. Insist now, mind !'

I really don't care ; I can wear a veil with
my bonnet, you know.'

'Oh, but that is not at all the same thing;
and then in the month of May, too ! Do you
know that May marriages are unlucky T

Oh, Lady Darlington, I am not superstitious!
Please don't tell mamma, or she
would perhaps put off the wedding; and then
that would cause even more trouble.'

Trust me ; I will say nothing. And am I
really not to see you married ? I am so sorry,
dear; but do remember what I said about
making men comfortable — that is the chief
thing. Study their food — they have such
queer stomachs, you know; and their tempers
are affected by what they eat. I must really

go now; I had not a conception it was so late.
Please ring, dear, for my carriage — if I stay
too long. Green will drink so many glasses of
beer that he will never see to drive me home;
coachmen are such a trouble — I suppose you
will have a pony-carriage ? I really advise
you to make your coachman take the pledge.
I wish I could persuade Green; but he is so
old and obstinate.'

Lady Darlington rose as she spoke, and
now proceeded slowly to button her long
Swedish kid gloves.

Shall you be presented at the next 
? Because if I can be of any use,
you know I shall be delighted ; or perhaps
Lady Puddicombe, your husband's relation,
will present you. That is the more usual
thing, perhaps.'

Oh no ; I shall not be presented ; we shall
travel abroad. Thank you again, dear Lady
Darlington ; please kiss me once before you

go.

Good-bye, my dear,' said the great lady,
pressing her lips on Dorothy's fair forehead ;
good-bye. I hope you will be very happy.'

When Lord and Lady Darlington sat opposite
each other at dinner that evening, in the
bright candlelight oasis of a dark oak diningroom,

he said to his wife, while he carefully
helped her to fish :

Did you see your little friend ? and what is
your opinion of the marriage ?'

Oh, Buffie, it all seems so strange,' said
his wife. ' She is marrying in a kind of disgrace,
so uncomfortably ; she is only to wear
a bonnet — not even to be dressed as a bride —
and the wedding takes place in May. Did
you ever hear of such a set of ill-omened circumstances
T

As long as they are married, I don't suj)-
230se the bonnet matters. I should not have
cared if you had worn bombazine on our
wedding-day, Nina.'

Oh, but that is different,' she said, reddening
with pleasure at his hearty words ;
besides, of course no one could compare with
you!'

THE WEDDING DAY.

|T was the eve of Dorothy's wedding-day,
and she stood meditating in
her own chamber. All the vexatious
business details were con
plated ; the boxes containing her small wardrobe
stood packed in the corner. She had
permitted no extravagances, remembering her
mother's slender income ; the wedding-gown
lay ready on a chair, covered with its plain
tulle veil — for Mrs. Strait had relaxed about
the bonnet at the last moment — and Margaret
had just left her with a kiss and the words,
Now go to sleep, dear, and have a good night.'
But Dorothy could not sleep. She had
robed herself in her pale blue dressing-gown,
and removed all the pins that confined her
beautiful fair hair, leaving it to tumble in
VOL. I. 21

waves down her back. She had read a chapter
of the ' Imitation and she had prayed by her
bedside as well as she could, spite of the
buzzing: thoughts and roaming fancies which
danced in her head the while.

Keith had passed the afternoon with her ;
his manner seemed to her somewhat more
excitable than usual, and yet, as it were,
tinged with a new touch of humility. He had
kissed her hands passionately, and he had
said : ' Dorothy, I am not good enough for
you — not half good enough ;' and she had
put her arms round his neck and whispered in
his ear : ' I love you just as you are.' And
they had parted a little more solemnly, a little
more silently than usual, he beginning a sentence
with, ^ Oh, how dear you are to me Island
then breaking off sharply, and gazing at
her with a kind of passion ; and she feeling
near to tears, and not knowing any reason for
it ; and then, instead of ' Good-bye,' he had
said ' To-morrow,' and she had turned with a
blush into the house.

All this she remembered now as she stood
there in front of her looking-glass, the pale blue
garments clinging to her, and outlining the
youthful curves of her figure, and the long
shiny hair shrouding her face like a golden

cloud. It was very natural, to be sure, she
thought, that they should have been both of
them a trifle confused, sad, and silent on this
day, the eve of their wedding.

Dorothy smiled a little to herself, and threw
-open her window ; the bright May moon
lavishly silvered the little garden with its
rays, touching the stiff standing rows of
tulips, and the sweet yellow blossoms of the
.azaleas and slender white narcissus ; the
streaks of light broadening as they spread
over the meadows, and far away to the clear
grey-blue sky. To-morrow this same moon
would look down again upon her, but she
would see it under another aspect, as mistress
of Blackness. She would not be alone then,
perhaps, but feel a strong arm round her
waist and the touch of a kiss on her hair.

If only she had not been oppressed with a
horrid sense of guilt and of ingratitude in
leaving her mother thus defiantly, as it were,
hind against her will ! Mrs. Strait on this, the
last night of Dorothy's girl-life, kissed her
quietly and coldly on her brow, and said,
^ Good-night, Dorothy ' — nothing more. She
must have known no child could sleep thus,
conscious of deserving forgiveness, and receiving
none. If even now, at this late hour,

21—2

Dorothy might fling herself on her mother's
breast and ask for a blessing. Why not ?
The night was far advanced certainly ; one
o'clock had struck by the old Dutch clock.
But Mrs. Strait's slumbers were light ; she
often lay wakeful for hours. Dorothy would
not disturb her, but just steal into her room,
and if she were not sleeping speak to her.

The impulse became irresistible. She took
her candle in her hand, and opened her door.
The passage was perfectly dark and silent ;
the old oak panelling absorbed the small
flicker of the candle, and wore an increased
aspect of gloom and magnitude. She could
hear the big Dutch clock ticking at the foot
of the stairs, and the creak of the chains that
bore the weights.

She stood for a moment thinking ; it was
necessary for her to pass Margaret's doors
Mrs. Strait's being the corner room at the end
of the landing ; so, taking courage, she slid
past noiselessly with a guilty feeling, lest she
should alarm her sister. Directly she pushed
open the door of her mother's chamber she perceived
that her premises were correct ; Mrs. Strait
was awake, for her head moved on the pillow.

What is it, Dorothy ?'

Oh, mamma !' — the girl set down her
candle on the nearest table, and hurried to

the bedside — ' Oil, mamma, I have come to ask
you to forgive me. You said nothing tonight,
and tomorrow I am to be married —
and — I could not bear it.'

'Indeed!' Mrs. Strait's tone was depressingly
cold.

Won't you give me your blessing, and say
a kind word to me ?'

Dorothy knelt down, and laid her head by
her mother's on the pillow. Mrs. Strait edged
away a little impatiently.

You ought to be sleeping, Dorothy, at this
hour. Your eyes will be red tomorrow.'

I do not care. I care for nothing but your
blessing now. Mother, bless me !'

You are quite ridiculous, child ! What
do you want ? You have pushed through
this affair by the aid of your own obstinacy
and now, just when you are on the verge of
victory, you pretend to desire my sanction.'

I don't pretend,' Dorothy said softly.

You should have thought of it all before.'

There was no sign of relenting in Mrs.
Strait's tone ; it was hard, incisive, and deliberate.
Dorothy twisted her arms above her
head, and threw it back despairingly.

Mother, it is so shocking for us not to
part friends. Do give me your blessing.'

That is just like you, Dorothy,' her mother

said with a whine ; ' always wanting something
at unreasonable hours, and worrying me
with fine feelings and sentimentality. Your
poor father was just the same, never could eat
his dinner in peace if he thought he had
offended me. T hope you will become more
rational. Get me my sleeping-draught, please.'

Mrs. Strait, with half-closed eyes, watched
her daughter as she glided across the room
and poured out the draught with shaking hand,
and noticed how sad and pale she looked.

Go to bed, now, child,' she said, ' when
Dorothy handed her the glass. ' Go and sleep.'

^ Say one kind word, mother, and I will go.'

^ What can I say ? I can't make fine
speeches in the middle of the night, of course.
I hope you will be happy.'

'Is that all?' Dorothy still lingered,
tenderly smoothing the bedclothes.

What else can I say ? Do go to bed, dear,
and try not to take to late hours when you
are married ; they ruin the complexion. And
now, once more, good-night. I do not intend
to speak another word.'

Mrs. Strait turned round on her pillow, and
deliberately closed her eyes.

Good-night, mother; God bless you!'

Dorothy kissed her mother, and slowly

withdrew from the bed. In her own room
the shutters stood wide open, precisely as she
had left them; the moonlight streamed in,
mixing its blue rays with the yellow candlelight,
bringing into relief the snowy bed,
gleaming upon the wedding costume spread
carefully over the back of a chair, glancing
off the sharp polished edges of the furniture.
Dorothy restored the candle to its place by
the looking-glass, and dropped into a seat.
This, then, was her farewell to the closed
pages of her maiden life. How freezing and
lonely it was ! The pale moonlight seemed to
mock her with its pearly coldness, and to fill
her with a kind of unreasoning dread. She
shut the window and pulled down the blind.
It was warmer and more cosy so. But the
silence still oppressed her. It was soon broken
by the whirr of a moth's wrings trying to scorch
itself in the candle. The weird thing buzzed
round her as she faintly tried to catch it and save
the poor insect's life. Its wings brushed against
her face; she shuddered a little. Presently
she covered her face with her hands, and, her
nerves now utterly unstrung, began to sob.

The wedding-day rose calm and clear; the
air was fresh, and the sunshine unexpectedly

brilliant. The church bells rang out gaily,
and the villagers crowded round, standing in
the road and among the graves, moved by
laudable curiosity to see Miss Dorothy married.
The old crones especially, to whom such an
event is always interesting, had early taken
good places. First of all they indulged themselves
with a good stare at the bridegroom, who
drove up in a dogcart with his two friends.

'A one-horse trap! 'ain't much of a thing;
and for a squire, too, who they do say has a
big fortin. My boy Jim, who works in the
garden, says he's uncommon open-handed.'

Perhaps he do it out of bluster-like; there's
some as does that — wears bad clothes and keeps
their money in a chest.'

There's the bride ! ' The old women
pressed close together and peeped over one
another's heads, as the beadle waved them
back to make a path for the procession. ' Oh,
my, ain't she a dear ! She's got a carriage at
least; and that's her ma, the old lady in
lavender silk, and her sister in white — bless
her heart ! '

^ Why, sure you've seen her often enough
before!'

She's been in and out of the village all her
life — one of ourselves, as it were. Clothes
don't change you that much.'

They make a difference, though ; she is a
pretty creature, bless her heart ! '

The bride had meanwhile moved on, and
was lost to view inside the church. The
edifice itself was closely packed with spectators.
Mrs. Parkinson and Mrs. Maynard occupied
front seats. From every available pew eager
faces strained and bent, like swaying cattle ina
truck, endeavouring to catch the smallest
glimpse of the interesting ceremony.

Dorothy stood on the marble altar steps, very
white and perfectly still except for the gentle
flutter of her veil, which revealed the beating
of her heart. The night's vigil and emotion had
somewhat exhausted her, but factitious excitement
lent her strength, and she was unaware of
the many lynx-eyed mortals critically regarding
her. As the central figure they scrutinized
her appearance unreservedly, from the natural
spray of orange-flower in her hair, culled by
Keith's express orders that same morning in
the orangery at Blackness, to the wide hem of
her plain white satin dress. But she was distinctly
conscious of Keith's proximity. She
was permeated with a sense of joy in the
knowledge that he stood beside her, that he
held her cold quivering hand in his firm grasp,
and pressed a small gold band possessively

upon her finger. Suddenly she seemed to
understand that the clergyman was saying
in an impressive voice, * I pronounce that
they be man and wife together.' As these
solemn words fell on her ears, she stole a
furtive glance at Keith, seeking to measure
his impressions by her own, but his countenance
remained impassive, though he bit
nervously at his moustache. Then a new
and terribly real conception of the inevitable
seized upon her; she felt as though she must
protest, scream out. And all the time, with the
sting of the irrevocable — a word that transcends
the most infinite conception of a finite creature
came the delirious sensation of perfect self-surrender,
for life, for ever !

A little later they were standing together
alone in the corner of the green drawing-room,
by the window. Keith held both her hands.

My wife !' he said ; ' my property now !'

Dorothy threw back her veil with a sudden
movement, lifted her face, white and pure like
a snowdrop on its stalk, to his, stole her arms
round his neck, and said,

Oh Keith, my beloved, be kind to me ! '

END OF VOL. I.

BILLING AND SONS, Painters, GUILDFORD AND LONDON.

S d: H,

•JN^VMSITY OF ILUNOtt-URBANA

3 0112 04641



OF THE

UNIVERSITY

or ILLINOIS

'^B^l-^1^

■ . ■' '. "• ■ '■■■<:"■'%

Jl fiO\}tl

BY

LADY VIOLET GREVILLE,

AUTHOR OF
"ZOE," "FAITHS AND FASHIONS," ETC.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. n.

LONDON :
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

^ttbUslurs in ordinary to ^zv majesty tht (^ntzn.

1883.

[A /I Rights Reserved. 1

CONTENTS OF VOL. II.

-CHAPTER

I. LOVING - - -

IT. VENICE . - . ,

III. STILL UNDER THE SPELL

IV. A VISITOR - - -
V. PALIS - -

VL AT A BALL -

VII. DOROTHY SPEAKS

Viii. THE MARCHESA

IX. IN THE ROYAL GARDENS

X. ON A TERRACE

XL IN A GARRET

XII. LADY DARLINGTON -

XIII. WHAT LADY DARLINGTON THOUGHT

XIV. COUNT PINSUTI ASSERTS HIMSELF

PAGE
- 1

- 21

- 35

- 49

- 69
-. 84

- 104

- 118

- 130

- 145

- 157

- 162

- 176

- 191

-CHAPTER

PAGE

XV. JOYNTE AGAIN - - - 210

XVI. FEMININE CONFIDENCES - . - 217

XVII. THE SHADOW OF FORMER DAYS - - 232

XVIII. KEITH MEDITATES - - > . 245

XIX. ILLNESS - - - - 251

XX. AT HOME AGAIN - - .266

XXL A DISCOVERY - . . . 283

CHAPTER I.

LOVING.

T was morning — the morning of the
twenty-ninth of May ; a morning
as bright and clear as the tender
rose of Dorothy's cheek or the
smile that haunted the corner of her curving
lips. She sat silently beside her husband
while the carriage rolled towards the station,
her hand clasped in his, and the strange sense
of possession, which seems a woman's first
impression of marriage, pervading her entirely.
It was as if she had passed from her own
existence into that of another — some new,
vaguely delightful existence, joyous, and full
of eager hope.
VOL. n. 1

As they passed down the drive, where the
dew still lay heavy on the fresh young grass,
and the browsing deer lifted their slim heads
to stare, and then, with a pretence of fear, suddenly
bounded away ; as they passed through
the lodge by the curtsying woman, and along
the lanes redolent of new-mown hay and hawthorn
blossoms ; as they turned their backs on
the familiar village and the Angel House,
surrounded by its many coloured lichen -
clothed wall, and on all the sights and sounds
of her childhood, finally reaching the tiny
deserted station, where a few countrywomen
waited with baskets on their arms for the
coming of the train — Dorothy realized, to her
surprise, that she felt no pang of regret, no
tremor of doubt, such as had assailed her on
her wedding eve.

Safe in her husband's arms, his caresses had
transported her into another region ; like the
kiss wakening the princess in the fairy-tale,
Keith's love had made all her previous experiences
wax faint and far away, leaving only
the promise of a more intensely vivid existence
in the future. The numerous pin-pricks
that had given her such acute pain — Mrs.
Maynard's insinuations, Margaret's half-envious
sneers, Mrs. Strait's cruel indifference —

all evaporated, sinking into welcome insignificance
in her mind. Keith loved her ;
Keith was hers.

She looked with a tender wonder at all the
paraphernalia of a fashionable young man's
requirements — at the mountain of rugs and
coats, at the large dressing-bag set full of
silver-topped bottles and ivory brushes, the
cigarette-cases of various hues and shapes, the
railway lamp and key, the luncheon-basket, and
the variety of articles which her little head had
never before troubled itself to imagine.

Keith, after asking permission, lighted a
cigar (Dorothy wondered that she had nev
before noticed how peculiarly pleasant and
aromatic was the smell of tobacco smoke), and
now sat still in his corner of the railway
carriage, in an evident condition of quiescent
well-being. Dorothy, close beside him, feasted
her eyes on his appearance. In the days of
her courtship she had scarcely dared to lift
her eyes and study his features deliberately ;
but now, now that he was her very own, her
treasure and her care, she noted every curve
and line, and trick of speech or manner.

How his mind showed itself, even in his
clothes, she thought, which were so neat, so
well-chosen, so simple ; how easily the grey

1—2

shooting-suit fell about his well shaped limbs ;
with what careless grace he held his cigar,
when turning suddenly and catching her
wistful eyes fixed upon him, he smiled lovingly
back at her.

Have we everything, dear ?' he said
kindly. ' I hope le Goui put in all your
things ] you see, I scarcely know them by
sight yet.'

Le Goui has forgotten nothing, I think.
What a capital servant he is ; has he been
long with you, Keith T

Years !' said Keith lazily, stretching out
his fingers in search of Dorothy's hand, which
had slid den under her cloak. ' He always
treats me like a child that knows nothing,
and is quite furious if I dare to insinuate that
he may have made a mistake. He will adopt
you as another child now, I suppose, so you
really need not disturb yourself about anything.'


I have only the travelling-bag you gave
me and my rug and ulster,' said Dorothy,
thinking how delightful it was to owe everything
to the handsome man beside her, and to
feel like a beggar-maid lifted into the light of
a new King Cophetua's generosity.

Keith's gifts had not been many hitherto,

but though few in number they were well-chosen
and costly : the dressing-case and
sundry family diamonds and necessary jewels
he intended to purchase and have reset on
their arrival in London.

Are you sure the maid will meet you at
the hotel to-night T Keith demanded, with
solicitude. ' I cannot have my wife without
a maid, compelled to go down on her knees
to pack boxes, and to ask the chambermaid
for charily rendered services.'

It is all right, I believe. I am sure
Trimmer — that is her name — understood perfectly
; but you know, Keith, I am accustomed
to do everything for myself. I have
never had a maid.'

We have changed all that, however, now,
dear ; my darling is never to fatigue herself
or be worried again.'

How good you are to me, Keith I' Dorothy
laid her head on his shoulder, pressing
closer to him, with the endearing action of a
child. ' How am I ever to repay you for all
you have done ?'

By being my own dear lovely wife. Dorothy,
do you know I think you are the most
beautiful woman I ever saw in my life ; you
will make a sensation at Venice.'

'But, Keith' — Dorothy spoke very low,
and stroked his hand gently as she spoke —
you don't care about my making a sensation
; you don't value me only for my beauty,
do you ? You love me just because I am
myself, your faithful, worshipping, devoted
little love. Say yes, dear.'

Keith laughed.

How sentimental women are, to be sure !
I never credited you with half the amount of
airy fancies you possess. I thought you were
a little cold at first — a trifle of a has-heu,
I am glad you are not ; women of flesh and
blood and ordinary feelings are far pleasant
to associate with.'

I don't know if my feelings are ordinary ;
I only know that I never seem to have lived
till I met you, and that you are all the world
to me. I can conceive nothing beyond or
above you ; you bound my very horizon,
Keith — my thoughts, my time, my life are
yours.'

Sweetly spoken, little one,' and he kissed
her on the upturned lips ; * but you must
keep those kind of speeches for me, remember.
Don't talk like that before the world ; people
might laugh ; sentiment is always sneered at
in society. / like it, you understand, immensely

; the very simplicity of it makes its
especial charm — but keep your love hidden.'

People would laugh at a wife's love for
her husband ! Oh, Keith, what can the world
of fashion be, then ?'

He smiled at the scared look in her expressive
eyes.

Don't be afraid, dear ; they will not laugh
at you, I promise you, for I shall be there.'

Keith, do you love me — really and truly,
I mean, with all your heart and soul, as I do ?'

Certainly. Have I not proved it ?'

By marrying me ? I suppose so ; but yet
it seems to me as if some natures absorbed all
the passion of others to feed their own life,
and yet could not respond in kind. Of course
they are wonderfully exceptional natures.
You are all that, Keith, and thus I feel as if
you never could love me as I love you, and
then I begin to doubt ; I am so very unworthy.'


Don't doubt.' He pinched her cheek kindly.

You have had everything ; you must
have loved and been loved. I cannot even
hope to be your first love; it is so hard that
a woman never can come first.'

I never loved anyone as I do you,' he
responded, a little hoarsely.

I know. I am — I try to be satisfied, dear,
and yet it seems to me as if I never could be
satisfied. I thirst for all you can give me.'

I have given you riches ; to be rich is the
best of all things — don't you think so T

'It is very nice to be rich, of course —
delightful,' and Dorothy looked again at the
magnificent fur rug, and the dressing-bag
with its massive fittings, and at the rings on
her finger, and remembered her new maid
and le Goui, and chid herself sharply for
being ungrateful; then, with a swing of true
sentiment, breaking in on the artificial appraisement
of novelty and ease, ' But for all
that, Keith, it is better to be loved; I would
rather have that than all.' And down went
her little fair, trim head (from which she had
removed the velvet hat in order to be more at
ease) upon his arm, while she burrowed her
face in the woolly material of his sleeve. Keith
thought it all very nice, very new and very
innocent. Dorothy's loving speeches had a
flavour of Arcadian simplicity ; they reminded
him of boyish feelings, of curds and cream,
and snowy lambs with their necks tied up in
blue ribbons. He had no objection to being
adored, for the serene devotion that shone in
his wife's gentle eyes proved a piquant contrast

to the hackneyed allurements of more
skilled and worldly women. There is, of
course, the ripe charm of experience, throwing
a borrowed glamour over the most ordinary
emotions, and carefully heightening the dull
and irresponsive faculties ; but to a man of the
world there is even a greater charm in the
awkwardness of first love, as it stumbles into
expression and ignorantly shows its hand,
keeping no artifices in reserve, but the constant
surprises afforded by the outpourings of
a rich and lavish nature seeking to spend
itself in love, and humbly waiting to be
taught the unfamiliar lesson. *

Keith, if we continue to love one another
like this, it seems to me that our affection will
grow and grow, and permeate our life until
earth will be turned into heaven. Is joy as
exhausting as sorrow?'

*No, darling, joy is never exhausting; it is
like the silver sparkles of a fountain springing
up perpetually and never drooping or ceasing
so long as the water, the feeder of its life,
remains. Joy is a tonic. And you, my
Dorothy, are going to have an immense
quantity of joy. Have you ever thought of
your first impressions of Italy — of what you
will feel there?'

I have sometimes tried to picture to myself
the scenes of which I have read — the
vines, the cream-coloured oxen ploughing, the
peasants, the blue sky which seems deeper and
clearer the more you look into it, and what a
writer has called the " caressing Italian sunshine;"
but it is only a dream, imagination
surely never can come up to reality.'

Ah, well, you shall see it all, Dorothy ;
and I will teach you which are the things
most worthy of admiration, and show you the
best pictures and greatest works of art. I ama
connoisseur in bric-a-brac, and I know every
shop in Venice.'

How delightful ! One should always
travel, I think, with a person who has lived
in the country, and is versed in the ways of
the people and understands their spirit.
Ordinary travellers, who only put up at inns
and talk to their couriers, must miss the whole
gist and sense of travelling.'

Quite true. I am sure we shall travel
profitably ; it will be an unconventional
voyage de noce let us hope. Meanwhile,
here we are. Put on your hat, dear, quickly;
and let us try not to look like a honeymoon
couple, or we shall attract much unnecessary
attention.'

notwithstanding Keith's precautions, the
pair created considerable interest wherever
they appeared. The handsome, intellectual-looking
man, and the lovely girl leaning on
his arm, were not ordinary travellers; and in
the waiting-rooms, in the passages of hotels,
on board the steamers, and in all the crowded
haunts which the exigencies of travel necessitated
their entering, they received a fair
amount of stares and curious glances from the
public. At last, after dazed impressions of
smoky London; after hours of brisk and
whirling movement, of a heaving, sullen,
foamy sea, of bright and delectable Paris, with
its hypocritical smiles and frivolous happiness,
and the deep pathetic and turbulent
misery hidden beneath ; after flashes of minute
French landscapes, with their long poplar-bordered
roads, and their tiny villages
crowned by the eternal steeple, and the blue-blouse
peasants driving cattle to market ;
after visions of muddy, rushing rivers, and
mountains, and flower-covered banks — Dorothy
caught her first glimpse of Italy — her first
sight of the wonderful tints of green, painted
as with a magic pencil, and the lavish loving
luxuriance of twining vine and acacia, bending
willow and waving grass, and the fields

of roses. Her eyes travelled from this restful
chromatic scale of emerald to the sapphire of
Italian Alps, to the rosy snow-peaks and the
delicate azm-e sky, and suddenly the thought
came to her that hitherto the charm of
colour had been hidden from her knowledge.
They stayed a few days in the quaint old-world
cities of Northern Italy, with their high
narrow houses and overhanging ironwork,
their grass-grown streets brightened unexpectedly
by little bits of brilliant drapery
hanging out of the windows, or by pots of
crimson carnations, with heavy drooping heads,
set on subtly-carved balconies; Dorothy thinking
of Romeo and Juliet, and of the sweet old
passionate love-story — thinking that she too,
like the Veronese maiden, had felt the swift
lightning-touch of first love, had said from
her full heart;

My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep ; the more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.'

Thrice happier and more fortunate she,
who, unlike Juliet, possessed her own truelove
for ever. But over such scenes and
memories, with which her schoolgirl mind
was charged, Keith would not let her linger ;
he thirsted for the day and hour when he

could install this bride in his palace at Venice.
He forgot, however, that the first impression
created by the Queen of the Adriatic is
scarcely the happiest. Like the most refined
kind of beauty, which leaves the careless
beholder at first sight unmoved, and requires
familiarity for its perfect appreciation, so
Venice, after a moment of comparative disappointment,
gradually tightens its hold on
the imagination and the affections, until residence
in the fairy city becomes a passion.
The gondolas looked black and gloomy to
Dorothy ; the waters of the canal dull and
sluggish ; the palaces dark and frowning ; and*
even a damp drizzle was falling when they
arrived, as if to remind them of England.

Keith cared nothing for this. He beamed
nth delight as he handed her out of his own
private gondola. He led her across the
threshold of a handsome building, over the
door of which hung a massive gilt lantern,
and said, staying his steps in the large painted
vestibule : ' Welcome home, Dorothy.'

Notwithstanding his kind words, a shiver
ran through her ; it was as though some
heavy cloud of darkness — some chill omen of
unhappiness — had descended upon her. Keith
noticed her shiver.

Are you cold — perhaps the hall is chilly ?
Come up to your own room ; I ordered a
fire there, in case you might like it.'

They mounted the vast marble stairs, and
passed through a heavily gilded door, on each
side of which stood two black and gold statues
of negro boys bearing lamps, into a long
gallery hung with mirrors and large oil-pictures.
Their footsteps echoed sadly down
the parquet flooring ; and their two dusty
figures were reflected in a million fantastic
shapes and sizes in the numerous looking-glasses.


At night,' thought Dorothy, ' I should be
afraid here ;' and she clung more tightly to
her husband's arm.

At the end of the long gallery there was
a large drawing-room, also richly decorated
with paintings, geldings, and mirrors, and
furnished with stiffly arranged satin covered
chairs and sofas. They passed again through
another and smaller apartment, into a room
fitted up in somewhat more modern fashion,
and evidently intended for intimate use. A
fire of wood-logs burnt on the low hearth, a
couple of easy chairs stood near, and the
tables were heaped with a profusion of bowls
and vases of flowers — chiefly roses.

This is your oya\ room,' Keith said, walking
to the window, and pushing aside the
heavy brocade curtains to admit the distant
view of the broadening waters of the Gran
Candle, and the setting sun gilding the dome
of St. Maria della Salute ; ' and next here is
your bedroom, and beyond it my rooms, which
lead on to the grand staircase from the opposite
direction. You perceive the palace
forms a complete square. Shall you be at
home here ? Do you think you shall like
it, dear ? I hope so.'

It is very magnificent,' Dorothy said with
a sigh, sitting down on one of the brocaded*
sofas. ' I never saw so many beautiful objects
together before in my life.'

A proud smile passed over Keith's handsome
features.

No ; I flatter myself I have some fine
things. See, here is a silver casket, worked
by Cellini ; here an old dagger, which may
have belonged to one of the Doges ; that
picture is a Titian ; this is a marvellously
beautiful specimen of a Florentine table ; and
that ivory and ebony cabinet is in the best
possible taste. I have put all the gems of my
collection here for you, Dorothy.'

She murmured her thanks, but the grandeur

and the silence of the large empty spaces oppressed
her. Hitherto, not even a servant had
approached. True, she saw two men in black
livery silently bowing in the vestibule when
they arrived, but they had not reappeared ;
and le Goui and Trimmer were still engaged
in looking after the luggage. There was a
feeling of unreality about everything ; she
seemed to herself like one of the princesses in
Hans Andersen's fairy-tales.

Keith now left her, saying he must speak
to le Goui ; and she determined to penetrate
into her bedchamber, thinking to find thereat
least some trace of familiar home comfort.
She lifted the curtain ; between each room
there hung some heavy draperies, which,
drowning all the usual sounds of domestic
life, produced a deeper sense of solitude.

The room was panelled with tapestry, beautiful
and rare even to her unaccustomed eyes ;
and the bed was a marvel of gigantic size and
skilled carving. The hangings were of rich
crimson and gold brocade; the quilt of yellow
satin sewn with lilies, and bordered with
deep lace of an old ecclesiastical design. The
carved and gilt dressing-table supported a set
of old silver caskets and bottles of quaint and
curious shapes. On one side of the room, a

large carved mirror reached to the floor ; and,
opposite it, a smaller mirror, framed in silver,
and divided into panels, was suspended over
the mantelshelf.

As Dorothy stood motionless with clasped
hands in the middle of the room, her little grey
figure (she was dressed in her favourite grey,
the colour having seemed most appropriate
even for a bride's travelling costume) glassed
like some faint-hued water-colour, each line
correctly rendered in the tall mirrors, she
seemed an imao:e of asceticism amidst the
gorgeous splendour of her surroundings.
Meanwhile, her thoughts swung idly to and
fro — mentally comparing her past and
present.

The Angel House with its fittings was faded,
antiquated, and mellowed by time ; the Queeii
Anne carvings and the panelled walls, the
washed-out chintz and the spindly-legged
tables, the bits of old Chinese porcelain,
collected when Chinese crockery was a fashion,
were certainly relics of a by-gone age, but
held no sad memories ; they were relics of
men and women who had lived and suffered,
and spent their whole time in quiet domestic
happiness. A homeliness and simplicity seemed
to speak from their lips, which was lacking in

VOL. II. 2

7q

the cold stateliness of the beautiful objects
around her.

Men and women must have lived in the
Venetian palace too ; yet she could only
realize them as ghosts — as wall-pictures, or
figments of her fancy. Her own little bedroom
at the Angel House, with the rose-patterned
dimity hangings, and the roses themselves
nodding in on a summer's morning, and
giving her a fragrant welcome ; the worn old
armchair, covered with chintz, in which she
had sat reading or thinking so many, many a
time ; the little bookshelf of common deal,
painted by her own hands, and filled with her
favourite authors — her Keats, her Shakespeare,
her Goldsmith, her Dickens, and, most prized
of all, her little well-thumbed, red-leather
^ Imitation.' How dear the memory of those
common articles seemed to her as, clinging
like a weary mariner in the ocean of empty
splendour around her to the one little touch
of home and childhood, she remembered all
these things.

Glancing round in search of some familiar
object, she noticed a large silver-clasped and
bound prayer-book on the centre table, covered
by an old silk cloth edged with faded gold
braid, and adorned by four tarnished gold

tassels. She seized the book eagerly. Hereat
last, was something homelike — the words of
prayer could never be strange, under whatever
clime, and must prove a link to bind the exile
to her country. She quickly unloosed the heavy
clasps. The book was empty ! It was only a
curious old missal-case. She dashed it angrily
on the table, and walked to the window.
Empty! — like everything else around her —
only sham magnificence, with no heart in it.
At that instant, there came a sound of footsteps,
and the servants.? appeared with the
luggage : le Goui, smiling and oily as usual;
Trimmer, fatigued and somewhat cross, permitting
herself to be ordered hither and thither

o

in a fashion no English maid who respected
herself would for an instant have submitted
to in her own country, or had she been less
dazed and tired.

Keith came in their rear.

Don't stay here, dear,' he said, with anxious
solicitude ; ' you might catch cold — see, the
window is open. Close it at once, le Goui,
Madame may feel cold; and have the fire lighted.'

I am not cold,' Dorothy said ; but her pale
face and pinched look belied her.

Keith drew her away into her sitting-room,

closed the door, settled her comfortably in an

9 9

armchair, and took his place on a stool at her
feet, pressing her two little icy hands in
his.

My little northern flower feels the cold more
than I should have expected he said. ' See, I
have not forgotten your predilections — the fire
is bright enough, and the room is full of flowers.
I remembered how sweet the Angel House
always smelt of lilies.'

You sent us those — they were your lilies —
all I have is yours, Keith. Oh ! shall I ever
make you happy? — say !'

CHAPTER II.

VENICE.

Dorothy awoke late on the morrow,
wondering where she was ; and
oflancino: first with astonishment
at the high bed and canopy of'
brocade which arched her head, seeming to
reach almost to the ceiling, presently leant
back with a feeling of delicious repose on
the large downy pillows adorned with a
large embroidered cypher in the corner and a
frilling of deep lace.

The rest seemed delightful to her, after travelling
for many days ; and the knowledge that
no further effort to dress hastily and catch a train
was required of her was certainly extremely
pleasant ; but she missed Keith. Where had he
gone, she wondered uncomfortably; the thought
of his disappearance immediately gave her

ii sensation of fear. She pulled the bell-rope
violently. Trimmer appeared in answer — as
English a figure as possible — with plain braided
white apron and neatly fitting gown. She
also had rested, and had had time to ' unpack
some of her things, which was a blessing,'
she announced with a sniff to le Goui, the only
servant with whom, much to her chagrin, she
could converse — the others being Italians who
had never left their own country ; and ' thank
goodness I am not like any of those foreigners,
who never wash, and dine off messes,' she
added vindictively.

Where is Mr. Chester ?' asked Dorothy,
from her bed.

Gone out, madame ; and please, he said
you was to have chocolate as soon as you rang,
and breakfast at twelve.'

At twelve ! It must be very late — what
o'clock is it, then?'

• Only just ten o'clock, madame ; a decent
English breakfast-hour. Ill tell the housemaid
Laureate they call her — to bring your chocolate
; which, it seems, is all folks have for
breakfast here.'

Keith had gone out. Dorothy lay still and
thought : she did not feel hungry (though
when the dainty chocolate, on its silver tray,

was brought to her, the aromatic fumes soon
gave her a desire to sip it), and needless to say,
she thought of Keith. He was the great centre
sun round which now all her ideas, like minor
luminaries, revolved. How she could best please
him, what, for the future, were to be her
duties, her occupations, her privileges? — such
were the problems that teazed her. It was
evidently all so different from England. The
very hours, the food, the lazy luxurious fashion
of breakfasting in bed, spoke of a life of self-indulgence
and ease. Where in this life was
the space for duties ? In what way could she
deny herself for him ? It seemed to her as if
pleasure must be the be-all and end-all of this'
enchanted and wonderful existence.

What had become now of the stern views of
duty and work — the earnest striving after knowledge
and acquirement which had lashed her
into energetic effort previous to her marriage ?

Keith invariably checked any tendency to
ambition and study on her part ; he said
women needed only to be charming and pretty,
and sweet-tempered. Indeed, she could scarcely
imagine the possibility of any outlet for her
talents or her ambition in this splendid lotus -
eating aspect of life.

Dorothy sighed, pushed her chocolate on

one side, and prepared to rise. Presently
Keith knocked at her door. His bright, decided
voice roused her from her dreams —
seeming to infuse an element of manly life into
the faded tapestry and heavy brocade hangings
which still unwarrantably continued to oppress
her.

I am coming in a minute, Keith,' she said ;
at which she quickly motioned to Trimmer to
fasten her gown.

That Keith should wait for her, that she
should be inexcusably late, perhaps delay the
luncheon, was certainly not the way to begin
married life. Lady Darlington, she remembered,
had particularly cautioned her against
ordering bad dinners, or keeping men waiting
for their food. Keith, however, was quietly
seated in a large arm-chair reading the papers
when she entered. He did not seem impatient or
annoyed, but looked up amiably ; she noticed
this with a little quick tremor of happiness.

Oh, Keith, I am so sorry to have kept you

waiting.'

It did not signify, dear. I only hope you
had a good rest. Don't distress yourself about
such a trifle ; but, indeed, if you had really
caused me inconvenience I should say the same.
Mutual forbearance is absolutely necessary in

the married state. Why should you rise early
if you don't wish to? I can always breakfast
alone.'

But Keith she said, looking shocked, ' I
would not let you breakfast alone for worlds;
why, I like to be with you — it is my duty and
my pleasure.'

It is a pleasure to look at you in the early
morning, Dorothy ; that pale blue stuff — what
do you call it? — is charming.'

I am glad you like it.'

Dorothy had found it difficult to divest herself
in a moment of her long established habits
of simplicity and thrift; almost all the dresses
of her trousseau were plain and of Woollen
materials, much to the chagrin of little Miss
Clack, the dressmaker, who asserted that it
was ' all very well not to spoil the modesty of
a girl's composition, but that married ladies
must, above all, be elegant.' It was with
quite a little show of anger that the worthy
woman had noticed Dorothy set aside all the
richer and more costly silks and satins proffered
her, and choose neat and inexpensive materials.
Dorothy had felt the force of Miss Clack's
remarks since she had come into the grand
old Venetian palace; her willowy figure seemed
to her to shrink to such small and poor

dimensions ; consequently her husband's commendation
of the blue merino, which was her
favourite gown, caused her unmitigated and
welcome satisfaction.

See what I bought for you in my morning
walk,' Keith said, tossing a little box into her
lap. ' I have not been idle, though you were
such a sleepy little puss.'

Dorothy took from the box a ring of antique
shape.

^ What a beautiful stone ; it shines like a
star, and seems to catch all the rays of light.'

It is a star ruby ; they are rather rare, and
thought to be lucky.'

They must be lucky, they seem to have a
soul in them — to be more than a mere jewel.'

I am glad you like it. The morning was
so fine, I strolled out, meaning to settle our
plans for the day, and in one of the little
shops on the Rialto I saw this, and thought
at once you would like it. Are you fond of
jewels?'

Not in themselves, but jewels like this
ring ' — here Dorothy slipped it over her finger
and looked admiringly at it — ' seem so full of
meaning, they attract and fascinate me beyond
measure ; pearls, too, I like — they are the perfection
of form and purity.'

Pearls stand for tears. You shall not
have any, Dorothy.'

Oh, please, Keith ; I am not afraid.'

Then you shall have the most beautiful
necklace I can get ; a matchless row of pearls.
But let us go to breakfast now ; my walk has
given me an appetite.'

The dining-room in nowise fell short of the
splendour of the other apartments ; it was
hung with old stamped leather, and had a
ruddy sheen of gold about it. Jets of gold
candelabra jutted out from the walls, and
overhead hung one of those fairy crystal
chandeliers, the delicate intricacy of which
is such that it seems almost incredible as the*
work of ordinary human fingers.

The meal concluded, while they sat drinking
the sweet Italian wine and nibbling at luscious
figs and strawberries, Dorothy could distinguish
the tide] less lap of the waves against
the stone bastions of the palace, and the distant
monotonous cry of the gondoliers. Every
instant she expected to hear a brisk clap of
the hands, to see the scene, like one of the
visions in the ' Arabian Nights,' disappear
into blank space, and to find herself perhaps
alone in her room at the Angel House, having
discovered that Keith's presence, his love and

her marriage, were only evanescent dreams.
No such imaginative fancies tormented Mr.
Chester. For some years now he had been
accustomed to luxury, and, indeed, previously
he had indulged, even on a small
income, in all the aids to a dolce far niente life
which the cheap and poetical surroundings of
a southern residence render possible, insomuch
that though he accepted riches as a
matter of course, yet poverty or even middle -
class humdrumness would have appeared intolerable
to him. Discomfort being essentially
a question of habit, sybaritic indulgence had
become with Keith second nature. He liked
his palace, his treasures, and his bric-a-brac,
not because of their intrinsic value, but
because they ministered to his acquired and
imperative tastes. He appreciated his wife
more keenly because she did him honour,
because she pleased his fastidious refinement,
and satisfied his sense of beauty ; also, perhaps,
because she spoke in a clear low tone,
neither mumbling nor bawling, and studied
earnestly to fall in with his slightest wishes.
He would never have lived a day with a termagant
or wilful woman ; yet it may be
questioned whether the gentle yielding love
with which his wife wrapped him round, as

in an atmosphere of southern scented breezes,
was the surest and best way of clinching his
regard for her. A faint suspicion of contempt,
the contempt of a selfish man who cannot fathom
the strength of love yielding its own will for
love's sake, tinctured the real affection he
entertained for her. She was a new element
of pleasure in his life and he thought to conciliate
her, like a child, by presents of jewels
and bonbons, and beautiful surroundings. He
judged her by himself; he would not have been
happy in a garret, and he scorned the notion
that Dorothy could have endured any fate
that necessitated sacrifice. How little we
know of the heart even of those we love best ! •
Keith acted according to his lights ; he thought
himself, and indeed he strove to behave like,
the most devoted husband.

The remainder of this their first day in
Venice was passed by Dorothy in a dream of
happiness. She was not sufficiently learned
in art to know the difference of a Giotto or a
Botticelli, to understand the technical marvels
of Tintoretto's colouring in the Doge's Palace, or
to read strange allegorical meanings in quaint
presentments of purgatory and hell ; but she
could shudder at the majestic and vivid conceptions
of a last judgment, and she could feel

the intense beauty of the Madonna's countenance
in the glorious ' Assumption,' that
haunted her like a vision of heaven. She
could perceive the delicate purity of tone and
grace of gesture in a group of Lucy della
Robbia's cool and spiritual white bas-reliefs;
and, best of all, she could surrender herself to
the charm of the Venetian life and climate as
she floated, towards evening, in a noiseless
gondola, nestling in her husband's arms, and
while the frail bark swept like some dim image
of night out into the wide golden coloured
quivering waters, and sky and sea met in one
ruddy streak, the liquid notes of song sprang
upward in that passionate cry of love :

Oh, Venetia benedetta, non ti posse piu
lascars'

The days passed like magic in a rapture of
love; Dorothy wishing only that time might
pause, that the hours of each day might
lengthen indefinitely — days which were all
dazzling sunshine, restful shadow and lingering
flower-scents ; nights of moonlit heavens,
pricked with twinkling stars, their silence
cheered by the dim echo of some distant
lover's serenade. No aftertime could be so
beautiful again — so rich in wonders, so prolific
in grand and glorious sights.

Keith noticed lier intelligently admiring
countenance and felt satisfied. He could never
be dull in company with a woman so sensitive
to all the influences of art and beauty. He
had, however, less sympathy with her enthusiastic
raptures about the historic past, when,
shuddering, her hand locked in his, they stood
on the Bridge of Sighs; or else, when in the
quickly moving gondola they cleft the deep
shadows, and skirted the dank and moss-grown
walls of prisons and palaces, she
struggled, with all her energy, mentally to
reconstruct the past.

History is not half so interesting as our
own story,' he would say; 'lovers were always'
lovers, and Doges were but men after all, and
Shakespeare, we know, had probably never
even seen a Jew.'

Yet I like to think it was all true: that
once there lived a real Jessica, a real Desde-
mona. I like to people these deserted palaces
with living, breathing, happy creatures like
ourselves. I like to think of the grand sea-fights,
of the pomp and pride of the pearl of
the Adriatic, of the stir and life of commerce,
of the treasures brought from the
east and the west, and collected in this one
spot.'

Not, of course, of the poor prisoners pining
in the dungeons ?'

Yes, most of all of them ; of their poor
broken hearts and their lonely sighs

If you had your way, Dorothy, you would
waste all your time in feeling for other people
who have lived and died long ago, so that you
would never have a thought to spare forme!'


Don't you feel these things, too ?' His
imputation of her indifference fell unheeded,
she knew so utterly the falsehood of it.
Doesn't your heart burn within you at the
injustice and cruelty of men to Avar ds each
other ?'

I deeply feel the fact of having been cheated
out of my money, and persuaded to buy a
copy instead of an original picture, or a
tinkered up instead of a genuine bit of silver ;
but I am thankful to say, that owing to that
sad experience which, I fear, can only be dearly
gained, I am seldom taken in now.'

I was not speaking of buying pictures,
though, of course, to be cheated must be very
annoying; but when you hear or read tales of
suffering and misery, does it not seem to take
away for a time all your own happiness ?'

Certainly not. If it is a dreary book, such

as makes women cry, I toss it away and light a
cigar; if it is a true story, I try not to think of it.
There are plenty of people ready and willing
enough to concern themselves with melancholy
things — doctors, lawyers, sick-nurses, religious
people, whose business it is to cultivate the
loathsome; let them do it, and leave me in
peace.'

But, Keith, you are a Liberal, you are a
landlord yourself; you must surely occasionally
find it necessary to decide, to act, to take
the initiative on subjects that are not personal ?'

How easy it is, dear, to perceive that you
had once begun to study for a Cambridge
examination ! I scarcely fancy these are the
topics most brides linger over and talk about.
If you must know, then, I let people have all
the liberty they like, as far as is compatible
with my own. Is it not true, our liberty of
which we boast, political or theological, very
frequently consists only in curtailing other
people's liberty ? But the fact of my giving
others free scope does not mean that I am
to spend my life in their service. That
theological notion of self-sacrifice I look upon
as repugnant to the dignity of human nature,
and utterly mischievous.'

But is it not the teaching of our Lord?'

VOL. II. 3

Palestine is not England,' said Keith
lightly ; ' and teachings — after all not intended
in a literal sense — which were good for the
Jews of that time, would scarcely stand the
test of modern civilization.'

^ Do you really mean that our Lord's teaching
is obsolete ?'

No, not precisely. I will tell you, my feeling
is that it would be perfectly impossible to
carry out the views of the Bible, and I consider,
therefore, all religious discussions a decided
mistake : nothing produces ill - feeling so
quickly. I don't want to solve theological
quibbles with my wife. Shall we go and
have an ice at Florian's, eh ? You look quite
fagged out with the result of your keen spirit
of sightseeing and argument.'

Dorothy acquiesced, confessed she was a
little tired, feeling, indeed, that fatigue was
but a trifle compared with the smallest divergence
between her own and her husband's
opinions, which necessitated the silent avoiding
of a topic. He, it was evident, shied
away from all arguments on principle ; she, on
the contrary, would gladly have pushed them
to their extremest limits, content, if she then
deemed her reasoning incorrect, to acknowledge
her error with a proud joyfulness.

STILL UNDER THE SPELL.

T was about the end of June, when,
returning one day from a curiosity
hunt among the shops of the Rialto,
Dorothy found a card lyi:^g on the
large marble-topped table in the vestibule,
which felt charmingly pleasant and cool after
the exertion of a hot walk and the annoyance
of bargaining with vendors in a confined and
stifling space. She lingered a moment, enjoying
the welcome freshness, and holding the
visiting-card between her finger and thumb.

What is that T said Mr. Chester, noticing
her delay.

Some lady's visiting-cards she said.
So I perceive. Whose is it ?' Standing
behind her, he read the name over her
shoulder : ' Marchesa Bellaggio.'

3—2

Hitherto Dorothy had received no visitors,
and, whether from fear of intruding or from
ignorance of her arrival, very few cards had
been left upon her, Mr. Chester, indeed, seeming
indifferent as to the fact of her returning
visits. In any case, she would have pleaded
the natural timidity of a bride at encountering
perfect strangers ; but in addition, she dreaded
ceremonious calls still more from the fact of
her imperfect acquaintance with the Italian
language.

The Marchesa Bellaggio !' repeated Keith.
It is very kind of her to have called so soon ;
she is one of the greatest ladies here, and frequently
at the Court.'

Indeed,' responded Dorothy indifferently,
tossing off her hat as she settled herself luxuriously
on the sofa in her own cool room.

The green jalousies effectually shut out all
glare, and produced a most agreeable half-light.


You must return the Marchesa' s visit,'
said Keith.

Some day — yes.' Shyness overcame Dorothy
at the very thought.

No, directly — tomorrow, I mean. It is
always done here. You must not offend a
great lady at the very outset. Remember I

have been in diplomacy, and know the current
value of civility.'

You said nothing about quickly returning
the other cards ; you have not forgotten,
surely, that there are several there in that
.china bowl ?^

My child, you must learn to understand
the various shades of society. Those other
people did not signify ; the Marchesa is
different.'

Oh dear ! I shall never understand the
importance of these trifles,' said Dorothy, ina
desponding tone, fanning herself with a
newspaper. ' How fortunate for me that I
have you always by my side. After all, it is
perhaps nicer than if I were very mise, and
never needed your help.'

Keith stopped in his restless pacing up and
down to kiss her gently on the upturned brow.

Of course I shall help you, dear ; but you
must soon learn to be wise yourself. Our
honeymoon is over, Dorothy ; it has lasted
nearly a month. We have been very happy,
have we not ? We have had our pleasure ; now
we must taste of some of the business of life.'

Dorothy caught at Keith's hand, which
hung down beside the sofa, and pressed it to
her lips.

Is it really over ? I hate to think that
anything so perfect can be over. I am sorry

So am I sorry and Keith, looking at the
pure, pale profile while she kept her head
bent over his hand, thought she was certainly
a sweet creature, and felt proud that she
was his own.

But presently he became more practical.
You see, he was a man of the world ; he had
never before lived for so long a time in solitude
(even though the solitude had been enlivened
by the presence and love of a beautiful
woman), and he longed to return to the companionship
of other men.

Yes, we will go tomorrow, Dorothy ; in
the afternoon, at the hour the Marchesa drinks
coffee. Put on your blue dress ; you look
best in that, and, naturally, I should wish you
to make a good impression.'

I don't care what manner of impression I
make upon strangers,' said Dorothy impatiently.
' What are they to me ?'

You are too unworldly, my dear. It is
no doubt a pretty and unusual trait in a
woman, but it gives rise to disappointments ;
it is better to be practical, and have a little
common sense. The world is not perfect, you
and I are not perfect ; but we shall get on far

better by making the most of our advantages,
and not expecting too much from other people.
Meanwhile, try and please the Marchesa.'

The mere fact of being commanded to make
one's self agreeable usually does away with
the possibility of the effort ; and when, on the
morrow, they landed at the foot of the marble
steps leading up to the Bellaggio Palace,
Dorothy felt almost paralyzed with timidity.
Keith observed the slight twitching of her
sensitive mouth, which he knew denoted agitation,
and whispered to her, with a kind,
strong pressure of her hand, the words :
Courage, dear ; don't be afraid.'

The Marchesa' s palace was as large and as '
magnificent as their own (indeed, it seemed to
Dorothy as if to be lodged poorly were the
exception, rather than the rule, at Venice),
and the servant led them through several
antechambers and galleries before they finally
reached the room — a moderate sized octagon,
hung with dark-red satin and garnished in
each corner with tall looking-glasses set in
white and gold frames, thus effectually dispensing
with angles — where their hostess sat
conversing with a friend.

The Marchesa was a remarkable-looking
woman, of tall stature, with a head like a

sphinx. She had chiselled features, her eyes
were magnificent, full of coquettish languor ;
her mouth, though somewhat large, was expressive,
and her complexion resembled clear
ivory. She was dressed in a loose robe of
tawny yellow, with some kind of wide soft
sash carelessly knotted at the waist ; and as
she spoke she played with a large cream-coloured
fan, on which were painted trailing
roses, opening and shutting it regularly
The little dark man to whom she was
speaking had a very brown skin, and a
face like a monkey. He used a great deal
of animated gesticulations with his speech,
bowed very low at the arrival of Mr. and
Mrs. Chester, stared rather rudely at the
latter, and then resumed his seat and endeavoured
to monopolize the Marchesa's
attention as before. She, however, snubbed
him most decidedly ; though this did not appear
to concern him much, for he took chocolate
bonbons from the box that stood near
him on a small inlaid table, and munched
them contentedly without cessation.

Keith was an old acquaintance of the Marchesa's,
and ' in fact I look upon him almost
as a brother,' she said, in an explanatory
fashion to Dorothy.

The latter sat a little apart, very straight
and upright on her chair, taking these
speeches literally, and wondering what the
Marchesa's ao'e miofht be: she did not look
above thirty, yet Dorothy thought she must
be older.

And so this is your wife. Do you like
Venice ?' said the Marchesa, in pretty, broken
English, dragging out her words with affected
hesitation, then suddenly relapsing into rapid
Italian or French, volubly addressed to Keith.

We like Venice much, and we are going
to stay for the present,' he said. ' It is all
new to my wife ; she has never been abroad
before.'

Ah, then indeed you will find much to
see. Venice is at its best just now, and you area
bride : the place, the climate, all suit. C'est
bien ici Fendroit pour faire I'amour, n'est-ce
pas ?' she added, with a knowing glance at
Keith. ' I hope we shall be great friends
Mrs. Chester. If I can be of use — you understand,
I know everyone in society here. You
will entertain, of course ? Oh yes,' seeing
Dorothy shook her head, ' you must entertain.
Mr. Chester, give un petit hal to introduce
your wife. The fact is, she herself looks like
an old picture. You will delight the Italians,

madame ; we all rave about beauty here.
Yes, yes ; you must give a soiree intime and
we will organize some dinners al fresco at the
Lido. We must make haste though, for people
will soon begin to leave Venice ; some of my
friends will be most happy to help you. You
like that kind of thing T

Yery much,' said Dorothy, smiling and
showing her pretty teeth — glad that she
could enter heartily, at least this once, into
her animated hostess's plans for her pleasure.

The Marchesa then discussed some mutual
friends with Keith in Italian; and the little
man — who had been presented to her as Count
Pinsuti, and who continued to stare at her
unabashed — dragged his chair a little nearer
to that of Dorothy, and offered her a bonbon.
She thanked him gracefully, and took one,
fearing lest a refusal might seem a breach of
good manners.

Yery good, n'est-ce pas ?' said the little man,
floundering in the attempt to speak English,
and screwing up his eyes and his forehead as
though these contortions gave him greater
facility for pronouncing strange words.

Dorothy nodded absently, and allowed her
eyes to range around.

The Marchesa, who seemed omniscient, or

rather mesmerically alive to the condition of
her guests' feelings, immediately endeavoured
to renew the conversation with Dorothy, appealing
to her as to her tastes, her occupations,
asking her which pictures she preferred,
and what were her favourite haunts ?

Dorothy answered truly, that it was all very
new to her, and she had really scarcely had time
to form an opinion; mentally deciding that if she
had, her own private and intimate sensations
should certainly not be at the beck and nod of
an impertinent Italian Marchesa, who asked
questions of simple Englishwomen in order
to laugh at their mistakes. Dorothy was
convinced that the extreme interest expressed
by the lady could not be genuine, and that
those large lazy eyes only assumed their apparent
admiration.

The Marchesa, indeed, could scarcely repress
a smile at the evident joy with which Dorothy,
like a child released from a lesson, jumped upas
soon as Keith said :

I fear we must not waste any more of your
time.'

No, indeed,' chimed in his wife, eagerly
making her adieus.

The Marchesa accompanied them to the
door.

Come soon, again, pray ; I am at home on
Thursdays. And don't forget, we shall all
expect you to give a party.' Then, in a
lower key to Mr. Chester, Dorothy having
already stepped over the threshold, ' Je vous
felicity, mon cher ; votre femme est un ange !'

When the Marchesa had bidden her visitors
farewell, she turned interrogatively to the apelike
man.

Well, what do you think ?'

Pretty, certainly,' he said, still munching
a bonbon ; ' but fade — a regular English
miss, without manners, or aplomb, or anything
o'.'

I expect she has no vanity. What an unbecoming
shady hat she wore ; and yet, notwithstanding,
one noticed her good looks. I
wonder what induced Mr. Chester to marry her
was it only for her looks ?' mused the Marchesa,
lying back in her chair and tapping her
feet impatiently on the floor. ' He had money,
liberty, beauty. What does a man like that
want with marriage ? I suppose he likes her
lien T

Again she appealed to the incurious Count,
who was far happier sitting by her, writing
verses to her beauty, carrying her fan, or her
shawl, and generally sunning himself in the

light of her smiles and popularity, than in
discussing the why and the wherefore of an
Englishman's marriage.

Keith was different when he was here last,'
she continued, as if to herself ; ' he was more
galant, more lively. That little pale woman
looks as if she had taken all the spirit out of
him.'

I am sure I don't know what you would
have. He appears in excellent health, and
seemed very happy.'

'Ah! you, Count, are always happy, and
so you judge others by yourself. I must find
out more about this English couple. They
interest me — though the bride, certainly, has
not my sympathies. I can forgive a woman
for being ugly, but not for being bete. I suppose
she is jealous, too, as she did not wish to
give a party. Probably thinks that handsome
husband of hers will flirt. Nothings more
likely, I should say, remembering what he used
to be. If she begyis to be jealous, however,
she will make some fine misery for herself. I
know what jealousy is — moi qui vous parle.'

You are not jealous of me, I give you no
cause,' said the little man piteously.

You ! Bah ! You don't count. Non,
mon ami — I am not, afraid of you.'

'' I am very devoted,' he said humbly.

^ Oh yes — very devoted!' and she tinned
away with a laugh. ' I think I shall go out
now ; there may be a breeze from the sea.
You are dull company this afternoon,
Count

She rose, yawned, smelt at a bunch of
crimson roses in a glass on the console —
finally walked away with a slow and haughty
gait.

The little Count began to whistle softly to
himself, as soon as he was alone.

'E bene!' he murmured gently; 'e bene !
she is in a bad temper to-day ; but she cannot
do without me. It is those stupid English
people that have upset her. Povera mia ! But
she must come in presently; she will want her
shawl, and her fan; and it will be, "Count,
where are you? Count, do make haste, see, I
am waiting ; I cannot start till you come."
I know it all — and it is very pleasant, when
the woman is pretty. AJi, per Banco I but
she is handsome, and almost handsomest when
she is in a passion ; but she must not take too
much interest in that Englishman — he has an
Italian look, too. I wonder how the blonde
English girl agrees with him ?'

The Chesterss spoke but little on the return

journey. But when they were alone together
at eventide, sitting side by side on the big
sofa, in the dim twilight among the shadows,
Dorothy put her arms round Keith's neck, and
leaning on his bosom, she said warmly :

Oh, my darling, how glad I am I have you !
Is society always like the specimen we had of
it this afternoon ? Does everybody stare and
look coldly at one, and ask stupid questions,
while all the time utterly indifferent to the
answer ? And must one always talk when one
has nothing to say ? Oh, dear Keith, I hate the
Marchesa — I can't bear her and her ways. Do
let us stay at home, and be happy together.'

Dorothy, we cannot always live alone ;
you must overcome this foolish shyness.'

It is not only shyness. Has the Marchesa
a husband ?' she added presently, in a dry
tone.

Oh yes ! a dull pompous man, who cares
more for gardening and agriculture than for
his wife.'

^ And who was the little Count ? How ill-behaved
he was !'

Some great friends I never met him
before. Of course, you know, foreign fashions
are different to ours. He was probably her
cavalier e serventeJ

Which means-well,

her admirer — her devoted servant.
The arrangement is of no importance ; but it
has its conveniences.'

Keith,' said Dorothy, lifting her face from
his shoulder, ' let us talk of something else ;
my head aches. I wish there were no such
things as Marchesa in the world.'

a

A VISITOR.

iFTER the lapse of a few days, the
Marchesa paid a visit to Mrs.
Chester, who happened to be alone.
She came unaccompanied, and was
beautifully dressed.

Dorothy's shyness diminished considerably
when she found herself receiving company in
her own boudoir, with familiar objects around
her, and the photographs of her mother and
sister, in two little velvet frames, keeping her
in countenance on a low table. It was far
pleasant thus, than when she was being
trotted out in the presence of the ape-like
man, for the edification of the critical Marchesa;
yet she still possessed few ideas in common
with her visitor, and several awkward halts
occurred in the conversation.

VOL. II. 4

Is that the portrait of jour sister ?' said
the Marchesa, noticing the direction of
Dorothy's e3^es when they sought strength and
encouragement in a friendly face. ' She is
very nice-looking. How many sisters have
you ? Only one ? Ah, I never had any I
I am a spoilt child ;' and the Marchesa leant
back and laughed consciously.

Not knowing precisely what answer was
expected of her, Dorothy made none ; and
was at once set down by the Marchesa as
decrement gauche.

The conversation languished a little after
this misadventure ; the Marchesa herself found
it difficult to talk to women of the type of
this English girl, who took everything so
seriously, understood none of the light sparkles
of society chatter, and was only interested in
such subjects as pictures, her husband's doings,
and improving books.

The Marchesa confined herself therefore to
asking questions.

^ Ciel ! what a life !' she murmured compassionately,
as Dorothy related to her the
fashion in which her days had passed at
Dronington, and described the style of her
amusements. ' And you don't play or sing ?
Mr. Chester used to be very fond of his violin !'

Dorothy shook her head.

And you have never been to a dance but
that one at Lady Darlington's, in honour of
the birth of their baby son ? Ah, my dear, I
pity you profoundly ! I adore dancing. When
I was your age, I used to go to a ball every
night.'

Indeed, madam e,' interposed Dorothy
earnestly, ' I have been very happy. Don't
pity me, I beg ; and now '

Now of course, is the period of the lune
de miel • — lune de desenchantement^ as some
people call it ; but that does not refer to
you. Well, certainly men cannot live on
ethereal happiness ; they want something a •
trifle more solid. You must not let your
husband become ennuye^ remember that.'

Dorothy felt a sudden dull thump in the
region of her heart. Words like these, only
spoken very differently , had been Lady Darlington's
last piece of advice : ' Make him comfortable,
keep him in a good temper.' The
worldly Italian and the simple-minded English
lady were agreed in their opinions.
What strange creatures men must be if they
required so much humouring !

Your husband has old friends here,' the
Marchesa continued, in her vibrating, oily

4—2

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

tones ; ' they will naturally want to see a
good deal of him. You will be asked to
many parties, and you must give some in
return. Your husband adores music too ; I
remember of old that he is very artistic. You
might, to begin with, organize a lovely fete de
nuit, now the weather is so warm : the effect of
lanterns on the water Avould be exquisite.'

^ Doubtless ; but I assure you I have no
wish to give a fete de nuit^^ said Dorothy,
with a touch of dignified composure. ' I
don't think Keith would care for it — especially
if he thought the idea of it would be distasteful
to me.'

^ But, ma cohere enfant think, how you yourself
would enjoy it ! You told me you
thought the dance at the Darlingtonss quite
perfect.'

So it was ' — here Dorothy blushed — ' but
I was a girl ; it was all quite different. I
don't think married women should dance — at
least, I mean I don't care to dance now.'

Ah, la petite prude P said the Marchesa,
gazing with considerable envy and astonishment
at the rosy hue mantling Mrs. Chester's
cheeks.

The Marchesa could never manage a blush,
even with the best intentions. But she consoled

herself by reflecting that involuntary
blushing was exceedingly disagreeable.

Society here is not so strict, except, of
course, in Lent. My confessor would never
think of imposing restraints of that sort upon
me. Priests know very well that women
must have amusements.'

I am a Protestant,' said Dorothy quickly,
mentally invoking a return of her childish
horror of Popery, and of the bigoted intolerance
which had procured for an English
Queen the epithet of ' Bloody Mary.'

Of course you are, you poor thing,' said
the Marchesa, in a tone of irritating pity.
Our religion is so comfortable; I wish you
could be converted.'

You need not hope for that ; I am firmly
attached to my own religion.'

Dorothy's heart indeed smote her sorely for
having so soon forgotten the good Yicar's exhortations
; and she firmly determined to
seek out an English church without fail for
the following Sunday. After all, in a time of
honeymoon abroad, it was not so very surprising
if ordinary religious duties were a
trifle neglected.

We will not argue,' said the Marchesa
coldly. ' It was only interest in you that

made me say I wished you were not a heretic;
and I will have a "no vena" said for yom conversion,
if you like.'

Thank you, Marchesa said Dorothy,
touched with remorse for her uncharitable
opinions ; * you are very kind, I am sure.'

The Marchesa yawned a little; she had
prolonged her visit, hoping that Keith would
make his appearance : but she had entirely
exhausted her interest in the bride's uneventful
past, and she now longed ardently for
something more exciting to happen. At that
instant le Group entered with some letters on a
silver salver, which he silently handed to
Dorothy. Her eyes sparkled.

Letters from England,' she said, with a
little catch of pleased excitement in her voice.

Ne vous genet pas, chere madame,' said the
Marchesa, rising. ' I will leave you to the
perusal of no doubt good news from your
mother and your sister, and all the sweet,
poetical reminiscences of your sainte jeunesse.
Ah, c'est beau cependant la jeunesse.'

The Marchesa then departed, with a considerable
flutter and rustle of garments, and
Dorothy, sitting down, her letters in her hand,
heaved a sigh of relief.

What a woman ! I shall never like her. I

wish Keith had not such a strangely high
opinion of her importance. I am sure she is
worldly and heartless; and oh! I should not
at all like to be at her mercy. She reminds
me, with all her beauty, of a bird of prey.
She has talons, I am sure, though she hides
them under her soft manner.'

The woman of fashion was as yet a type
unknown to our little heroine. At Dronington
her only experience had been of the quiet
villagers immersed in their petty if absorbing
cares — where such questions as to whether close
23ews should be abolished for the introduction of
straw chairs, or the church lighted by oil or
paraffin lamps; or whether a district nurse
quite as necessary if not as important a
personage as the parish clerk, should be
appointed; or else the topic of Jane Mason's
departure for America, and the marriage of the
smith's son were discussed. The county folk
were steady-going, respectable families, who
performed, like the swallows, an annual migration
to London, and punctually returned at the
close of the season with a show of new bonnets
and smart dresses, which set the fashions for
humbler folk during the ensuing twelvemonths;
magistrates, who attended road-meetings,
board-meetings, and punctually transacted

all local business; their wives, who
taught in the Sunday-school, laid foundation-stones
of churches, and drove in regularly to
the county ball and flower-show; their sons,
who shot partridges and pheasants, rode to
hounds, wore a red coat at dinner, and gave
the sole tinge of liveliness to the proceedings.
Sometimes the daughters wore eccentric
coiiFures, or startling lawn-tennis dresses, while
there existed an archery club which had
designed a costume for its lady members of
green and yellow. Again, some interest was
excited by a certain Miss Dewdrop,the daughter
of a brewer, the belle of the county, who gave
herself airs, and might, people whispered to one
another, even marry a duke; but women of
fashion, women who had nothing to do but to
spend money and give fetes and walk about
all day idle, attended by young men, and were
answerable to nobody for their opinions or their
conduct — women like these Dorothy had never
seen. She could not help feeling as though
some great mystery of iniquity, some of the
flavour of a forbidden fruit, hung about the
Marchesa, marking her out as different from
others of her sex. How, indeed, could this be
possible, Dorothy further argued, seeing the
Marchesa was so perfectly beautiful, so perfectly

dressed, so sweet and amiable and
feminine, and so much admired and esteemed
in the highest society ? Being unable to
decide this question to her own satisfaction,
Dorothy proceeded to open her letters. The
first was from Margaret, written in her bold,
scrawl hand, a few lines of which almost
filled a sheet.

'Dear Dorothy' (it began),

I am awfully glad to hear you are all
right, and the gondolas and the moonshine
sound delightful. I think, however, the
difficulty of taking a constitutional must be
rather a bore though, after a time. I wonder
one does not lose the use of one's legs. I
walk a great deal in self-defence, having no
carriage. How I should like a pony-cart I
Those horrid Miss Dewdrops splashed my
clean cotton frock from head to foot yesterday,,
as they drove by; so horribly vulgar of them!
Everyone is just as usual. Mamma and I are
very dull in the evenings; she generally sleeps
good bit. Then, after I have strummed and
sung a little (by-the-bye, I have some new
songs), out I go into the garden, which does
smell so sweet, and I walk up and down and
think. A nightingale has taken up its abode

in a tree near, and sings every night at the
same hour; and that rose we planted last year,
Souvenir de Malmaison, is beautiful — a mass
of blossom. So you see I am not badly off
for the romantic ; and when there is a moon,
the garden is as pretty as Venice, I am sure,
and with a little imagination you can take the
choruses of the men going home, rather late
and rather drunk, for the songs of the gondoliers.


But really, Dorothy, I feel more and more
every day how shabbily you behaved in
marrying: before me. I think I shall console
myself with the doctor — who has rebuilt his
house with a new stucco front, a decoration
of red tiles and two miniature bay windows,
and is evidently on the look-out for a wife —
sooner than be an old maid. To be sure, he
drives a very seedy gig and smells of whisky;
but anything is better than the dulness
here.

'Mrs. Parkinson has got a new protege a
gutter child who is to be trained in the choir,
taught by the schoolmaster, and clothed by
herself, and is to turn out a prodigy. Her
cats are quite well. Mrs. Maynard makes
bigger eyes than ever at everyone she meets —
man, woman, and child included — and gets

more and more acid in lier sweet barleysugar
fashion.

show is dear Dorothy? She is such a
favourite of mine — quite perfect to my idea ;
but wasn't it a mistake for her to have married
against her mother's wishes ?" is a specimen
of something she said the other day, but you
know it all by heart.

The Yicar gave us a splendid sermon on
Sunday; it was on behalf of a hospital for sick
children, and he really pleaded so eloquently
that I actually parted with a shilling which I
had kept in my pocket intending to devote it
to quite another purpose — for a new bonnet.
I felt so sorry afterwards I had acted on
impulse, which is always a mistake; for I
dare say the hospital will not care for the
shilling, and I shall have to go on wearing
my old bonnet.

I do hope you will come back soon. What
fun it will be to see you do the great lady ;
besides, you will be able to take me out into
society a little. I suppose you will be a swell
in the county; but never forget, my child, that
it was I, your elder sister Margaret, who
eventually clinched your marriage. You and
mamma would have gone on crying and
arguing till now. She, poor dear, is quite

reconciled, however, now. I overheard her the
other day dilating on the charming stay her
daughter, Mrs. Chester, was making in Italy,
and on the quantity of beautiful things her son-in-law
had collected in his palace at Venice.
Isn't that lovely? You will find us all open-armed
and open-mouthed here, ready to receive
the bride. They talk of a reception,
triumphal arches — what not ! I don't mean to
help; it would seem zf6>6> ridiculous.

What do you think ? Mr. Coote arrived
here unexpectedly the other day. He said he
had come about some business of Keith's;
can you imagine what business? He put up
at the inn, and stayed nearly all day with us.
Actually dined here. Martha really cooked
very well, and I had made some pulled bread,
and some sandwiches a la chasseur, very hot
and very spicy, which he was good enough to
pronounce excellent. He is looking sunburnt.
That is all the news. Do they wear flounces
or frilling s at Venice ?

Your always devoted sister,

Margaret Strait.'

How the words brought Home again vividly
before her eyes, and the real goodness of heart
that underlay all Margaret's abrupt and careless

speeches ! She could see it all before her —
those long long evenings when the two sisters
had paced up and down in the narrow garden,
with the twilight deepening around them, the
bats flitting past, swooping so low that the
breeze from their wings almost ruffled the
girls' hair; the scent of the white lilies, standing
like straight sentinels in the border; the
honeysuckle on the porch, the trailing sheets
of ghostlike clematis hanging against the wall.
And then their talk, so merry, quick with the
joyous consciousness of youth; their innocent
dreams; Margaret's castles in the air, of opera-boxes
and velvet gowns; and Dorothy's high-strung
vision of herself as a modern Victoria
Colonia, with a second Michael Angelo for her
lover. Each of the girls had their simple
vanity, each dreamt of a blissful future, each
then was panting to begin the journey of life.
Dorothy, indeed, had now already become
a wayfarer, and progressed some distance; that
happy heedless time had dwindled into the
past; her courtship, her marriage, her honeymoon
were over, counted as things that had
been; the dreams were evaporated, and she had
awakened to a life of action. She felt years
older than Margaret now. She would no
longer be contented to dawdle in a garden

and weave a maze of bright fancies. No !
She was ready now to take her place, to play
her part on life's dazzling stage.

Dorothy sighed, and turned over the other
letters in her lap. They were all for Keith,
and amongst them she thought she recognised
a crabbed handwriting that was familiar to
her, in its quaintness and the number of its
careless flourishes.

Keith returned in time for dinner, full of
interest and curiosity ; he had heard from the
porter of the Marchesa's visit, and was eager to
learn how Dorothy had comported herself.

How long did she stay ? did she talk
much ? '

She asked questions, and I answered them to
the best of my ability. There are some letters
for you on that table.'

Oh yes ; of course, the English post has
come in. Did you get on quite well, then?
You liked her better to-day, I suppose?'

I don't think she would care much for my
approbation or my liking; she is not that sort
of woman. Won't you read your letters?'

Keith had thrown a passing glance at them
as they lay on the table, but continued his
walk up and down the room.

The letters can wait. I think we might

give a little party ; it would be a nice way
of introducing you to all the people here, as
the Marchesa suo^o^ested/

Have you been talking to the Marchesa
then ?' Dorothy's eyes flashed as she spoke.

No, indeed ; but her opinion is not to be
undervalued.'

^ Why does she not give a party herself ?
Will not that do just as well ?'

You shall not have any trouble about it,
I promise you. I will get a list of people
from the Marchesa. Our cook is vers good,
and there are excellent confectioners in the
town ; and as for le Goui, he can organize
anything, from a the complet for two, to a*
state banquet. You need never be afraid of
him.'

It seems, then, the only person to be
afraid of is myself — whether I shall behave
properly, not look like a wild beast that has
just been caged, betray country manners, and
disgrace you by eating with my knife!'

Dorothy, I do not recognise you. What
is the matter ?'

When Keith looked at her in his cold, calm,
high-bred fashion, Dorothy immediately became
much ashamed of her ebullition. The

fact was : she had realized the whole thing so

acutely, the manner in wliicli she was to beset
aside, and treated like some kind of useless
doll, while everyone else toiled and busied
themselves. She remembered, as a contrast,
how at home the girls had alternately been
trained to make bread and cakes ; and how she
herself, when kneading her dough, had scores of
times propped a German or French book in
front of her, and read thus, in order not to
lose one valuable moment of study while
attending to her household cares. But here,
unable to speak Italian, she could not even
entertain her own guests, while the butler
and the cook were far better acquainted with
their duties than herself. She hated, as only
a proud woman who loves can hate, the sense
of being insufficient to her husband's happiness.
In addition, she cordially disliked the
Marchesa, and these two reasons combined
sufficed to make her irritable and uneasy.
But Keith's tone, so cold and pained, yet not
angry, recalled her to herself.

Keith,' she said penitently, ' I will do just
what you like ; I was wrong to oppose your
wishes. I know that you really want to give
me pleasure, and that this thing seems almost
a kind of duty — and — and — come here, dear,
and tell me you are not displeased !'

Not displeased — a little disappointed, perhaps.
I did not think you could be such a
baby — that just because I am proud of you,
and wish you to make the acquaintance of my
friends, you behave like a silly child.'

I am so sorry, Keith.' She dared not say
again, ' It is because I hate the Marchesa ;'
but she took his hand, dragged him gently onto
the sofa beside her, and put his fingers to
her lips. ' My master, my love, are you not
my all ? how could I grieve you ?'

Keith played a little absently with her hair,
stroking it down, while he thought : Yes ;
obedience in a wife was very necessary. He
was glad she saw and understood it now. ^

I wish you were a little more like other
people,' he said gravely, after a pause.

Am I not ? I will try to be. You will
teach me.'

Women should never be remarkable except
for their charm and amiability. You are
too fond of solitude.'

Solitude a deux is not solitude.'

No ; but it is an impossibility. No man
can isolate himself with impunity from the
society of his fellows. We should be certain
to quarrel if we were always together alone.'

Even though I love you so dearly ?'

VOL. II. 5

Perhaps for that very reason. We have
nearly quarrelled now. I am not one of those
who appreciate lovers' quarrels, as they are
called. Each quarrel destroys one particle of
love, and the last quarrel destroys all.'

I could never cease to love you, Keith ;
you seem a part of myself.'

If we quarrel you will cease to love me ;
let us never quarrel.'

'Never, never!' she said fervently, a tear
slowly gathering in her eyes and falling upon
her pale blue dress.

There — now you are staining your gown.
Don't cry, darling.'

He took her in his arms and kissed her.
She put her lips to his, and clung to him like
a child that has been chidden ; and thus she
shed the first tears of her married life. Wherein
the whole wide world was she to find comfort
now, if he turned away from or was cold
to her ? She had not behaved like Victoria
Colonia to-day, and her Michael Angelo,
when grieved, was not one to sit patiently
down and write pathetic sonnets. And yet
it was a kind of instinct of love that had made
her imperatively revolt fi^om submission to
the Marchesa's influence — an influence which
she felt unconsciously to be baneful, and

which seemed, she knew not how, to threaten
the confidence that existed between herself
and her husband.

A sadness as of impending evil weighed
down her spirits ; yet it felt sweet to be encircled
in the arms of him who was dearest to
her in the whole world — him whom she had
cheerfully followed into a mysterious future —
him without whom she could not, so she believed
now, exist a single day.

Presently Keith loosed her from his arms,
and immediately she felt as though a great
peace and support had forsaken her. He
took up his letters, and broke their seals
indifferently. ♦

Ah,' he said, as he opened the one with
the crabbed handwriting, already noticed by
Dorothy, ' a letter from Palis — why, the postmark
is Milan! He is on his way here.
Bravo ! he will be in time to help us with
our party. He says we may expect him any
day. He must never see you cry, Dorothy, or
he will think I ill-treat you. Poor old fellow !
I am glad he is coming.'

And so am I ; I took a great fancy to his
honest round face, and we got on very well.
He wrote some verses for me. You see,
Keith, I do like some of your friends ; I like

5—2

KeitKs Wife.

Mr. Coote, too. By the way, he has been to
see Margaret ; they were delighted with his
visit.'

It would be a famous marriage for her ;
Coote is exceedingly well off.'

Yes, that would indeed be nice,' said Dorothy,
by a great effort speaking cheerfully,
and wiping away the last of her tears.

PALIS.

A LIS arrived in the very midst of
the arrangements for the ball,
which from a vague idea had developed
into a clear conception, from a
conception into an actual fact, and now loomed
in all its reality in the shape of piles of ,
' menus ' on approval, trotters
busily engaged in rubbing parquet floors — one
and all scattered variously about the apartments,
which were pervaded by a universal
smell of wax-candles, turpentine and flowers.

To most people it would have seemed irksome
to find themselves among the bustle of
preparations such as these ; they would have
experienced discomfort, reticence, or perturbation;
but to Palis the element of agreeable and
frivolous activity was precisely delightful.

He gave Dorothy puzzling and comic advice
respecting the invitations, designed arabesques
and illustrations for the bills of fare, and
passed long hours consulting with the cook in
the kitchen, licking his lips like a cat before a
saucer of milk while discussing the respective
merits of celebrated dishes, and with gloating
attention superintending the progress of
various succulent sauces, into some of which
he persuaded the chef dexterously to insert a
minute flavour of garlic.

The cuisine of my mother-country,' he
would say on these occasions, ' containing the
rich Provencal odours which are wafted to my
nostrils, and quicken my senses with the
memory of past delights, is stimulating
vivifying, and regenerating. Your flabby
pale Parisian messes have no savour and no
vigour ; they are only suited for the palates of
petits craves, or of feeble invalids.'

The cook, with sleeves upturned, and a
serious importance of mien such as befitted
the reputation he was required to live up to,
smiled condescendingly at Palis' s raptures,
and stirred his saucepans with a conscious
sense of merit in the presence of so appreciative
an admirer.

Occasionally Palis would coax out of him

some delicate dish of shell-fish for breakfast, or
else a concoction of chicken with a remarkably
distinctive flavour ; and of these the ardent
epicure was usually permitted to partake
alone, Keith being too sensitively dainty, and
Dorothy too exclusively British, to share his
tastes. Palis, at least, had thus nothing left
to desire. Gastronomic pleasures, agreeable
society, lavish sunshine, music, and sweet
odours, presented themselves to him in ceaseless
variety. He held culinary discussions in
the kitchen, literary arguments in the drawing-room,
and sang out of healthy lungs, to his
heart's content, every barcarolle and chanson
of his repertoire for the delectation of Dorothy
who, never weary, listened approvingly as she
lounged among her cushions in the gondola.

She also enjoyed amazingly the summer evenings
on the lagune, when Palis hould bid the
gondolier rest on his oars, and with his rich
sympathetic voice stir the echoes to music.
She would then shut her eyes, and dream away
in a kind of mystic ecstasy ; or else, in a more
critical and artistic mood, watch the pearly
tints of receding buildings, the sheets of gold
upon the quivering waters, the gradual and
tender fading of the rosy clouds into saffron,
opal and cream, until Night drew her pale

curtain, and wrapped all things in the dim
loveliness of shadow.

Palis was her usual escort on these occasions,
because Keith seemed perpetually engaged.
Sometimes it was an old acquaintance who
had just arrived in Venice, and who must be
visited — sometimes the Marchesa wished to
try over some new music with him, or hold
an important conference about invitations, or
impart to him some new and brilliant idea
with regard to appropriate floral decorations —
sometimes he must scour the bric-a-brac shops
for an ancient ornament, suddenly supposed to
be of vital importance — sometimes there were
letters to write, lists to make out ; but always
it seemed imperative for him to leave Dorothy.
She felt completely thrust out of his life ; and
had it not been for Palis 's ever bright society
must have been sad indeed.

The Marchesa entirely monopolized Keith's
time with music and talk, and engrossed his
attention with her own affairs, putting forward
the specious plea of Dorothy's inexperience,
and her want of knowledge of Italian life and
usages, etc.

The implied reproach stung Mrs. Chester
keenly ; yet she could not but acknowledge its
justice, while comforting herself by the assurance

that once the ball and its attendant vexations
were past, all would be well, and she
might then employ the amount of wasted leisure
that hung heavy on her hands in a complete
subservience and dedication to her husband's
interests.

Surely,' she thought, * ignorance is only a
fault of youth. He knew I was an unpractised
girl — he loved me best so, he said ; and I am
not a bit changed. I am willing — oh, so
willing to learn ; anxious to be taught ; waiting
for my master ; longing for the day and
hour when I can be his constant companion,
his trusted helpmate, his valuable counsellor.
I have given him my whole life : my sole •
wish is for his happiness, and with youth and
strength to aid me, and the willing energy of
love, I cannot fail — I must succeed.'

But her very eagerness to serve, and the
vexation she experienced at her inability,
threw a faint shadow over her lovely face, and
marked her fair brow with a troubled expression.
Palis, whose essential quality was
observation — the very bread of a journalist,
according to his own dictum — noticed this ; and
with the good-nature he ever displayed when
its exhibition cost him nothing, rallied her on
her want of spirit.

Why are you sad ?' he asked one day, while
the gondola floated slowly over the still
waters ; ' you have everything to make you
happy. Are you homesick ?'

How could I be anything else but happy ?^
she answered evasively, dipping her hands in
the cool sea, and letting the glistening drops
trickle one by one from the tips of her
fingers. ' I should be an idiot if I were not
happy. Have I not everything I could wish
for, and a husband who loves me ?'

He does indeed V said Palis with interest,
kindly looking at her; ' but you cannot
deceive me! There is something which you
are trying to hide from everyone, and which
frets you. You think of it while your eyes
are watching the tints of the sky or sea — you
think of it when you lie awake on your bed at
night ; and for want of telling it to some one
you are letting it gnaw at your heart, and take
away your appetite. You eat none of those
eggs "a la pointe d'asperge " this morning,
which Keith and I pronounced excellent.'

I don't care for eating, as you do,' she
said, smiling ; ' at least, I am no connoisseur.'

There you certainly lose a great deal, and
reveal a fault of your nature. But you have
a graver fault than that — you are morbid.

Why not throw oiF your feelings, if they depress
you, in an article, as I do ; or in a poem
like Goethe ; or in a picture, like a painter.
Nothing destroys beauty like self-tormenting
and beauty is a very precious gift of the gods,
not to be lightly despised

Beauty is of no avail if one is otherwise
stupid and awkward Here Dorothy modestly
averted her face.

You are, excuse me, entirely mistaken.
Beauty, to Keith for instance, is the sole desideratum.
Look beautiful, fascinate, dazzle
everybody at the ball, and you will see and
can judge for yourself of the result.'

I wish I were wiser,' she said, sighing.

^ You are quite wise enough, but you are
too self distrustful. Humility never succeeds
in society. Look at me. I know my own
worth exactly, to a tittle. I have appraised it
carefully ; I could lend money on it, and not
lose a penny. I don't overrate or underrate
my value, but you don't suppose I am' quite
such a fool as to inform the world of what
it is. I began life as a nobody, without recommendations,
powerful protection, or money.
But I had plenty of self-possession and a great
capacity for work ; all I wanted was for the
public to give me a hearing. The question

was how to obtain it. We all wish and sigh,
but we do not all go the best way to obtain
our wishes. I waited a little till I could see
my chance of a literary career, then I published
a book of poems at my own expense ; the
poems were crude, but they were fresh — full
of the impalpable essence of youth, which is
strong from its very volatility, like the
sparkle of champagne, which infuses a sense
of bounding life no dry and matured port wine
san give. No one read my poems. " Well,
well," said I, " my friends, we'll try again, if
sou please, and have better luck next time."
I struggled to obtain an interview with a
great man, a power in the literary world. Impossible
; he was always engaged. Naturally
I knew it must be so, for I was only a poor
devil, and when were poor devils patronized
by rich and influential autocrats ? At last, as
my good star would have it, in his very antechamber,
when I was turning away rebuffed
and disheartened for the twentieth time, I meta
friend. " You don't know Sopwirth ?" he
said. " All right ; come with me." By his
side I was of course promptly admitted. I
got my chance of speaking to the great man ;
that was all I wanted. " Young fellow," he
was pleased to remark, after we had conversed

a little, " you may be useful to me ; you seem
to have your wits about you. Call again tomorrow."
I called again on the morrow, and
in a week I became his secretary. One day a
leading article had to be written, while he
chanced to be writhing in bed with the gout.
Let me do it, sir," I said quietly, seeing his
sour grimaces. " You ! could you do it ?"
I will try, sir." The article was written
and pronounced a success ; ^\q editions of the
paper sold out that day. Since then I have
lived in clover. I write what I like, go where
I like, and wield a powerful weapon in my
pen. People are civil to me wherever I am.
What has it all to do with you, you ask.
Just this — if I had been humble I should not
occupy my present position. I have always
asserted my own claims, and, consequently,
have always received brevet rank. No one
loves ease better than I do, but no one knows
better how to dispense with it. Here, for instance,
I eat and drink and talk to you. Of
course I am come on a special mission ; a
certain amount of copy has to be written —
and it will be written ; a Review started — wee
mean it to be a success. But that is no reason
why I should not snap up every scrap of
pleasure that I can attain into the bargain.

Life gives us success, but we must make our
own happiness.'

Here Palis leant back, and puffed complacently
at his cigarette.

Happiness depends, surely, more on others
than on ourselves. We cannot live alone.'

Precisely there you mistake. Go to your
looking-glass and examine yourself; then
array yourself bravely, smile and be happy,
and the world is at your feet.'

^ Dress would not satisfy me, and my world
consists of one person.'

Dress would not satisfy you, but success
will. Dress is the means ; a smile is your
counsellor ; success means to you — love.'

Dorothy reddened. Palis discreetly turned
away. Perhaps it was only the reflection of
the sunset on her cheek. He relit his cigarette,
thinking : ' I am wasting my pains ;
she is only an insipid blonde, as I believed.
A nice little woman enough, fit to sit by the
fireside and look at her husband with a pair
of fond blue eyes, as he yawns in his
chair, but no match for a successor of the
Borgia.'

Under this fanciful title it was to be surmised
that he intended to designate the Marchesa.
He certainly admired Dorothy's purely

classic beauty, and he was moderately sorry
for her peines de coeur, if she had any ; yet in
his heart he almost despised her. The women
he loved, perhaps from his own almost feminine
intensity of sensation and his habit of
referring to himself as an ' old aunt,' were
masterful and demonstrative, loud and passionate
in their love as in their anger ; women of
the south, brimful of emotion, and burning
with violent sensibility.

Dorothy's very gentleness, her quiet concentration
of feeling, seemed to him weakness.
He wished to help her, but it was as one helps
a snail or worm, by taking it carefully out of
the garden-path and placing it on the grass,*
lest some heedless foot should crush and kill
it. In his own prosperous happy career he
could afford to do little kindnesses of this sort,
warn or advise silly foolish creatures, and be
glad of the opportunity.

Dorothy, after this conversation, appreciated
him better than she had ever done before. She
had always considered him as a delightful
companion ; now she believed him to have a
good heart, and her inclination to like him
received a powerful impetus. They spoke no
more of sad subjects that day ; their talk became
bright and merry. Palis related his

experiences of travel in Italy, and kept lier
constantly laughing until they returned to the
palace. Some of his advice bore fruit, however.
No sooner was Dorothy at home than
she proceeded to her bedroom to consult with
Trimmer about her dress for the ball. She
had not bestowed a thought on it hitherto,
but she now conscientiously endeavoured carefully
to weigh the maid's advice. The latter
was addicted to somewhat pompous language,
and had her own ideas of what great ladies
should wear.

Your dresses are too simple, ma'am,' she
said, 'but I prefer you in blue; this seems to
be the best dress for the occasion, and you
can wear your turquoise and diamond tiara
and ornaments.'

As she spoke she displayed a pale blue
diaphanous dress, decorated with silver braid
and lace.

Yes, that will do. Trimmer,' said Dorothy,
looking attentively at the dress, while her
thoughts wandered.

It wants a belt, ma'am ; this sash is a
poor thing, and the sleeves are large. I will
nip them in the ghost of a piece, if you like.
When I lived with Lady Mandrake, she would
say to me, " Trimmer, I don't like large

sleeves, they are so vulgar." She was a
particular lady, was Lady Mandrake.'

Dorothy had heard stories about this lady
already often, for while Trimmer brushed out
her mistress's hair, her tongue wagged irrepressibly
; and spite of half-hearted interest, Dorothy
had become aware of Lady Mandrake's predilections,
of the number of powdered footmen
she kept, of her French cook, and the early
luncheons at which her ladyship gorged herself,
permitting her unfortunate daughter and
lady companion only the Spartan supper of dry
toast and baked apples, in which her own soul
delighted; she knew now by heart about the
early drives in the close, yellow-lined coach,
and of how the companion and daughter were
sent for a tete-astute drive when they had
quarrelled, while Lady Mandrake sat at home
to receive visitors, chuckling at her own
cleverness, and looking, in her green satin
gown and glistening headgear, like some old
Indian idol before its worshippers. Lady
Mandrake never fell out with Trimmer, who
alone understood her ways and the mysteries
of cosmetics, hair-dyes, and an abstrusely
complicated toilet. As Trimmer cheerfully
remarked, ' Had it not been for her ladyship's
premature demise after a large luncheon-party,

VOL. II. 6

I should never have been at liberty to take
another situation.' Lady Mandrake left her
faithful servant a legacy of ten pounds to buy
mourning nth, and a first-rate character, besides
a wealth of stories and anecdotes with which
to enliven her succeeding employers ; but
Dorothy was very weary of the stories and
sayings, and of Lady Mandrake's ill-natured
behaviour to her dependents ; especially was
she weary to-day when, sitting on a high
velvet chair, she contemplated her blue
draperies, and listened to the maid's complacent
remarks.

Does it want a band ?' she said innocently ;
then make one.'

Trimmer looked aghast. Lady Mandrake
had nothing made at home, for all her dresses
came from Paris; so she stood there like a
statue of surprise, petrified by fear, one finger
continuing to point to the extended folds of
the dress, while Dorothy wearily rested her
head on her hand. Suddenly Keith made an
irruption into the room.

Looking at your dresses, Dorothy, I perceive.
Are you very busy?'

]sot in the least, dear,' said she, rising
with alacrity and twining her arm into
his.

I was just remarking that this dress
requires a band, sir,' said Trimmer severely.

^ Is that your ball-dress ? It will suit you
beautifully. Wants a band, does it? Well
now, how fortunate! I remember I saw in a
shop the very thing — an old silver belt set
with large turquoises. I will buy it at once.'

Into, no ! pray don't, Keith. Trimmer is
mistaken; I do not require it.'

Yes, you shall have it; it is a fine thing in
itself, and will certainly complete your toilette.
The man is a dreadful Jew, but I can get it, I
think, for little above its real value.'

Trimmer smiled to herself as she refolded
and put away the dress. ' Mr. Chester was a
perfect gentleman, surely; but as for his wife,
well, it was evident enough that, with all her
beauty, she had not mixed much in good
society,' was the comment of the sagacious
maid.

6—2

AT A BALL.

HUM of voices pervaded the palace,
whose sumptuous galleries and
reception-rooms were flooded with
light from the rays of thousands
of candles. The large gilt doors were thrown
back to their widest extent; a gay throng of
women, whose bare shoulders and glancing
jewels gleamed from the multitudinous mass
of silks and satins, the men making hideous
black patches in the luxuriance of colour,
streamed up the marble staircase, which was
half hidden by banks of tropical and sweet-scented
plants and flowers. Within the
entrance of the grand gallery Dorothy, in her
blue dress, stood, calm and self-possessed, by
the side of her husband, holding in her hand
a bouquet of white roses, and pleasantly

receiving her company. There was something
so pure and so noble in her simple,
gracious fashion of welcome, that it converted
the universal curiosity into universal respect
and admiration. Palis, from his vantage-post
behind a marble console, could hear the remarks
of the company and notice the impression
she created. At first there was some
surprise expressed at the simplicity of her
dress — the blue cashmere falling in numerous
straight folds, and being gathered in at the
waist like that of a Greek statue; her hair
rippling in pretty natural waves, tightly coiled
and crowned by the tiara of turquoises and
diamonds ; the antique silver belt encircling her
slim waist. She wore neither a necklace nor a
bracelet. Some of the women cavilled.

She is full of pretensions, and tries to do
the i?igenue, that is clear,' said one recognised
beauty to the other.

The men raved of her extreme fairness, and
the dark Italian ladies threw angry glances at
their attendant swains.

She will do,' thought Palis to himself, ashe
walked towards one of the open windows,
whose balcony had been converted into a bed
of roses. ' She has excited admiration and
envy — the two conditions of success — and

lie seems quite unconscious of it all. Keith
must be gratified.'

Keith, indeed, seemed to be gratified ; for the
company having ceased to arrive, he left the
post of reception, and danced and talked, and
found seats for the old ladies, making himself
generally agreeable.

Dorothy had refused all invitations to dance,
and stood leaning silent and abstracted against
the large gilt doors, fingering the roses in her
bouquet. She was tired of smiling and bowing
and shaking hands ; and as everyone was
engaged, she could afford herself the luxury of
silence for a few moments.

The ape-like Count stood at her side, but he
did not speak. He was watching the Marchesa
a magnificent apparition in a crimson robe.
She and Keith were waltzing ; the latter cheerfully
nodded to his wife as he passed by, and
after a few turns, stopped with his partner at
the far end of the ball-room.

The Marchesa was speaking eagerly. He
listened and looked grave. Her beauty had
never showed to greater advantage ; the pale
ivory of her skin contrasted finely with the
colour of her dress ; her lips were ruby-red ;
her eyes vied in brightness with the diamonds
in her jetty hair.

TheMarchesa Bellaggio looks well to-nights
one man said to another, close to Palis' s elbow.

Splendid ! She understands dress. I think
Chester is of our opinion. He gazes into her
eyes oftener than he need.'

Bah ! He's just married. What is your
impression of his wife ? C'est une grue, je
pense. Une petite poupee, pale par les
brushes angleterre. For myself, 1 prefer
more colour.'

So do I, as a rule ; but that rose-leaf complexion
is very pretty. She is a contrast to
the other women.

I like her style of Marguerite dress : the
simple hair, the girdle. What will you bet
that those are all studied effects ?'

They say she is quite a country girl he
picked up in a village, and that he has asked
the Marchesa Bellaggio to give her some
lessons in " chic." '

She may teach her some other lessons, if
he does not take care. I wonder if the petite
femme is jealous ?'

Apparently she is not. The Marchesa
arranged the whole affair of the ball, decided
who was to be invited, etc. ; while Mrs. Chester
was doing the platonic with that fellow Palis,
the journalist.'

Sapristi!' muttered Palis to himself, 'I
had better get out of this, or I may hear
something which will necessitate my quarrelling
with one of those fine gentlemen ; and
that is an item which was not included in
Keith's programme, and which he might not
like. What brutes those fellows are I I will
go and talk to Mrs. Chester ; she looks somewhat
triste.'

Dorothy's eyes sparkled when she beheld
Palis. His kind open face seemed so familiar
and welcome, whereas the sea of unknown countenances
around had caused her an impression
of solitude.

Will you take a little turn with me ?' he
said. ' I see there is a lull in your duties, and
an ice will refresh you. Let us go this way;
there is less of a crowd.'

^ Why do you not dance?' she asked, ashe
gave her his arm. ' You are so foreign
in your tastes, I am sure you must love
dancing.'

I did, but I fear I have a little lost my
figure ; though it is plain enough to see that I
had lessons of deportment in my youth.'
Palis spoke in a bantering tone, and looked
ruefully at the decided obesity of his lower
man. ' A sedentary life ruins one's figure,

but after all it is the countenance that matters
not the waist.'

I am afraid I managed very badly to-nights
Dorothy said, when she received her ice, as
they stood near the window looking out upon
the silvered waters. ' Those Italians speak
so fast — and I cannot even understand their
French, much less their Italian ; but I tried
to remember what you had said about not
being humble.'

You appeared very self-possessed,' said
Palis, nibbling at a large slice of chocolate -
cake he had secured for himself. ' You will
soon get into the way of these things, and
when once you learn to know their monotony,'
you will have forgotten to be shy. What do
you think of society ?'

It seems rather a waste of time. Dancing,
of course, is pleasant enough ; but in a crowd
there is not much conversation possible, and
at the best it is very desultory.'

People don't come into society for improving
conversation ; but it is most amusing to
watch all the little tricks and jealousies. I
am never tired of it. Society means, you know,
the art of outshining one's neighbours; wearing
bigger diamonds than one's acquaintances
who wear little ones, or can only afford paste ;

driving a carriage-and-pair when one's friends
are forced to be contented with a fiacre ; and
asking more people, and spending more money,
burning more candles, and wasting more flowers
than anyone else. Such is society, and therein
consists the delight of it. The gratification of
vanity is far more consoling than the enjoyment
of mere pleasure. Anyone can have that
—a ride in the country will give it, or a quiet
picnic ; a daisy will do as well as a tulip ; a
violet as well as a gardenia ; a cloud as well
as a gown of poult de sole — but then it affords
no scope for vanity. You perceive T

What a dreadful view of human nature!'

Society is an aggregate of all human
vices; there is no room for the virtues. If
you do as I do — find your recreation in
laughing at them — you will never be dull.'

That would be hateful to me.'

Not really. Do you see that little woman
there in pink ? She is as ugly as sin, but a
most successful flirt. Her tongue is as sharp asa
needle ; and she amuses everyone. She has
lots of admirers, plenty of adulation, and not a
single friend. The man with her has a pretty
wife, whom he leaves at home to cry her eyes
out, because she is stupid, and cannot make
his house lively. Probably she will console
herself in time ; at present, she sheds tears,

and thus drives her husband still farther away.
Men cannot bear inundations of salt water.
One never sees her without red eyes in public;
and, after all, how can one love a woman with
red eyes? Leah certainly had them, but then
it was her misfortune, not her fault ; and I
dare say, though Jacob behaved exceptionally
well to her, she had to suffer many '' mauvais
moments " from Rachel's caprices. But I see
you are not listening, Mrs. Chester ; shall we
go back to the ball-room?'

Dorothy's observant eyes had noticed Keith
disappearing through a door with the Marchesa
on his arm ; she thought he looked exceptionally
radiant. It was not surprising
that, in his own house, with so handsome a
woman by his side, and adulation and come
aliments surrounding him, he should seem
happy ; and yet such is the contradiction of
human nature, that Dorothy involuntarily
wished he had not looked so happy.

Presently Palis left her, and she remained
standing alone under a candelabra, till she
was joined by several young men, who
hastened to pay their court to her. The light
from the candles threw a pale transparency
over her features, and outlined her fair head,
with its circlet of diamonds, against the dark

satin background. There was something very
pathetic and charming in her appearance, and
Keith, happening to be free at the moment,
glanced in her direction, and caught sight of
her graceful figure.

^I have never valued with my wife,' he
thought; and a thrill of conjugal pride passed
through his heart. ' Dorothy, will you valse
with me?'

At the sound of his voice, the crowd of
empty admirers melted away on each side,
and the two were left alone. The number of
dancers had diminished ; some were enjoying
the fresh air on balconies ; some flirting in the
ante-room, which was filled up like a tropic
greenhouse with palms, and ferns, and fountains
; some were eating ices in the tea-room.
The parquet floor looked invitingly smooth
and cheering ; the orchestra was playing a
ravishing valse.

^ Come,' urged Keith, ' you have not danced
yet!'

I don't know if I can dance.'

She hesitated, and thought with longing
that it would be sweet to twirl to such strains
in his arms.

Every girl can valse. I am sure you areas
light as a feather. Come!'

Almost before lie could answer, he had. his
arm round her waist, and they had glided oflT
over the slippery floor.

Keith danced beautifully; it had been one
of his principal accomplishments when, as a
diplomat, he had led most of the cotillons at
Rome. His arm guided his partner firmly, and
his steadiness supported her. But Dorothy,
fluttered with happiness, and unaccustomed to
the exercise, turned giddy after a few paces,
staggered, and would have fallen, had he not
held her upright, and presently pushed her
into a chair.

Are you better ? Why, you look quite
pale!' he said, anxiously examining her face.
Dorothy, what was it ?'

I don't know ; I so seldom dance. And
now — oh dear! — I have lost all the rest of
that turn ; and the music is delightful.'

Yes, it is a good swinging tune ; but you
had better stay here, I will fetch you a glass
of water.'

An elderly lady, owning a pair of very
yellow shoulders, and sparkling with diamonds
now proffered her large black fan, and stood
s}Tnpathizingly over her, talking volubly, and
addressing her remarks to the by-sanders.

Poor thing ! the heat of the room and the

dancing have been too much for lier. Her
husband seemed so concerned — quite in a
dreadful way ; but I dare say she will soon be
better.'

The flow of words fell like the sound of
rushing waters upon Dorothy's ears ; and a
bitter thought, bearing the sting of a serpent,
pierced her to the heart. She had again disappointed
Keith. What must he think of her
he, who hated fuss? How stupid it was
not to be able even to dance without turning
giddy! Keith presently appeared with the
water; but the old lady, who turned out to bea
personage of importance, still talked on.
Dorothy thanked him with a loving look.
And now the Marchesa approached.

Madame is ill ! Ah, you had better stay
quietly near the open window, there — the fresh
air will soon revive you! Mr. Chester,' she
added unconcernedly, ' what time is supper ?
And you really must explain to me how that
figure of the masks in the cotillon should be
performed.'

They disappeared together ; and Dorothy,
now forsaken by the old lady, who had gone
ois on the arm of an elderly admirer in search
of refreshments, remained alone, somewhat
sad and chilly. She was not permitted the

respite long, however ; for, supper being announced,
Count Pinsuti claimed lier, and kept
her attention constantly occupied in efforts to
understand his barbarous French.

Palis sat on her other hand, pleasantly
busy with pickled cucumber and a salad of
crabs. At the far end, among a glitter of plates
and flowers, sat enthroned the Marchesa and
her host, at whom she threw killing glances
from her languorous black eyes, and smiles
from a row of pearly teeth. She had a fashion
of appearing absorbed in the person who washer
companion for the moment, usually thought
specially attractive ; and on this night she
chose to be absorbed in Keith. ^

'Will you dance the cotillon?' he asked,
heaping her plate with strawberries.

The intimacy between them had surprisingly
increased.

I am not sure if I shall dance;' she tossed
her head.

Will you dance with me?'

Do you mean it, or is it only the civility
of mine host? I don't require any humbug
fi'om you, for you know you are a married
man now !'

Yes.'

Keith looked, and her bright orbs flashed

also at the moment in the same direction, to
where Dorothy presided composedly, looking
pure and ethereal.

^ Mr. Palis seems very devoted. Is he an
old friend of your wife's?'

He is my friend !' said Keith, with intention.


'Ah!' — the lady's 'ah!' was expressive —
she is very lovely ; no wonder he likes to sit
beside her !'

I fancy the supper is a greater attraction
than my wife,' Keith said, laughing. ' Palis
is a gourmet.'

I thought he was only a journalist. Does
literature pay, then, in England ?'

Palis contrives to make it do so ; but his
tastes are simple, and his rooms only a front
and back drawing-room, in which the tables are
strewed with papers.'

Horrid!' She made a pretty little moue.
'I know — dirt and cobwebs, a grubby dressing-gown,
and a greasy breakfast-set, and the maid-of-all-work
in curl-papers. I have read of such
things.'

No, no ; it is not so bad as that. We
have had some pleasant literary breakfasts
together, old blue crockery on the table
garnished with a bowl of gold-fish, a water-lily

floating in the middle; good company and
good talk, and first-class omelettes.'

I have finished ; shall we go ?' she said,
indolently making a movement to rise.

^ And the cotillon — you will dance it with
me ?'

Perhaps; if you deserve it.'

How different are the meanings of words
according to the sense in which they are
intended, and the person by whom they are
used ! A soldier deserves the Victoria Cross
that is, valour ; a sister of mercy deserves a
heavenly crown — that is, self-immolation; a
poor person deserves relief — that is, poverty;
a diplomat deserves the blue ribbon — that is*
astuteness, perhaps also a little falsehood; a
young man deserves a reward at the hands of
his lady — that is love sometimes, generally
flattery.

Keith took care to deserve the lady's hand
for the cotillon when the moment arrived.
Chairs where being ranged round the room,
strange-looking banners, waving ribbons, gaunt
sticks, ungainly masks, tambourine, and large
baskets of sweet smelling flowers, were being
brought in by watchful attendants and disposed
about. The orchestra, well refreshed — the
leader a trifle flushed with good wine, his

VOL. II. 7

acolytes pale and haggard with many nights'"
watching of the happy disporting of others —
took their places, tuned their instruments
and began the inspiring valse.

I suppose we had better go,' said a British
matron to her plain daughter ; ' these things
are interminable, and you have not got a
partner. What is the use of staying to see a
parcel of foreigners dance?'

Oh, mamma, pray stay ! I may have a
partner presently ; and I hear the presents are
going to be lovely.'

The speaker had thin red arms, and an eager
face, and it was her first season. The fond
mother forthwith relented, and the two women
stood for the remainder of the evening against
the door, watching, carping, and cavilling.

Mrs. Chester does not dance remarked a
young attache to his fi:*iend.

No ; it's a pity. She's awfully handsome,
and nice to talk to ; doesn't snap a
fellow up a bit. But, I say, Chester is carrying
on to-night !'

Oh, he always does ! I declare, that pretty
little Fairfax girl has no partner, I must go
and ask her.'

They were all settled now : the couples satin
a circle, like a wreath of flowers with their

colours mingled; the elderly diplomats,
husbands, or fathers, loitering about in little
knots, twirling their mustachios, and talking
scandal or politics.

Dorothy, having attended to her guests, now
took refuge behind a curtain, and breathed
the fresh air from the window. No one had
noticed her disappearance, and she could safely
look out into the quiet night, murmurous with
the sound of lapping waters and the distant
cries of the gondoliers. The morning was
breaking ; fleecy grey clouds were rising on
the horizon, the pallor of day mixed with the
azure of moonlight ; pigeons cooed softly.
Behind her was the room with its lights, and
its intoxicating rhythmic music, and the warm
breath of flowers, and the heated luminous
atmosphere. She could see, by half turning,
Keith and the Marchesa floating round
contentedly in the mazes of the dance. How
lightly she moved, how easily he held her !
She could catch fragments of their talk. Ah !
why had she herself behaved so stupidly?
What must Keith think of her now ? Out thereon
the canal it was so peaceful and quiet. The
smell of the sea seemed to carry a freshness
with it — a health, a reality, in which the
visions of the ball-room were wanting.

7—2 ■

She moved a little forward, and leant looking
in among the dancers. They were dancing
the flower-figure : Keith stood in the middle,
guiding and directing people, occasionally
gaily clapping his hands. Dorothy's pale
face, peering from the curtains, arrested his
attention. He had a hunch of red carnations
in his hand ; and he immediately hastened up
and presented them to her.

You ought to take a turn with me for
themes he said ; ' but I will excuse you, since
dancing makes you giddy. Are not these
carnations sweet ? Don't overture yourself,
darling.'

Before she could speak he had glided off
again. The Marchesa's sharp eyes had seen
the whole of this little episode. When he
rejoined her where she sat, her bodice pinned
all over with the bouquets presented by her
friends, she said in a cold sarcastic tone :

Bravo, mon cher ! bien, tres bien ! You area
man of the world, you neglect nothing. I
liked your little domestic idol. Carnations
mean devoted love ; I only gave you a yellow
rose, that means jealousy. I am sorry the
ball is nearly over; it has been a dream of
beauty. Let us appreciate the present, at least ;
let us try to prolong it.'

A man has always a past and a present,'
he said sadly.

And a future. You have forgotten the
past !'

I never forget the past ; at least, not some
things.'

Shall you forget to-night ? I do not want
you to forget it.'

There are some moments one can never
forget,' he said absently.

He took the yellow rose, as he spoke, from
his button-hole, and hid it in his breast-pocket.

^ No, do not forget,' she whispered with a
bewitching look, rising to dance again.
Dorothy had not heard the words, but sie
had seen Keith's action. The ball seemed
to her suddenly like the dance of death,
figures whirling furiously into a mad vortex;
the hurrying tones of music, the noise, the
heat, the late hour, the breaking morning
striving with its cold grey rays to drown the
glare of candles, impressed her like some
hideous phantasmagoria ; the men became
satyrs, the women bacchantes ; a skull seemed
to peer from beneath circlets of jewels,
death's heads to gibber under flowery wreaths;
the dancing, the movement, the scents, turned
her giddy and faint. As in a horrible nightmare,

the garish scene oppressed her till she
almost gasped for breath. At that instant
a pale streak showed above the horizon; it
widened and grew redder; it turned to gold,
and tipped the domes and steeples ; it glittered
on the roofs, it made the heavens all a blaze.
The sun had risen. She turned her back
upon the sight and sounds of revelry, and
stepped out on to the balcony. She gripped
the cold stone with her hot hand, while the
breeze cooled her feverish cheeks. She ceased
to hear the music, which, indeed, had stopped;
a perfect peace lulled her senses, and her heart
no longer throbbed. Away oat on the lagune
she could see little boats with orange sails
calmly floating, while the sky was blue overhead
; then she drew her hand across her eyes,
as though to efface from her brain the thoughts
of the past night.

'Dorothy, is that you?' said a voice at
her elbow suddenly, Keith's calm, languid
voice ; ' I thought you had departed long ago
to bed, worn out with your exertions. I have
seen the last of the guests to their gondolas ;
everyone is gone, and I am just off to the
Lido to bathe. I don't feel a bit sleepy, and
a swim will do me a world of good. Goodnight,
darling; take a rest now at once.'

He kissed her lightly on the forehead and
was gone. She could hear him humming the
last bars of the cotillon valse as he went down
the gallery. For a minute or two she stood
motionless, looking after him ; then she also
crept slowly and noiselessly away. The servants
were already beginning to gather up the
fragments of the ball; and le Goui met her,
carrying a silver candelabra from the supper
table. Her room was full of sunshine, and she
Alas alone and quiet at last. She flung herself
down full-dressed on her sofa, for Trimmer
had retired hours ao'o to rest.

DOROTHY SPEAKS.

there sleep must have eventually
overtaken her, for when she awoke
some hours after, Keith was standing
over her, his two hands in hif^
pockets, contemplating her figure as she lay on
the sofa, a crumpled mass of drapery around
her, and her hair tossed in wanton waves about
her brow. She slowly opened her eyes, feeling
chilly and aching in every limb, and raised
herself with difficulty. Keith's face wore a
half-mocking smile.

Dorothy, what is your reason for choosing
this extraordinary position to sleep in ? '

At this question all her troubles returned
to her mind — the Marchesa's serpentine attractiveness,
Keith's attentions, the yellow
rose he had placed in his breast-pocket, her

own strange wild sensations ; finally, the lassitude
that had overpowered her.

"Where is the yellow rose ?' she said ; ^ what
did you do with it ? '

Keith stared ; he had already forgotten.
^ What yellow rose ? '

The one the Marchesa gave you, and which
you seemed to prize so dearly

'Ah, that! Well, I think I lost it when I
went to bathe. Do you want it? and, pray,
where are my carnations ? '

Here!' she pulled some faded flowers from
her bosom.

That's right ; I am glad you kept them.
Now, dear, dress and come to breakfast. I
don't believe any woman but yourself would
risk wearing an evening gown in this broad
daylight after a ball, and still look lovely.
How white your shoulders are ! and my poor
tiara, look where it lies ! '

The tiara, indeed, had fallen on the floor by
the hem of her gown, and now glimmered
brightly against the thick pile of the Persian
rug.

Oh, Keith, I am so sorry ! I was very
tired, and I fell asleep. And where have you
been? and why do you look so bright while I
feel utterly exhausted?'

She spoke gaily, but Keith noticed that
her tone was different, and that she carefully
averted her eyes.

You are overtired ; that is all, darling,'
lie said, stooping down to her and putting his
cheek against hers, which was rosy with the
glow of her late slumbers. ' Jiist think how
long I have been knocking about, and going
to balls and leading cotillons. I am an old
war-horse now, well inured to all these things,
but soit are a little country girl. You will
feel better after you have had some breakfast.
I had a capital swim.'

Had you ? ' Dorothy still reclined listlessly
on her sofa, fingering the tiara in her
lap. 'You must take me with you another
time.'

Certainly ; a number of people, were out
-already this morning, and two ladies, the
Marchesa Bellaggio and her cousin — capital
;swimmers.'

She has been with you already this morning
?' Dorothy said, starting to her feet.

Yes ; why not ? They decided not to goto
bed, like myself, and to take a longer afternoon
siesta instead. Why do you look so
:astonished ? Surely,' as the fact slowly dawned
upon him, and his wife's deeds and words

>. — ■ — '

were revealed to him in a new light — ' Surely
you are not jealous ?'

She did not answer, and her cheeks, which
had suddenly paled, now flushed a little.

Jealous ! Dorothy — after all your protestations
of love.'

It is because I love that I may feel jealous
she responded briefly.

'Bah!' Keith shrugged his shoulders expressively.
' Jealousy is a confession of weakness;
but after all, I suppose you are only a
woman, like the others.' He turned away
with a scowl on his brow.

Keith, Keith ! don't you see ' — she caught ^
him by the arm as she spoke — ' don't you see
that I cannot bear it ? You looked at her so
strangely ; you put her rose in your breast-pocket
; you danced so much with her ; you
went out this morning to meet her.'

Rubbish ! I went to have a swim, to cool
myself after the hot rooms.'

Is it jealousy anxiously to guard the
treasure one values ? Is it jealousy, having
given one's self utterly to a person, to feel as
though if his face turned away from one it
would mean death ? If this is jealousy,
Keith, then I am jealous — because I love you!'

You must be a fool, child, to put all these

sinister meanings into the simplest acts. I
have lost the rose, as I told you. The Marchesa
thinks nothing of these trifles : they are
the insignificant courtesies of society ; they
make one popular ; they pass the time — that
is all ! You are my wife ; but that does not
prevent my talking and laughing with other
women — especially when they are clever and
aesthetic." ' The Marchesa is a wonderful
musician.'

Dorothy was seeking to read his thoughts,
scanning him with her serious, deep eyes ; she
felt puzzled and unsatisfied. He continued :

Don't look at me like that, as if I had
committed a crime ! The Marchesa is a
pleasant companion, a true artist, a '

^ She is a dangerous woman, I know she
is ! I overheard two men discussing her last
night. They said you had taken the place of
Count Pinsuti! What did they mean?'

Only idle talk ; the babble of men who have
nothing to do but to invent scandal about their
neighbours. Italian men have no occupation.'

Keith, I hate her !'

I am sorry for it, my dear,' he said composedly.
' You will have a great deal to do
if you begin by hating every woman I speak
to. You have me here always ready by your

side. You see more of me than anyone else
does. Is not that enough for you ?'

No, it is not enough !' and her eyes shone
tenderly.

I can't stand jealous women.'

You have not had a wife before, Keith. I
am not a woman only — I am your wife!'

Listen, Dorothy ! I loved a woman once,
some years ago, and she turned my life into a
hell by her jealousy. Don't you begin it. I
could not stand it !'

She died, did she not ?'

She died,' he responded curtly.

And shall I die, too ? I cii die for you,
Keith. It seems to me as if, under some conditions,
dying were easier than living.'

She spoke very quietly, and her look had a
far-off serenity.

You will live to a good old age. You
have splendid health, Dorothy.'

Keith, you are my life ! Do not deceive
me!'

^ I haven't a thought of it, my dear!' her
tone was too earnest to suit his frame of mind.
Are you coming to breakfast ?'

A break in sentiment generally dispels it.

Yes, I will come. But, Keith!' — she put
her arms round his neck and touched his lips

with hers — ' remember I have given you my
life ! What should I do with it, if you — cared
for another?*

It gave him a strange kind of sensation
when this loving, pleading woman in the low
dress, with the silver trimmings glinting in
the sunlight, clung to him, her golden dishevelled
hair half hanging about her shoulders,
her warm red lips lifted to his, and the sharp
sound of pain in her voice as she talked. He
soothed her as one would a child, pleased
with her beauty, and yet a little wearied with
the chains he had himself riveted, and which
were the cause of her exactions. He kissed her
fondly again and again, not saying much, but
implying everything by his caresses, till she
was calm. That auspicious moment arrived,
he left her to the hands of Trimmer, who now
presented herself, eager to perform her accustomed
duties.

You should have let me sit up for you,
ma'am,' she remarked briskly, while she vigorously
brushed out her mistress's hair. ^ It is
very injurious to fall asleep by an open window.
No wonder you are chilly! Lady Mandrake
avoided draughts as she would poison ; and
it's my belief it was owing to those precautions
that she survived to a good age.'

I should not care to live to be very old
said Dorothy, whom the maid's chatter bored.
Everyone must die some day.'

Yes, indeed, ma'am ; and it's well to be
prepared, as the prayer-book tells us. But
premature deaths seem to be more unprepared
like. I should like to die comfortably in my
bed, with my hair all smooth and tidy, and a
frilled bed-gown, if I were a lady.'

Dorothy smiled a little, and cut the conversation
short by taking up a book.

Keith, meanwhile, moodily smoked a cigarette
in his wife's sitting-room — the only apartment
to which normal order had been restored
in company with Palis, who had had a good
supper, a good sleep, and was now on the quivive
for a good breakfast.

'What's the matter?' said the latter, when
he had watched for some minutes the curling
rings of smoke from his friend's cigarette,
You look out of sorts this morning. I
always say it is a mistake not to get a night's
rest. You young men try perpetual experiments
with your health, and then — patapouf I
one morning there comes a fit of the gout,
or a neat little paralytic attack, and you are
flange with a real bad illness.'

111-health is a bore, I dare say. I never

experienced it. But, Palis, it is women who
are the real difficulty. One never knows how
to take them. The gentlest and the best have
the secret of tormenting one.'

A conjugal row?' asked Palis gravely; ' it
is early days, surely !'

No such thing — no one could have a row
with Dorothy ; it is the extreme sensibility of
her nature which frightens me ; she feels things
so acutely.'

She looks always very quiet.'

Still waters run deep, you know. I believe
I was a fool to marry,' he added, with a sigh.
^ There is too much of the Bohemian in my
nature. I am too contradictory.'

You will get accustomed to it. Harness
tames even a racehorse.'

Jealous, bah !' said Keith, as if to himself.
^ Why the dickens should anyone be jealous?
If a thing is yours and you value it, keep it ; if
it isn't, what's the use of fretting? — there are as
good fish in the sea as ever came out of it.'

But that doesn't apply to wives and husbands.
Your choice once made, is made for
sever.'

Yes, indeed ; as Hume says, " I had my
choice of a prison, but that is but a small
comfort, since it must still be a prison." Weare

all apt to make blunders, and it is a bore
if the blunder be irrevocable.'

^ Mrs. Chester looked lovely last night.'

I know she did. She's lovely — a thousand
times handsomer than the Marchesa of whom
she is jealous, who is at least ten years older,
and uses pearl-powder ; but the Marchesa is
good company, has fine eyes, and amuses me.
One goes into society to be amused.'

Mrs. Chester doesn't understand that, I
suppose?'

She doesn't, more's the pity.'

Did she cry ?'

^ No, but I saw the tears in her eyes. Shea
darling, and I'm a brute. But I can't help it;
jealousy completely disgusts me. It is a weak
vice. Revenge I can understand — a man might
get some satisfaction from that.'

Do you know why jealousy annoys you ?
Because it gives you trouble — forces you to
take one side or the other, to care for something.
You are a thorough sceptic, Keith.'

So are you.'

Pardon, mon cher, I use other men's prejudices
for my own advantage. I use them
knowing what they are worth; I neither rail
at nor despise them. But, au fond I have my
own ideas. I say the prayers every day which

VOL. II. 8

my mother taught me as a child. I have a
respect for my country. I never lie except
from necessity. I owe no man anything, and
I am true to my friends. I make love to many
women, but I take good care not to marry one.'

The worst of it is, I love my wife dearly,
and yet I do the things that make her
miserable. Can you account for it? I really
do mean to make her happy, only somehow
she does not understand it.'

I imagine a man never really loves a
woman that he does not make her suffer
more or less for his infatuation. You must
sugar the pill, my boy — make up to Mrs.
Chester in other ways.'

Presents ! I have it. I'll go out directly
and buy her something — money shall be no
object. We will go together, you and I, and I
will bring back the smile to the eyes that
have shed tears, lot but what I suppose it's
really as natural to women to cry as it is for
men to whistle ; it never seems to spoil their
complexion or their appetite so long as the
exercise is indulged in in moderation.'

The day, which had commenced in golden
splendour, now gradually grew cloudy ; by the
time Keith returned with the filigree earrings
he intended as a peace-offering for his wife

the sky was gloomy and overcast, and in the
afternoon rain began to fall heavily. Mr.
Chester and his friend, possessed by the
usual masculine restlessness, sallied off to
play billiards at the Cercle ; and Dorothy
remained alone. Her heart was heavy, and
her head ached; she could settle to no occupation
; the night's dissipation had unstrung
her nerves and fatigued her body. She sat at
the window with a volume of Macaulay's
Essays' on her lap; but she neither turned the
leaves of her book, nor managed to attune her
mind to reading, and only idly followed with
her eyes the perpendicular falling drops in
their junction with the turbid waters of the
canal. Bright, beautiful Venice had lost her
character to-day; she was dull and grey and
gloomy. The sparse gondolas that crept sadly
along were closed and dingy ; the happy, gaudy
population of the streets had disappeared like
the butterfly before the storm ; the wind sobbed
round the carved balconies of the old Gothic
palace, and echoed the sadness of Dorothy's
heart. Keith's present of the filigree earrings
lay beside her in their velvet-lined morocco
case, but they gave her no pleasure. She instinctively
felt that they were bestowed as a species
of bribe.

8—2

I shall never say anything more lie
thought ; ' but if he understands me so little,
things can never be the same again. To think
that earrings could compensate for his not
caring for me as much as I thought !'

Mrs. Chester was inexperienced; she had
given up her own ambitious dreams for the
sake of love, and she forgot that her husband's
views on the subject might not comprise equal
self surrender. She forgot that a prize once
possessed loses its value proportionately in a
man's eyes.

Dorothy verily lived in his house, under his
eye, ready to appear at breakfast, dinner, and
all reasonable hours; how, therefore, could she
expect to be always in his thoughts ? It is
a very common and early mistake, that of
judging other's feelings by our own. True
and enlightened sympathy is the gift of
advancing years, of increased and bitter
experience; it is the heritage of suffering, the
price of pain. In youth the tones of the spirit
are not finely attuned; they do not vibrate in
perfect unison with the emotions of others,
nor give out a full and harmonious sound at
the touch of our groaning fellow creatures:
the heart is too self-absorbed to know aught
but that it lives and loves, and glows and

suffers. It is only when that heart has been
rudely torn and shaken and trampled upon,
when the glamour of pleasure and desire has
been rent aside, and the cry of humanity,
going up from a thousand lips, seems to find
an echo in our aching heart — it is only then
that Sympathy can extend her healing touch,
and in helping others learns the secret of her
own joy.

Keith was worldly and Dorothy was selfish —
through the very love which, exalting her idol
above heaven, left her defenceless alone on
earth — and each exacted from the other that
which it was out of cither's power to give. Thus
it seems to be always in life: we go blundering
hind stumbling along, like supers on an unlighted
stage, till one day unexpectedly a
brilliant stream of light falls on us, illuminating
all the dark places, and we see ourselves
.and others clearly at last. But then it is too
late. The corn has ripened, but there is no
friendly sickle at hand; the heart is bleeding,
but no one cares to stoop and bind it up; the
last faint spark of hope flickers out, and no
cherishing hand tends and nurses the flame.
We are alone, and we must abide alone till we
can lift our eyes to heaven, and discover there
the love which has been denied us on earth.

THE MARCHESA.

EITH's rendezvous with the Marchesa
at the Lido had really been unintentional.
He had never supposed
that, heedless of pearl-powder and
complexion, she would expose her charms
after a night's dissipation to the rays of the
morning sun, and lose the opportunity of
indulging in well-earned rest. He had not
asked her to meet him, and it was a surprise,
though naturally an agreeable one, when the
Marchesa and her cousin, smiling under the
shade of their broad-brimmed hats, greeted
him cheerfully. No one could blame him if
subsequently they had laughed and talked
together. The Marchesa was essentially hon
enfant, and an accomplished swimmer. She
was as graceful and nimble as a fish, could

take mad headers from a little swaying boat,
dive and lie in most bewitching fashion, rocking
on the waters, her full lips curved into a
smile as she gazed up at the blue heavens.
The display of her pretty gambols — though
perhaps Keith might not have approved of it
as an exhibition of his wife's prowess — was
naturally attractive to a man, and he returned
home with a light heart and a good appetite.
He felt perfectly innocent — his conscience reproached
him with nothing; so that Dorothy's
jealous reproaches provoked him doubly, as
being most uncalled-for and disagreeable. It
was certainly far more difficult to please an
adored wife than a lively friend. Presents,
indeed, offered an easy solution of the matter;
but even presents might satiate, and in time lose
their soothing qualities. Thus Keith gloomily
reflected while he played at billiards, missing
the easiest canons, and twice blundering
over the particular stroke which had proved
generally infallible, till he eventually succeeded
in losing two successive games.

I can't play to-day,' he said impatiently,
throwing down his cue, which he pushed over
to Palis, who stood in his shirt-sleeves with a
cigar between his lips, looking fat and rosy
and the very impersonation of good-humour.

Try your hand, old fellow, now ; you will
make more of it than I shall. I must take a
stroll.'

Take a stroll ! why, it is raining cats and
dogs ! You must be more than commonly
affected by the madness of the English to
suggest such a thing !'

It is raining,' said his friend, with a philosophic
shrug of the shoulders, looking out of
the window, and noting the large drops clinging
to the pane and the wretched expression
of a brown, bare-legged boy wedged up
against the corner of a doorway, where he
strove to find a scanty shelter from the storm.
(A southern population always appear to
look upon bad weather as a personal affront
offered them by the Deity.) ' But I don't
mind ; it won't hurt me. I shall go and pay
visits.'

Once in his gondola, no visit could appear
so natural and pleasing as that to the Marchesa
Bellaggio, on the plea of inquiring
whether she was fatigued, if she had caught
cold, and also with a view to trying over again
the violin Romance of Svendsen, which on his
last visit she had pronounced charming.

Keith soon found himself in her small
red satin drawing-room, where she sat alone

under a many - coloured Venetian mirror,
behind a very English-looking tea-table, on
which stood a small silver tea-kettle emitting
vapoury steam.

quelle chance!' said Keith; 'I never
dreamt of finding you alo'ae/

Because, I suppose, you did not wish it,'
she answered languidly, holding out the tips
of her fingers for him to kiss, in true Italian
fashion.

Of course I did. How can you suggest
the contrary ! I came purposely to know if
you were fatigued with your exertions.'

Swimming never tires me. It is so free
and fairy-like an exercise — very different frown
the tramp in thick boots along a muddy road,
which they tell me English ladies delight in.'

They would swim too, if they could do it
as well as yourself

Keith thought of Dorothy. What a pity
she had no accomplishments ! Then he took
the cup of tea the Marchesa handed him, and
at the same time gave one rash look into her
sleepy, lustrous eyes — eyes that hid rapacity
under languor, and selfish indolence under the
air of tenderest appeal.

Mrs. Chester is none the worse, I trust, for
her exertions ?'

As the Marchesa spoke she carefully poured
cream into her cup, watching him furtively,
but keenly, during the operation.

^ She is a little tired, I fear ;' and Keith
sighed.

The Marchesa immediately suspected something
beyond fatigue, and with joy scented an
intrigue.

Those fragile, ethereal - looking women
can't stand much fatigue, I suppose ; but then
they have such advantages : their very fragility
commends them to men's love and attention.
Confess you could not care for a woman if she
were not beautiful, gentle, dependent — appealing
to that sense of power which is inherent
in all men, but especially in you. Ah, I have
watched you, studied you.' (Keith did not
object to form an object of study to a pretty
woman.) ' You have your vanity too, though
it is well hidden away in that mysterious
heart of yours. By the way, though, is not
that a misnomer — have you a heart T

How can you ask, Marchesa ? I am a
victim to soft-heartiness.'

You male victims, you mean. I wish I
knew for a fact ' — the Marchesa poised her
head meditatively on one side — ' I wish I
knew. You are a riddle.'

A riddle to which I am sure you possess
the key said Keith gallantly, who believed
compliments as necessary to a woman's happiness
as cream to cats.

I ? Mrs. Chester, you mean. She is the
proper keeper of your heart ; and if I were in
her place I should not let it lightly go from
my care. Yet, do you know, there is something
to-day in the air that impels me to confidence.
Is it the intimate of the tea-table,,
do you think ? But to you, who know my
sad fate — married at fifteen, un vrai bee, to a
man I could not love (how could I ? he is a
nonentity, a peevish, sickly nonentity, a vegetarian.
Can such have a loving heart and
warm blood in his veins ? No, no!) — I must
confess how much I have honored for a true
marriage, a marriage of the heart — like yours !
to belong by every tie that is most sacred and
tender to one I could love passionately, who
would be a guide, a help, a friend — for we
women are so weak, and weakest when we
love most — to share his companionship, his
occupations, his thoughts. Ah, you will
think me "tete monte." Yes, it is a dream, a
dream of paradise — that one impossible ideal
which each one raises, and each one in his
turn is doomed to behold shattered at his-feet.

Well — somehow when I see you, and
thmk of your happiness, these kind of dreams
come to me. Is it not foolish ? but then it is
so innocent ; and how seldom we women of
the world can be innocent — like your sweet
Dorothy!'

The Marchesa stopped ; a tear glittered on
her lashes. She shook back the deep-hanging
lace of her sleeves and displayed a finely
rounded arm. Her dress to-day was more
than usually unconventional. She wore a
loose robe of some soft Eastern silk, which
seemed to have deliciously retained the sun's
rays in its hues of golden-red, and which hung
loosely about her, concealing the figure, and
being cut open in a heart-shape at the neck,
where it disappeared into floods of tawny lace.
Keith had never before seen her in so gentle a
mood, and her manner tinged With such
graceful sweetness.

Do not speak so, Marchesa!' he said ; 'you
whom we all admire, all respect.'

Respect is a cold word, Mr. Chester, and a
true woman hates the cold ; she shrinks from
it — for when cold touches the heart, it means
death J

The Marchesa was pale — too pale ; but her
lips glowed red, and her eyes were full of

light. The tea-table stood between her and
Keith, with its air of homely comfort, while
the rain pattered at the windows and the wind
blew shrilly outside. People asserted that the
Marchesa was artificial and designing. Keith
thought her infinitely sympathetic. Why is
it that experience so frequently teaches us to
distrust our own inclinations? — though first
impressions occasionally assert themselves
with unpleasant pertinacity, and refuse to give
way to reason or the warnings of friends.

Keith was a believer in the brotherhood of
sympathy, and had often blamed his wife for
her cautious method of making friends.

^ I like to wait,' she would say, ' and get tc?
know people.'

And yet, you little fool, you loved me at
first sight !'

Ah, that was because I was a fool,' she said
prettily. Then, with a sudden dash of remorse,
No, you know I do not mean that — because
love is love, and you are perfect.'

What had the recollection of this little
matrimonial episode to do with the Marchesa
and her large dark eyes, and her loveless
marriage, and her yearnings, and Keith's
presence at her tea-table ? Nothing whatever,
excepting that mental association plays us

strange tricks ; and that today both the
Marchesa and Keith dreamed dreams. Dreams
not capable of interpretation like that of Pharaoh,
nor yet possessed of any moral tendency,
nor yet innocent, as the airy imaginings of
rosy maidens in their morning slumbers ;
but dreams — impotent, idle, lying, wonderful
dreams !

Suddenly the red satin walls seemed to Keith
to part asunder, and to admit the cool vista
of a pale-green room with old-fashioned white
carvings, in which the fair head of a young
girl bent over her embroidery. This mental
picture was painted in the purest and freshest
of colours ; and though Keith continued to
look into the Marchesa's dark eyes, he now
saw only clear blue orbs. The picture indelibly
impressed on his memory from the first
day, restored the vividness of tender love and
of those ideas of purity and innocence that
had so charmed him at that period. Was it
not Dorothy's guilelessness, the spotlessness
of her spirit and of her beauty, that had bewitched
him ? — and were not these qualities
as truly and completely hers as ever ?

Keith slowly withdrew his gaze from the
Marchesa's face ; but she, with the quick perception
of a woman of the world, had already

noticed that his gaze was sightless, that his
thoughts were not with her, that his dreams
possessed no affinity to hers.

A constrained silence fell upon them. The
red walls had closed again, and Keith knew
but too well in whose presence he was.

When a woman has invited a man's confidence
by proffering her own — when the offer
has been doubtfully accepted, and instead of
the warm welcome she anticipated, her little
confessions have met with a cool reception — she
is likely to feel aggrieved — angry, if you will.
But the Marchesa's abandon did not comprise
any absence of self-control; she had no intention
of driving away her visitor by a silly disproof
temper. She wisely sheathed her weapons of
war, and elected to wait for a better opportunity.


Chance marquee, ce sera pour une autrefois,'
was the mental comment with which she
comforted her own impatience. Holding out her
hand with the frank action of an understanding
comrade, she said with a slight laugh :

There ! we have both of us been romancing
like schoolgirls, lever mind — it is a pleasant
and healthful amusement. I have wasted
your time for you ; do you owe me a grudge ?'

Certainly not ' — Keith rose at the clearly

expressed hint — ' but I rather think it is late ;
so I will leave you.'

Only to come again, I hope, for you have
not played anything ; and I was longing to
hear the Romance. Well then, it must be for
another day.'

Of course, Marchesa. You know I will
always play you anything you like;' Keith
bowed himself out, completely the man of the
world again. ' Time spent with you is always
most agreeable.'

Nevertheless, Keith's feelings were somewhat
of the order of his who said :

He who fights and runs away,
May live to fight another day.'

The rain had ceased, and he dismissed the
gondola, proceeding to stroll slowly along the
complicated network of narrow lanes and
traghetti, which he knew so intimately.

Poor Marchesa !' he thought -, ' she has a
heart, which makes it hard for her, though
for me there is no danger ;' and, thus thinking,
he repeated between his teeth those verses
of Monckton Milnes, which somehow sounded
appropriate to the situation :

When along the light ripple the far serenade
Has accosted the ear of each passionate maid,
She may open the window that looks on the stream,
She may smile on her pillow, and blend it in dream ;

Half in words, half in music, it pierces the gloom,
I am coming — Stale — but you know not for whom.

Stall — not for whom.

Now the tones become clearer — you hear more and more,
How the water divided returns on the oar ;

Does the prow of the gondola strike on the stair ?
Do the voices and instruments pause and prepare 1
Oh, they faint on the ear as the lamp on the view !
I am passing — Prem^ — but I stay not for you !

Prime — not for you !

Then return to your couch, you who stifle a tear ;
Then awake not, fair sleeper — believe he is here.
For the young and the loving no sorrow endures ;
If to-day be another's, tomorrow is yours.

May, the next time you listen, your fancy be there.
I am coming — Scar — and for you and to you !

Scar — and to you !'

VOL. II. 9

'j^MW'j mw ^^^v ■m\

CHAPTER IX.

IN THE Royal GARDENS.

leith, from this day forward,
gradually lapsed into the idle,
lounging life which his long residence
abroad rendered most congenial
to him. The Marchesa was a good
pianist, and it was astonishing how many
hours she found it necessary to practise with
Keith's violin. At other times he would
saunter, talk, and pay compliments to the
numerous pretty and fashionable women that
clustered, clad in the most brilliant of summer
garments, in the afternoon on the piazza, until
he earned for himself the title, unanimously'
bestowed, of the most agreeable young man
in Venice. The dolce far niente is a species of
existence that grows upon its votaries. One
hour spent in luxurious indolence makes it

easier to cla^^dle away the next, until the
slightest exertion becomes tedious.

Palis's bright sunny nature, and his gift of
song, naturally caused him also to be drawn
into the vortex of fashionable society, which is
pretty much the same all over the world,
being selfish in its pleasures, and insatiable in
its demands for amusement. Palis pleased
the company none the less by his show of
indifference and careless philosophy ; and his
presence at all social gatherings soon proved
indispensable.

Mrs. Chester, on the other hand, was not
popular. That graceful mode of wasting time,
while yet preserving the appearance of eternal
business, remained a sealed mystery to her.
The quiet village life, with its round of daily
duties, had created in her a desire for something
more satisfying than the chatter of
coffee - parties. Besides, she had become
thoroughly imbued with the true spirit of
Venetian life — its dreamy soothing influences
its charm of varied colouring. Nothing
pleased her better than to stroll through the
busy market-place, and note the wondrous
tints of fish and fruit, the gleams and
glitter, the gold and silver sparkles, the ruddy
fruit glowing in the baskets of the rosy

9—2

market women from Mestre, the wealth and
warmth of colony which, almost dazzling: her
unaccustomed eyes, had once inspired a Titian
or a Paul Veronese. Occasionally, sated by the
gaudy show, she would stroll into some dusky
church, where the sacrament lay exposed on
the altar, and the priests knelt adoring
before it, while the smell of incense filled the
heavy air.

Dorothy envied the faith which seemed
thus a part of the simple daily life, though she
could not share it. But sweetest of all to
her were the long expeditions in the swiftly
gliding gondola, which, now that Palis was
constantly engaged, she took alone with her
gondoliers, floating down narrow canals, where
the green waters lapped gently against marble
steps and moss-grown walls ; and through the
dim shadow of an arch gleamed the graceful
foliage of a vine or an acacia ; and bars of
golden sunshine suddenly struck the eye, or
snatches of melodious song fell upon the ear.
Long, lonely excursions did Dorothy make
thus, learning to love the solitude and the
silence.

One evening she wandered at the sunset
hour in the Guarding Real. Keith and Palis
were dining out with a party of men, and

her time was lier own. She had lingered
beyond the usual hour, feeling sad and listless.
Walking thus in the deserted gardens, now
forsaken by the fine ladies and dandies, with
their fans and parasols, where the air was
sweet with a thousand mingled scents, involuntarily
she thought of the words of
Alfred de Musset, which Palis had once sung

to her :

A Saint Blaise, a la Zuecca,
You etiez, vous 6tiez bien aise,

A Saint Blaise.
A Saint Blaise, a la Zaecca,

osseous etions bien la.

Mais de vous en souvenir

Prendrez-vous, la peine ? ^

Mais de vous en souvenir
Et dey revenir.'

^ " De vous en souvenir et dey revenir," ' she
repeated slowly ; ' already I, so young, have
memories — can I ever forget ?'

A Saint Blaise, a la Zuecca,
Dans les pres tiers cueillir la verveine :
A Saint Blaise, a la Zuecca,
Vivre et mourir la.'

How far off the old English life seemed
now; and yet how her very heart yearned for
it ! If she could but persuade Keith to take
up his obvious duties as a landowner, to build
cottages, improve farms, and look after his
own tenants, they would then have mutual

interests, mutual tastes. But here, Dorothy
sighed — companionship seemed impossible.
Mrs. Maynard visiting dirty poor people and
teaching little children, even against her will,
appeared in the light of a saint compared to
herself, wasting indefinitely the precious hours
of existence.

At that instant the ardent glow of the
descending sun attracted her attention. Sea
and sky met in one sheet of flame, except
where the line of shadowy buildings, their
arrow-like cupolas and minarets pointing
upward, formed a horizon; the vague violet
mass, with the great light behind it, seeming
to float in an incandescent lake. A wonderful
stillness pervaded everything. The sea was
confounded with the sky ; the one appeared to
reflect the other. All sense of existence felt
unreal and vague; mystery encompassed her,
life became spiritual, sublime. Then by slow
degrees, like hope dying out, the brilliant
colouring faded ; objects waxed misty and
opaque, a grey haze filled the place of the
gold and ruby gleams, and the air grew chill
and cold.

Dorothy started from her dreams, unclasped
the hands she had pressed closely together in
her thrill of enthusiasm, and turned to seek

her gondola. She found the place where she
had left it, stepped lightly in without vouchsafing
a glance at her attendant, so absorbed
was she in her reverie, and, somewhat fatigued,
leant back among her cushions.

The gondola shot swiftly out into the
lagune, now a clear unbroken sheet of
crystal, on which twinkling stars threw
quivering images. The plashing of the water
gently accompanied her thoughts ; she asked
nothing better than to float thus onward in
careless silence. But soon she noticed that
their progress lay in the wrong direction ; they
were drifting out towards the pearl-grey sea.
Venice and its twinkling lights lay behind
instead of before them. In her pretty half-broken
Italian she called out to the gondolier:

You have not taken the right Away ; I wish
to return to the palace!'

At the sound of her voice a man crouching
in the stern, whom she had not previously
observed, stepped forward, and said in
English :

We are not going home just yet, for I have
to speak to you.'

What have you to say T asked Dorothy in
sudden fear, for the night was coming, and
;she was never very bold, though the sense of

being accompanied by lier own trusty servant
had hitherto given her courage in her lonely
expeditions.

Do you not remember me ?' said the
stranger, now approaching closer. ' I remember
you perfectly!'

Why, I have never seen you !'

You have indeed, on one occasion —

think!'

Dorothy shook her head. There was something
in the calm insolent manner of this man,
his strange apparition, and her own un-protectress,
which alarmed her exceedingly,

Mrs. Parkinson introduced us,' he said ;
and I walked home with you one afternoon
at Droning ton.'

Then you are '

*Elias F. Joynte, Mrs. Parkinson's jt^r^^^^^^.^

Why did you disappear so suddenly ?
What are you doing here ? What do you
want with me ?'

Dorothy shrank visibly under the influence
of the sinister smile that curled the corners of
his mouth, where the scrubby black moustache
permitted it to be visible, and lurked in his
hard grey eye. Women, like dogs, instinctively
and unerringly scent the presence of
danger.

I shall tell you that presently ; but I want
to talk about yourself first. You seem to
enjoy Venice, but it is imprudent of you to
go about alone — indeed, scarcely befitting a
bride ! Where is your husband to-night T
he added roughly.

He is dining out. I cannot listen to you
any longer ; and, Mr. Joynte, I beg you to
leave me.'

Willingly, as soon as we reach dry land ;
I have no wish for a swim. And meanwhile,
as we are most agreeably alone together in the
midst of this solitary lagune, I fear you will
have to put up with my company; not to speak
of the fact that, as I took the liberty of sending
home your own gondola, this man is my
paid servant. Observe, therefore, that you
are in my power. We are a good way from
Venice, and your screams would not be heard.
I say this in order to warn you ; but I have
not an idea of harming you. I only want to
talk to you!'

Dorothy glanced helplessly round and
resigned herself, seeing that opposition would
be fruitless. The prow of the gondola was
now set towards Venice, but the distance
between them and the city remained considerable.


Do you really not know the cause of my
disappearance that day ? You thought it was
generosity on my part, eh ?' he chuckled disagreeably.
'Fear, then? idleness? — what?'

I thought, simply, that you were unable
to substantiate your accusations,' she said
quietly, ' and that you had wisely retired.'

^ Did you, now ? Well, it was nothing of
the sort !' Joynte's American twans^ increased
with his excitement. ' Mr. Chester jf^ax't/ me
to go!'

'It is false!' cried Dorothy, starting from
her seat, then sitting down again, with a sudden
remembrance of her position.

'Is it ? Ask him !'

He spoke with such a force of conviction
that for a moment she hesitated. There was
doubtless some strange misconception in all
this, which it was not her business to unravel;
but of one thing she was certain, Keith must
be innocent !

I don't suppose you are quite so infatuated
now,' proceeded Joynte, ' as you were at that
time. It was not such a very satisfactory
marriage for you, after all. You seem to have
a good deal of spare time on your hands ; and
a young wife is naturally riled about that.
Such a pretty creature as you are, too !'

Dorothy winced. If the suspicion had never
crossed her mind that it was not quite usual
for young married women to spend their days
in comparative solitude, at least she knew
that to listen to a hint of such a thing from a
man like Joynte was impossible.

My affairs are my own!' she retorted with
spirit. * If you like to say anything about
yourself — if I can help you' — she glanced
doubtfully at his comfortable grey suit, and at
the picturesque soft felt hat he wore — ' I am
ready to do so.'

Thank you. I am not starving,' he said
with a sneer. ' Still, you can help me. I wish
you to be my ambassador with your husband.
You have beauty, influence, I suppose — unless
the Marchesa Bellaggio has robbed you of it
all ! He must listen to you ! Tell him I want
the remainder of the sum he promised me,
and a little more besides. A fellow like me —
a bit of an epicure — can't live on nothing. I
am very fond of horses — I could breed them
in my own country; but for that I must have
capital.'

If you have any claims on Mr. Chester,'
said Dorothy firmly, beginning to recover from
her alarm, and to resent the fact that her
womanly compassion was being traded on,

you lead better write to him, or ask for an
interview. I cannot take any messages; and
this is in no way my business.'

^ Do you refuse ?' Joynte's voice trembled,
but whether from passion or fear Dorothy
had no means of judging, the whole of her
energies concentrating themselves in a feverish
desire to reach home quickly.

Yes ; I refuse.'

Then, Mrs. Chester, I am sorry for you ;
but whatever evil consequences happen, must
rest on your own head. Your husband is a
criminal I I could bring him to j justice any day ;
but I should have held my tongue if you had
obeyed my orders. I can tell you a strange
story indeed ; he '

I don't want to hear!' she put her hands
to her ears to shut out the sound of his words.
^ I don't want to know anything. You
are a vile informer — the lowest thing in the
world r

And you are a fool !' He seized her roughly
by the arm ; she thought he was going to harm
her, and could scarcely repress a scream. ' But
you will repent this, and one day come to me
for mercy ! I shall know everything that you
do. I shall dog and follow you everywhere.
You can't escape me ! Do you still refuse ?'

Yes faltered Dorotliy, feeling giddy with
pain and excitement.

They were now in the midst of the city ;
lights were flashing, people talking and singing,
boats passing. Joynte would dare nothing
here, she believed. Very soon, indeed, though
to her it seemed an eternity, the prow of the
gondola grated against the marble steps of her
palace, and Joynte cried harshly: ' Get out !'

She obeyed slowly, for her limbs were
trembling under her. Once more she stood
alone and safe at her own door, while the
gondola floated off, and bore the men away
into distance and obscurity. She waited a
little before she summoned strength to rinsr
the bell and lift the heavy brazen knocker.
The servant, when he appeared, seemed surprised
to see her thus alone.

Is Mr. Chester come in T she asked, striving
to regain her usual composure and appear unconcerned.


Receiving an answer in the negative, she
ordered some chocolate to be brought to ber,
lest her lack of appetite should excite suspicion,
and hurried to her own room. She wanted to
be alone; she wanted to think, to still the
beating of her heart and the feverish excitement
of her mind. First, however, she must

endure the ordeal of Trimmer's attentions,
suffer the assistance which she dared not
refuse, listen to her questions as to what she
required, during the slow process of dis-robins.
Then would come the refreshment-tray,
and many tedious moments must elapse
before Trimmer consented reluctantly to depart,
and Dorothy remained free to hide her
face in her hands and think.

Keith a criminal ! What did it mean ?
The idea was ridiculous, impossible, foolish.
Crime and gentility were decidedly incompatible
— in fact, divided by an abyss — then her
love returned with a strong, hearty gush.
Keith, who was wise and clever, whose misfortune
it was to be so perfect that universal
admiration fell to his share and caused her
jealousy — the very suggestion was treason to
his good qualities. Never again would she
be jealous, but, on the contrary, shield him
from foul accusations, believe in him, try not
to doubt him. It was envy that had originated
these slanders, she was sure — envy of his
beauty, his fortune, his happiness, of her love
and at this thought she smiled.

Now restored to her habitual calm, she rose
and walked to the looking-glass, where she
contemplated with disapproval her swollen

features and her red eyes. She began to
bathe them industriously, telling herself that
dull looks could give no one happiness. Her
well-meant efforts succeeded, for when Keith
returned at a late hour, flushed and talkative,
a serene and happy woman stood ready to
welcome him. The sight was a contrast to
the society he had just left, and his face
beamed with agreeable surprise :

Dorothy,' he said, * how pretty you look !
There is no one to compare with you. The
fellows were deadly stupid to-night, and sang
out of tune. After all, there is no place like
home. Give me a kiss, dear, and tell me what
you have been doing in my absence — sighing
or fretting ?'

Neither,' said Dorothy, as she threw herself
on his breast, and nestled happily in his
arms.

She did not breathe a word of Joynte's
communication. It seemed to her as though
suspicion were too vile a parasite to be permitted
to exist near Keith, and that the mere
mention of it would sully her pure lips. ' I
trust him, and he trusts me,' she thought
and what do I care if all the world is against
us ? — no one can ever part us now.' The
sense of irrevocable possession is occasionally

Keith's Wife.

the veriest two-sided sword, and cuts the
deeper the closer it is pressed to a loving
heart ; but to her at that instant it afforded
inexpressible comfort.

ON A Terrace.

Dorothy contrived to keep her fears
and her sorrows to herself upon
this occasion ; though afterwards in
spare hours, of which she had many,
and quiet moments, which her affluent position
freely afforded her, they swooped down
like a swarm of stinging insects upon her
mind, and pricked and worried her. In one
respect Joynte's accusations proved beneficial,
for they caused her to attach herself with a
greater pertinacity of affection to her husband,
and to avoid all reproaches and jealous suspicions.
Her sweet, well-balanced nature
resumed its normal calm, and while she
eagerly availed herself of every opportunity
of enjoying her husband's society, she endeavoured
to make herself as pleasant and
necessary to him as possible.

VOL. II. 10

Keith soon noticed this agreeable change,
and readily profited by it without troubling to
ask any questions. Joynte, indeed, appeared
no more on the scene, though for many days
Dorothy scarcely dared venture out of doors
alone for fear of meeting him. People gradually
began to desert Venice, and the English
girl caught herself sighing for the shade of
wide-spreading trees in her own native land.
Not so Palis, whose mysterious mission to
Venice lengthened indefinitely, like Penelope's
task. He seemed to expand, to grow fatter
and rosier and merrier with the heat, which
relaxed and enervated everyone else. In his
grey alpaca coat, loosely knotted tie, and wide
white pantaloons, he sauntered about, provokingly
cool and happy, blowing the cigarette-smoke
in epicurean indolence from between
his lips.

Keith; on his part, did not suffer from the
heat, though it rather bored him. He had
adopted as a relaxation the habit of passing a
portion of the sultry day sometimes in playing
the violin to the Marchesa's accompaniment,
sometimes on the terrace of her palace, where
the breezes blew in fresh from the sea, and the
Marchesa herself lay, in a light thin garment,
gently rocking in a hammock. No

further confidences passed between them ; her
matrimonial difficulties were only incidentally
alluded to, as when she spoke of her husband's
absence on their country estate, and remarked,
that it was pleasant to be free to do as you
liked in hot weather ;' or when, in answer to
Keith's inquiry as to how much longer she
intended to stay in Venice, she answered,
I don't know ; I am very happy as I am.
It is so dull in the country ;' adding, as she
saw a question rising to his lips : ' There is
only my husband there, you know. The
house is too small for company, and the roads
are bad.'

Keith understood all that was conveyed ki
these simple words, and made no further
inquiry. He liked to see the Marchesa lying
there, so handsome, so cool, and so good-humoured;
he liked to talk and smile, or sit
silent and listen to her pungent remarks on
men and manners, and her original and independent
views on the ' rational cultivation of
pleasures as she termed it. ' I have the
supreme contempt,' she asserted, ' for people
who take their pleasure as children do their
medicine, because it is given them. Now
pleasure is a study. The first necessary
is, that you should weed your society; 



body is not fit to enjoy. You must choose
your surroundings — your scenery as they say
on the stage — and avoid fatigue, for satiety is
the grave of pleasure. In addition, there are
numberless other gifts that require to be cultivated
: the senses of smell and taste, the
faculties of the eye, the ear, the nose — general
taste in fact, for the vulgar may stare and
grin and wonder, but they have no notion of
pleasure, which is a fine art not to be mentioned
in the same breath with dissipation.'

Certainly, if the so-called fine art consisted in

making everyone else's comfort subservient to

hers, the Marchesa understood pleasure to

perfection; for while Keith quietly smiled at

her paradoxes, and she herself played with

her fan — lifting it gently, letting it drop

languidly, fluttering it coquettishly, waving it

mysteriously, closing it abruptly — she kept

Count Pinsuti ever on the trot carrying out

her behests. It was ^ Count' here, 'Count'

there, ' Count' everywhere; the patient little

fellow trotting hither and thither, puffing

perspiring, yet always obedient and devoted.

Naturally, with the impotent envy of an inferior

nature, he hated Keith, though he privately

cheered himself with the comfortable assurance

that the Marchesa's liking for the Englishman's

society was only transitory, the mere caprice
of a pretty woman. To this end he determined
to relax none of his efforts to please,
and to continue to deserve her favour by
making himself necessary and invaluable.

How hot it is here,' she remarked one day
to Keith, as she lay in her hammock among
the orange and oleander bushes that grew in
tubs on her terrace. ' I like it; the heat seems
to infuse fresh life into me. No sun is too
burning for my comfort — in fact, purgatory
will have no terrors — but you suffer, I suppose.
You look so hot, you poor creature, who come
from a chilly country.' ^

I don't mind it,' said Keith, though he
gasped a little ; ' but he ' (pointing to the
Count's retreating figure) ' must find it hot
and rather trying — you never let him sit still
for a moment.'

Exercise agrees with him,' said she airily ;
he is like those dogs — retrieve, don't you
call them ? — who are never happy except when
they are fetching and carrying. If he did not
do that kind of thing for me, he would be
doing it for some one else. People dilate on
the wrongs of slavery — '^ je men moque
bien " — some people are born slaves — and
Count Pinsuti is one of them.'

Do you think they like to be slaves ?' said
Keith pensively.

Certainly ; it is their nature. I don't
much appreciate the species, but probably they
have their interest and their use.'

I suppose everything has its use ?'

Yes. Even you have your use. You
have made my summer very agreeable to me.'
She said this in a casual kind of fashion, quite
as though it were not a bit of a complimentary
speech; indeed, without pausing, she abruptly
added, ' When do you leave Venice?'

I really scarcely know.'

Depends on your wife, I suppose,' she said,
with a flirt of her fan.

No, but '

On what then ? you will scarcely lay the
blame on me, I presume. Ah, Count ' — this to
the faithful servitor, who having returned, now
stood patiently offering her a larger fan —
really I am very sorry; the breeze has risen ;
I don't think I feel hot now — in fact, a little
chilly. Would you mind fetching me a shawl ?'
She accompanied these words with a bewitching
smile, and the little man trotted off again immediately
with a half stifled sigh, previously
wiping his face.

There now, you see,' she said, triumphantly,

to Keith. ' I told you he likes it. But to
return, when are you going ?'

Are you anxious for my departure?'

I think you can guess whether I am ; but
sometimes an unpleasant certainty is preferable
to uncertainty.'

I will stay till you bid me go.'

And your wife ?'

Married people are one. What pleases
me, pleases her.'

Verily, a model couple.'

The Marchesa lifted her eyebrows, turned,
and resting herself on her elbow, gave him a
queer unbelieving look. * Mrs. Chester does
not like me; she scarcely ever pays me a visit
now.'

An omission, I am sure,' he said hastily.
I will tell her — it is pure forgetfulness.'

Don't trouble yourself Your wife is no
fool, and you make a mistake in treating her
as if she were ; she is a clever woman.'

eyes?'

^ Don't look incredulous : she is, I tell you,
a clever woman; and she loves you, consequently
has sharp eyes. I should not like
Mrs. Chester for a rival. She is just one of
those women who say nothing, keep very
quiet and mum, and suddenly swoop down

upon you, when you least expect it, with some
overwhelming piece of diplomacy.'

Dorothy is no diplomat. She is simplicity
itself.'

Who said she wasn't ? Simplicity is the
most consummate art, and the keenest weapon
of women and diplomats. Believe me, you
don't half understand your wife; but you are
not singular — not every husband does understand
his wife.'

Keith resented this summary disapproval,
feeling it to be a subtle commentary on his
intelligence, and naturally preferring to believe
himself above the ordinary run of fools. At
the same time he was anxious to propitiate
the Marchesa, yet not desirous of discussing
his wife's faults or perfections. The Marchesa
noticed his annoyance, and inwardly rejoiced.
The little Count at that instant reappearing,
she signed to him to approach and pour out
some sirop and iced water that stood on the
tray beside her. She took the glass from his
hand, and as she did so, slowly lifting it and
looking into his face the while —

Your health. Count ; drink mine now, for
you must be thirsty, and our pensive Englishman
also. Shall I drink to your health, Mr.
Chester, and that of your fair wife ?'

As you please, Marchesa; good wishes are
never to be despised. But your sirop is too
sweet for me. May I have cognac and seltzer-water
instead?'

Keith returned home somewhat moodily
inclined, to find Dorothy more than usually
merry. At dinner she bantered him gaily,
and even asked kindly after the Marchesa.
Keith sipped his hock, thought her more than
commonly pretty, and wondered in his own
mind if she were a diplomat. The cool white
garments she habitually wore brought into
relief her golden hair and fair complexion.
Her face was bent over her plate, and her eyes
fixed on the rosy peach she was preparing "for
his delectation.

There, dear, it looks very juicy;' she said,
handing it him nicely peeled, with a spoonful
of sugar. ' And now, who do you think I
have heard to-day is coming here?'

'Who?' he asked, with his mouth full, drawing
her towards him and making her perch on
the arm of his chair. ' Your mother and sister ?'

Dorothy laughed.

I can't imagine their starting off on so
long a journey. No, it is the dearest and best
of women — I mean, of course, except mamma
and Margaret, who are dearer and better still.'

Who is it, then ?'

^ Keith, you will delight in her, I know-have

some more sugar, dear? You will like
her so much. I only hope I shan't be jealous
of Lady Darlington.'

Oh! is it Lady Darlington?'

'Yes — don't look grave — she and Lord
Darlington will be here immediately, and she
has asked me to order their rooms at the hotel.'

Stuck-up English swells, I suppose they
are; and that is what you think charming!'

They are not stuck-up; she is a little dear,
and I have always heard he is a good fellow.'

Hunts, doesn't he?'

Yes, keeps hounds, and knows such a
quantity about everything in the country;
and they have besides such charming children.
Keith, I Wonder whether you like children;
I don't think I ever asked you.'

She laid her face against her husband's
cheek, so that he was forced to put down his
Vine-glass to kiss her.

Yes — Lady Darlington is a perfect woman,'
she said presently; ' I like her exceedingly.'

Some one else is perfect, too,' he said
effusively; though he wondered a little bit
whether all this talk of Dorothy's were not
diplomacy, and if she were holding up the
Darlingtonss to him as an example to be copied

a kind of grown-up edition of the good boys
and girls in tracts, who never did anything
wrong, and lived happy ever after.

Notwithstanding the doubts sown in his
mind by the Marchesa's clever innuendoes, he
still believed in Dorothy's simplicity, still
credited her with no after-thoughts.

What brings the Darlington here at this
season ?' he asked ; ' the gaieties of London are
scarcely over.'

Oh, they do not care for gaieties. The
hounds are the most troublesome things in
their establishment — everything has to be
regulated by them; and it seems July is a
month when nothing particular is required —
there is no regular hunting nor cub-hunting
only an occasional show of hounds, and Lord
Darlington has for once consented to miss
them.'

How knowingly you talk !'

Because, you see, I have heard of all this
fi'om Lady Darlington. I don't know much
of him except that he is a bold rider, a great
judge of hounds, and that Lady Darlington
adores him '

And so you think I shall adore him too —
eh, Dorothy?'

Not necessarily. But men — Englishmen —
always seem to have a kind of freemasons

amongst themselves by which they at once
find mutually interesting topics of conversation;
and I am sure you cannot have much
in common with these Italian men.'

Keith stroked his moustache and smiled.

Nor, perhaps, shall I have much in common
with Lord Darlington. I rather dislike men
who can talk of nothing but horses and
hounds.'

Keith dear, you will try to like him, for
my sake, won't you?' she said earnestly,
unable to banish the secret hope from her
mind that somehow Lord Darlington's advent
might lead to a return to England, that again
to Keith's becoming a practical landlord and
a resident in the country, a result culminating
in the realization of her dream — to have a
wider, happier sphere of life. These vague
enthusiastic visions floated now unceasingly
before the mind of the fair English girl, leaving
her no rest as she sat in her palace at Venice,
surrounded by treasures of art, satiated already
with the gorgeous colouring of nature, the
sunsets and moonlight effects. Her head, full
of sundry similar cogitations, was just now
pillowed on the shoulder of the handsome man
whom she called husband, but of whose inner
soul-experiences and former mode of life she
remained profoundly ignorant.

IN A Garret.

grievance,

LIAS F. JOYNTE was an American
by birth, but he was also a member
of that vast human family these
whole existence is one gigantic
whose heart and thoughts and

faculties gradually rot themselves away in
aching envy and disappointment. He was
young, he was ambitious, and he was discontented.
From the day when, as a mere lad,
he had been told by some idle busybody that
his cousin Ida Phaer, heiress to the family
wealth, seemed a likely match for him, until
the day of her death as Keith's betrothed,
when the discovery was made that she had
left the latter all her fortune, Joynte had felt
that his life was a mistake — felt it and chafed
under the sensation until he almost went mad.

Quite mad, the authorities averred, when,
under Keith's advice, they locked him up in a
madhouse. Latterly he had attained his
liberty, but never his freedom of mind ; he
still lived only under a kind of protest, he
was still haunted by a terrible fear of incarceration
in those dreadful prison walls, still
driven to lead a kind of skulking, frightened
existence. Moreover, since his interview with
Dorothy he kept pretty closely hidden, stealing
out only at night, or else to seek his food
in one of the low trattoria of the neighbourhood.


He had found himself mistaken in his
estimate of Dorothy's character, having
fancied she would possess a timid nature,
nervous excitability, and a weak vacillating
disposition in accord with her blonde and
fragile appearance. He had hoped she would
succumb to his threats at once — agree to his
terms, and offer him a large sum of money
for silence. Instead, making all due allowance
for a first thrill of natural feminine fear, he discovered
her to be calm, self-possessed, and full of
logical common sense. True, he had still the
option of holding over her head the threat of
unknown terrors, which by their very vagueness
have power to quell the lustiest courage;

yet how was it possible to be sure that she
might not impart her fears and indignation to
her husband ? who in that case would promptly
proceed to immure Joynte again as a maniac,
perhaps even, if he had threatened her, as a
dangerous one.

It was for this reason that, having played
his trump-card, and made the appeal to Mrs.
Chester, he now remained in the seclusion of
private life in a garret. The two hundred
pounds given by Keith, together with the
small sums he had extracted from Mrs. Parkinson's
good-nature, had by this time almost
entirely melted away : forty pounds alone
having been frittered in a week's insensate
dissipation among boon companions on his
way through Paris.

Elias was not a drunkard by nature, nor a
riotous liver, but he had a gift for dribbling
away money : he dribbled it chiefly in company,
and probably enjoyed it less than the
associates who laughed at him for his pains ;
but there was a kind of almost pathetic
generosity about the man, inducing him to
stand treat on all occasions, when he had
anything in his pockets. Fortunately, Venice
was a place in which one could live economically
— where butcher's meat was an unnecessary

luxury, and there was nothing to pay
for sunshine.

In order to arrive at Joynte's abode, it
became imperative to plunge into a labyrinth
of narrow alleys, each bearing the closest family
resemblance, until you reached a tall flesh-coloured
house, with dilapidated green shutters,
ois which the paint peeled in flakes, and
which, whenever there was any wind, flapped
uneasily on a set of rusty hinges. The lower
part of the house consisted of a small general
shop, the wares of which were chiefly displayed
outside, the inside being stifled in dirt
and darkness, and encumbered by strings of
tallow candles, baskets of gourds, bundles of
dried seeds, mouldy-looking cheese, etc. ; and
lighted dimly, only in the far background, by
a wick burning in a saucer of oil, before a
hideous little plaster Virgin, decked out in
tinsel and pink paper.

The presiding genius of the shop, a fat
Jewess, with gold necklace and earrings,
passed a great portion of her time seated in
the doorway bargaining with customers, but
apparently seldom able to conclude a satisfactory
transaction, which reduced her means
of livelihood to an interesting mystery.
Possibly her lodgers contributed no inconsiderable

item to the domestic revenue ; for
up a dark, rickety stair, smelling strongly of
grease and garlic, you eventually attained to
2b couple of garrets, one of which was, at the
present moment, occupied by Joynte. Hereunder
the tiles, sweltering in the baking July
sun, he sat smoking in a dirty shirt, leaning his
arms upon the window-sill, whence hung a few
gaudy rags, and a crimson carnation drooping
its heavy scented head far below the pot in
which it grew, as though thoroughly ashamed
of its humble position, and yet unable to
conceal aught of its beauty and its fragrance.

Here Joynte sat and ruminated the livelong
day, looking down with sullen eyes upon the
busy street-life below ; upon the fruit-sellers,
and the gondoliers lounging, spitting, and
lolling against the doors of the wine-shop at
the corner ; at the Jews, with their shabby
clothes, their greasy looks, and aquiline noses,
cringing rapidly by ; and the sailors, with
their bronzed faces and long earrings, laughing
with pretty girls in brilliant-coloured
handkerchiefs and shawls. He sat brewing
bitter hatred and resentment within him, and
longing to find some means of wreaking his
revenge.

VOL. II. 11

LADY DARLINGTON.

ORD and Lady Darlington had
indeed arrived in Venice. Lady-darlington
brought with her a maid,
a fat pug, and a collection of photographs
of her darling children, in every variety
of size and attitude, little Letty's first tooth
mounted in gold and hanging to her watch-chain,
and a bit of Hetty's golden hair in a
locket round her neck. Her pocket and
travelling-bag contained a bundle of letters received
at different stages of the journey from
nurses and governesses, with the latest reports
of the state of health and spirits of the
children, and abounding in such details as the
variations of the weather, and the increase or
decrease of the infant's appetite.

Lord Darlington brought with him a valet

and a courier, his kennel-book, stud-book, and
Bailey's Magazine which proved an engrossing
study at all times, both convenient and inconvenient
— in railway trains, during tedious
halts at wayside stations — in the suite of dull
and solemn hotel apartments, where a large
gold clock and a pair of candelabra formed
the chief ornament and decoration, yet for
which ninety francs a day were charged, in
honour of the fact that the English family
were a milord and a milady of the very
highest rank (the courier took care to impress
this on everyone he met), and understood
little else but English, which, while a trifle
inconvenient in foreign travel, yet proved their
high distinction, and that they were the kind
of people who counted accomplishments as a
secondary consideration.

On this the evening of their first arrival in
Venice, it being then past the usual English
dinner-hour, to which, whenever possible, they
religiously conformed, they sat in the vast
palatial apartment prepared for them ; my
lady busy arranging the children's photographs,
and my lord on the sofa, reading the
last accounts received of hounds and horses
from the stud-groom.

All well at home,' said he presently, laying

11—2

down his letters and making room for my
lady beside him on the sofa. ' Swivel says
the roan is sound again, and Warrior is going
like smoke. Duchess's puppies will be magnificent,
marked just like their father, and already
as game as possible ; there isn't a scrap of distemper
in the kennel. He is having Spilikins
broken in for you ] so, thank God, that's all
good news.'

He doesn't say anything about the children,
does he ?' said her ladyship, with a touch of
anxiety in her tone.

Not a word. But his letter was written
before the telegram you received this morning,
so it is all right.'

Of course,' she said pensively, ' telegrams
are quicker than letters, but they are not so
satisfactory. Dear little Letty had a slight
cold when nurse wrote, and I particularly
wanted to know if she had tried the linseed -
tea.'

The hay is all safely in, and the crops look
beautiful. Swivel says. If we have an early
harvest we shall begin cub-hunting comfortably
; but I wish to goodness I could have
been there to superintend the laying out of
the new thorn covert. They are sure to make
a precious muddle of it without me.'

It was very good of you, dear, to take me
for this trip said his wife, affectionately slipping
her hand through his arm ; ' because I
know what a quantity of things there are for
you to do at home.'

^ Never mind, Mna, for once, though it is a
nuisance about the thorn covert. Foreign
countries altogether are a mistake, I think.
The champagne was abominably sweet in Paris;
and I never saw such a way as they farm
abroad — the land divided into those absurd
little patches, sometimes only an old woman
to dig them ; the barbarous lingo they talk,
too. However, I suppose it is all right ; and
one must travel occasionally.'

You are the dearest and best of fellows in
the world,' said Lady Darlington exclusively ;
'I really wanted very much to see Dorothy
settled in her palace. It sounds so funny — a
palace for ordinary mortals ! But I shall
never ask you to come abroad again — at least,
not until little Letty is older, and we can take
her. We must show her the world, you know,
Buffie.' (This was her husband's pet name,
given him during his brief period of featherbed
soldiering, and used by his comrades as a
diminutive for his title of Lord Burfleet.)

I suppose we must he said regretfully \

but anyhow, we will choose a time when
there are no confounded thorn coverts to be
made.'

Lord Darlington might have been born in
those prehistoric times when we are told
there were giants in the land.' He was of
such abnormal stature, so big and so bluff ;
and yet so genial and gentle withal, that
women and animals felt no fear of him, and
indeed generally loved him. Though his
limbs were gigantic and his strength exceptional,
his face was as innocent as a child's.
Keen grey eyes looked out at you from beneath
the broad honest brow, and the complexion,
rosy and clear from early hours and
constant exposure to fresh air and cold water,
glowed with the freshness of early youth.
On this account perhaps it was that little
children unblushingly twined themselves
round his legs whenever they found the opportunity,
and dogs and cats purred and
wagged their tails or leapt upon him, with
the innocence and sense of protection peculiar
to the young and undeveloped of their
species.

It was a sight to see when he appeared in
the hunting-field, smiling and serene, in his
neat scarlet coat, and riding one of his handsome

horses, took his place in the midst of
the joyous hounds, with their banner-like
waving tails. How the farmers touched their
hats, the gentry came quickly up and wished
him good-morning, the ladies bowed from
pony-carriages, and even the small boys holding
open gates pulled with a will at their
forelocks in token of respect, with perhaps a
lurking expectation of halfpennies !

He had a word and a smile for all, so that
while his equals respected, his inferiors adored
him. He was so profoundly simple and so
profoundly just — two qualities that are often
found together ; so conscious of his own
duties and privileges, so unconscious of his
dignity ; so tolerant of his own rights, and yet
so interested in all the sorrows of his poorer
neighbours ; such a man and, above all, such
a gentleman, as to make the veriest Socialist
pause and think better of it in his bitter abuse
of the aristocracy.

Little Lady Darlington, with difficulty
hoisting herself as high as his arm, looked
up proudly in his face and worshipped him.
These two simple people, surrounded by their
children, their dogs, and their horses, and
absorbed in uneventful country pursuits, were
perhaps the most unintellectual and happiest

couple in existence — a fact that might seem
subversive of the prevailing doctrine that
knowledge is power — they had so much influence
in their way, and so little book-learning.


Lord Darlington was usually habited in a
suit of grey homespun, breeches and gaiters
complete, the product of his own mill ; but
on the occasion of his visit to Italy he so far
deferred to public opinion as to wear trousers
instead of breeches, still retaining, however,
the grey material. It would have been therefore
impossible, as he stalked through the
streets of foreign cities, attired in this easy
and unconventional costume, to mistake him
for anyone but a born Englishman ; and indeed
he would violently have resented being
treated like a foreigner, for whom and his
ways he cultivated the supreme contempt,
saying in his loud, hearty tones, to which his
little wife cried vainly, ' Hush!' :

An Englishman is worth a dozen foreigners
any day, and will fight them all round — he
will, indeed, by Gad!'

This innocent bravado not appearing to
injure anyone — the foreigners in question being
indifferent to insults they could not understand,
and continuing, like the silly creatures

they were, to tear off their hats, make room
for madame, and grimace according to their
ridiculous usage — gradually the young lord's
martial ardour expired, and he began to look
with a more favourable eye upon the renowned
objects the courier pointed out as worthy
of notice, being even finally persuaded into
admiring the strange and stately aspect of the
Queen of the Adriatic.

Poor benighted creatures !' he was heard to
say; ' fancy their taking all this trouble to-build
a town in the middle of the sea, where *
there is not even a pack of hounds within
reasonable distance !'

On the morning after their arrival, when
the gondola sent by Mr. Chester appeared to
convey them to their friend's palace, where
they were expected to breakfast, Lord Darlington
sarcastically eyed the conveyance and
exclaimed :

The hansom of Venice ! Slow and inconvenient,
very; damp, too, but cheap; a
saving in horseflesh and extra helpers, very
likely!'

I think it is lovely,' said his wife ; ' and
does not shake a bit. Oh, Buffie, you must
give me one for our lake at home; it would be
so nice!'

'And import one of these fellows, too, I suppose?'
he said, surveying the gondoliers. 'No,
I thank you ; I much prefer an English coachman
who thoroughly understands his business.'

During the time occupied in traversing
the space between the hotel and the palace,
Lord Darlington gave vent to various other
derogatory remarks about the economy of a
gondola ; such as, 'that they were dingy-looking
articles at best, and that the canals
did not seem particularly odorous, and that no
man could keep his figure if he were always to
be punted about in this ridiculous fashion.
How, indeed, did the people ever get exercise?
No wonder the women grew fat and the men
flabby!' at which Lady Darlington laughed,
and then vowed she could see a great deal of
poetry in it, though perhaps in time it might
become a trifle monotonous; besides which,
she was not quite sure whether Venice would
be healthy in the long-run, certainly not for
children.

And thus, in the most amiable of tempers,
the pair arrived, were received in the vast cool
hall by le Goui himself, more impressive and
condescending than usual; slipped a little on
the polished parquet of the long gallery, and
finally reached Mrs. Chester's boudoir.

Then the two ladies rushed into one
another's arms with exclamations of:

How are you, dear ? How nice you look !
Not a bit changed.' ^ So kind of you to come T
A nice cool dress ! Paris, is it ?' ' And the
children all well, I hope?' while the gentlemen,
in their more sober fashion, contented
themselves with shaking hands.

Then all four, the ladies having finished
their embraces, looked at one another in
silence, as though much surprised and
a little embarrassed at the meeting — as is the
habit of English people. Finally Lord Darlington,
in the tone of one imparting valuable
information, said :

Uncommonly fine weather for the harvest V

Yery hot,' echoed his dutiful wife, with a
pant.

The usual weather here,' said Keith
airily, while Dorothy drew her friend into a
cool corner of the apartment.

Presently Palis appeared, and then further
presentations took place, which were cut short
by a summons to the breakfast-table.

You call this breakfast?' said Lord Darlington;
' I call it dinner, all except the soup.
What stomachs foreigners must have!'

We eat less often here than in England,'

Keith said, with a smile, as he noticed that his
guest's appetite was excellent; ' and the food
is lighter.'

Your cook has not yet quite attained to
the true Provencal seasoning, however said
Palis deliberately.

Lady Darlington looked up surprised; and
Palis, imagining she was asking for salt,
hastened to offer it, and, in so doing, upset
the contents of the salt-cellar.

'Never mind!' he cried, gallantly pouring
some claret over the snowy mound on the
table-cloth. ' I will soon make it all right.
There, I forgot ; what have I done ? I knew
claret and salt were connected somehow.'

The decorous le Goui here interposed and
speedily restored order, while Palis let off a
few conversational fireworks in the shape of
paradoxes in order to divert the attention of
the company.

Is there any society here ?', asked Lady
Darlington, when she found a favourable
opportunity. ' I should so like to see some
fine Venetian ladies.'

Her ladyship's mind was evidently a little
hazy: she had visions of Titianesque beauties,
with ruddy waving hair, wearing velvet gowns
and stomachers of precious stones.

There are several here — beauties — would
you prefer a Marchesa or a Confess?' said
Palis ; while Lady Darlington, unacquainted
with the foreign titles, wondered what he
meant. ' I should recommend the only Marchesa
in Venice now for your inspection.
Chester can tell you all about her; he plays the
violin with her every day.'

Lady Darlington, looking up questioningly,
intercepted a flash of appealing reproach sent
across the table by Dorothy, and the little lady
immediately decided upon her after-breakfast
chat. She had not long to wait, for Mrs.
Chester almost immediately suggested that they
should take coffee in her boudoir, and while
the gentlemen smoked their cigarettes Lady
Darlington and herself should inspect the
palace. Dorothy had not been long in her
friend's presence before she felt the old sense
of peace and comfort steal over her, and the old
faith and trust return. Lady Darlington did
her duty bravely: she admired marqueterie
and buhl cabinets, and old Venetian mirrors,
and silver caskets, and valuable embroideries,
looked at the view from Dorothy's bedroom
window, and examined the fine old quilt sewn
with lilies, not caring a fig about any of these
things, but only longing for the moment to

arrive when lie might draw forth Dorothy's
confidence, and hear, as she mentally expressed
it, ' all about everything.'

How happy you must be, dear,' she said,
when at last they came to an anchorage on
the low sofa in the boudoir, beside which
stood the table with the steaming coffee in
quaint capo-di-monte cups, and the liqueurs in
the thinnest of Murano glasses.

How delightful — how interesting Mr.
Chester is, and how beautiful your palace — you
have everything you wish for. We shall never
get you home again, I suppose?'

I should be very happy to come home,'
said Dorothy, with a sigh. ' Have you seen
mother and Margaret lately? It seems to me
such an age since I spoke to them. One
seems to make such an enormous stride of
time in a moment after one is married.'

Have you many friends here?' said Lady
Darlington abruptly.

None, that I care for.'

Not even the Marchesa, of whom they were
speaking?'

Certainly not.'

But she is an old friend of your husband's ?'

I believe so.'

Dorothy turned away her head, but her

persistent little friend, seizing her by the chin,
twisted it round so as to obtain a good view
of her eyes.

Dorothy, what is the matter ? ^

Nothing, Lady Darlington, I assure you.'

There is, though. Why don't you make a
friend of this woman ?'

I don't know.'

You do. Tell me, dear.'
^ Because '

Well, why?'

Because I hate her ! There ! the murder
is out; now please forget all I have said, for —
oh! here are the gentlemen; for heaven's sake
don't betray me, for I think,' and her voice
sunk to a whisper, ' I think Keith rather likes
her.'

WHAT LADY DARLINGTON THOUGHT.

JTTLE Lady Darlington lapsed into
unusual silence after receiving this
confidence, while inwardly deciding
that if she could help it, matters
should not remain in statu quo. Alone with
her husband, on the return journey, skimming
the waters in ghostly fashion — the silent
moving gondola plunging one moment into
deep mysterious shadow under arches that
looked as if they might serve the purpose of
an entrance into hell ; at other times emerging
into silvery moonlight, almost as bright as
daylight, only far colder and chillier, and less
sympathetic — she slipped her tiny chubby
hand into her husband's big one and sighed.

Tired, dear ? ' he said, puffing at his big
cigar. ' Sight-seeing is very fatiguing, and to

my mind one clinch is exactly the same as
another.'

^ Yes said Lady Darlington absently, her
mind wandering far from sights and wonders,
for which, indeed, she had but a very partial
admiration, laboriously cultivated, though regarding
it as a solemn duty to ' read up '
Murray conscientiously, and to listen to all
the explanations offered by garrulous and
silver coin-loving cicerone s.

Buffie,' she hazarded again, easing her
anxiety by another sigh.

Yes,' he said. ' What is it?'

^ I want to speak to you.'

Speak away; I am listening.'

Not here ; when we reach the hotel,' with
a shy glance in the direction of the gondoliers.

They can't understand a word of English
said her lord contemptuously.

I don't know. They may, perhaps. Besides,
these canals at night are so creepy.
What was that gave a splash — a rat ? — or was
it some one trying to drown himself? It is
dreadfully lonely and mysterious here.'

Nonsense, little woman ! I can only see
a set of mouldy old houses, with moss growing
up their sides, though I am aware of a strong
smell of dirty water.'

VOL. II. 12

Her ladyship here relapsed into a silence
which she preserved unbroken until they
reached the hotel and were once more safely
installed in the palatial apartment with its
painted frescoes of life-size gods and goddesses,
its stiff velvet-covered furniture, and its large
gold clock occupying the chimney-piece, on
which the photos of the children were distributed
with a lavish hand.

Lord Darlington mixed himself a tumbler
of whisky and soda-water, lighted another
large cigar, then, settling his huge limbs in one
of the armchairs, looked inquiringly at his
wife.

She again said ^ Buffie,' and stopped.

Well ?' he said encouragingly.

Buffie, I am unhappy about Dorothy.'

Already ? It seems rather unnecessarily
early, especially as you are already troubled
about Letty's cold. I think Chester capital
company. You had not led me to expect half
so good a fellow; fond of hunting — nice lightweight
too. Told me all about the Roman
hunting. Says he shall buy some horses, and
ask my opinion about them first, when he
returns to England. His wine and cigars,
too, are excellent. Altogether, I should say
it was a very well managed establishment.'

^ Do you really think so ? Well, I always
maintain I had rather have your opinion about
people than that of any one ^ else I know.
You are such an accurate judge

^ Habit, my dear; when a man is always
judging hounds and horses, it makes him
sharp and observant.'

But really, Buffie,' her ladyship spoke
diffidently, for Lord Darlington's opinion
always inspired her with the deepest respect,
on this occasion I don't think you have given
enough attention to the subject. Think over
it a little. The facts are '

I know. Pretty little girl, countrified, a
trifle too pale and thin for my taste.'

Here Lady Darlington smiled consciously,
for her own enibo7ipoint caused her many
anxious moments, the longest walks and
rides seeming to make not the slightest impression
upon it.

He married for love, of course, for the girl
had not a shilling ; she had never seen another
man, and there was a bit of bravado about it,
and spite of her mother and relations. Keith
Chester is a man of the world — sensible
fellow; she is a little schoolgirl ; finds marriage
not quite the bit of silly sentimentality
she expected ; naturally confides this to a

12—2

friend of heF youth. A dozen children will
soon settle that little difficulty, my dear.'

Lord Darlington stopped, out of breath,,
after this lengthy speech.

It isn't exactly that,' said Lady Darlington.
' I am afraid Mr. Chester is not all
he should be ; that Marchesa we heard
about '

Is that the way the wind blows ?' said her
husband, emitting a prolonged whistle. ' If
so, Chester is a fool ; it is early days for him
to tire of his love-match. My dear, I can't
believe it. Women are so impressionable, you
know. So she told you this, did she ?'

Lord Darlington took the cigar from his
mouth, and remained absorbed in thought.

She told me a little ; but we were soon
interrupted. I think — I am sure she is miserable.
/ should be, I know, if you looked too
much at another woman.' Little Lady Darlington
shuddered at the mere idea.

'Not likely, is it, Nina?' and he pinched
her cheek affectionately.

'But what shall I do, Buffie?' pursued the
affectionate creature, stroking the sleeve of his
grey tweed suit.

Nothing, do nothing,' he said emphatically.
Least said soonest mended, and don't, above

nil, encourage confidences. For my part, I
could see nothing unhappy about her. She
laughed and talked as merrily as a colt neighs
.all breakfast-time.'

^ Yes, with that absurd man Palis. I
laughed too. What an oddity he is! But
one may laugh and yet be miserable. I have
often laughed and cried in the same breath;
for instance, when Letty tumbled off her
pony, and I cried because I thought she was
hurt, and then I laughed when I found she was
not hurt, and looked such a little queer object
covered with mud; oh yes, I know how it
feels. Buffie, dear, I think you might do a
great deal for poor Dorothy.'

Go on — what shall I do?'

Talk to Mr. Chester ; you know how
popular you always are with men;' be nice
and friendly to him, persuade him to go back
to England and live on his property; it is so
much more natural, you know. They could
travel with us — that would be delightful — and
once in England, Dorothy would be among
her own people, and the Marchesa out of sight
and out of mind. I know what it is to be at
home; but a palace isn't a home — there's no
one cares for you, there's no farm, no garden,
no poultry-yard, no poor people '

You have the sentiments of a true Briton
there's no place like home, eh? Well,
I'll see what I can do; will that satisfy
you?'

Oh yes,' and she seized him round the
neck and gave him a good hug. She did not
believe that any affair Lord Darlington felt
inclined to interfere in could long remain a
tangle, for she knew what excellent common -
sense he possessed, and how quickly he disposed
of any quarrels that occurred in the
hunting - field, actually accomplishing the
herculean task of pleasing every one and yet
of upholding the right. So she quickly reassured
herself about Dorothy, and went to*
sleep that night a happy and contented little
woman.

The following morning she was up betimes,
staring out of the French window, which
stood open, at the strange and varied sights
that met her eye: fisher-boats, with orange
sails, carrying crabs, shell-fish, and sea-fruit
of all kinds, guarded by tawny-limbed arranged
fishermen ; gondolas stationary, with
their attendants brushing, dusting and tidying,
or gondolas moving, filled with ladies, chiefly
English, wearing blue veils and carrying
Murray s;' distant cupolas glittering in the

sun, market-women with baskets of peaches,
peasants — a motley array; and while she looked
on with interest, listening to the hoarse,
unintelligible cries and guttural squabbles,
mentally wishing Lord Darlington would
make haste and dress, so that they could
start for the Chesterss' palace and put their
little diplomatic action in train at once. At
last his lordship appeared, ruddier and fresher
than ever, straight out of his cold bath, like a
giant refreshed.

I am so glad you have come at last. I
have been waiting for you so long; do make
haste, dear, and have your breakfast, that we
may go off at once to the Chester.'

But his lordship was in no hurry. He ate
his breakfast leisurely — meat and eggs and
ham, just as if he were in England — washed
down with claret-and-water, and then he
smoked his cigar and read his letters, and
found there were two or three he must answer,
which he accordingly did in a rough and
clumsy writing, getting very hot, and giving
vent to a great many sighs over it, besides
inking his fingers and his pocket-handkerchief.
All this while his wife stood by, inwardly
chafing, and volunteering her assistance, which
was as persistently refused.

Do let me write for you, dear,' she pleaded,
^ I can do it in half the time

Not a bit of it. Swivel wouldn't understand
it at all if he didn't see my fist, and
there are a whole lot of orders about the mares
and the foals, which I must explain myself
carefully.'

The letters over, his lordship dallied still
to read the latest accounts of racing, and the
prospects of the harvest, in the morning paper,
having concluded which, he was at last persuaded
to fetch his hat and to follow her
ladyship, who, by this time, sat like a statue
of patience in her gondola, shading her face
from the burning sun with a white cotton
parasol. It was the hottest part of the afternoon,
for Lord Darlington had not hurried
himself with his preparations, and at this hour
Keith was wont to take the air and indulge in
musical and artistic talk on the Marchesa's
terrace. Palis glibly imparted to them this
information, when the couple landed at the
steps of the Chesterss' palace and confronted
him, cool, cheerful and unconcerned as usual.

^ I am going there myself presently,' he
added ; ' if you like to be introduced I'll
take you. She's a very handsome woman,
the Marchesa, and capital company — quite a

favourable specimen of Italian aristocracy.
Will you come?'

Lady Darlington threw an anxious, inquiring
glance at her husband. What if he too
were to be inveigled in the enchantress's toils?
His lordship hesitated a moment.

Well, I've no objection ; I haven't a thing
on earth to do here. My wife can stay with
Mrs. Chester meanwhile, and we shall all be
back to dinner.'

Which I have taken the precaution to
order,' said Palis.

Well, I suppose it must be so,' said Lady
Darlington resignedly, as much as to say, ' I
can't help myself, but I feel this is a temptation
of the devil's, and ought to be resisted, if
you only understood.'

The two men then bowed and departed,
leaving the little lady alone on the doorstep,
with le Goui regarding her admiringly. She
heaved another sigh — the third the poor soul
had emitted in the last twenty-four hours —
then turned and followed the well-bred servant
into Dorothy's presence.

You have come alone,' said the latter
warmly, rising from a low chair and looking
like some gentle violet near a gorgeous rose,
beside the more ample presence and accentuated

colouring of her friend. ' How kind of
you, dear Lady Darlington.'

Don't you think said the latter, ^ now
you are married you might call me Nina. It
is more comfortable.*

Dorothy, with a little show of reluctance,
yielded to her wishes, and as they feat familiarly
on the same sofa there seemed every
prospect of a fine flow of confidences. Contrary,
however, to Lady Darlington's expectations,
which, womanlike, had soared high in
anticipation of some food for gossip, no confidences
were offered. Dorothy talked freely
of the pictures, of the hot weather, of Venetian
life, of trips to be taken in company to the
Lido and other picturesque spots, asking
many questions about her home, her mother
and sister, the Vicar and his wife, and local
affairs, but saying not a word of her own
inmost feelings or of her matrimonial im-broglie.
Lady Darlington dared not ask or
seek information. It would clearly have been
disobeying her husband's injunctions ; she
therefore experienced a decided ebb and check
in her eager curiosity.

What do you do with yourself all the afternoon?'
she said presently.

I stay at home, read or write, or sleep

while it is very hot. Then we go out in our
gondola, Keith and I, or Mr. Palis, till dinner-time,
and again in the evening.'

You must pass a good many hours alone T

Yes said Dorothy ; ' it is unavoidable, I
suppose, when one is married. I suffered
from the solitude at first, having had mamma
or Margaret always at my elbow in old days.
But it has its advantages, too. I read a good
deal now ] I have taken up my studies
again.'

I see a big, well-worn book there in your
work-basket. What is it? Though I scarcely
know why I ask, for even if you tell me,. I
shall be as wise as I was before. I never
read a stiff hook in my life — can't even understand
how anyone can.'

Dorothy drew the book from beneath her
embroidery.

It is " Peines et Delits," by Beccaria,'
she said, holding it up for her friend's inspection.


What a dry thing ! What is it all about ?'

It is a treatise on crime and its punishment.
Beccaria is the great authority for such
things, I believe. I found the book on an old
bookstall, which accounts for its ugly appearance.
You see, I try to improve my French. '^

Why not read French novels ? Have you
none ?'

Plenty !' Dorothy laughed. ' Keith reads
nothing else. See, here they all are : with
long names and short names, and every
variety of title — all kinds and sorts, nice
and nasty, I believe. I am tired of seeing
all those yellow covered volumes lying about,
for I don't care for novels ; they don't
interest me — since I hnYe lived one,' she added,
with a mysterious smile ; * serious books suit
me much better, and send me to sleep too, if
necessary.'

But mme — what interest can crime have
for you T persisted Lady Darlington.

Oh, a great deal,' said Dorothy airily. ' I
always thought criminals interesting, and liked
to read about them — don't you ?'

No ; crime is such a vulgar thing.'

All crimes are not — political crimes, for
instance, or those that spring from revenge,
love, jealousy.*

I presume I am not poetical !' said Lady
Darlington, smoothing out the frills of her
govvn. ' I decidedly prefer a quiet humdrum
existence to any amount of romance; but
you were always high-strung. Dorothy, do
you remember I warned you when you were

engaged, and told you bow to keep your husband's
heart ?'

I remember — by good dinners ! But I
have had no chance of putting your advice in
practice. Keith had already such an excellent
cook, and a treasure in le Goui ; and Mr.
Palis understands the culinary science to perfection.
There is no room for my talents.'

What is Mr. Palis ?' said her friend.

^ A journalist — a poet — a man of the world
everything, I think, in turn, but nothing
long. He told me himself the violent friendships
he takes up never last more than two
months.' • ^

'Is it a violent friendship for Mr. Chester ?
and has he much influence over him ?'

Lady Darlington felt she could safely satisfy
her curiosity on these minor points without
disobeying her lord.

No ; they are old, but very calm friends.
Keith likes and admires him ; you see, he has
always been accustomed to bright and gay
society.'

Ah, my dear !' said Lady Darlington,
with a profound air of knowledge ; ' I always
distrust men who have apparently nothing on
earth to do but to trot about after one's husband
and humour all his whims — creepers

I call, them — nasty, cringing, wriggling
things; they always end by becoming a
woman's lover or her enemy.'

You quite misjudge Mr. Palis,' said
Dorothy gaily ; ' he could never be either.
He is too simple, and too indolent.'

Simplicity, and a journalist ! Be sure
my dear, that is all put on for your edification.
Besides, he is half a foreigner, and too
fond of onions and garlic'

That is true; but he likes sugar-plums,
too — chocolate especially.'

'I don't understand the creature' — Lady
Darlington shook her head dolefully — ' and I
don't want to. My advice is, get rid of him,
my dear.'

And order dinner myself, is that it ?' said
Dorothy, now fairly brimming over with
hilarity.

CHAPTER Xii.

COUNT PINSUTI ASSERTS HIMSELF.

ORD DARLINGTON did not share
his wife's disparaging opinion of
Palis. The latter possessed in a
high degree that quality, raj:e
indeed, but essential to a diplomat, or one who
aspires to be a leader of men, and the absence of
which embitters and endangers friendship —
that quality, of so intangible and subtle a
character as to defy definition, which only
takes root in intensely imaginative and
sensitive minds — Palis possessed tact He
understood how to suit his conversation as
neatly to his company as the Florentine
cabinet-maker does the woods of various tints
and textures which he fits together to compose
a table, or some ingenious and beautiful
piece of handiwork.

Palis judged people rapidly at a glance ; he
seized the salient features of their character
correctly, and his sentiments took their cue
from the prevailing hue of his associates'
thoughts ; in the presence of quiet people of
somewhat obtuse intelligence, crushing his too
vivacious manners, his exuberance of spirits,
toning himself down into a subdued gentility,
relieved by the faintest spice of natural malice,
sufficient to give a sparkle and zest to the
conversation.

Lord Darlington was a simple straightforward
country gentleman ; he loved horses.
Palis talked of horses, though, to save his life,
he would not have dared seize one by the bridle,
preferring always to avail himself of a seat
in a lumbering and safe barouche, in company
with old or young ladies (young preferred).
Yet, in the course of his miscellaneous reading
and 'getting up' of journalistic subjects, he
had stumbled upon sundry bits of recondite
knowledge about horseflesh, which he now
aired for Lord Darlington's edification. He
discoursed copiously on the breed of Arabs,
showed acquaintance with their special points
and peculiarities, and knew which was the
true strain of blood.

Lord Darlington warmed visibly, offered

the speaker a cigar, took one himself, and said
he had long thought of importing some Arab
mares, but believed it did not answer.

You cannot get them — at least, not the
best,' said Palis knowingly ; ' the Sheikhs
will not part with anything really valuable :
money will not tempt them.'

I once had a steeple chase mare,' said
Lord Darlington, 'who was bought by the
Egyptian Government to run a race of endurance
with Arabs. The distance was eighty
miles, and she was ridden by an English lad,
too. She beat them all ; and yet she was nota
wonderful animal, by any means — a stayed,
certainly, but she had no sjDeed ; that does
not say much for the Arab horses, does it ?
when the English mare beat them on their
own sand, under their own sweltering sun.
The English horses are the finest in the world.
Austrian and Prussian horses are as soft as
butter. Puncheons can't do fast work, and
Arabs have no shoulders.'

'No doubt of it,' said Palis enthusiastically.

My dear fellow, come down and stay with
me in December, at Lovemere Hall, and Forgive
you a mount worth the finest Arab in the
world, on such a splendid animal as, I'll be
bound, you've never crossed. I bought him

VOL. II. 13

in Ireland — that's the country for horses ! His
dam ran in the Derby ; and I'm having him
broken in now for her ladyship to hunt next
winter.'

Palis accepted this offer of hospitality with
outward glee, inwardly registering a vow that
nothing should tempt him in the depths of a
chilly winter to go within miles of a place
where the inmates talked of nothing but sport,
and the very women rode to hounds.

Presently Lord Darlington, suddenly recalled
to a sense of the object of their expedition,
which he had momentarily forgotten in
the delights of horsey talk, put a few leading
questions respecting the Marchesa to his companion.


Is she really handsome ? — does Chester
admire her T

She is a splendid woman !' emphasized
Palis, throwing his dimpled short-fingered
hands about expressively (he loved dark and
joyous beauties). ' Charming, unscrupulous,
plays the piano delightfully ; but I don't
think cares a ^g for Keith — or, indeed, for
anyone except herself !'

Excellent ! I am afraid Keith is a flirt ?'

By habit only. By nature he is cold — a
sluggish circulation. I believe him to be

devoted to his charming wife, in his own
peculiar indolent and " grand seigneur "
fashion. He ought to have been a King
Ahasuerus, and he would have held out the
golden sceptre to Esther with becoming
dignity !'

Do you think he gives himself airs ?

jSTo, no ! You don't understand me.' Palis
lowered his voice and became confidential,
patting the cushions rhythmically with his little
fat hands. ' The airs I speak of are innate —
he is unconscious of them. He is naturally
haughty, contemptuous, cynical by temperament,
but so exquisitely refined, and has suchj^er-
sect manners, that he only appears superlatively
and un-Engiishly polite. The English are not
very polished, you know,' he added apologetically.


We don't make phrases said Lord Darlington.
' Thank God for that ! I hate
palaver. But if you want a downright honest
friend, the true Briton is your man. He might
not step into the gutter and raise his hat whenever
he meets a woman he does not know, to
oblige her ; but he will stick up for an absent
pal " behind his back, and remain your
friend through thick and thin.'

Certainly. My best friend is an 



man. Do you know him — Hugh Yen-naked
?'

I haven't the pleasure of his acquaintance.
Is he in your line of life ? Literature, isn't
it?'

Into, he can't scribble a bit. Besides, he's
the eldest son of a very rich man ; but he goes
in for music. Plays the piano — has a touch
like Chopin! — and sings delightfully. A
splendid fellow! He would come up to my
room this summer straight from the river in
his flannels and play the piano, just as he
was, till we forgot all about the dinner-hour.'

Ah !' said Lord Darlington, who was not a
bit musical ; ' but you're fond of your dinner,
ain't you? Know all about it, too, in a kind
of connoisseur way, don't you ? I should prefer
your friend if he hunted.'

^ I dare say he does ; he rides, I know. We
intend to set up house together, when we
return. His father keeps him very tight ; but
that won't signify — we shall be very happy !'

Exactly,' said Lord Darlington, whom this
domestic talk about a stranger now slightly
bored ; puffing in the direction of the canal,
he added : ' Are we near ?'

His new friend, quick as thought, changed
the venue, and rattled off on a new subject.

While the two men thus discoursed, other
events were taking place in the Marchesa's
palace. At an early hour of the afternoon,
and previous to Keith's arrival, Count Pinsuti
had asked an audience of the Marchesa.
She, Sultana-like, replied that he might wait ;
which he accordingly did. The lady's prime
principles, in her dealings with men, being
that they must never be treated like kings, but
like slaves — slavish adoration being the natural
outcome of unreasoning worship — and men, asa
rule, bore out the truth of her philosophy by
humbly cringing at her feet, and gratefully receiving
any stray favours she might chance to
fling to them. The favours being pretty impartially
distributed, the charm of rarity and
doubt was thus added to their value.

The Count had for some time enjoyed a
more or less undisputed monopoly in the
share of her smiles ; that is to say, according
to her arbitrary valuation. He fetched
and carried more than anyone else, waited
more patiently, obeyed more implicitly, admired
more earnestly, and consequently was
doubly appreciated. All this, however, dated
from the prehistoric period — before Keith's
advent.

Since then the Count had been snubbed,

set aside, contemned, almost brutally driven
away. With the stubborn endurance of a
narrow and ignorant mind he waited — at first
patiently, then impatiently, but always silently
until he finally decided that an explanation
must take place this very day. The Marchesa
was welcome to treat him badly, but
she should treat no one better ; she might
frown upon him, but she must not smile upon
another ; she might depress, degrade, humiliate
him, but she should riot exalt another, especially
when that other was a married man,
on whom all the gifts of fickle fortune had
already been showered.

Thus decided within himself the Count of
the ape-like face, the old and honoured title,
and the sly and cunning disposition. He
himself could have married any day a wife
from among the best families in Yenice ; but
he preferred to remain single and dally with
the Marchesa ; and he scornfully rejected the
idea of yielding an iota of one of his hardly-earned
rights.

The Marchesa, at her toilette, sitting in front
of her mirror, gazing with admiration at her
long silky hair with the blue sheen gleaming
in its ebony depths, smiling at the reflection of
her handsome face, and debating whether she

would wear a tawny yellow or a creamy white
robe on this afternoon, knew nothing of the
Count's strange aberrations. Lapped in the
lazy luxury of her own fancies, she had neither
perceived the Count's pique, his smothered
rage, nor his final boiling up of despair ; indeed,
it is doubtful whether in any case she
would have condescended to notice it, for she
was a very great lady — and great ladies are
not easily put out by the strength of other
people's feelings.

Her husband was absent at the tiresome
country-seat where she was always so extremely
bored. He was happy superintending
the harvest, the olive-yards, the tree-planting,
drilling dull peasants, and hearing the evening
croaking of from's. She was alone in Venice :
and she saw Keith every day. The mind of
the Marchesa (but would it not be flattery
to call that a mind, which was only a chaotic
mass of selfish desires, purely personal aspirations,
languid enjoyments, vanities, puny
conceits and vacuity?) was set upon enchaining
Keith, and displaying him as a captive attached
to her triumphal car ; and further, upon
estranging him completely from the innocent
and gentle woman who (her rival was forced

unwillingly to confess it) still reigned supreme
over his affections. ^

Hitherto, the Marchesa scarcely dared hope
she had made any definite impression upon Mr.
Chester; he still conversed as unconcernedly
as on the occasion of his first visit to her;
still played his violin; still drank his tea, or
sipped iced lemonade, with the air of a man
perfectly at home and indifferent ; and
though spending much of his time in her
company, she could construe none of his bantering
talk and graceful compliments into the
semblance of a tender sentiment, or anything
but the pleasant intercourse of two musical
enthusiasts.

How I could ever have let him go,' she said
to herself reproachfully, 'when he was last in
Venice and we were friends, without finding
out half the charm he has for me — that it
should have been reserved for me to know
this only when he was married to a pretty
baby — is incomprehensible to me. Fool that
I have been !'

The Marchesa, whose coiffure was completed
to the satisfaction of herself and her bright -
eyed Italian maid, now decided upon the tawny
yellow costume, and leisurely descended to the
salon where the Count had already impatiently

waited for about three-quarters of an
hour.

The process of waiting when you have something
disagreeable to say, that you are anxious
to get said and done with, is not one likely to
cool an ardent lover's anger and jealousy; and
the Count was by this time stewing and choking
with rage, and more determined than ever to
provoke a decisive explosion.

Count ! Good-morning ! I am afraid I
have kept you waiting a little she said, sailing
in unconcernedly, and looking more gracious
and fascinating than ever.

'You always \ee^ meriting; and if it is
your good-pleasure, I do not complain,' said
he, bowing low over her hand ; ' but there are
otlw things of which I complain.'

The heat of the weather, perhaps ?' she
said haughtily, interrupting him; ' you should
go en villegiature. The Marquis writes that
the country is charming, but even if it is hot,
you need not complain of the heat — a wiseman
bears inevitable ills in silence.'

If they are inevitable !'

What do you mean?' she said coldly, seating"
herself. ' Why do you talk in riddles ?
You have nothing to complain of, I am sure !'

You do understand, then, that I wish to

complain?' he said, taking a chair near her,
and looking earnestly and firmly into her
face.

Of what?' she said languidly, examining
her slim fingers, the diamond rings on which
sent sparkling rainbow flashes across to where
he sat.

Of you!' he said hotly; 'of you, whom I
adore.'

If I don't adore you, what possible right
does that give you to complain? I don't
quite see the drift of your remark,' she said
pointedly, dropping out her words with carefully
adjusted deliberation and indifference.

You loved me once !'

Never !' she said more quickly, though
still preserving the same cold and equable
tone.

Before that man — that idiotic Englishman
came,' he persisted, ' you loved me ! I came
and went as I liked — you encouraged me — I
was necessary to you !'

You come and go now. it seems. Count,'
she said, in a more cutting tone, smoothing
out some folds of her gown with suppressed
irritation, ' whenever the spirit prompts you.
You were here this morning before I was even

dressed!'

And you made me wait. I waited.'

Of course ! What else would you have ?
That is what you came for, I suppose?'

Listen, Madame la Marquise ' — the little
Count's voice trembled; he rose hastily and
perambulated the room with crisp quarterdeck
stejos — ' I will hQ first in your affections!
I was so once.'

And if I ivill not, sir, my will is as strong
as yours, I am convinced; let us talk of
something else.'

No — no ! You always put me off with
excuses, you shall hear me out ! I have proved
my devotion to you; I demand my reward!
Send away the Englishman, and let all the
past be forgotten; we will live again in a new
and brighter future.'

I shall not send away the Englishman.
Who will play the violin to me?' she said
firmly, ignoring the rest of his peroration.

'Then / will!' answered the little Count,
his eyes sparkling, and his diminutive ugly
appearance gaining a kind of dignity from
this resolve. ' If need be I shall kill him ;
and he may learn what is the vengeance of an
Italian I'

The Marchesa kept silence, and looked with
dismay at the speaker. He was small, but

he was sharp and cunning : a midnight
vengeance — a stab in the back — truly such a
contingency was possible.

You would not really carry out your
threat?' she said persuasively; 'I know you
only say this to frighten me.'

I say what I mean. My love for you is
very serious, madame, and not to be trifled
with!'

But, Count, be reasonable. Sit down ; listen.'

The Count turned his head to listen, but he
did not sit down.

Let us be the very best of friends. You
shall come here whenever you like : will that
satisfy you?'

Yes, if you send the Englishman away.'

The Count subtly surmised that, his rival
once fairly out of the way, the path would lie
clear for him to urge his suit.

He will go soon,' she said, in a distinct
voice ; ' he must return to his own country.
Why should I quarrel with him?'

'Marchesa, you can choose; I have said my
say.'

The Marchesa threw him a swift look of
hatred; and the door at that instant opened
and admitted Mr. Chester.

Count Pinsuti immediately rose; and after

the customary greeting, into which he infused
a satirically exaggerated politeness, he took
his leave, saying in a warning voice to the
Marchesa, as he did so :

^ I shall return later to receive any orders
you may have to give me, madame.'

The Marchesa bowed her head slightly, but
did not speak for some moments, during
which she leant back in her chair, gloomily
contemplating her small slippered foot. She
was taking a resolution; the crisis had come
upon her sooner than she anticipated. The
Count, on whom she had proudly trodden,
wormlike had turned ; he must be crushed at
once, and for that she needed' an ally. To
secure the ally she needed reflection.

Keith, on his side, cool, gentlemanly, and
pleasantly amused, seated himself in his accustomed
place to await the lady's good pleasure,
unconsciously fingering a cut-glass phial containing
eau-de-cologne, which lay on the small
gold console beside him.

The silence lasted a while. These two were
intimate enough now to understand and appreciate
silence. At last the Marchesa roused
herself. Possibly she had decided upon her
course of action ; the resolution was taken.

Mr. Chester,' she said slowly, ' don't you

think the Count has become very tiresome ? I
am in a bad temper to-day. The sirocco is in
the air, perhaps, or I am more sensitive than
usual, but it gets on my nerves. What is one
to do when that happens to one with an acquaintance
?'

It is difficult to say. Drop the acquaintance
quietly, I suppose.'

Impossible !' The Marchesa made a gesture
of despair.

Then be firm and determined ; decline to
receive his visits.'

Impossible !' again said the Marchesa
despondingly.

^ What is to be done then? Tolerate him?'

Impossible ! He will not be tolerated,'
she said in a low voice.

'Ma foi ! What can I advise ?'

Yet you alone can advise me. I believe
you to be my sincere friend.'

Keith's eyes answered :

Certainly.'

You do not know how often I need a real
fi:-iend.'

Keith looked sympathetic.

I thought ' She stopped, and treated

him to a glance fi^om her fine languorous eyes,
in whose depths he could read passion and

entreaty. ' I thought ' she resumed with

an apparent effort ; then suddenly: ' Oh, Mr.
Chester, I am so lonely

She buried her face in her hands and burst
into tears.

So proud a woman in tears! It affected
Keith somewhat, though at that moment he
knew with certainty that it was only compassion,
and no tenderer sentiment, moving
him to take her limp hanging hand, and
whisper in her ear:

Calm yourself, my dear Marchesa.'

I will, if you tell me,' she murmured low,
letting: her fingers close round his.

The situation was somewhat embarrassing.
The Marchesa's bosom still heaved with sobs,
tears streamed from her eyes, which she
stanched with the delicate cambric handkerchief
she held in one hand, while the other
clasped Keith's fingers. How is it possible
to console a pretty woman, except by assuring
her of your love ? And to such a declaration
Keith did not feel inclined to commit himself.
So he said nothing, feeling intensely clumsy;
and the Marchesa found nothing better to do
than gradually to dry her tears and withdraw
her hand from his.

I have behaved like a fool and a brute to

the poor woman thought Keith, while yet
rejoicing to escape further complications.

'I am absurdly weak and emotional,' she
said, looking at him with a mournful air.
It must be the weather. Do not mind my
tears.'

I do mind them,' said Keith. ' I cannot
endure to see a charming woman in trouble.
Believe me, I am very sorry for you. Shall
we play something to distract you — or what
can I do?'

The Marchesa sighed. Perhaps she thought
further confidences were due to her from
Keith ; perhaps she thought the little drama
she had played had not resulted in success.
Suffice it, that after the lapse of a few awkward
moments, the pair were not sorry when Palis
and Lord Darlington were announced.

Keith, without any show of reluctance,
ceded his place to Lord Darlington, who at
once decided in his own mind that the
Marchesa was a far handsomer woman than
rumour had led him to anticipate. Her recent
tears had given unwonted softness to her
sphinx-like eyes ; her soft and creamy skin
had lost none of its delicacy of tone, and her
manner was more sweetly sympathetic than
ever.

Keith conversed in the embrasure of the
window with Palis, who, while pretending to
notice nothing, registered the moral certitude
that he and Lord Darlington had interrupted
a passionate love-scene.

Things soon resumed their normal aspect,
but Keith carefully avoided lingering behind.
When the English lord's visit had arrived at a
conventional length the three men took their
departure together.

'Which way are we going now?' said Lord
Darlington, looking at his watch, as they stood
on the marble steps near the gaily-striped
post to which the gondola was attached. ' I
am getting hungry. By Jove ! that is *a
handsome woman, for a foreigner. Does she
paint ?'

VOL. II. 14

JOYNTE AGAIN.

T the farther end of an alley bordered
with small shops, chiefly for jewellery,
in which the fine gold chains
for which Venice is famous were
displayed, dressed in a plain morning-gown of
blue and white linen, and wearing a broad-brimmed
straw hat, garnished with a wreath
of wild-flowers, stood Dorothy in front of a
bookstall absorbed in the silent perusal of a
book which she had taken up, and was holding
in her hand while she read it. Here
Joynte found her. He had approached so
close to her that he could have touched her
shoulder or whispered in her ear. He even
became conscious of a certain sweet smell
of heliotrope that hung about her garments,

but as yet lie had neither heard nor seen Hm.
Her book engrossed her entirely.

Mrs. Chester,' he said at last.

She started at the sound of his voice. It
had come then — the meeting she had so
dreaded, that for days she dared not venture
out alone; now, just as her terror had begun
to diminish, the monster stood adam at her
elbow, like a second Mephistopheles, trying to
sow the seeds of suspicion and of guilty imaginings
within her heart. She had succeeded,
after some effort, in driving; from her mind the
vivid recollection of Joynte's threats; she had
dispelled her own doubts; she disbelieved his
accusations; she had confidently established,
to her own satisfaction, by a long course of
reasoning, the utter fallacy of any unpleasant
mysteries. Only a lurking jealousy of the
Marchesa, which she strove against courageously,
still disturbed the equanimity of her
happiness; and behold, just when her confidence,
and innocent security, returned to her,
this man must needs shatter the whole fabric.
She looked at Joynte with wide-open terrified
eyes — the eyes of one who tries to avoid
the inevitable; she looked up the street and
clown again for a mode of escape, but her
tongue was paralyzed.

IJ: — 2

Well, Mrs. Chester, you didn't expect to
see me again, did you?' said the American
jauntily, perceiving his advantage and warm-ins
to the work. ' I warned you how it
would be. If you remember, I told you you
had not seen the last of me. Suppose now
you drop your grand airs, my lady, and listen
to me — come !'

Joynte was not quite comfortable in this
gentlewoman's presence ; she awed him in
spite of his bravado.

What do you want ?' she said softly, bowing
her head.

Well,' he said, with a laugh, * I guess I
want a great deal more money than the last
time, my lady. I've gone up in value, it
seems ; and yet I've gone down in the world.'
Dorothy silently glanced at his shabby
dress and miserable appearance.

Down in the world, you see, a bit more
than I was; that's the way of it. One goes
up, and another down ; I guess that makes it
all square. Now, listen — I'm not given to fine
words. You and Mr. Chester want your secret
kept : name your price. I'll engage not to
trouble you for £1,000, though I'll take more
if you like to offer it. I can't do it for less;
every chap must look out for himself

I don't know what you mean,' she said, ina
cold clear voice, moving on a little in the
direction of home. ' I have already told you
that I wish you would settle your affairs with
Mr. Chester ; I know nothing about his
business matters !'

No !' he said, with a sly and cruel look ;
perhaps it would be better for you if you
did. Maybe you never heard tell how your
husband got his money?'

I have heard it was left to him;' she drew
herself up proudly.

Under what circumstances?'

You have no right to annoy me in this
way here, in the public streets !' she said
nervously; ' if you do not leave me at once I
will call for assistance !'

Pray do. There are plenty of people
about ; but you will repent the scandal far
more than I shall. I have nothing to lose,
you have evei^y thing — position, fortune, an
adored husband!'

Joynte had learnt his lesson well. Herein
the company of this young and delicate
creature, he felt no fear.

Dorothy shrank within herself; it was true
she knew nothing. Who could tell what
harm might come of too hasty an action on

lier part? Joynte pursued, quickening his
pace to keep up with her.

Mr. Chester's money was left to him by a
woman whom he cruelly injured; and '

'I don't wish to hear blame of my husband
interrupted Dorothy. ' Have you anything else
to say?'

You are right; perhaps I have no business
to soil your virtuous ears with ugly stories ;'
his tone was insufferably sarcastic. ' Suffice
it, then, that your husband is a criminal, and
that I must have hush-money. Do you
understand ?'

I understand nothing, except that you
wish to frighten me into giving you money,'
she said firmly. ' What is your address ?
Why should there be any mystery about you?
Why not come to our house, and speak to Mr.
Chester in my presence?'

^ Because he will choose to run the risk of
detection sooner than to pay my just demands;
but I am desperate now. Besides, you yourself,
with that fair proud face, would turn
from him with loathing if you knew all.'

Never I' said Dorothy quickly.

You are very bold, my lady ; but the time
will come, very soon maybe, when you will
not be so bold.'

'I will speak to my husband about you
she said, with a touch of pity for the miscreant
in her voice. ' I will ask him to give you
money, but I can do nothing for you myself.'

Will you now — do you mean it ?' says
Joynte eagerly; then, checking his impulse of
joy, ' Mind you do now, or it will be the
worse for you; I'm a desperate man.'

I don't know what Mr. Chester will say —
I don't know if he will help you; but if he
has injured you (unwittingly I am sure), if you
have any claim upon him, I shall use all my
efforts to urge him to make reparation.'

He has injured me. Look at me, if you
don't believe what I say. /, who was once a
gentleman '

The beggarly whine, , with the true professional
mendicant ring about it, with which he
uttered these words, stifled the momentary
spark of pity in her breast. She continued
coldly :

I can promise nothing, except that if it is
justice you want, you shall have it, as far as it
lies in my power.'

When shall I hear from you ?'

Give me your address.'

'No, indeed, and be nabbed like a fox in
his lair ! No, my lady ; I'll meet you here

whenever you like — that's the best arrangement.'


Here, then, on Tuesday next said Dorothy,
after an instant's hesitation. ' Leave me now.'

You may count on my discretion,' he
answered with a lofty bow, almost pathetic in
its absurdity.

Dorothy hurried on, casting no look behind
her, as Joynte disappeared into a neighbouring
alley. She was already late for breakfast, and
her head was in a turmoil. Soon she would
know everything and be released from this thick
cloud of mystery and terror that hung about
her and poisoned her very life. Soon she
would be mistress of Keith's secrets, and
discover that he was worthy of her trust.
With a lighter heart she pursued her way,
hailing the hour that was to bring a blessed
certainty, instead of the gnawing uncertainty
in which she lived.

CHAPTER Xii.

FEMININE Confidences.

'9^=5SS£^n#OROTHY, however, found no immediate
opportunity of speaking .to
her husband. He came in after
they had sat down to breakfast,
talked little, eat less, and seemed considerably
preoccupied. Directly after the meal he
again disappeared; and Lady Darlington
arrived, more cheery and chatty than ever, to
fetch her friend. She had shifted the burden
of her care about Dorothy's trouble on to her
husband's broad shoulders, and with the happy
trust that formed one of the principal ingredients
in the harmony of their conjugal
arrangements, she felt herself free to devote
her time quietly to sight seeing and gossiping.
She was sustained by a never-flagging curiosity

and a childlike interest in the shifting scenes
and the strange habits of the people, which
had the power to amuse her infinitely more
than pictures, by however great a master,
about which she understood nothing, and
marble churches for which she cared less.
She needed Mrs. Chester's society at all times ;
she liked her to share her simple pleasures
and all her sensations of wonder and admiration.
She would come running in like a stray
sunbeam or a small whirlwind every morning,
and cry encouragingly :

Do come out, Dorothy ! Steer mind the
heat; it's nothing if you don't think about it,
and wear a veil. Darlington has gone off
with your husband somewhere, and I have
seen such a funny place which I am dying to
explore with you.'

Dorothy would smile in return, shut up
her book or fold her work, and sally out with
her friend, patiently following her lead into all
kinds of odd corners and out-of-the-way places,
explaining and expatiating whenever possible,
by the aid of her superior knowledge. It
happened consequently that for several days
Dorothy could obtain no moments of intimate
talk with her husband. They were never
alone until late in the evening, when Keith

complained of sleepiness and fatigue, and she
instinctively felt it would not be a propitious
moment for so serious an explanation. Strange
to say, though she believed that the hour
which was to bring her a pleasant certainty
had only been deferred, she could not divest
herself of a nervous and unreasonable anxiety,
which clouded her brow, disturbed her slumbers,
and kept her quieter and sadder than
usual. The few days of respite Joynte had
allowed her were now nearly expired. Monday
morning dawned, and on Tuesday she had
promised to meet him. Human nature, weak
and erring, shrinks from the foretaste of pair;
it is easier to say to ourselves, ' I can know,
when I like,' than to stretch out our hand for
the knowledge which may bring with it fresh
responsibilities and greater difficulties.

Throughout the relations between herself
and her husband, there had existed a one-sided
state of things, owing certainly to her own
mistaken delicacy and ignorance of the world,
but still much to be deplored. She had
lavished upon Keith all the devotion of which
she was capable, and she had checked his wiser
efforts to confide his faults to her. Consequently
a barrier of mental reserve lay between
them which increased her present difficulty.

How was she to speak to him of any subject
which nearly concerned his own private affairs,
and about which her questions might seem a
mark of suspicion and interference ?

Only once had the cloud of reserve between
them been fairly dispelled, and that was on
the occasion of her jealous outburst after the
ball ; an outburst she had regretted and repented
of ever since, as an act of disloyalty
towards her husband.

Keith noticed none of these mental struggles.
He kissed his wife affectionately and carelessly
morning and night, and escorted her occasionally
on some of the expeditions which she made in
the company of her English friends — picnics,
al-fresco dinners, suppers, or musical evenings
on the water, but there was no question of
mutual confidence between them.

The eventful interview with the Marchesa,
which Lord Darlington and Palis interrupted,
has been recorded ; it afforded Keith considerable
food for rumination. He had behaved
unfeelingly towards the poor lady, he was
afraid, at a time when she was already deprived
of sympathy and affection in her own home,
and sought it in the society of intimate friends,
thinking no harm. He had been a fool, and
a prig. Keith's vanity whispered to him, that

for a pretty woman to give him her confidence
was the finest compliment she could pay him.
Keith's common-sense urged, that perhaps,
after all, he had mistaken her meaning, and
that her words and looks could bear the most
unstrained and innocent interpretation. Then
Keith, easy in his vanity, fell to hoping that
the latter hypothesis were not the true one;
finally thought it necessary to assure himself
of the fact, and to make his visits to the Marchesa
considerably more frequent. She, with
the wiliness of a coquette, now read all his
thoughts, and played with him accordingly.
Alternately mocking and gay, or sad and
sentimental, making little returns upon herself
of sorrow and pretty self-upbraidings, she
pricked, and piqued, and maddened him beyond
endurance. To himself he said comfortably :

I do not care for her in the least, but it is
an experience.'

The Marchesa knew better. She knew that
she was gradually gaining a mastery over this
man, which would make him her slave just for
so long as she chose to keep him.

On this very Monday, when Dorothy kept
saying to herself reproachfully, * I must I
really must steak to Keith about that poor
man to-day!' the Marchesa organized another

little explosion. Count Pinsuti had been
making himself intensely disagreeable, as
indeed was his habit; had muttered darkly
of revenge, and a determination to stand it no
longer ; the it vaguely hinted at being painfully
clear to the Marchesa's experience. She,
on her part, thought fit to bring matters
between herself and Mr. Chester to a crisis.
When he arrived, violin in hand, at the usual
time — which was now accelerated by at least
an hour — he found her grave and silent, with
the air of some one who has come to a serious
determination. This in itself annoyed him.
When a man lets himself drift, he cannot bear
to be brought up sharply by the checks of
another's resolution. Having exchanged morning
greetings, he ventured to ask if she were
indisposed, or had any cause for sorrow.

None that you would understand,' was the
reply. ^ I am going to the country.'

Indeed I' Keith's countenance fell. ' Is
not this a sudden resolve?'

It is one I think necessary,' she said
drily.

When do you go 7

That depends. To-morrow or the next
day, perhaps.'

And, in that case, I shall not be able to

come and see you every day ; and music will
be at a standstill, now it has become the delightful
habit of my present life. How I shall
miss you !'

I don't think so she said gravely, avoiding
all coquettish airs and graces. ' You will
equally have the society of Lord and Lady
Darlington, and of Mr. Palis, and — your
wife!' She dropped her voice at the end of
the sentence.

But I shall miss you!' he said warmly.

That is a mere phrase,' she answered,
shrugging her shoulders. ' One only misses
what is absolutely necessary to one's happiness.
Unfortunately, I have tasted of the
realities of life, and I have learnt to despise
mere conversational froth.'

My words were not conversational froth!'

Her contemptuous tone irritated Keith exceedingly.


Were they not ?' she said, a little more
coldly. ' Do not let us dispute ] I dare say
the country will be charming.'

Am I never to see you, then ?'

Oh yes ! when I return, if you are still
here — in a couple of months, perhaps.'

And until then ' his voice was filled

with regret.

Until then, I suppose, you will exist
pretty much as you have done hitherto ; you
mil continue to behave as the model husband
• — the kind friend.'

Why do you taunt me in this way T he
said sharply.

I? Don't you always speak with the utmost
veneration of your wife's perfections?
are you not devoted to one another? am I
not right to take the cue from your own
lips '

Let my wife alone, please,' he interrupted
harshly; ' she has nothing whatever to do in
this discussion.'

'Ah, there it is, you see!' said the Marchesa,
leaning back in her chair, and beginning
to play with her bracelets. ' How can I,
a lonely, neglected creature, talk happily and
unconcernedly, as does the woman you love ?
Sometimes — don't be shocked — sometimes I
envy her dreadfully. Why should she have
had all the chances ? If you had loved me I
should have been as good, as innocent, as
pure — innocence is only ignorance, after
all; a mere matter of education. Don't you
think / have the makings in me of a good
and devoted wife ? — of course. I have a heart,
intellect — all the instincts of self-devotion —

and yet I am tied to a boor, who neglects me
whom I was not even allowed to choose for
myself, but was sold to when a mere child.
Ah ! why is life so unequal in its chances ? why
is Heaven so unjust? why has your wife everything
that woman can desire, and I no tiling —
nothing that I hunger for? My heart is
empty — no one loves me

You are mistaken, Marchesa ; everyone
loves you — Count Pinsuti adores you

^ He — that wretched little object ? He
bores me. A woman cannot express greater
indifference to a man than by saying that he
bores her.' *

Do / bore you ?' he said, without thought,
his eager vanity asserting itself imperiously.

'You?'

In that one little word the Marchesa bared
her heart, her wishes, her intentions — in that
one word she made her declaration — in that
one word Keith read everything, and struck
the full chords of her envy, her jealousy,
her restless desires. He rose hastily : something
within him seemed to whisper, ' Fly —
fly, while it is yet time.' He was no paragon
of virtue, certainly ; but he remembered his
gentle wife at home. He was no knight sans
peur et sans reproche ; the cynicism of his

VOL. II. 15

own maxims of life had blended with the
coldness of his heart and disregard of
principle : yet even worldly prudence warned
him to take care.

Don't go !' The Marchesa had comprehended
his movement, and sprang up herself
to arrest him. ' Once before you left me sad
and unhappy ; speak to me now — comfort
me.'

She was standing beside him, the fire of
her large eyes seeming to burn into his brain,
and confuse his reason with doubt, fear, inclination,
and vanity, mixed in one strange
medley.

Keith!' She threw an unutterable tenderness
into her voice. The woman was an accomplished
actress, and on this occasion she
was scarcely acting. Her lips shaped themselves
into words of love, and her eyes followed
suit. He made a step backwards, and seized
her hand in both of his. ' You will come
again ?' she said earnestly, looking at him
with her passionate eyes. He bowed his head,
and hastily left the room.

Even Lady Darlington noticed Keith's
strange preoccupation at dinner that evening;
his absence of mind; the irrelevant answers
he gave to questions, to which they had no

possible reference ; the way that lie poured
water into a glass, and forgot he had done so,
and then went on pouring in more water, till
the liquid ran over upon the cloth ; his silence,
and his evident anxiety to escape from his
friends. And all this time Dorothy was waiting
for a convenient opportunity to begin the
interview, which must be gone through with
to-night.

After dinner, Keith retired to his library,
ostensibly to write letters. Lady Darlington
began to play the piano in the saloon, trying
with one finger to pick out the melody of
Palis's favourite song ; the latter smoked and
talked with Lord Darlington on the balcony.

Dorothy, spying her chance, quick as
thought slipped from the room and followed
her husband. She found him sitting at the
carved bureau, in his large leather armchair,
with the silver inkstand of best Florentine
style in front of him, and some papers spread
all about. But she could see that he was not
writing — only idly making little blots and
figures on the spotless paper with his pen.
She stole softly near, and laid her hand on his
shoulder. He started violently.

Keith, I want to speak to you.'

What is it ? Don't you see I am busy T

15—2

He drew another sheet of paper towards
him, and tried to appear as if he were lost in
abstruse calculations.

Oh, Keith, spare me an instant, and don't
be angry, dear !' She slid down on her
knees, and laid her arm on his chair. He did
not encourage her or help her one little bit ;
but the humble, pleading attitude seemed
to aid her in her difficult explanation. ' I
met a man,' she continued, hesitatingly jerking
out her words, ' two or three days ago,
who knows you. He spoke to me, and said
many things I could not understand.' Still
he gave her no sign of approval, and only
bent a little forward, as if about to dip his
pen in the ink. ' You know, Keith, I have
never asked you one single question that
might seem to imply a want of confidence. I
trust you too much for that ; but, dear, he
says you have injured him, and I have promised
him, for your own sake, to repair this
injustice — if it exists.'

What is the man's name?'
Elias F. Joynte.'

Her voice trembled ; she dared not think
of the consequences of this revelation. Keith's
face twitched a little, but otherwise he showed
no emotion.

It is the old story. He tried to set your
mother against me, you know — and Dorothy,
I forbid you to speak to him. He is mad ! I
will arrange for him to be locked up.'

Don't harm him, Keith. Poor creature !
I don't believe he is really mad. He talked
sensibly enough — said he was a desperate
man. Won't you give him the money he asks
for? He says if you will do that, he will engage
never to trouble you again.'

The wretch !' growled Keith between his
teeth. ' How much does he ask ?'

A thousand pounds.'

Is that all ? Only a thousand pounds !
He is very moderate in his demands, upon
my word! Tell him to go to Jericho!' he
hidden, with sudden fury — ' no, of course you
can't — I will tell him myself. Is he here ?'

No ; he would not give me his address.
Keith, don't be rash. What is it ? Do tell
me what is his claim upon you ?'

She had not meant to say this : she had
thought he would confide in her of his own
accord ; but now she felt that any further
mystery was unendurable. She must know all.

My dear, don't alarm yourself. It is a
mere nothing,' said Keith, with a slight laugh,
in which she detected more fear than fun.

He must not be allowed to annoy you in
any way. I will speak to the proper authorities.
The thing he refers to was a transaction
of my bachelor days. But, as I have
already told you, he is mad. Leave him tome,
dear. I will get rid of him.'

Dorothy still knelt on in her humble attitude,
looking out of her troubled eyes, and
her anxieties scarcely set at rest by Keith
manner.

I must see him then,' she said, ' and tell
him the result of my mission ; for I promised
to do this,' she added, no longer timidly, remembering
it was her clear duty.

No ; as he is mad, it is not safe. Who
knows what he might say or do ? Where had
you arranged a rendezvous?'

A light shone in her husband's eyes which
she did not like. He seemed so wild and
strange himself to-night, and in all his words
and gestures he had showed no love for her.

I will not go to him, as you forbid it,' she
said, rising from her knees and standing
straight and composed before him ; ' but I
cannot betray the poor man's secret unless I
know your intentions towards him.'

As you please,' he said, a little wearily,,
turning towards the table.

Keith — haven't you a word for me ?' she
cried, flinoino^ her arms round his neck.
Speak to me — comfort me !'

She used the self same words that the Marchesa
had used that afternoon.

Keith kissed her gently ; but his kiss
chilled her. There was no love in it. He
was thinking that all women were alike — insatiable
in their demands upon a man's time
and affections.

He wanted as much comfort himself, at that
moment, as she did. This reappearance of
Joynte's was perplexing ; and the worst of it
was, he did not quite see the end of it. v

Everyone knew, that to give hush-money
was to condemn one's self to a lifelong
slavery; and still he had not quite the courage
to stand it out and face disagreeable consequences.


There was ho knowing what might happen.
Ida's mother was still alive. He never could
have borne to give up his riches now ; and
besides, what would the world say?

Dorothy slowly unwound her arms from his
neck, and went out, sobbing a little quietly to
herself. Yes! Keith was certainly changed
terribly, incomprehensibly changed.

THE SHADOW OF Former DAYS.

.EITH hurried off the next day, at
least two hours earlier than usual,
to pay a visit to the Marchesa.
The latter was of so incomprehensible
and capricious a nature that he
scarcely knew whether to fear or to hope ;
scarcely felt certain whether she might not
have departed for the country, having
merely amused herself at his expense. The
handsomest woman in Yenice in love with
him ! Could it be true ? And the whole
affair had originated entirely in her own
impulses, for he himself had never thought
of anything but the violin-playing.

Naturally, his vanity was extremely flattered ;
and yet it seemed but a kind of Dead Sea
fruit after all, the taste of which was bitter

in his mouth. The flutter and excitement
caused by the Marchesa's conduct sufficed to
blind him somewhat to the fact of Dorothy's
troubled looks, and to the annoyance of
Joynte's reappearance.

After all he said to himself, stepping
lightly along, ' after all, it was only at the
time of my marriage that he had any power
to harm me ; for, certainly, if the old lady had
heard his story, she would probably not have
believed mine, or have allowed me to marry
her daughter ; but now, I really cannot see
who would even listen to him.'

Thus comforting himself, Keith prepared
his most charming manner, wherewith to greet
and captivate the Marchesa. She was at home.
She had not left Yenice ; and she even assured
him that she had decided to defer her journey
indefinitely. All his wishes, therefore, were realized.
She was wise enough to behave to Mr.
Chester much as usual ; to make no further declarations,
and to imply nothing but the tenderest
of friendships. This behaviour suited his
fancy exactly — to hover on the confines of
sentiment rather than to plunge into the
mazes of passion. He did not object to wear
a chain, but it must be a chain of roses ; he
had no dislike to spoiling and flattery, as long

as emotions of an overwhelming and exhausting'
nature were carefully consigned to the background.


They spent some agreeable hours together
looking over new music, and trying songs ;
finding one another's company even more delightful
than usual, until Keith, in the very
midst of a song, suddenly put his hand to his
head.

*What is the matter?' said the Marchesa
tenderly, by this time considering herself entitled
to a vested right in his sensations.

A violent pain has just seized me,' he answered.
' I feel giddy — I think I must leave
you.'

Perhaps you walked too quickly in the
sun?'

Possibly.'

Take great care of yourself,' she continued
gently ; ' your health is very precious to your
friends. I shall send to inquire about you
to-night. Meanwhile, my gondola shall take
you home. And pray see a doctor as soon
as possible.'

Mr. Chester's premature return caused considerable
surprise in his own home, where
his servants were accustomed to his presence
only at meals ; but Dorothy, who, looking

out of the window, had recognised the Marchesa's
gondola, asked no questions.

She had just come from an expedition
made in company with Lord and Lady Darlington
and Mr. Palis, and they were now
sitting round the low table, drinking five
o'clock tea.

Don't let me disturb you,' said Keith, ashe
passed through the boudoir in which they
were assembled. ' I have a headache, and
I am going to lie down.'

Declining Dorothy's offers of assistance, he
stretched himself on the sofa in his dressing-room,
and damping a handkerchief in eau-de*
Cologne, he bathed his hot brow.

Was it attributable to indisposition, to
giddiness, or was it an unwelcome return of
memory ? He could swear that he had seen
a phantom of the past, just now, on his
way home — a figure leaning against a marble
pillar beside a porch, changed, saddened,,
shabbier, but still with the same eyes, reproachful
and passionate, the eyes of Judith.

Judith! Why should thoughts of her
cling so persistently to his spirit this afternoon
? Judith must be dead. She was very
ill when last he heard of her in Rome, three
years ago. He had not inquired about her

since ; he lead forgotten her. How, indeed,
could she be here ? It must have been a
mistake on his part, an hallucination of his
sick brain. And yet, even as he pressed the
cool and fragrant handkerchief to his burning
eyes, the phantom haunted him still. It
seemed to enter by the door, to come, with a
floating motion, nearer and ever nearer ; to
fix its large sad eyes upon him, till their rays
pierced into his heart, and bared in all its
contemptible folly the poor frivolous ideal of
life and duty he had always upheld, to
stretch out its hands pleadingly towards him.
Then rapidly he saw a fierce, unearthly
triumph light up the worn face of the phantom,
and Keith felt himself slipping, slipping,
being dragged away against his will, whither
he knew not, while he frantically and unavailingly
grasped at anything within his reach —
at the chairs, at the couch, at the carved leg of
a table.

A hoarse cry of terror was forced from him,
and he awoke from the kind of stupor in
which he lay, to find Dorothy standing, lovely
ind calm, at his side, holding in her hand a
silver goblet filled with iced lemonade. He
drew her towards him, and kissed her cheek.

Warmth, regret, and affection were conveyed
in his embrace.

Dorothy, on her part, had been all day torn
by conflicting emotions. She loathed herself
for having broken the promise and missed her
rendezvous with Joynte. She pictured to
herself his rage and disappointment. She
remembered that he had called himself a
desperate man, and she dreaded lest harm
should come to Keith from his revenge. She
had obeyed her husband, indeed ; but at what
a cost of suffering and self-respect ! In addition,
she was sorely tormented by the knowledge
that there did exist a secret which sh
was to be debarred from knowing, and about
the guilt of which, spite of all efforts, she
could not prevent feeling some suspicion.

Keith was her idol. She had thought him
faultless. Was he to prove as erring as any
other mortal ? The most perfect love is not
blind ; it does not worship impossible images
of fantasy, but yet its idol is of pure gold,
unalloyed, and refined in the ardent and
searching fires of charity and forbearance.
Dorothy had not yet attained to such a love.
Hers was still a very human passion, in which
she beheld the reflection of the Ideal rather
than the more sorrowful picture of the ReaL

But even as she stood by Keith's side and
heard the anguished cry which was the cause
of his awaking, and looked upon his deathly
face, perturbed and distressed out of his habitual
calm, and felt his hand clasp hers and drag
her down to him, and his lips ^il one long
kiss upon her cheek, she knew he loved her,
and her heart grew light.

Keith,' she whispered, ' when may we go
home ?'

Are you homesick ?' he asked kindly.

Not exactly ; but still, I should like to go
home — to Blackness — to the lovely room
filled with books, and to the fairy lake ; and
to all the peace and beauty

Would you really like it ?' he said
thoughtfully.

Oh yes, indeed ! Would not you ?

I will see if it is possible,' he said, kissing
her again.

His words filled Dorothy with a great
happiness. She loved Venice ; its poetry and
picturesqueness appealed vividly to her imagination,
but the associations which clung about
it were sad and agitating. Her jealousy, her
fear, her suspicions, had taken their birth
here in this city of dreams, hanging between
sea and sky; whereas in England — her own

homely England — she might hope to find
more lasting peace.

I should not be surprised if our friend
Chester had met with some annoyance said
Palis to the Darlingtonss, when Mrs. Chester
had retired to attend her husband. ' He has
seemed considerably preoccupied lately.'

I only hope he will not make Dorothy
unhappy, for she is such a dear girl said
Lady Darlington softly, feeding her pug with
bits of buttered cake.

They understand one another, I think,'
said Palis again.

I can't fancy a man caring to live abroad
when there is no necessity, especially in such a
place as this, where there is neither sport,
political life, nor anything else to amuse him,
and when he has a nice little property at
home,' interposed Lord Darlington sagely.
Blackness is not a large estate, but he has
plenty of ready money.'

Yes, but he has no ambition,' said Palis
quickly ; ' which is the more to be regretted,
because he is clever enough to keep the
Universal Review going alone. You have no
idea how well he can write; and he knows a
great deal, thanks to his diplomatic career
and all the worldly wisdom he has acquired.'

He knows most about pretty women, I
should imagine,' said Lord Darlington sarcastically,
whose wild oats had been quickly
if generously sown. ' Now, women are all
very well in their way — you need not listen,
my dear' (little Lady Darlington immediately
opened wide her ears, and listened withall
her might) — ' but they can't occupy a man's
whole life ; he must have something to do
besides. Now, it strikes me that Chester has
not a thought beyond paying compliments to
ladies and playing the violin.'

Lord Darlington had a great contempt for
musical men. His mother, when he was a
schoolboy, insisted on his being taught music;
and as the cultivation of it shortened his playtime
by half an hour, he naturally and very
properly took a hatred to the art. However,
he succeeded nolens volens in learning his
notes, and actually got as far as to play
Nelly Ably ' with one hand fairly correctly,
when he had the good fortune to catch one
finger in a rat-trap and chop off a piece of
it, which afforded him a valid excuse for
dropping the obnoxious study. His lordship's
soul could scarcely be said to ' discourse sweet
music ;' he did not object to Lady Darlington's
feeble performance of ' I cannot sing the

old songs ' Annie Laurie,' and ' The place
where the old horse died in the long winter
evenings, when he reposed in his armchair
with the newspaper spread across his knees,
and his eyes shut. It gave a pleasant finish
to the hard day's hunting, and the little lady's
sweet piping voice lulled him to sleep and put
him in a good humour; but as for listening to
a sonata or seeing a man sit down, when he
wasn't paid for it, conscientiously to play
Chopin's Preludes or Beethoven's Sonatas,
his lordship said it was simply sickening.
Chester played the violin without much
execution, but with a sweet sympathetic tone
and finish of expression which delighted the
ladies and made Lord Darlington irate.
This fact, indeed, accounted for his lordship's
unusually severe strictures upon his friend's
tastes.

Chester ought to go into Parliament,' said
Palis. ' That is his place ; he has a knack of
speaking.'

^ What is he — a Liberal, I suppose ? There,
you know, I can't sympathize. I am strongly
Conservative. What are you?'

Sometimes one thing — sometimes another,'
said Palis, laughing; 'whatever my paper
happens to be. It is such a comfort to write

VOL. II. 16

anonymously ; no one knows what your
personal views are. You know, our journal
leads public opinion; that is to say, we carefully
notice which way the wind blows, and
trim our sails accordingly. But I'm so
devoted to Keith — next to Hugh Yennaker,
he is my greatest friend — that I really would
write him up if he took to public life, whatever
his opinions '

Is there any chance of it, do you think,
Mr. Palis?' said Lady Darlington eagerly.
.rit would be so nice if he were a Conservative;
you know it is really and truly more respectable.
But now, as we are talking about Mr.
Chester,' she continued, her curiosity getting
.the better of her manners, * do tell us what
was the queer story once circulated about him,
which Dorothy told me was very nearly the
cause of their marriage beings broken off.'

I really know nothing precise whatever,'
said Palis quickly, loyal exceedingly ; ' some
previous entanglement, I believe.'
/ 'Is the lady alive, then?'

Oh no; she is dead — and left him her
fortune.'

Well, but there can be nothing disgraceful
in that. What could people meanes was she
not a lady?'

Perfectly so; a charming American girl

Well, then ?' Lady Darlington interrogated
impatiently.

Well? that is just what I say.'

^ It is very strange,' mused the little lady.
(Lord Darlington, meanwhile, had fallen
asleep.)

Yes ; it is very strange. Keith is a good
fellow.'

'A capital fellow,' echoed his lordship,
waking up, and chiming in vaguely. ' Who
said he was not? Rides well to hounds, too.'

The more Lady Darlington thought it over,
the more she felt convinced that some great
mystery underlay Keith's existence, and the
more, with that rapacity for excitement frequently
to be found among people who neither
read nor write novels, did she long to discover
the solution.

We must really take Dorothy home with
us,' she remarked to her patient husband, ashe
stretched his long limbs beside her in the
gondola.

Not without Am, my dear,' he answered.

Oh, of course not without him ! No one
could wish to separate husband and wife; but
I am convinced the air of Venice does not
agree with either of them. A man ought

16—2

not to have that queer kind of sudden headache,
and she looks worn to death.'

Do you think she will look better in
England ?'

Certainly. I can keep an eye on her there
the horrid Marchesa will be out of the
way — and you will insist on his going out
hunting every day. No one can be ill who
takes plenty of exercise.'

This view of the matter commending itself
entirely to Lord Darlington's approbation, he
dropped all further opposition, and with it the
subject of the Chesterss' health, and fell to
talking of the latest news from Swivel.

To think that I shall soon see Hetty and
Letty again!' said his wife ecstatically; 'I
shall be so pleased ! I wonder if the darlings
are grown? We must take them a necklace
of those glass beads they make here, and then
they will look perfect cherubs.'

KEITH MEDITATES.

EXT morning Keith felt no ill-effects

from the previous night's

indisposition. A trifle of languor

perhaps oppressed him, and His

eyes were rimmed with dark circles ; in other

respects, he wore his ordinary appearance.

Dorothy, through her spectacles of tender
love, scrutinized him carefully, but could
find no ground for anxiety. However, the
temporary fondness he had shown her had
evaporated. He was no longer particularly
affectionate, but quiet, composed, and somewhat
abstracted.

After breakfast he left the house as usual,
and paused for a moment, undecided in which
direction he should bend his steps. He felt a
remarkable distaste to the Marchesa's society
this afternoon ; for, as he argued within himself,

in reality she could not be compared to
his wife in youth, in beauty, or in freshness of
feeling. Her fascinating ways were but artificial,
and savoured of trick; and he was not
quite sure that she was a real musician. Thus
musing, he pursued his way towards the cafes
of the Place St. Mark.

The air was balmy, the sky clear, yet he
experienced a lassitude of limb that affected
his spirits. What was the use of life ? what
was it worth? whither did it lead? To men
of idle self-indulgent habits there must come
such moments : moments when the game does
not seem worth winning, nor the brightest
gauds of ambition and glory to be aught but
lying shams. And yet Venice was lovely at
this moment : the wide expanse of lagune
stretched clear in the azure distance; cupolas,
tall and snowy, sparkled in the sun; the
laughter of girls echoed in the soft breeze;
windows suddenly opened let out snatches of
song, or the gay voices of men ; the rhythmical
splash of the gondoliers' oars, their joyous
cries, spoke of life and gaiety, and of the fair
new hopes of each renewing day.

If he were to fall in the eyes of his wife, of
whose idolatry he was pleasantly conscious,
what a foolish, an uncalled-for degradation!

A few follies of youth — sins, if you like ;
yes, perhaps they were sins (but every young
man was guilty of them, after his degree) —
were destined to pursue him through life,
remorselessly and unaccountably. He shrank
from the publicity to be incurred, if he com :
mitted Joynte to his proper place, the madhouse,
as long as Judith, whom he had
believed dead, was there, a living witness
ready to proclaim the truth.

The truth ! Was it the truth that surged
back upon his memory with waves of overwhelming
force? that awful time in Rome,
when he was half distraught with disappointment
— the suspense, the misery, the end so
quickly consummated, then the long silent
hours of agony. Gradually the numbness of
reaction, hope reviving, forgetfulness bringing
its blessed balm, a fresh love — a glimpse into
a haven of purity and peace ; finally, an
anchorage of quiet domestic happiness. As
in a mirror, the various phases of his life
passed before his mental vision, revolving,
narrowing, concentrating round the follies of
his youth. Judith, the impersonation of those
follies, stood before his fancy again, with flashing
eyes, pale, quivering lips, and cold revenge
speaking in her voice.

Perhaps, however, his wife, who loved him
so well, who was so innocent and so gentle,
would believe none of these things ! A. warm
thrill of reviving hope passed through his
veins; then her words flashed upon him,
spoken firmly and honestly :

I will not betray the poor man !'

Justice, then, was a stronger sentiment in
her than love ! Keith lifted his hand to his
forehead. It was burning. The languor of
his limbs had disappeared, and a feverish
longing for change and active movement now
possessed him. Fresh air and a swim would
soon still these madly beating pulses. He
hailed a passing gondola, and desired the man
to convey him to the Lido.

It was late when Keith returned home, both
mind and body thoroughly fatigued. Dorothy
scarcely repressed a cry of dismay to see his
hair still damp and blown about by the sea-breeze,
his face pallid and drawn, his eyes
unnaturally bright and febrile.

At dinner he became jocose and talkative,
drank a good deal of wine, and entered into
an argument with Lord Darlington on the
subject of sport.

The guests having departed, Dorothy retired
to her own room with a book. Keith and

Palis — the latter, as usual, overwhelmed with
work, which he got through at nocturnal and
erratic hours — sat up late in the night, smoking
cigarettes and planning out copy for the
Universal Review,

There, Keith,' he said ; ' listen : all the
papers of Europe and America are to be
represented in it; every shade and degree of
opinion. No one is to be greater or less than
another — poet, priest, aristocrat, and Eed Republican
are to say their say, and plead their
mission ; no more dogmatism, no more 
lines of demarcation between class
and caste; the aristocracy of the mind, and the
democracy of social institutions, the communism
of the intellect, free and open competition,
the great principle of co-operation
regulating everything ; not a sham that will
not be exposed, not a vice that will not be
condemned, not a virtue that will not be
upheld, not a misery that will not be assisted
by the triumphal voice of universal enthusiasm.
The best of liberty, the truest of equality,
progress !'

Thus cried Palis, with a flushing cheek and
sparkling eye, lighting his thirteenth cigarette
while he dashed aside a pile of manuscript.

Keith felt no particular enthusiasm for the

cause of the Review — he did not care much for
liberty, equality, and progress; but the thing
served to distract his mind as well as anything
else, and Palis' s enthusiasm was catching.
The little man, with his red curling
beard, his bright blue eyes, and his almost
feminine delicacy of skin, had such a wonderful
vitality, such an exuberant joyousness, such
a perfectly transparent sincerity, that he carried
away his auditors. His power of persuasiveness
was probably the secret of his success,
while his sense of boyish fun and perception
of the ludicrous tempered the acrimony
of his attacks and blunted the pungency of
his sarcasm.

No one could dislike Palis, though few
cared to depend upon him. From each he
won a meed of admiration and regard.

ILLNESS.

Circumstances never happen inexact
accordance with our anticipations.
Keith, on waking next
day, tried to rise, and found himself
too languid; tried to think, and was
forced to confess himself incapable; tried to
speak, and was interrupted by a nasty little
cough.

Le Goui brought tea on a silver salver, and
Dorothy sent for the doctor — a black-eyed
dapper Italian, with a smell of garlic and snuff
about him, who shook his head and prescribed
an infusion of violet leaves.

Is he seriously ill ?' asked Dorothy, arresting
the doctor as he took his departure
through her boudoir.

The doctor pulled out his snuff-box, tapped

it, inhaled a pinch, sighed, blew his nose, and
finally said :

No, signora. It is a little feverish attack;
it will soon pass. He must lie quiet, and
drink the infusion I have prescribed.'

'• Must he take no other precautions ? Can
I do nothing T

The doctor looked approvingly at Dorothy's
golden hair and gentle beauty.

No ; no other precautions are necessary.
He will soon be well ; but he must drink the
infusion, and lie still.'

Such queer visions and fancies crowded in
upon his brain and danced before his eyes,
that Keith felt glad to lie still ; and between
his half closed lids to see, in the subdued
light, the tapestried gods and goddesses on
the walls, and his wife sitting quietly, a little
pensive, by the big dressing - table, laden
with carved silver caskets and bottles. Indeed,
to everyone in the palace, this illness
seemed to bring relief: to Keith, who was
glad to give up puzzling and arguing himself
over Joynte's demands or Judith's unreasonableness
; to Dorothy, distracted from her
private cares by the joy of proving herself
^ capable nurse, an office she had always
been qualified to fill; to Lady Darlington,

who was glad because she thought the fever
would aflPbrd a powerful excuse for her friend's
return with her to England ; to Lord Darlington,
who was glad because his wife was
glad, and because he should soon see his
beloved hounds.

Perhaps Palis felt more regret than anyone
at the lack of Keith's co-operation in the
business of the Universal Review; but no
little worries preyed long on his perennial
flow of spirits ; and, as a set-off, an inspiration
had just reached his fertile brain — the
idea of a stirring war song, whose martial
strains would serve to rally the readers of the
Review, as the ' Marseillaise ' stirred the heroes
of the revolution. He hummed the melody
about the house all the day long, and tried it in
every key, and with all varieties of modulation,
on the piano in the grand gallery, the tones
of which were inaudible to Keith in his bedchamber.


This occupation, and the succeeding one of
copying out, revising, and arranging, kept Palis
happily employed for several days ; so that he
scarcely noticed how the time flew by, nor
that Keith, after swallowing an incredible
quantity of violet-tea, and patiently lying
still, as prescribed, had now entered upon his

convalescence, and was able to resume his
place at dinner.

The doctor still continued, however, to
shake his head and look serious, privately
imparting his fears to Dorothy, whom he now
mentally qualified as una donna solide.

Get him home ' — so ran his whispered
advice — ' get him home. He is sure to have
another attack if he remains here.'

Dorothy racked her brain vainly in the
endeavour to find a potent argument for his
departure, and finally decided to trust to the
chapter of accidents.

The Darlingtonss leave us on Wednesday,
you know,' she said, throwing out a little
reconnaissance on the first evening Keith
appeared at dinner.

Palis woke up from his musical dreams,
and discovered, to his surprise, that Keith,
though as gay as ever, had grown considerably
thinner and paler.

I think I shall travel with them,' he said;
^ my chief wants me home. I have finished
my work here, and should like to get my song
printed.'

Why, then, we shall not have a single
English friend left!' cried Dorothy, in dismay.


Let us make up a party, and travel
home together,' suggested Palis, to whom
all life appeared a kind of picnic, for which
it was wise to make up a party. * I ama
capital traveller, Mrs. Chester, I assure
you!'

Are you ?' said Keith, smiling. ' The only
time we travelled together you were in a
brown study — the throes of composition, I
suppose — all the time. You forgot your
luggage, forgot your watch, mislaid your
passport ; lost your hat, and my time, and
your own ticket, and only succeeded in preserving
from the general chaos an obese
carpet-bag, whose sides, threatening every
moment to burst, were tied up with string

Which bag exists to this day.'

I am sorry to hear it. From it you
periodically extracted a Bologna sausage, a
roll, and a lump of chocolate, with which you
refreshed your inner man.'

I never lost my temper among the articles
you enumerated just now.'

That is true ; but you exercised mine.
What strange fancies you had, too ! I remember
a Piedmontese youth with dazzling teeth
and large brown eyes, and a couple of white
mice, for whom you conceived a strange infatuation.

I found you regaling him and his
mice on cakes and fruit in the buffet.'

^ Quite true. That fellow could sing. My
dear Keith, he was a Mario in disguise. What
a lovely voice he had! what eyes! and he
was fresh, too, from his native village. stature
unadorned and unspoilt by the vices of civilization
has, I allow, the greatest charm for me.'

He was certainly unadorned — and partial
to fleas.'

Confess our journey was a pleasant one,
after all.'

'It was pleasant,' said Keith musingly; 'it
was so unorthodox and so comical. You
kept me in a constant state of laughter, suppressed,
unfortunately, most of the time by the
exigency of circumstances — sometimes by your
preternaturally polite attentions to old ladies
with baskets and bundles, sometimes by your
knowing stare at young ones, your peculiar
conversations with guards, porters, cab-drivers,
and shop-girls.'

La comedie humaine,' said Palis, sighing,
as he helped himself to cucumber. ' Mrs.
Chester, does your heart direct you to
England?'

'Oh yes, indeed!' she said eagerly; 'and
Keith knows it — don't you, Keith?'

Keith threw a kindly glance at her. Since
his illness he felt himself quite the model
husband. He had accepted with the best of
grace Dorothy's devoted attentions and unwearied
care ; the domestic hearth was now
become his ideal, for Judith's reappearance
had cured him for ever of platonic or even
musical flirtations. He was quite sure now
that it was not safe to be on friendly terms
with any woman but his wife.

Dorothy, you had better decide our plans
he said magnanimously, seeing they were
waiting for him, Jove-like, to pronounce his fiat.

There can be no doubt, then. I pronounce
at once for England,' said Dorothy quickly.

Hurrah for England, its mists, its lawn-tennis,
and its pretty women !' said Palis,
breaking into the familiar strain of his beloved
war song.

Perhaps, however, the doctor will not
allow me to travel yet,' said Keith doubtfully,
feeling, like all men, as thoroughly nervous
about his health, now he had taken the alarm,
as he had been reckless and careless before.

The doctor has prescribed it said Dorothy
gaily ; ' and I was already at my wits' end how
to carry out his instructions without opposing
your wishes.'

VOL. II. 17

Then, after all, I have a scheming little
wife.' Keith looked at her, and smiled so
cordially that the smile set her heart beating
with exhilaration.

Leave it to me, Keith,' she said — ' leave it
to me. You shall not have a minute's bother.
I will arrange it all with le Goui. We will
take him and Trimmer and the cook, and
discharge the Italian servants. May I write
to-day to Blackness, and order them to prepare
the house — and to mamma and Margaret ?
What joy it will give them! Dear Keith;
how good you are!'

Regardless of matronly dignity and of the
presence of Palis, who discreetly fixed his
eyes on the ' Touches a la Reine ' which he
was eating, she jumped up and kissed her
husband; but had only just time to resume
her seat, with cheeks still rosy-red, when
le Goui entered with the next dish, and
observed her with his well-regulated eyes,
which had learnt to see everything and notice
nothing.

How happy Dorothy was in the next few
days ! She flew to her friend Lady Darlington,
and confided to her all her hopes and her
delight, and the truth that for a long period
she had been really and truly home-sick.

She held consultations with le Goui — who had
by this time accepted her presence in the
household as an inevitable necessity, and was
agreeably surprised to find out how much
good sense on the whole she possessed, and,
now that she had become more proficient in
Italian, how cleverly she could manage the
servants — as to the arrangements best calculated
to promote Keith's comfort, and spare
him fatigue on the journey. She paid ofi* the
household staff, and totted up bills with the
ardour of an army controller ; she visited
cupboards, and turned out hidden nooks, and
examined linen indefatigably. All this gave*
her the greatest satisfaction, and so changed
the current of her thoughts that she even
forgot Joynte, though he had taken care to
remind her of his existence by a certain greasy
note, in which he urged her good offices with
her husband. She ran no risk of meeting him
either, for she scarcely ever went out alone or
on foot.

Keith was perpetually at home, and in her
presence. He was so kind and gentle to her;
he showed such trust and such approval of
her doings ; he grew so dependent on her
society ; he went out so meekly for a daily
airing in the gondola ; he lay so peacefully

17—2

all day, in his state of indolent weakness, on
the sofa in her boudoir, smoking and reading
French novels, that the conviction crossed her
mind that never, not even in the intoxicating
days of honeymoon and courtship, had she
tasted such perfect happiness. Keith seemed
so entirely her own, in bodily presence, in
heart and in inclination.

She mused thus one evening, sitting at the
large dressing-table, by the glimmer of two
stately wax-candles set in silver candlesticks,
while Trimmer, in a flutter of joy at the idea
of returning to her native land, brushed out
her hair. The heavy locks were spread out
to their full extent, and when the brush retreated
in its regular movement they flew
back into curling waves, till they covered her
shoulders with a veil of gold.

^ Nothing again could disturb their married
happiness,' so ran her reflections. ' They
understood one another now ; Keith knew
how much she loved him, and he loved her
dearly in return. How foolish she had been
ever to disquiet herself concerning the Marchesa,
who was musical and artistic, and
naturally interested Keith in their mutual
tastes. Certainly only a wild imagination
could have read harm where there was none.

and mistaken common courtesy for foolish
dalliance. Venice might yet have only pleasant
recollections in her memory. True, the
mosquitoes were troublesome, and Joynte's
behaviour had caused her uneasiness ; still, salvolatile
for the former, and perfect trust in her
husband for the latter, afforded satisfactory
alleviation. She would certainly regret the
charm of moonlight nights and the superb
colouring of brilliant days, and all the varied
delights of a life composed of sensation only,
of a perpetual feast of eye and ear. England
would probably seem cold and chill in the
contrast ; but England was her home, and
there lived her mother and Margaret, and
there were still the scenes and surroundings
of her happy childhood.'

Her reflections were interrupted by Trimmer's
voice, tired of mechanically lifting and
dropping her arm without any responsive
notice from her lady.

Dear me, ma'am ! how strange it will seem
to tread a peninsula again after living in the
water.'

'An island, Trimmer,' corrected Dorothy,
scarce able to restrain her laughter, for very
little things made her laugh just now.

Well, I'm sure, ma'am, it's all the same

— some foreiofii word or other it is that means
dry land ; not but what land never is very
dry in England Without a deal of drainage.
Is Blackness a damp place, ma'am ?'

I don't think so. I have lived in the
neighbourhood all my life.'

I only ask because Lady Mandrake always
passed the best part of the autumn at the seaside,
and I have not been accustomed to the
country at that season, and the mist and
damp; though I'm perfectly sure I shall get
used to it, for I've a very strong constitution.
With Lady Mandrake we always used to have
a large house by the sea, and a deal of company
visiting ; for you see, ma'am, there's
folk who have not got much money of their
own, and so profit by other people's, and
live at the expense of a great lady. To
be sure, they must do many things that are
irksome, walk when they are tired, talk when
they'd like to sit still ; but, as I always say,
"each one must earn his bread." The one
earns it by the sweat of his brow in the fields,
the other in a hot ball-room ; but the bread
that's earned is the same, for all that.' Here
Trimmer brushed again more vigorously.
Why, there was my lady's daughter, who
was married and a widow, and came home to

live with her. I've seen her ready to drop,
with talking to this one and that one, and
receiving company, while Lady Mandrake
slept in her chair ; and sometimes she would
"come running up to her room and say, " Now,
Trimmer, there's a dear, fetch me a cup of tea
strong, mind, for I'm very tired'' I'd fetch
it in and welcome — for I'm not proud — if
the housemaid would just leave it at the door
and give a little tap, so as I should know it
was there. Then just when the poor lady was
a-setting down like comfortable to her tea, we
would hear my lady's bell ringing sharp,
and the footman come up and say, ' Please,
ma'am, there's company in the drawing-room
;' and down would go the poor lady
without a word, and the bread and butter,
which Mrs. Tubes had cut special fine and
wafer-like, untouched. And I'd say to the
housemaid, as I folded up the dresses, " Jane,
she's earning her bread like one of us, and a
hard job she has of it." '

You are right, Trimmer ; there is a great
deal of drudgery in fashionable life,' said
Dorothy sweetly.

Lady Mandrake got her money's worth
out of her, too. She certainly gave her board
and lodging, which she had no call to do ; but

then she tormented her m a sly way. She'd
make her get up early to write notes, and sit
up late to answer them. " Maria," she'd say,
"you're younger than I am; you've younger
legs than I have." And she'd go on so, till
she nearly ran her off those young legs.
I'm glad I'm only a servant, Jane," I said,
sometimes; "for when I've done my work,
I've no need to be ragged at, and I can draw
a quiet breath, and read the Family Herald;
and I ain't got to think who is to be asked to
the next tea-party, and what single man would
do to make up fourteen at dinner." For my
lady was superstitious, ma'am, very, with all
her masterfulness. Are there ghosts at Blackness
?' asked the garrulous lady's-maid, running
off in a new sequence of ideas.

Ghosts ! None that I know of,' said
Dorothy, as she dismissed her attendant.
Ghosts ! what ghosts could there be in a
cheerful house, inhabited by a pair of married
lovers ?

Ghosts meant remorse and secrets, and dark
and bitter days; and how could there be any
such things at Blackness, where the only
ghosts were pictures of ancestors and ancestresses,
all quietly laid to sleep in the family
vault, all accommodated with their monumental

brasses and complimentary epitaphs,
the very names and pedigrees of which breathed
respectability and decorum. No dark forehead
owing hung over Mrs. Chester; no regrets
disturbed her. She was young, innocent, and
beautiful ; there was no place in her cupboard
for a skeleton.

AT HOME AGAIN.

I HE sleepy ' village of Dronington
was roused into the liveliest state
of excitement. Triumphal arches
of pink calico and laurel spanned
the main — in fact the only — street; from the
linen draper's (the general bazaar and universal
emporium), the grocers and the butcher's
shops flags and banners waved, bearing the
mystic words, ' Welcome Home,' ' Happiness,'
Long Life to the Bride and Bridegroom,'
while the surprising variety and number of the
colours and devices must have dazzled and
astounded the unwary stranger, had any such
passed by.

It was not every day that Dronington had
the happiness of receiving a rich young squire
and his bride, thus combining the gaily matrimonial,

dear to the hearts of ladies, with the
loyally conservative, precious to the farming
and labouring interest. True, Mr. and Mrs.
Chester were not personally popular ; he had
resided abroad, and she had lived so quietly
at home, having little to spend on charity or
pleasure, that no time or opportunity had
hitherto been given for the cultivation of any
warm personal feeling on the part of society
or dependents ; yet a halo hung around the
couple — the halo of wealth and good-fortune —
which in society irresistibly engenders respect,
tempered by affection.

It was the rural and universal belief thiit
now Blackness possessed a resident and generous
squire (for if he were rich and resident, he
might be likely to prove generous) the country
people could expect a future of prosperity.

Mrs. Parkinson naturally became one of the
most energetic and active of the decorative
committee, which she raised to a mission of
love ; and Mrs. Maynard and the other ladies
of the parish, carried away by her enthusiasm,
proved capable helpers.

Tears stood in Mrs. Strait's eyes at these
tokens of her daughter's importance. The
slight difficulties and misunderstandings that
had preceded the marriage were blotted out of

her memory and comfortably forgotten, insomuch
that aspersions on Mr. Chester's character
would have now astonished no one more
than herself.

Margaret, happy and unconcerned, carried
her head higher, bought a new gown with
cherry ribbons, and laughed a good deal more
than the occasion seemed to warrant. Her
sister had certainly mentioned, in the letter
announcing their return, that Keith's illness
was the immediate cause of it, and that he
was not equal to much fatigue ; but Margaret
reflected that no one able to travel could fail
to be gratified by, or object to, rejoicing and
congratulations on his behalf. So she joined
the band of hard-working ladies with considerable
alacrity, twisting wreaths and inventing
designs for garlands and decorations to the best
of her ability.

Another source of pleasure was afforded herby
the permission to roam about Blackness
and give orders, to inquire of the housekeeper
as to the state of the larder, and to
impress upon her that plenty of plums must
be put into the cakes baked for tea. There
was a charming sense of responsibility in all
this, mixed with a diverting contempt of
consequences. She held long discussions with

the obliging Mrs. Nutmeg as to the respective
merits of the tapestry or the red damask
chamber for the use of the invalid — Margaret
inclining to the tapestry-room, which possessed
blue satin hangings and a fine view of the
lake and fairy island, and Mrs. Nutmeg thinking
the red damask more comfortable and
appropriate, because it owned the finest bed.
Eventually, Margaret carried the day, and
the tapestry-room was decided upon. Mrs.
Strait passed her time in examining the embroidery
on the pillow-cases, which had been
executed in an Irish nunnery, and was
astonishingly elaborate ; and thus matters
progressed until the morning of the day that
was to bring home Mr. and Mrs. Chester.

There, that will do, I am sure.' Margaret,
with due satisfaction, settled the bunch
of roses and heliotrope she had just brought
from the garden in a queer shaped Venetian
glass, and stood a little way off, the cherry
ribbons waving merrily with each movement
of her head and hands, to examine the result
of her labours.

There, now, if Keith is not satisfied, I am
sure he ought to be — blotting-case, papers,
inkstand, flowers, books, all complete. Will
he smoke, I wonder? Well, if he does, here

is a pretty little saucer to hold the ashes, and
he has a nice view, and all the sun. Mrs.
Nutmeg, don't you think Mr. Chester will
be very comfortable? I should like to sleep
in that bed with the big frilled pillows and
the blue satin counterpane. What a lovely
counterpane.'

Mr. Chester brought it himself from
Italy,' said the fat housekeeper; ' they seem
to spend a deal more trouble on their beds
there than we do ; but I reckon they don't
sleep any better, with their fevers and their
agues and what not. Poor dear master, I
hope he is better, though he will be wanting
possets and teas still, I suppose.'

I hope so, too. Men soon pick up, I think,
though I've always heard they are the worst
invalids possible. Hark ! What is that ? It's
oh, it's the carriage! — let us run, or we
shall be too late.'

In another moment Dorothy was clasped in
the arms of her sister, who had flown out all
smiles and cherry ribbons to welcome her.
Mr. Chester looked pale and feeble as he
stepped from the hired landau, drawn by a
pair of horses, supplied for all ceremonies —
weddings, elections, funerals, or party-going
(open or shut according to the weather), by

the landlord of the Seven Stars. Margaret
was at no loss for exclamations.

Well, you're home again, that's a comfort;
and what a set of ghosts you look, too; poor
dear Keith! can't he walk without a stick?
Come in here; tea is ready in the library (if
you don't mind going upstairs), and such a
good cake — I superintended the making of it
myself! Dorothy, you are as fresh and clean
as if you had not been travelling.'

We only came 'from London, to-day, you
know,' said her sister, smiling, while Margaret
twined her arm in Dorothy's and overwhelmed
her with caresses; 'but Keith is very tired
the journey from Italy was so long and
tedious.'

Here Margaret surprised a mutual loving
look from the pair, full of tender yearning on
Dorothy's and reassuring trust on Keith's
part, and immediately decided within herself
that she would on no consideration whatever
be an old maid. In audible tones she said,
however, something quite different.

^ I am so sorry you are tired, because you
really will have to go into the village tomorrow,
and show yourself, and admire the
triumphal arches - those you saw on your
way from the station were nothing — we have

all worked so hard, and are so pleased to see

Margaret again kissed lier sister, but Keith
sank wearily into a chair. This movement
drew Margaret's attention to him.

^ You are to have the tapestry-room, you
know, Keith, and it is very comfortable.'

Why, that is the best room in the house,
and 1 have never slept in it.'

All the more reason you should,' replied
Margaret, making a little-courtesy ; ' as you
are the master of the house, and an invalid
now. But this is a special occasion ; you are
to get well quickly, you know, and not
imagine this a precedent for the future. You
are only allowed to be ill once in a way.'

'Yery well; but in that case you will have
to come and nurse me when I am ill !'

Margaret tossed her head gaily, and flitted
over to where Dorothy stood talking in a quiet
business-like way to Mrs. Nutmeg.

You mil stay and dine — you and mamma ?
Oh yes, you must; I will take no denial!'

Dorothy laid her hand kindly on her
mother's shoulder. Mrs. Strait was in a
highly hysterical state of tears and delight.

Mrs. Nutmeg, we shall be four; and please
let us have dinner early.'

Doesn't lie give her orders well ?' remarked
Mrs. Strait admiringly. ' I declare, Dorothy,
you have grown fat, and carry your self
better; I used to be afraid you stooped a
little.'

How delicious to think we need fear no
mosquitoes to-night !' irrelevantly said Dorothy,
giving vent to a sigh of relief; ' they used to
worry Keith so when he was ill.'

In your own palace ?' said Margaret, with
astonishment. ' I. thought a palace must be a
kind of enchanted place !'

Dorothy smiled a little sadly. The enchantment
had but too quickly evaporated, leaving
in its stead a bitter sense of disillusion.

Oh yes ! mosquitoes and everything disagreeable!
Venice was dreadfully hot; now
this place is perfection!'

It feels damp said Keith, shivering. ' I
really think a fire would be pleasant.'

In August !' cried the astonished Margaret.

Why not ? In this variable British climate
one can endure a fire all the year round, and
keep the window open if one is too hot.'

But only look at the flowers ; and a little
later on there will be a moon. Look at all
these beautiful geraniums, and lobelia, and
cancellaria, and the bed of heliotrope, and the

VOL. II. 18

late roses, and then think of a fire ! I see you
will import all your foreign chilliness here ;,
and, I declare, Dorothy, you dress differently.
Well, I like that : your gown is prettily
looped up. Trimmer must arrange mine forme
; you won't mind, will you, dear?'

Margaret looked pleading, and Dorothy willingly
gave her consent.

The dinner was a lively affair, and a source
of constant surprises and laughter. The
grand cook had not yet arrived ; but Mrs.
Nutmeg and the kitchen-maid improvised a
charming meal ; and le Goui, equal to all
emergencies, brought up the champagne
perfectly iced.

Margaret enjoyed herself as she had not
done for months ; the little epicure loved
good cheer and luxury. Keith looked on
languidly, and could hardly eat the roast grouse
Mrs. Nutmeg's forethought had provided.
Dorothy had made a little toilette, and, with
her pretty cheeks somewhat flushed, presided
at the table in a condition of supreme happiness.


They had parted with the Darlingtonss in
London ; Palis had returned to his Universal
Review and his literary duties ; the Marchesa
and her musical proclivities had been left far

behind in shadowy translucent Yenice, and
Dorothy was once more with her own people.
She looked at all the loved faces with devout
and thankful joy — at her husband's finely
chiselled features, her mother's familiar droop
and weary worn face, at Margaret's affectionate
and beaming countenance, and she felt her
heart expand with thrills of wonderful
gratitude.

Le Goui moved with velvet tread about the
airy dining-room, filling up the glasses, and
handing round a dish of late strawberries ; and
as she Watched it all — the pleasant home-like
scene, the flowers, and the fruit, and the
friendly ancestors benignly looking from the
walls — it came to Dorothy to wonder what
good things earth could give that she did not
already possess, except, perhaps, a little baby
face nestling in her lap. Well, there was
time enough for that !

It was not late when the party separated.

Mrs. Strait and Margaret intended to walk
home attended by a man-servant ; and it was
felt that the abnormal effervescence of high
spirits could not be expected to remain long
at high pressure. Keith, too, was an invalid,
and kept early hours.

The last ringing tones of Margaret's voice,

18—2

dispensing good-byes and good wishes to the
company, ceased to resound gaily in the air;
and by the small fire that had been lit agreeably
to Keith's desire in the library, Dorothy
and her husband now sat waiting till le
Goui should summon him to rest with the
announcement that all was ready.

What a happy day it has been, Keith !^ she
said, drawing a small stool near, and seating
herself at his feet ; ' everything so pleasant —
you at home again and nearly well, for you
will be rested tomorrow. I think this and
our wedding day are the red letters of my life.
How homely everything is ! The books and
their dear old covers, and your mother's pretty
china, and the Looking-glass and velvet. You
will say it is bad taste ; but I like it far better
than that old tapestry, which always seemed
to suggest something mysterious and uncomfortable
and weird.'

There is tapestry in my room here,' said
Keith, whose face had grown pallid as he
warmed his hands at the blaze.

But it is quite different; only just a piece
in a frame, and the subject is gay; no one
could have gloomy fancies in that blue satisfied
bed, I am sure.'

Keith, in his capacity of invalid, soon retired



to rest, but Dorothy felt too happy for sleep.

She moved in blissful restlessness about the

dressing-room opening into Keith's room,

which she had appropriated in order to ensure

a prompt attendance to his wants, singing

softly to herself, moving little things upon

the table, glancing at the prints upon the wall.

Then, true to her old habit, she opened the

window and looked out.

The terrace, dotted here and there with jars
of feathery palms or drooping fuchsias, lay
peacefully steeped in the golden light of the
harvest moon, whose rays glittered on the still
waters of the lake. The scene had all the
beauty of Venice, with none of its sadness — the
sadness of ruin and decay. Here there was a
smiling garden, ample foliaged trees, telling
of plenty and content.

She heaved a happy sigh, and busied herself
again about the room. Presently she heard a
faint sound from Keith's chamber, as though
some one were calling. She opened the door.
Keith's voice, grown a little querulous, reached
her.

I can't sleep ; I am too hot. Will you
move the counterpane and give me some
orange-flower water to drink?'

Oh, Keith, I am so sorry ! you finished

the last bottle yesterday, and I fear there is
no more unpacked. Shall I call le Group?'

No ; let the poor fellow rest. He has
worked hard enough all this week. But it is
very vexatious. I shall never sleep, I expect.'


^ Would you like anything else?'
Dorothy removed the counterpane thoughtfully.
If Keith could not sleep, he would be
so tired tomorrow.

Stop ! let me see ! Yes ; I have an idea I
put a bottle of orange-flower water in that
cabinet with the old-fashioned brass handles,
in the corner. It stood in my bedroom when
I was last here. I can't think why Mrs.
Nutmeg moved it. Here is the key, on my
watch-chain, and the inside part unlocks with
my key-ring. Open it and look.'

Dorothy did as she was desired, and found
the bottle. When she had poured out a glass
of water, and he had taken a long draught, he
said:

^ There, that is better. Thank you, dear ;
that will do now; and by-the-bye, as you have
opened the cabinet, find a paper which I shall
want tomorrow. It will save me trouble to
have it handy. It is the draft of an agreement
about a farm, and there are a couple of letters

on the subject. Find them all, and put them
on the table

There are a good many papers said
Dorothy, rummaging in the cabinet. ' Shall
I look them all through?'

Yes,' he said wearily, closing his eyes.

In the indistinct flicker of the candle, which
she was forced to hold in one hand while she
turned over the papers with the other, she
found it almost impossible to decipher the
writing ; so she hastily gathered up all the
papers in a heap, in her gown, and took them
into her room to examine at leisure, by the
light of her lamp. Keith seemed drowsy, and
her presence might drive away the precious
boon of sleep.

The papers were a queer medley. First
she found Keith's certificate of baptism, and a
packet of letters from his mother, written ina
faded, ladylike hand, on paper brown with
age; these she handled respectfully, pausing
over the simple, motherly terms of endearment
addressed to ' her darling boy.' Next
she found a half torn French novel of Balzac's,
treasured for some mysterious reason ; printed
lists of companies, a game-license, the prospectus
of a wine merchant, an old diary of his
boyhood, and a packet of sweet smelling

pastilles, all evidently tossed carelessly in to-keep
them out of the way.

She turned the things over more and more
impatiently. What a quantity of trash —

treasured trash, too ! Keith must have made
a mistake, the lease could not be here. It did
not seem like a receptacle for business papers
all. Then came a few more unimportant
letters, and that was all. Dorothy gathered
them together and stole back softly to replace
them in the cabinet. Perhaps she had left
some behind inadvertently. She glanced at
the bed with the idea of appealing to Keith,
but his breathing was quiet and regular. He
was sleeping at last.

She looked again more carefully to see if
any receptacle had been omitted in her search,
passing her hand in the semi obscurity gently
up and down, and into all the crannies. In
so doing, her fingers pressed against a button,
and a small drawer flew open. In it was a
leather case, and a bundle of papers. Fancying
she had attained her object, she again
crept back, leaving the door, as before, slightly
ajar. She drew a small chair up to the table,,
seated herself, and began methodically to untie
the ribbon which bound the documents,,
and to unfold them one by one. As she did

so, she noticed that they were chiefly letters —
love-letters — and signed ' Ida.'

Then immediately her observation was drawn
to the leather case. Opening it, she found
that it contained a miniature — the likeness of
a handsome young girl, with bright beaming
eyes, quantities of light auburn hair, and a
high-spirited expression. Beneath was written,
in flowing gold letters, ' Ida.' It was the
portrait of Ida — of the girl who had loved
him, left him a fortune, and was dead. Was
she on the brink of the mystery of which
Joynte had spoken ? Should she know all ?
How handsome the face was ! how fine the
delicately aquiline nose ! how high-bred the
upward curve of the nostril ! It was the face
of one who would love to rule ; yet she was
dead. Peace to her memory !

Dorothy closed the case reverently. She
felt no petty jealousy, but rather a tender
pity and gentle curiosity. Next came the turn
of the letters, which she seized with feverish
haste. Love letters ! she herself had never
written any ; her romance had been so short ; but
Ida had turned in another page in the book of
love. From one of the letters, as she unfolded
and read them, there fell a piece of
foolscap paper, scrawled over in a man's hand

Kettles Wife.

Dorothy's eyes but too rapidly seized the
meaning of the writing ; and, as she did so, the
paper dropped from her shaking hand, and her
head fell forward on the table.

A DISCOVERY.

^T was some minutes before Dorothy
recovered from the stemmed condition
into which she had sunk,
sufficiently to summon her energies
to the further perusal of the paper. For a little
while she gently fluttered some stray leaves
of the letters, and read a few of the passages.
At first, they were only unstudied outpourings
of a girl's ardent love, more broadly and unguardedly
expressed than is perhaps usually
considered orthodox ; yet their very frankness
revealed their innocence. They ran
through the whole gamut of passion, beginning
in the simple major of true friendliness,
warming, deepening, till they swept along,
striking complex chords of ardent affection;
presently they turned into the plaintive minor

of self distrust and humility, till A\4tli a crash
of sharp discords the storm of jealousy and passion
was ushered in. Such tender phrases as,
You have grown so precious to me ;' ' My eyes
hunger for a sight of you. I could fain tell
you so over and over again ; and yet I cant
turn my heart into words ;' ' M}^ garden is so
beautiful : sweet scents are in all the air. Oh,
to have you here to make it perfect!' were
succeeded by cries of misery, of jealous desire
so acute, that Dorothy's heart died within
her. ^ I have a wild longing upon me,' Ida
said once, ' to be near any river or water that
is rushing away somewhere — anywhere, and
is not stopped, like a lake, by earthen banks ;
a swift, stealthy-rushing river, strewed with
amber froth, hurrying on to that future,
which sometimes seems a deep, dark sea, in
whose bosom lies the storm — sometimes the
clearest crystal mirror. I thirst to be loved,
and crave to hear your voice ;' then followed
pages of wild and bitter reproach, and harsh
upbraiding ; then again softening streams of
tenderness, ' I cannot give you up : I am so
fond, and so weak.'

Finally came a short cold note : ' You
have deceived me unworthily. I will never
see you again !'

But though this human tragedy, played out
thus intensely before her eyes, moved Dorothy
as with the sio'ht of some new world of strong
emotion and undisciplined feeling, carrying her
out of her own little narrow sphere of homely
love and duty, still it was the letter on the
piece of foolscap paper, the letter written in
long scrawl uneven lines up and down the
page, blotted here and there as though composed
in the heat and hurry of passion, that
iced her blood and made her hands tremble.
She glanced at the signature. Her forebodings
had not deceived her. It was from Elias
Joynte.

'Scoundrel!' it began; 'plotting villain!
capable of stealing away one girl's affections
for the sake of her money, while you break
the heart of another; and not content with
that, even stoop to crime — to the cowardly
treacherous crime of murder, I am determined
to denounce you and to hand you over
to justice. I was in the garden of the Villa
Peruzzi on that afternoon which decided
your fate. I saw all that took place, crouching
in the bushes just under the long French
windows opening into the garden. I heard
Miss Phaer tell her servants she did not wish
to be disturbed, and lock her door on the

inside; then just as I was myself coming-forward
to speak, and reveal to her facts
which your future wife ought to know, I saw
you creep through the little garden-gate, to
which you had a private key, Miss Phaeton
key, and I lay still and watched. I saw
Miss Phaer greet you, somewhat surprised at
the intrusion, looking like a lovely picture in
her Avhite morning-gown with blue ribbons,
matching the snood that bound the chestnut
hair which streamed all down her back. You
evidently took her at a disadvantage ; she had
not expected you. You came nearer. Her
eyes flashed, and her look was haughty. She
reproached you. I could not hear the exact
words, but not a gesture was wasted upon me.
You lost your temper; she cried. Those
beautiful eyes brimmed over with tears. Her
passion rose, but you grew quieter and paler.
You were nearly as pale as new ivory. She
turned away then, and covered her eyes with
her handkerchief.

Having stung her, I suppose, to the quick,
you poured yourself out a glass of water from
the carafe that stood on the table. Into this
you threw some liquid out of a small bottle,
which you took from your pocket. A sudden
exclamation from Miss Phaer, who still had

her back to you, startled you ; instead of
dropping the liquid deliberately in, your hand
shook ; and all the contents fell into the glass.
You quickly put the bottle into your pocket
and walked to the window. Your face a&
you looked out straight at me, who was
crouching, motionless and attentive, so near
to you and yet invisible, was a study. You
were haggard ; despair was written in your
eyes. Presently you turned and saw Miss
Phaer in her white morning-gown, her beautiful
hair streaming down her back, quietly
drinking the poisoned glass of water. Of
course this was exactly what you wanted.
You rushed towards her, pressed her in your
arms, apparently to stifle her cries, for you
never called for help. After a moment you
laid her on the sofa, and flew as if the furies
pursued you down the garden into the street,
letting yourself out at the little gate, which
you did not fail to lock, taking the key away
with you.

Miss Phaer was dead. I stayed some time
watching her; she never moved. I climbed
over the wall the way I had come myself
(knowing otherwise I should have had no
chance of being admitted into Miss Phaer's-
presence, for, as you remember, she had

quarrelled with me about you), and I was
glad and thankful to get out of the place. No
one thought she had been murdered, no one
had seen the occurrence ; her door was locked
in the inside. The glass and the prussic acid
accounted to her mother for everything, knowing,
as she did, of her broken engagement,
consequent on the discovery of Judith's story.
To the outside world she died of heart-disease ;
but her death followed so quickly on the
rupture of hei* engagement to you, that the will
she made in your favour was never revoked.
You were rich, and you were free. Was ever
anything more damnable ? — was ever crime
more profitable ? As soon as I discovered
this I determined how to act. I saw you
to-day, and I told you that unless you at
once, and without demur, handed over to me
my cousin's fortune, I should denounce you.
You laughed, you sneered, said I could prove
nothing. Very well — time will show. I write
this detailed account of what I have seen, in
order that you should understand my power.
I give you till tomorrow at sunset ; if by
that time you do not send me your written
promise of restitution, you know the consequences.
I am a man of my word. Choose !

E. JOYNTE.'

On the margin of this terrible epistle was
written, in Keith's clear small handwriting,
the words :

Elias Joynte, a dangerous lunatic, was, by
my advice, confined in a madhouse that same
day.'

The letter, with its marginal annotation,
had evidently been forgotten ; for it had lain
among the folds of one of Ida's love-letters,
where, except for the unfortunate chance of
Dorothy's search, it would probably have
rested for ever.

It seemed to Dorothy afterwards, looking
back upon this awful time, as if she must laye
sat there motionless for hours. When she
lifted her head at last, and looked around, the
lamp had gone out, and the candle flared in
its socket. She put her hand to her forehead,
which ached with a dull pain; slowly,
as in some horrible torture, the knowledge she
had acquired stamped itself upon her brain.
She began to cry out in agony, wringing her
hands :

My God — my God ! not this — not this !'

Involuntarily the God neglected in our
happy hours is earnestly invoked at moments
of heart-rending trial ; but no comfort came
to her soul, only an utter loathing and revels

II. 19

sion from the surroundings of her luxurious
life. Her husband a criminal — her riches a
fraud! The very blue satin hangings, the
soft yielding carpets, the carved furniture,
acquired by sin and treachery ! She tore the
diamond rings from her fingers, and threw
them on the table : she hated them — herself —
everything.

In the next room lay Keith, the author of
all this misery, unconscious of the drama
being acted thus silently and cruelly in his
vicinity ; and through the door came — in the
drear and solemn silence of the night, of those
hours when birds are hushed and the spirit
wakes — his gentle breathing — the breathing as
of a tired child.

Dorothy moaned. They had been so happy
lately; she had loved him so. And now,
awful thought, could she ever love him again ?
ever bear to touch his lips with her pure
lips ? to take his hand — the blood-stained
hand of a murderer — in hers ?

The remaining years of her life must be a
penance, an expiation, a cry for mercy to the
throne of the Almighty. Was it possible that
men could live, happily, frivolously, carelessly,
with such an awful sin on their conscience?
^as there, perhaps, really no such thing as

conscience and remorse? Her head swam,
riofht and wrongs mixed themselves in her
mind. But oh ! the wretchedness, the meanness
of it all; did she even now know everything
— who was Judith, and what was her
story? Perhaps the very bitterest suffering
to a proud spirit lies in the sense of deception,
of having lavished despised treasures on unworthy
objects, of having cast pearls before
swine. Dorothy, with all her gentleness,
encouraged self-respect bordering on pride;
she had surrendered her heart into this man's
keeping, she had chained her existence to his,
and now she must suffer with him and through
him. Through the long hours of the night
the old fabric of happiness crashed and fell in
ruins about her, and still the agony lasted,
rising and falling in rhythmic phases of proud
rebellion or dumb and helpless despair.

Silence overcame her at last, the silence of
the heart and of the brain. She grew too
exhausted to suffer: the strain and disruption
had been so intense. Poor little unit battered
about in the great churn of human misery,
what were her woes that they should attract
much attention? Thousands of other aching
hearts that night ached in unison, thousands
of proud spirits lay crushed in bitterness and

self-abasement. Gradually the silence wa
broken by a tentative chirp, the darkness
grew less dense, and the timid rays of light
gathered strength, and rested on the golden
head bent down in piteous agony. The
glorious day returned in its beneficent course,
and brought with it balm and peace. Dorothy
slept.

END OF VOL. II.

BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD AND LONDON.

I T « "iSIITIX °^ 'Lunch-URBANA

0112 046414006

L I B R.AR.Y

OF THE

UNIVERSITY

OF ILLINOIS

82.5

\4 • ^

3i ^obel

BY

LADY VIOLET GREVILLE,

AUTHOR OF

"zoE," 'faiths and fashions," etc.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. in.

LONDON :

RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON,

^nblishtvsi in ordinary txr ^tx JEtaj^sts t^^ ^nszn.

1883.

[All Rights Reserved']

"^ '' o^ o^-oi^As

CONTENTS OF VOL. III.

Chatter PACK

I. DOROTHY SHOWS CAPRICE - - - 1
II. DOROTHY RETURNS TO THE ANGEL HOUSE - IT

III. KEITH ASSERTS HIS AUTHORITY - - 32

IV. LADY DARLINGTON SYMPATHIZES - - 49
V. KEITH TRIES HIS HAND AT CONSOLATION - 63

VL THE Darlington AT HOME - - 80

Vn. THE NEW GOVERNESS - - - 95

Vii KEITH TALKS POLITICS - - - 112

IX. DOROTHY KEEPS HER OWN SECRETS - 129

X. SUNDAY AT LOVEMERE - - - 145

XI. DOROTHY GIVES CAUSE FOR SCANDAL - 156

Xll, THE GOVERNESS IS DISMISSED - - 176

Xii RAPHAEL DINES - - - - 191

XIV. THE WANDERER . - 204

CHAPTER PAGE.

XV. REST FOR THE WEARY - - - 222

XVI. MRS. MAYNARD OBJECTS TO HER RELATIONS 23^

XVII. WHICH TREATS OF HUNTING - - 254

XVIII. A violin's broken String - - 271

XIX. 'THE GRAVE OF ALL THINGS HATH ITS

violet' - 28^
XX. MAY-TIME - 307

CHAPTER I.

DOROTHY SHOWS CAPRICE.

OEOTHY!'

She started up, rubbing her
eyes, and feeling exceedingly confused
and doubtful, as memory
straggled into consciousness.

Dorothy!' came again the cry, this time ina
louder kev.

xJ

I am coming,' she said, striving to speak
calmly and naturally, though the sound of
Keith's voice made her shiver.

Why, you are dressed!' he remarked wonderingly.
' Have you not been to bed yet ?—
surely it is morning ?'

VOL. III. 2

I fell asleep in my chair she replied briefly,
taking up a bottle of medicine to hide her
discomposure, and marvelling inwardly how
she could have slept.

What o'clock is it ? Shall I take my
draught ? I think I should like some tea.'

It is only six o'clock,' she said, consulting
her watch, which was still going ; * le Goui
will bring it at the usual hour, I suppose.'

How light it is already !' Keith turned
wearily on his pillow. ' If it is so early I
suppose I must try to sleep again a little.'

I suppose you must,' she said, still in that
voice of rigidly regulated calm.

Kiss me, dear.' She stooped obediently,
just touching his forehead with her lips ; then
she turned away and quickly passed into the
next room, shutting; the door of communication
carefully behind her. Arrived there, she
halted, cold and shivering, with a determination
to think over matters carefully. It was
evidently no dream, as in the first instant of
awakening she had devoutly hoped. Thereupon
the table, near her burnt-out candle and
her open travelling-bag, lay the bundle of
letters in confusion ; the blue ribbon that had
tied them together ; the miniature case with
Ida's portrait ; and on one side, just as she had

tossed it from her, the paper written in Joynte's
hand, creased and crumpled from her own convulsive
grasp, obtruding its hateful existence
upon her. With newborn energy she lighted a
match, seized the paper, holding it gingerly, as
though it were possessed of some strange stinging
power, and set fire to it. As soon as the
fire sprang up and curled round her hand, she
threw the paper into the grate, and watched the
greedy flames consume it. Presently nothing
remained of it but a few black flaky fragments,
and with a deep sigh she sank into a chair.
The written accusation no longer existed, the
crooked characters haunted her no more with
their terrible meaning ; yet what had she
gained by thus destroying the tangible proofs
of crime, when its meaning was graven upon
her heart, when her faith and her ignorance
had alike vanished ? She gathered the letters
slowly together, tying them up with the blue
ribbon, and laying them neatly by the minas
with the intention of replacing them
in the bureau at the first convenient opportunity.
And while she busied herself thus
mechanically, even taking ofi^ her dress and
preparing to go to bed in order to escape
Trimmer's keen and critical eye, a resolution
which during the last hour lay dormant in her

1—2

mind gathered streno-th and coherence, gradually
assuming practical proportions. The
doctrine so persistently preached by Mr.
Maynard recurred to her memory, the outcome,
as he deemed it, of his great Lord and
Master's teaching, to which Dorothy had once
vehemently refused to assent. It rose before
her now, as the huge soulless Moloch to which
frail humanity must inevitably bow.

Self-sacrifice! The very word meant
sorrow, sadness, suffering. Dorothy had refused
to hear the call ; had persisted in taking
more purely 'personal views of life ; had
sought happiness in wilful fashion. And
now, the inevitable forced itself upon her ina
far more real and unbearable shape than
that presented to her by the good Vicar.
To share in the advantages of a crime was
to her an utterly distasteful notion ; to bruise
her own heart, and trample on her own love,
the only possible solution. Keith had sinned
from the lowest motive, for greed ; he had not
even repented, but he had sought to drag
another soul with him down into degradation,
Dorothy's soul, hitherto pure and innocent.
For unconscious participation was still a participation
from which her conscience recoiled.
Fate had saved her for its oven mysterious

]purpose. And lie ? He must expiate. Those
who had strength to sin, must have courage
to endure shame. Shame, and Keith ! Oh,
no — no; she could not bear it! The very
thought stung like a viper's tongue. Still
she could not, dared not, share the results of
his crime. She would go away quite quietly
somewhere, tell no living soul — not even the
mother, who would surely be harsh in her
judgments — shroud the secret in her own
heart, guard her husband's cankered reputation,
foolishly loving him because she could
not help it, but resigning all hopes of happiness.
Tears rolled silently down her cheeks
at these thoughts — tears of self-pity, with
which her eyes were wet. But though she
continued to weep over her misery, her
resolve only grew more fixed and lusty.

In a little while Trimmer knocked softly
at the door, bringing a cup of tea and some
letters in her hand. She exclaimed to find
the curtains undrawn, and Dorothy lying in
bed, with large eyes wide and wakeful, and
the traces of her sleepless night and scarcely
wiped tears still on her face.

Haven't you slept well, ma'am ?' she asked,
with the astonished anxiety of a servant
whose hearty supper and plethoric temperament

induces sound sleep, and makes her
incredulous of others' wakefulness.

Not very well ; I have a headache.'
Dorothy put her hand to her eyes, in order
to escape further questioning.

Dear me, ma'am, that's a great pity ; for
the people about are all agog, expecting you
and Mr. Keith in the village presently; and
they are ready to cheer, and the flags a-flying
and a brass-band playing already!'

Oh, I had forgotten ! Of course, the

rejoicing ' said Dorothy, seized with a

speechless terror at the mere vision of such
incongruous proceedings.

It seems the village was never in such a
commotion before ; it is even worse than when
Lady Mandrake's daughter was married,
though that was a business, goodness knows !
and the funeral of her husband coming so
soon after, too ; and the poor young lady
stepping from orange-flowers into widow's
weeds, as it were !' pursued Trimmer, folding
and tidying as she talked. ' Mr. Flint is to
read an address, and Mrs. Horsfall's little girl
to present you with a nosegay '

'What is to be done?' ejaculated Dorothy
wearily.

Done, ma'am ! You won't have much todo

but to dress smart ; there's a deal of dress
expected on these occasions. It would have
taken place last night when yon arrived, only
Miss Margaret said she was quite sure Mr.
Chester would be tired out and might be
displeased.'

Yes, indeed he would,' said Dorothy
quickly, rejoicing that at least she had been
hitherto spared this ordeal. Still it was all
to come, and by what possibility could she
escape it?

When Trimmer had finished tidying, and
her orderly fingers had put everything into its
proper place, she left the room. Dorothy,
again alone, pushed back her heavy hair front
her forehead, and exerted herself to rise.
What her future conduct must be she scarcely
knew; only of one thing she Alas certain, that
the chain binding her to her present state of
life must be broken as quickly as possible, and
that she must without delay listen to the imperative
commands of her own conscience. Mr.
Maynard's advice would have been of the
greatest possible service to her at this juncture,
but she could not send for him without telling
him all the truth, and to this revelation she had
decided no temptation or feeling of personal
weakness, should lead her. Meanwhile, if

she could only gain a little time to mature her
plans she must think seriously. But thinking
hurt her, and it was no fancied throbbing
that beat like the strokes of a hammer on her
temples. She was dressed at last, but this
morning she did not, as usual, kneel down and
say her prayers. A feeling of bitterness and
disappointment ruled her tyrannically. She
could not endure meekly to bow her head and
murmur the daily petition, ' Thy will be done.'
Self-denial was evidently a duty, but no joy.
She had been injured in her pride, her love,
and her self-respect, but she could scarcely be
said to have erred. Under these circumstances
she chafed against an attitude of humility and
resignation. Trimmer had insisted on Dorothy
wearing one of her best gowns — the day
was bright and beautiful, like a tardy lino^erinof
of perfect summer — and besides, she must remember
the rejoicing. Dorothy, thinking
dress the veriest trifle, in the face of her great
grief, quietly consented. Margaret had herself
arranged to come up for breakfast (the
expectation of amusement tempting her to rise
sooner than usual), and Keith in consequence
made the effort of an early toilette, and descended
to the dining-room. Dorothy carefully
timed her appearance so as to avoid a tete-a~

tete with her husband, while Margaret' &
Hvely presence obviated all chances of unpleasant
silence. Margaret, suffused with
dimples and smiles, looked, in her pale blue
cotton gown and dainty frills, the veriest embodiment
of sunshine, and poor Dorothy
weary and worn with the night's conflict, felt
grateful to her for her bright assistance.

What time shall you be ready for the reception?'
asked Margaret. ' I have just been
telling Keith all about our preparations.'

Keith is really not strong enough for so
much fatigue,' said Dorothy, taking her seat
at the breakfast-table, and looking anxiously;
across to her husband, who had heaped his
plate with bacon and eggs, and seemed prepared
with a good appetite. He looked rested
too, and considerably less languid than
usual.

I can stand the fatigue quite well to-days
he said cheerfully. ' I wish Palis had been
here though, to help me through with it ; he
is a host in himself. These kind of things
are a deuce of a bore, and I believe he really
likes them. However, I suppose it pleases
people, and if I am to stand for Parliament
some day, it is as well to take every opportunity
of making one's self popular.'

Certainly Margaret nodded her head
approvingly.

But tomorrow would be better,' uro:ed
Dorothy timidly, feeling as if Fate must always
be too strong for her.

No ; the triumphal arches will be faded
by tomorrow, and Mrs. Horsfall's little girl,
who has not slept from excitement for a week,
would be dreadfully disappointed,' interrupted
Margaret ; ' besides, the band is engaged, and
the Odd Fellows are to turn out. No, no,
Dorothy; you must not think of such a thing.
Why, you are a regular kill-joy, and would
deprive everybody of a treat.'

By-the-bye, I must speak to Flint about
the tenants' dinner,' Keith remarked, while
Dorothy sat silently pouring herself out some
tea ; ' we must do something for the people in
return.'

Let's roast a live ox, and have a May-pole
and all sorts of things,' said Margaret eagerly.

Roast a whole ox, I suppose you mean,
you little goose !' responded Keith, laughing at
her enthusiasm. ' You shall have anything
you like, Margaret. I appoint you master of
the ceremonies.'

That will be nice. You may trust me to
spend plenty of money, and make everyone

happy. Why, Dorothy,' as her eyes suddenly
rested on her sister's face, ' what is the matter
with you ? You do look pale, quite ghastly ;
and you always used to have such a nice complexion,
exactly like a rose-leaf.'

I did not sleep well last night,' murmured
Dorothy, feeling herself blanch under her
sister's good-humoured but unsentimental
scrutiny ; ' and do, Keith, please, put off the
rejoicing till tomorrow !'

Not on account of me, Dorothy,' he answered
imperturbably. ' I assure you I feel
far better than I have ever done since the
commencement of my detestable fever, and
you never mind fatigue.'

No ; you were always the strong one of the
family, and able to sit up reading and studying.
Come and take a turn in the garden, Keith,'
coaxed Margaret, when they rose from table,
Dorothy pushing aside the tea which she
had scarcely tasted, and the piece of toast she
had been engaged in idly crumbling between
her fingers. ' There are a number of roses
still, and such a delicious bed of mignonette,
besides quantities of cherry-pie, which I
begged the gardener to plant. Come, Keith.'

Keith needed no coaxing. He had always
been partial to his lively sister-in-law, and

to-day Dorothy seemed dull and incomprehensible.


What time shall we 2:0 to the village ?'
Margaret called out, as she stepped OA^er the
window-sill. ' Settle it, Dorothy, will you ?
They are all anxiously waiting to know.
Hadn't we better have an early luncheon, and
give up to the people the whole of the afternoon?
— that will tire you least, Keith.'

As you please, dear,' said Keith, who was
in high good-humour, feeling himself the hero
of the hour, and gratified at the attention he
was receiving.

They departed, talking gaily; and Dorothy
returned to her own room, now quite deserted
and set in order, and smelling sweetly of
the jessamine that climbed on the wall outside.
She would gladly have burst into
tears, her heart was so overcharged with
sorrow : she could even, with the least
encouragement, have sobbed on the prim
Trimmer's shoulder, as on a rock of refuge,
had the latter been present ; for she was
thoroughly dispirited and miserable.

But this could not be. Her strange series
was one that must be nursed in solitude.
The life she genuinely appreciated, the delights
of a luxurious home, glowing garden-beds,

and pleasant park-like grounds, the
advantage of marriage with a orood-lookmo;
young man who loved her, the noisy rejoicing
m her honour made by poorer neighbours —
all these she must renounce for as lonely and
wretched a lot as that of the veriest outcast
in the land, and the decision must be taken
irrevocably and quickly. From her window
she could see Keith and her sister slowly
pacing along the terrace, stopping now to
admire a flower-bed or examine a shrub, now
resuming their merry walk, while the swift
echoes of Margaret's laughter lightly reached
her ears. Into this healthful happiness her



resolution must break, like a bombshell bursting
over an innocent and unsuspecting town,
shattering hope and joy, and bringing fear
and desolation in its train. She stayed
watching the pair till le Goui, coming out
bareheaded with a note and a message, summoned
them in. Doubtless the message was
to announce Mr. Flint's presence and readiness
to receive orders for the tenants' dinner.
ISTot a moment was to be lost. Dorothy
pressed her hands firmly against her beating
heart, and swiftly descended the softly-carpeted
stairs.

At the library-door she stopped, hearing

the sound of voices. For one brief doubting
second only, however; this was not the
time to hesitate. She turned the handle, and
pushed open the door. Her husband and
Mr. Flint sat talking, and both looked up,
surprised at her entrance. Mr. Flint, remembering
her bridal status, bowed effusively, and
uttered a pretty speech referring to youth,
love, and beauty. Dorothy reddened, thinking
that tomorrow he would see cause to
speak very differently.

If you are busy,' she said gravely, addressing
Keith, ' I will not detain you. I only
wished to ask you to put off the people's
reception till tomorrow.'

'Till tomorrow!' Mr. Flint and Keith
simultaneously ejaculated.

Till tomorrow,' said poor Dorothy, vainly
trying to find efficacious words. ' I am tired,
and I am sure it will knock you up, and — and,
in short, I particularly wish it.'

Under those circumstances,' Mr. Flint
bowed respectfully, ' there can of course be
no question : the reception must be deferred.'

Dorothy, this is absurd,' said Keith irritably.
'I told you before I felt quite well
enough; and there is no possible reason for
this sudden caprice.'

I have my reasons,' answered Dorothy
quietly.

Mr. Flit now soothingly remarked, gatherings
that there was some known domestic
disturbance at work :

Ladies, you know, . sir, must never be
hurried. Perhaps Mrs. Chester's toilettes are
not unpacked.'

Let Trimmer unpack them at once ; she is
paid wages for the purpose.' Keith spoke ina
commanding tone. ' What on earth is the
use of a servant if she cannot be ready when
she is wanted ? Where is Trimmer? I will
ring for her at once.'

Pray do not blame Trimmer,' said Dorothy
meekly ; ' it is not her fault. It is entirely,
as you said, my caprice — I do not feel well. I
cannot go through the rejoicing to-day.'

But really, Dorothy, you are unpardonable.'

Mr. Flint again interposed.

^ Surely, sir, it would be ungallant to insist
with a lady — it would distress us all. We
can easily defer the arrangements, and explain
to everyone concerned that Mrs. Chester is
fatigued with her journey — it is such a natural
result. Have you any other orders for me,
madam ?'

None,' said Dorothy, whose gratitude

evinced itself in the feeblest radiance of a smile.
That smile, evidently the guerdon of his
obligingness, completely captivated Mr. Flint.
He informed his wife, at tea the same evening,
that Mrs. Chester's beauty was astonishing,
and her manners graciousness itself. Mrs.
Flint, who had the feminine faculty of depreciating
ladies she had known familiarly,
merely shrugged her shoulders and contemptuously
pouted a little at this announcement,
any further satirical remarks on her
part being cut short by the urgent solicitations
of baby, whom she was successfully rearing
on a liberal diet and abundance of porter.

As soon as Dorothy had left the room, and
the reflection of her smile had died away from
the responsive countenance of Mr. Flint, he
resumed his former business-like expression,
and said :

I suppose, then, that is decided. I had
better go at once and inform the people of the
change in your plans. After all, a pleasure
deferred is a pleasure redoubled -, and Mrs.
Chester did seem fatigued.'

I don't know what was the matter,' said
Keith drily; 'nor, indeed, does it seem to me
that a woman ever knows her own mind for
two minutes consecutively.'

DOROTHY Returns TO THE ANGEL HOUSE.

^q'^^HE day dragged slowly away.
Margaret laughed and joked indefatigably
with Keith, but her*
jokes fell flat, and there was no
responsive merriment on his part. A kind of
gulf seemed to separate husband and wife ; by
a tacit consent they exchanged together only
necessary words, and avoided each other's
society. The remotest suspicion of the truth
certainly never crossed Keith's mind. He
only felt it exceedingly disagreeable that
when his health permitted and his inclination
prompted, Dorothy should suddenly exhibit
unaccountable caprice and a desire to thwart
his wishes. As for any real reasons on her
part, of course he did not believe in them.
Women were always impulsive and unreasoning.

III. 2

able, though, with the exception of a display of
silly jealousy, which might be set down to
youthful ignorance of life, he could not really
saddle Dorothy with any serious faults.

He determined, at any rate, not to lower
himself by descending to argument, but rather
sensibly to profit by Margaret's easy and
light-hearted companionship. Still a strange
discomfort troubled him, and he was relieved
when the long summer's day drew to its
close, and Margaret went home, escorted by
the footman.

The weather continued perfect ; there was a
luscious warmth in the still air that disposed
to pleasant inaction, and made the mere fact
of existence desirable. They had sat chiefly
in the garden, where the long shadows lay
motionless across the bright green grass, and
the scent of the mignonette attracted busy
booming bees ; they had drunk tea and tasted
of juicy peaches, and spent the afternoon in
luxurious fashion, and yet, with the exception
of Margaret, whose mood was governed
entirely by external circumstances, no one had
really found pleasure in any of these things.

Dorothy retired as soon as her sister had
started to go home, fervently hoping to be
spared any explanation with her husband.

This was not unlikely, from the fact that
le Goui invariably, since his master's illness,
assisted at the latter' s evening toilette, and
that Trimmer never left Dorothy till she had
seen her arrayed in her muslin dressing-gown,
and let her shining hair down to fall in waves
around her shoulders. Provided Keith did
not call (and if he were sleepy he might
not), the door of communication could
easily remain closed, and thus all conjugal
talk be avoided. It seemed as if this were to
be, for though Dorothy listened intently as
soon as Trimmer had departed, she could no
longer hear le Goui stirring.

She breathed more freely, but kept still, for
fear of attracting to her Keith's attention.
She sat on, motionless, in front of her
dressing-glass, with hands crossed in her lap,
waiting until she heard the final sounds which
denoted the retirement of the household — the
footman with harshly creaking shoes marching
down the passage to put out the lights, and
the slamming doors, like a retreating echo,
dying away behind him. For some time
longer she sat quiet, her heart beating loud
and audibly in the stillness, till she felt sure
Keith must be asleep. Then she rose, fetched
pen and paper, and began to write. When

2—2

she lead finished (the task took a considerable
time) she folded and directed her letter, and
laid it in a prominent place on the table.
In the afternoon she had restored the packet of
letters and the miniature case to its place in
the bureau, and there remained now only her
personal preparations to be consummated.
She went into the anteroom outside, where
she had noticed a small portmanteau, which,
though emptied of its contents by Trimmer,
had not yet been removed. This portmanteau
Dorothy quietly dragged into her room, and
proceeded to fill with linen and various
garments — only the very plainest and simplest
of her gowns — a black one — and a warm
cloak. The portmanteau was small, but it
sufficed for her wants. Besides this she took
a plaid shawl, a small travelling-bag, into
which she put her purse and some personal
jewellery of no great value. Then she dressed
herself in a dark grey merino, and sat down
again till the first rays of daylight crept slowly
through the curtains. She was going away,
with the intention of placing an irrevocable
barrier between herself and Keith ; she was
taking a great plunge at the behest of duty,
into the chill and unsympathetic world. She
must never hope to be happy, perhaps never

even be at peace again. The hour was deed
sad and solemn.

Sweet memories crowded upon her mind,
sweeping away the sense of present evils, till
the accumulated emotions and pent-up restraint
of the day found vent in bitter welling
tears, that forced themselves quietly
through her lashes, and dropped in widening
blotches on her gown. She let herself cry fora
little, it soothed and did her good; but
presently she dried her tears, put on her hat
and cloak, and taking up her plaid and handbag,
crept to Keith's door.

Good-bye,' she murmured softly — ' good-^
bye, my dear love.' He could not hear — yet
only that thin door stood between her and
happiness.

When she emerged into the passage, the
house was perfectly still, except for the twitter
of awaking birds pluming themselves in the
branches, the sound of which came faintly
through the windows of the hall. With a
light firm step, having put away in that goodbye
all her last . weakness of regret, she descended
the stairs, and unbarred the front door
as cleverly and noiselessly as she could. Once
in the open air, the damp freshness of the atmosphere
(the dew was clinging closely to the

blades of grass) restored her a little, for she
was feeling faint, and she proceeded with a
brisker energy to trudge down the avenue.

It was now about six o'clock, and as she
passed through the lodge and turned into the
high-road she began to meet labourers going
to their daily work. One or two recognised
her, stared a little, and awkwardly touched
their caps; others passed her by with a
Morning', miss !' At the friendly familiarity
she crimsoned, and hastened her steps till she
reached the Angel House.

How pretty the little garden looked, beneath
the bright caresses of the morning sunbeams ;
the sunflowers and dahlias stood wet and
glistening with dew, and a shower of crystal
drops from the clematis fell on her head as
she passed beneath the porch. Sarah was up,
cleaning the passage and steps. She gave a
start of astonishment as she beheld Dorothy,
and cried out :

Lord save us, is it you?'

Yes, it is I,' said Dorothy. ' Hush ! don't
make a noise.'

And to think of your coming in like that,
for all the world like a ghost, just when I was
cleaning up early so as to go to the homecoming,
and see all the sights !'

By this time Sarah Alas wiping the soapsuds
off her arms with her apron, and indulging
in prolonged and curious stares.

Is my mother awake? I want to go to her

Dear me, no, ma'am ; she is never called
till half-past seven.'

What shall I do, then ?' thought Dorothy
vaguely, aloud.

Well, I don't rightly know, ma'am. Maybe
you'd step into the kitchen and take a cup of
tea : cook is down,' suggested Sarah, puzzling
her poor head profoundly to find a reason for
the bride's apparition alone, and on foot, at
this early hour. Such solitary expeditions
did not enter at all into Sarah's conception of
the privileges of matrimony, and she wondered
what construction the baker's young
man, who was courting her, would give to
such vagaries when she told him.

Dorothy assented to Sarah's proposal,
knowing of no more agreeable method to pass
the time till Mrs. Strait's waking, and followed
her into the kitchen. Cook was equally
astonished, but less demonstrative in her surprise,
which was soon merged in concern for
the young lady's comfort.

The kitchen was pleasant enough; a bright
fire burnt in the grate, and the kettle hummed

comfortably. Dorothy thought of her cake-making
days, seemingly removed into a
blurred and indefinite past.

Sit ye down, ma'am, there,' said cook, who
was homely and kind, having attained a habit
of authority in the exercise of her profession,
which, coupled with the fact that she had lost her
husband and buried six children, as she said,
gave her a right to speak !' ' Why, you're all
of a tremble, and your cheeks as white as
white. If furrin' travel does that for folk, all
T can say is, let 'em stay at home.'

'Thank you,' said Dorothy gratefully, when
cook, while volubly talking, removed her
gloves, chafed her cold hands, and stirred the
fire to a brighter blaze.

'These 'ere mornings do seem fresh-like,
and I warrant you've tasted nothing this
blessed day.'

Dorothy shook her head.

Poor lamb I Well, take this tea — it's the
best two-and-sixpence — and drink it now, do.'

Dorothy drank eagerly. Material comfort,
warmth, quiet, and the honest attentions of the
old servant, were what she needed most just
then. Her head was too tired for much perplexing
thought, and her heart ached with
suffering. By the time she had finished her

tea, and cook had crooned over lier in simple
hearty fashion, Sarah returned to say that
Mrs. Strait was awake.

Dorothy rose.

I must go now, cook ; but thank you for all
your kindnesses

No need, ma'am, you're most welcome. I'm
sure I've only done my booty, and you don't
look fit for much still.'

Indeed, I am quite well,' answered Dorothy,
as she followed Sarah upstairs.

The latter threw open the bedroom door, but
immediately retired to the kitchen premises,
evincing thus a greater delicacy and reluctance ,
to intrude upon the interesting meeting of
mother and child than might have been
expected from an unsophisticated servant-girl.


Dorothy ! you here, at this early hour !'
Mrs. Strait cried from her bed, steadying her
little lace nightcap with one hand, and raising
herself with the other as she spoke, to obtain a
better view of her daughter. ' What has
happened ? Is Mr. Chester ill ? but no, in
that case of course you would not be here.
Have I overslept myself?"

Mother I' said Dorothy, hurrying to the bedside,
and twining her arms fondly round her

mother's neck, * I have come to stay with
you — don't send me away.'

Bless me, child, what do you mean ? You
surely haven't quarrelled with your husband,
which is against the Bible and Prayer-book, for
they say there a woman is to obey and have
power on her head because of the angels —
though why the angels should care whether
one wears a bonnet in church or not, I really
can't understand ; but there — a bonnet is ladylike,
I confess.'

Mother, I want to stay with you,' repeated
Dorothy, stroking her mother's cheek with the
caressing gesture of a child.

Dear me, dear me ! but your husband,
what will he say to it ? and all the rejoicing,
too !'

I cannot go back — I cannot go back.
Don't ask me why, mother ; only it cannot be.'

'Just when I thought you were so happy,
and so did Margaret too, I'm sure. She told
me how you all sat in the garden and eat
peaches,' continued Mrs. Strait, in her peevish,
puzzled voice; 'and with such a comfortable
house, and a good dinner, and all that beautiful
fine linen. I declare Mrs. Nutmeg was
never tired of showing and admiring it. Dear,
dear ! how perverse girls are, to be sure !'

Mrs. Strait talked with the same kind of
pious regret in her tones as that a hen-wife
evinces when the sitting of eggs she has
watched over turns out to be addled.

I know — I know!' said poor Dorothy, still
coaxing and clasping, though now a trifle less
hopefully ; ' but, mother, you must let me stay
with you, please.'

I can't keep you from sour husband, my
dear.'

He won't miss me — he doesn't want me.'
Dorothy gulped down a sob as she thought of
all she had meant to be to him. ' Only promise
to let me stay here !'

But just think what people would say,
Dorothy ; and there's the expense. You've
got used to fine clothes now.'

'Oh, no — no!' said Dorothy decidedly,
remembering how the blue merino had always
been her favourite gown, and that at this
moment all the worldly goods she chose to
keep were contained in one small portmanteau.
I don't care for clothes. I'll work, and earn
money, and help you. I am sure I could give
lessons, and now I am married I can go about
alone.'

With your pretty face ! Oh dear ! If your
poor father, who was so particular, had but

lived!' moaned Mrs. Strait, hastily dotting
up figures in her head, and calculating
whether it would be cheaper to have an extra
mouth, bringing its own quota to the general
fund, to feed or not ; for, of course, if Dorothy
stayed, as a married woman she would pay
for her own living. It was easier to keep
house for many than for few ; and when
Dorothy did not forget everything over her
books, she had proved handy enough.

Perhaps you'll soon make it up with your
husband, and then he'll be angry with me for
having humoured you,' she said presently, as
the thought struck her. ' It would not do to
anger Mr. Chester, Dorothy being dependent
upon him.'

Mother ' — Dorothy slid down from the
bed, on which hitherto she had been half-sitting,
half-lying, with a faint sense of added
strength in the erect position — ' Mother,' she
said, ' I am determined never to go back and
live with my husband; and if you will not help
me, I must find a home elsewhere. But you
are sorry for me ; you will befriend me, will
you not?'

Her cheeks glowed, and Mrs. Strait saw the
light of determination in her eyes.

Well, well, dear, don't fuss ; it's ruin to

the complexion, and yours is very delicate.
You can stay here a bit if you like, till things
get straight ; but mind you, I don't take your
part against your husband. And what Mrs.
Maynard, with her sharp tongue, will make of
all this, I am sure I tremble to think. And
why did you come so early, flurrying me
before breakfast, which always brings on a
palpitation? and why didn't you take the
carriage ? — for Sarah said you had walked.'

^ Darling mother !' was all the answer
Dorothy vouchsafed, as she stooped and put
her lips to her mother's cheek. ' It is so good
to be at home again !'

^ Well, go now, there's a dear,' said Mrs.
Strait, immeasurably relieved to think the
trying scene was over ; ' go now and talk to
Margaret. I'm so confused, I expect I shall
not eat a morsel of breakfast; but it is quite
time for me to get up.'

But Dorothy did not go to Margaret; she
went straight to her own little room, laid her
hat and cloak and travelling-bag on the bed,
which was unmade, and carelessly piled with
blankets, and sitting down by the toilet-table,
looked around. Everything was as she had
left it : the bookcase with the old gap in it,
made by the absence of the ' Imitation' she had

taken away with her; the dimity-covered armchair;
the rosebud patterned dimity curtains,
pinned back to keep them out of the dust;
even the very monthly roses nodding against
the casement. Dorothy opened the lattice, and
the branch which the pane had confined
spread to its natural length, and dropped
fragrant dew into the room.

She broke off a rose, and put it in the front
of her gown. How peaceful and quiet she
could be here. Her brief married life faded
into the dimness of the past. Come what
might, at least she had chosen the right path,
and must abide by it for ever. Keith was
not likely to seek her out; he would never
wish to see her again, since she had left his
house in so abrupt and uncourteous a manner.
She wondered if he would suffer. Men did not
suffer as much from love as women did, she
believed; they had other occupations, other interests.
Then she smoothed her hair between
her two hands, and looked at the reflection of
her pale face in the glass.

At present she did not so much resemble the
angel of Fra Angelico's picture as a presentment
of our Lady of Colours, with her calm
oval face and sad weary eyes. Nevertheless,
when Margaret came down late and good-tempered

as usual, she found, to her astonishment,
her sister sitting quietly in the breakfast-room,
taking tea from the caddy, and putting
in large spoonfuls in the absently reckless
fashion of former days, seemingly just as if
she had never been married at all.

KEITH ASSERTS HIS AUTHORITY.

HE news of Dorothy's departure was
broken to Mr. Chester by le Goui,
who brought the letter she had
written (which busy Trimmer, much
to her bepuzzlement, had found on the table
in her mistress's room) on the salver, with the
matutinal cup of tea. Keith at first failed
to realize the meaning of the words contained
in the letter, though indeed they were plain
enough, and written in Dorothy's neatest
hand.

I am leaving you,' she said, ' for ever, as
I think it best for both of us. I have heard
the story of your past life, and I cannot bear
to think of it. If you wish to do what is
right, you will immediately return to the

lawful heir the fortune which rightfully belongs
to him. But whatever you decide, I
know that further intercourse between us
could only be miserably painful — in fact,
impossible. I feel now as if I should never
hold up my head again. I loved you, Keith, so
very dearly — I shall go to my mother's fora
little ; but you need have no fear. My lips
will be sealed as to the reason for my leaving
you. Let people think what they like ; gossip
soon dies out. I am not your enemy Keith,
though I can never again be your wife. Oh,
Keith, if only things could be different ! Pray
to heaven for us both, as I shall for you.

Your heart-broken

Dorothy.'

What did she know ?' Keith pondered.
'Had Judith told her? Could she have seen
her? What had brought about this sudden
revelation ?'

He jumped up wildly, and shook his fist in
the face of an imaginary foe. Xo one should
stand between him and his wife. She must
come back. He did not intend to lose her
so. He was master in his own house, and
Squire of Blackness. What did this weak
woman mean by setting herself up against his

VOL. III. 3

wishes and his rights? How sick he was of
that long-ago story of Judith, which everyone
seemed to make it his business to rake
up! Joynte, too, had he revenged himself?
The thought maddened him ; he tried not to
believe the worst. He rang his bell loudly;
when le Goui entered, in his automatic respectful
manner, waiting silently for orders,
Keith burst out :

Where is Mrs. Chester ? — who gave you
this ? Why the deuce don't you answer ? It
is your business to know what goes on in the
house.'

Mrs. Trimmer gave it me,' said le Goui,
in the measured voice which no surprise or
excitement could cause to vary by one semitone.
' Mrs. Chester left no other message,
and went out early this morning before any of
the servants were stirring.'

Did she take anything with her — luggage,
I mean ?'

Keith's voice shook a little.

Nothing, sir. But a slip of paper was
found pinned to her cushion, with directions
for Mrs. Trimmer to forward a small portmanteau
to the Angel House, containing, I
believe, some of Mrs. Chester's clothes. It
also stated that Mrs. Trimmer's services would

no longer be required. Mrs. Trimmer was
much upset, sir.'

The devil ! Let the portmanteau go at
once ; attend to all Mrs. Chester's directions —
or stop I no, don't send it. I'll walk down
there myself.'

The people in the village are all about, sir,
objected le Goui respectfully. ' You see, they
had been looking for the rejoicing to-day,
and it might be disagreeable for you. Shall I
send for Mr. Flint, who will be pleased to carry
out your intentions V

I am to be a prisoner in my own house, by
all accounts. Well, send for Flint — he's a fool,'^
muttered Keith, turning away to begin
shaving operations, ' but he is better than
nobody.'

Mr. Flint made his appearance in an incredibly
short space of time, having gulped
down his breakfast, to the loudly expressed
regret of Mrs. Flint, and hurried off, on the
receipt of his patron's message.

Keith received him in the blue-room, where
he moodily paced up and down, smoking a
cigarette.

Put off the reception at once,' he exclaimed,
when Mr. Flint showed his perturbed face at
the door. ^ Mrs. Chester is not well. I mean,

3—2

she is ill — no — gone away to lier mother's.
Deuce take it, Flint, I haven't been so upset
for a long time ! I'd rather by far that anything
else had happened.'

'Family differences are always to be deplored,'
soothingly said Mr. Flint, who had
arrived at a pretty clear idea of the state of
the case.

What do you mean ? I suppose, then, my
affairs are already public property.' Keith
rested his arms on the chimney-piece and leant
his head against them. ' You are a married
man, Flint, and you know that women are
sometimes queer, though Mrs. Chester was
decidedly an angel.'

An angel !' repeated Mr. Flint, in a tone of
conviction.

The purest and the best of living
women.'

The purest and the best,' echoed Mr.
Flint.

Don't be a fool, Flit. Why, you know
very little about her.'

Only common report,' answered Mr.
Flint meekly. ' My wife and she always
got on.'

You must do something for me, Flint.
You must stop gossip — it is all a mere

nothing. Mrs. Chester will change her mind
presently; but, meanwhile, she has gone to
stay with her mother.'

Exactly,' said Mr. Flint.

What do you mean by '^ exactly" ? She
must come back ; do you hear, Flint ? — she
mit come back. A married woman's proper
place is in her husband's house.'

Can you compel her ?' asked Mr. Flint
gravely.

Compel her ? — no. But moral suasion ;
you understand the kind of thing. As an
agent, you must have to deal with all sorts
and kinds of character.'

Not ladies though, I am sorry to say'*
Mr. Flint murmured regretfully ; ' only with
the rougher sex. I am afraid the clergyman
works more in that direction.'

'The clergyman — yes, to be sure. Yery
good, but, of course, I must see her myself.
We are devoted to one another, you know.'

Mr. Flint smiled respectfully, and ventured
mentally to differ. People who were devotedly
attached to each other seldom afforded food
for scandal. Then he remembered that Mrs.
Flint had called Dorothy ' high and mighty.'
He did not share his wife's opinion. To his
idea the very poise of Dorothy's head was most

graceful and engaging. He should rather
have termed her ' a sweet creature

Now mid ' — Keith had resumed his old
languid tones — ^ now mind, I won't have any
scandal trumped up about me. You may tell
what story you please, invent whatever you
think best. I suppose tongues will wag, but
you must not give them matter for the exercise.
The ox could be roasted whole, I
imagine, all the same, and the dinner given
to the tenants. We must throw a sop to
Cerberus. " Bis dat qui city dat." But I
dare say you are not a Latin scholar. I mean,
it is better to do these little favours quickly
when one is about it. You understand, I
presume? My affairs are not to be discussed
unpleasantly, for I have not the slightest
doubt that everything can be promptly and
amicably arranged ; only just for an instant,
you perceive, there are difficulties.'

I quite understand, sir. You may rely
upon me.'

And by-the-bye, Flint, as I don't want a
yelling mob at my heels if I put my head out
of doors, how can I go quietly down to the
Angel House and see my wife ?'

Thanks to his plans and precautions, Keith
had by this time almost reasoned himself into

the belief that the estrangement with Dorothy
was likely to prove a mere evanescent trifle.

I will send up a close fly from the Seven
Stars for you, and if you lean well back you
will not be recognised said Flint, taking his
leave.

Keith felt so much better after the agent's
visit — in fact tolerably reassured and hopeful —
that he was able to compose himself into a
study of the daily papers, and even, during the
morning, to stroll round with the gardener and
discuss plans for the autumn garden and the
transplanting of shrubs. Le Goui's curiosity,
which, though restrained by the bounds of his
acquired good manners and decency, was yet
considerable, became much exercised to account
for Keith's sudden change of manner, his
apparent serenity, and the healthy appetite
with which he lunched.

Master has had some news, but what it is
I can't think,' he reported to Trimmer, who
sat in the steward's room, in a high state of
dudgeon at her summary dismissal; comforting
herself, however, by the thought that she
could charge a month's warning, wages and
board-wages, so that, if she was only lucky
enough to find a new place quickly, she
might almost make a good thing out of it.

The gentry have no feelings,' replied the
lady's-maid, helping herself to beef-steak pie
for the servants' dinner had been delayed
owing to the general commotion. ' I found
that out long ago, when I lived with Lady
Mandrake. She was a fine masterful lady, and
minded nothing except that she had to die.
Providence was kind to her there, too ; for she
died quite sudden-like, with no pain to speak
of — of indigestion.'

Ah well, Mrs. Trimmer, we're all mortal,
more's the pity!' said le Goui, hurrying off
with the sherry decanter, which he considered
the appropriate beverage for grief Champagne
was too light and giddy a wine, claret sour
and depressing ; but sherry answered every
purpose, being both genteel and comforting.

When the fly arrived from the Seven Stars,
according to orders, Keith stepped in with
mixed feelings. It was very disagreeable to
have to lean back in the fusty vehicle, with
both windows up, in order to escape observation,
and to sit still, content to be drawn
along at a snail's pace by the miserable s tiff-need
old horse, who made almost daily
journeys between the village and the railway-station.
The whole proceeding utterly lacked
dignity, and almost approached to shame.

Keith heartily wished to make a good effect
at the Angel House, to convey an impression
of affability, generosity, and genuine regard
for a woman's deplorably fine sensibility, such
as might be expected from a large-minded,
temperate, and loving husband. He meant
plausibly to urge his lawful authority and
natural affection, certainly not to plead
humbly for forgiveness and restoration as a
suppliant.

Faint misgivings as to his own powers of
persuasion, and a fear of Dorothy's adherence
to what she believed to be right, disturbed
him, however, in his clandestine progress
beneath the triumphal arches and past the *
fiao;s and banners hano;ino; from the windows
of the houses.

What a pity — what a pity it all was, to be
sure, to lose such a unique chance of conciliating
public favour, and raising one's self
into popular notoriety ! Keith's sense of refinement
was almost too highly developed to
permit of his calling himself a democrat, such
men having neither taste nor culture -, but the
same refinement and exquisite perception of
the fitting made him also shrink with horror
from the crying injustice in the lot of rich and
poor, and the painful anomalies of the social

system. He wished everyone to be very happy
in his own way, and vas perfectly ready to
waive prejudices and old-established customs,
provided they were known to be injurious to
the people's interests ; at the same time he
would not have felt inclined to dirty his own
fingers by pulling some poor wretch out of
the gutter. He would make a good representative
of the people, but it would be in a
kind of careless, lavish, and condescending
manner, which took no account of the socialistic
theory of universal equality.

By this time they had reached the Angel
House. The driver scrambled clumsily down
from the box, and opened the fly-door, which
always stuck, and required to be pushed,
pulled, and wheedled into compliance with its
duty.

Keith walked up to the house with the most
becoming dignity and indifference he was able
to command. It was certainly an awkward
errand, to fetch home the wife whom one had
but recently carried off in triumph from the
arms of her weeping relatives. What disagreeable
version might she not have given of
the affair — for women were proverbially prone
to exaggeration — and how might the said relations
receive him ? Sarah, as neat and prim

as ever, looking as if she could not conceive
what business he had come upon, ushered him
into the empty drawing-room. He had asked
for his wife, but it was Margaret who presently
came down and received him amiably. He
experienced some gratitude at this unexpected
favour, for he was already beginning to realize
that it was going to be a far more unpleasant
affair than he had anticipated. There had
evidently been no attempt made at company
arrangements, the drawing-room blinds were
doAvn, the flower-glasses empty, and the books
ranged symmetrically in a circle round the
table, according to Sarah's inartistic taste.
The family must have been too much perturbed
by Dorothy's sudden irruption to alter
any of their habitual ways for her comfort.

Margaret spoke kindly : ' You asked for
Dorothy, but she is lying down with a headache.'


doesn't she mean to see me then?' inquired
Keith, wondering whether this would
be the proper occasion for a display of marital
authority.

I don't think so.' Margaret herself seemed
subdued by the gravity of the case, and spoke
in a low but distinct whisper.

Margaret ' — Keith took her hand, pressing

it warmly — ' Margaret, this must not go on.
I am .very unhappy. Do try to make Dorothy
listen to reason. Why, even if she thought that
things were not quite right, that I was to
blame — we all make mistakes, you know — but
even so, it is her duty to come back, not to
forsake me. Think how dreadful it would befor
us to part now — to quarrel — perhaps never
to see each other any more! It is almost
shocking. Try to make her understand — try
to soften her.'

This was quite different from the speech he
intended to deliver; he had abstained from
saying anything about marital authority, but,
on the contrary, had talked of softening
Dorothy, and stooped to ask her sister's intervention.
Yet, as Keith stood thus, in the dim
light of the unused drawing-room, clasping
Margaret's hand in the fervour of his entreaties,
such speech seemed the only possible.
It was as if he had beheld the shrouded figure
of his own happiness gradually disappearing
into the gloomy depths of an untimely tomb.

You will try, Margaret?'

^ I am afraid I shall not succeed; Dorothy
may not listen to me.'

Margaret was honestly grieved for this
handsome young man, who came to her in his

trouble, seeming to lean on her for comfort
and sympathy. She could not help surmising
that, in Dorothy's position, she herself would
have behaved very differently. But Dorothy
had always been strange and reticent, fond of
dull old books, and despising good advice.

'What is your opinion ? What does she
say ?' Keith asked anxiously.

She says very little indeed, and she refuses
to answer any questions — you may be sure I
have asked plenty.'

But she must give some reasons for her
extraordinary behaviour ; women do not
generally leave their husbands in that fashion,
in such a desperate hurry.'

I think it is very selfish of Dorothy,' confessed
Margaret, who ■ liked to agree with her
good-looking brother-in-law, ' and I have told
her so. She is just spoiling everyone's enjoyment,
for we had all been looking forward to
the reception, and Mrs. Parkinson and I had
worked like navvies, pricking our fingers
with thorns and evergreens, and hanging up
wreaths at the risk of our necks — and then to
have everything altered and upset for the sake
of some foolish fad is very disappointing.
When I said this to her, she only answered that
there were more important things in life than

pink calico and faded flowers. Pink calico,
too! I suppose she would not have had us
use red silk, she who used to preach economy
generally added Margaret, scarcely able to
restrain her honest indignation.

But surely you can offer some advice T
Keith was now meek enough, and ready to
snap at any suggestion Margaret's ready wit
might offer.

I really think you had better do nothing
just at present. Dorothy is evidently determined
to have her own way, and contradiction
would only increase her obstinacy : when one
can't go through a wall, it is better to go
round it.' Margaret, having aired this small
axiom of feminine strategy, laughed a little.
It's almost a pity, Keith, you did not marry
me instead of Dorothy. I should not have runaway,
I promise you, whatever you did, but
should have stayed in that comfortable house
at Blackness, and sat by your fireside, a thorn
in your flesh, on purpose to worry you.'

Yes?' Keith could not manage a smile.
Then do you mean that I am to go back to
my comfortless home with the charming conviction
forced upon me that all the village are
laughing at my discomfiture ?'

The mockery of indifferent neighbours held

a bitterer sting for Keith's sensitive pride than
his wife's desertion (much as he felt that), for
even in years to come it would be impossible
to deny the ridiculous position in which he
had once been placed by a woman's caprice.

I am afraid you must go home alone to-days
Margaret said, from the depths of the
armchair in which she had seated herself.
Keith still stood opposite, leaning against
the mantel shelf, with his hands in his pockets.
But I shouldn't remain alone, if I were you ;
it must be so dreadfully dull, sitting by yourself
over your wine, with no one to talk to.
Why don't you ask Mr. Palis or Mr. Coote
down to stay?' Margaret uttered the last of
these names with a slight and becoming blush.

Johnnie ! Dear old fellow ! Yes, he
would be an addition. He never needs to be
amused as long as you give him a gun ora
fishing-rod to handle. I declare that's a
very good idea of yours, Margaret. I will
telegraph to him at once. I don't know
where he is, though. Perhaps, if he is at
home, he may be going to have a party for the
1st of September. However, it still wants a
few days to that. Margaret, to think that he
was here when I fell in love and proposed to
your sister, and now — what a contrast it is !'

Perhaps things may all come right yet.
Hope on, hope ever,' said Margaret encouragingly.


It is pretty hard, though, to do that when
a man has had such a crushing blow. However,
you have cheered me a good deal,
Margaret, and I am really very much obliged
to you.'

Keith did not feel nearly as wretched as he
had expected when he sat over his solitary
dessert that evening, and leisurely sipped a
bottle of fine Neville claret which le Goui,
unasked, had considerately brought up and
placed before him, warmed to precisely the right
temperature. The telegram, very urgently
worded, had been despatched to Coote, and there
was every prospect that, being a good-hearted
fellow, he would make his appearance the
next day. Even if his skill were insufficient
to the task of unravelling the tangled skein of
matrimonial affairs, yet his cheery face and
glib flow of practical talk were exactly the
thiuofs best calculated to take off Keith's
attention from his own troublesome worries.
Coote never seemed to be bothered or in love.
What a fortunate fellow he was ! Certainly
an ardent devotee of field-sports escaped a
good deal of heart-burning and annoyance.

LADY Darlington SYMPATHIZES.

HAVE got some news for you,
Mna,' Lord Darlington announced,
when, according to his
invariable custom on the 1st
of September, he returned from cub-hunting
preparatory to the day's partridge shooting.
He walked into his wife's dressing-room in
his splashed blucher-boots and corduroys,
with the dew of the forest clinging to his
hair and moustache, and the earthy smell of
the mighty hunter, which has been handed
down since the days of Esau, pervading his
person.

He found her engaged in the mysteries of
her toilette, assisted by Hetty and Letty, who,
as they expressed it, ' were helping her to
dress ;' the ritual in use being to cling to her

VOL. III. 4

skirts, to run in between the obliging lady's-maid's
legs and under her arms, generally
causing her to drop whatever she held. If
this happened to be a saucer of pins, so much
the better for them; for she would then be
obliged to go down on her knees and pick
them up tediously one by one, a search which
delighted the children, and which the maid
had at last learnt to bear with equanimity and
long-suffering.

What is it, dear ?' asked Lady Darlington,
holding up her pink face to be kissed by her
huge, hardy husband, and then successively
lifting Hetty and Letty's pink faces to receive
the same affectionate salute.

Horsfall told me — he was out hunting this
morning — he says business is rather slack, so
lie means to come out pretty constantly. We
got on an old fox, had a rare good gallop —
ran into Harleigh Wood, where we changed
foxes, killed a cub, and blooded the hounds,
I am happy to say,' observed Lord Darlington,
proceeding to pull off his heavy boots with
the aid of the boot-jack Hetty officiously
thrust into his hand.

Yes, dear, but about the news ?' his wife
gently reminded, while the maid deftly pinned
up her ladyship's plaits, taking acrobatic leaps

after hair-pins to avoid contact with the active
infants.

^ It is about those Chesterss ; you were
always interested in them

Oh, dear, is it anything bad?' A sudden
paleness swept over the pink cheeks — for
Lady Darlington, notwithstanding her acquired
bravery about the hunting, always naturally
reverted to her old fear of accidents. ' Mr.
Chester is not hurt, is he ? — or, perhaps, he is
ill again ?'

Thank you, Hetty ; that is a great deal
better.' Lord Darlington luxuriously stretched
out his bootless feet in their grey woollen .
socks, and leant back in his chair. ' Perhaps
you might call it an accident, Nina — but not
quite in the usual sense, however — his wife
has run away from him !'

Buffie, you don't mean it,' she said, while
Lord Darlington laughed loudly, as the
oddity of the affair presented itself to him
more forcibly. ' There, that will do, Osborn,
thank you, you can leave the room,' added *
the little lady with dignity, suddenly remembering
the presence of a servant, before whom
such peccadilloes should on no account be
familiarly discussed (the children were too

young to signify). ' low tell me exactly

4—2

LIBRARY

all about it — what has happened ? I can't
believe that dear Dorothy, who was as good
as gold, has run away

She has only gone to her mother's ; but
by Gad, Mna, it is a rum start for a young
woman, you must allow that. You had better
go and lecture her, my dear, in your own wise
fashion, on the duties of matrimony.'

Of course I shall go and see her,' said
Lady Darlington gravely ; ' but I know she
would not have taken such a step, except
under the strongest provocation. Why, she
positively adored that handsome husband of
hers, who, between ourselves, I am afraid, is
a scamp.'

^ Hush, dear ; it is always dangerous to say
such things about people,' remarked Lord
Darlington, smiling.

Could the marchesa have turned up, do you
think ? Dorothy was dreadfully jealous of her

Fiddle-de-dee, there was not a particle of
ground for jealousy there — they only played
the piano together, and talked aesthetic nonsense.
I always told you no good could come
of a musical man — they have all the faults of
women, and none of the virtues of men. It
stands to reason they must, when they're at
home all day, fiddling and reading away their

brains, instead of taking a ride, or a constitutional,
or even a tramp with a gun
through the turnips.'

Tell me more — what did you hear ?'
Lady Darlington, while she talked, unconsciously
pressed little Letty, who had laid
her curly blond head on her mother's
shoulder, more closely to her maternal bosom.
How dreadful it all seems. Perhaps, though,
Mr. Horsfall exaggerated; men are so ill-natured
about women!'

Not a bit of it. Here you goose, Kitty,
why you've tumbled down and had a spill.'
The child was eno^ao;ed riding; cock-horse on
her father's knee, and burst into chuckles of
delighted laughter at her accustomed mishap,
without which, indeed, the game would not
have seemed perfect.

Every one is talking of it ; the people of
Dronington were going to give the Chesterss a
welcome home, but of course this has knocked
on the head all the festivities. Mrs. Chester
went to her mother's on foot in the early
morning, the very day after her arrival, and
Chester has moped alone at Blackness ever
since. Horsfall called on him, and the Vicar
too, but they were not admitted; he will see
no one accept Flint the agent, who I shouldn't

think would be much comfort; he's a very
good agent, but as to consolation, why — '
Lord Darlington whistled.

It is inexplicable mused Lady Darlington.


Well, dear, I thought you would like to
know all this. I advise you to have the pony-carriage
out, and drive over this afternoon to
the Angel House, and there you will hear the
latest intelligence. Now, are you nearly ready
for breakfast, for I can tell you I have a tremendous
appetite after that gallop ? By-the-bye,
Horsfall was riding a very neat grey
mare to-day — he bought her in Ireland. I
think I must get him to part with her — she
looks a real good sort, as if she could jump,
and would turn out a clinker!' thus saying
Lord Darlington marched out of the room
with one little girl perched triumphantly on
his shoulder, and the other hanging round his
neck, in close imitation, as she fondly believed,
of a sack of coals.

Mr. Horsfall had not only imparted the
interesting intelligence of Dorothy's flight to
Lord Darlington, but he had told every one
he met, and every client who came into his
office in the course of the next day or two.
His broadly expressed hints and comments —

added to the positive fact of the postponed
rejoicing, and of the tenants' dinner taking
place under the sole presidency of Mr. Flint,
disappointing everybody who had hoped to
hear Mr. or Mrs. Chester returning thanks
in person — made it plain to the most simple
observer that something had happened, and
that that something, coupled with Mrs. Chester's
solitary stay in her mother's house, an unexampled
occurrence in the early annals of
matrimony, implied a serious quarrel between
the Squire of Blackness and his wife.

Public opinion veered about considerably :
some people assumed that Mr. Chester was
possessed of so dreadful a temper that he*
had even been seen to strike his wife — this
assertion, however, seeming to depend only on
the testimony of servants, found but little
credence ; while other people declared that
Dorothy, though a blonde, was anything but
gentle, and that her trying disposition had necessitated
a request from Mr. Chester, usually
only addressed to burglars, to take whatever
she pleased, but to retire immediately from
the premises. The Vicar, appealed to on the
subject by his parishioners, declared he knew
nothing whatever about it ; but Mrs. Maynard,
at this period, formed a habit of drinking

tea with all her acquaintances in turn, on
which occasions she would shake her head
with a wisdom worthy of Lord Burleigh, and
drop her voice with an inflection of deep
mystery, driving nervous people into a state
of pleasurable tremor. ' That poor Mr.
Chester, so good-looking and so rich, it is
very hard upon him,' old ladies murmured in
the intervals of tea and toast, not a bit disturbed
by the thought that they had never
exchanged a word or a look with him, and
were not likely to, inasmuch as they neither
held a vote nor owned the remotest bomng
acquaintance with fashionable society.

Mrs. Parkinson, in her warm emphatic tones,
roundly asserted that she had known the Strait
girls ever since they were children, and that
Dorothy was incapable of anything mean :
she might have been badly brought w^ — Mrs.
Strait, though a Churchman, was rambling
in her talk, and far too careless about her
daughters ; but she had certainly never inculcated
anything but the strictest morality. In
reality, no one knew anything positive beyond
the bare certainty that Dorothy, on her departure
from Blackness, had found a shelter
with her mother. Mrs. Maynard became consumed
with curiosity and baffled interest,

when day after day she called at the Angel
House, and received always the same unsatisfactory
*Not at home, ma'am,' to her inquiries.


^ I think it positively rude,' she confided to
one of her cronies, ' after all my kindness to
Dorothy ; and it is so marked, too, for I ask
for the whole family one after the other, and still
I am told they are all out. Now, is it likely
they can be always out, when no one has set
eyes on them lately ? — it must be meant for
rudeness !'

She was still further confirmed in this
opinion when Mr. Maynard received a message
from Mrs. Strait, requesting his presence, and
he remained closeted for two hours in the
widow's company, while his wife waited outside,
stamping up and down impatiently. But
the Yicar was reticent to a degree, and all Mrs.
Maynard' s ingenuity could extract no welcome
revelation from him.

But Charles, why did they send for you ?
You may just tell me that' coaxed Mrs. Maynard
; ' what did Dorothy say ?'

I did not see her.'

Not see her ! Why, I thought you went
to give her good advice. What in the world
was the object of your visit, then ?'

Mrs. Strait wanted a talk.'

Well, I'm sure it is rather late in the day
for a talk, when a married woman has done
such a daring deed as to leave the kind husband
who has given her everything. I declare
I have lost patience with Dorothy. If you remember,
I always prophesied no good would
come of that marriage.'

You certainly did ; but I imagined you
had doubts of Mr. Chester's fitness.'

That is just like you, Charles, always
bringing up one's words by the wrong end.
I said the marriage would be an unhappy
one, and it is unhappy; now, was I right or
wrong ? It is early days, though. But May
weddings are always wretched. I suppose you
would say that had something to do with
the Virgin Mary, who does not like jDCople
to marry ?'

'Sophie!' Mr. Maynard looked up reprovingly
from the pages of his clerical
magazine.

But, nothing daunted, Sophie returned again
to the charge : ' What does Dorothy mean todo,
and how long are her best friends to be
kept from seeing her?'

I think that while she is in such trouble
and mental distress, she shrinks from

seeing anyone ; and, for my part, when there
exist melancholy misunderstandings, I approve
of discreet silence.'

Oh ! then she is in distress of mind, and
there are misunderstandings ?' said Sophie,
glad of the smallest crumb upon which to feed
her love of gossip. * Will there be a scandal
I mean more than there has been already,
and shall we have a divorce ?

I hope not indeed,' answered the Yicar,
much distressed by Sophie's flippancy. ' I
think Mrs. Chester is too good to purchase a
few years of worldly happiness at the price of
another's shame.'

But if it is the law, Charles ? I can't see
why one should not avail one's self of any
law made by the Queen and the Parliament ;
there can be no sin in it,' said Sophie, as she
rejoiced to think of the spicy seasoning
whispers of a probable divorce would lend to
her talk at future tea-parties.

^ " Those whom God hath joined together
let no man put asunder," ' softly murmured
the Yicar, turning over the leaves of his
review.

That's all very well, but the Lord Chancellor
himself puts them asunder — or whoever
the bewigged dignitary may be who administers

the law ; and you Charles, have nothing to
say to it.'

After all this, it was a considerable shock to
Mrs. Maynard to hear that Lady Darlington's
pony-carriage had been seen driving through
the village, and stopping at the door of the
Angel House, where, after some little parleying,
her ladyship had descended, sending
away the carriage for an hour to the Seven
Stars, at the expiration of which time she had
again entered the vehicle and driven rapidly
off, without pausing to call at the Vicarage or
anywhere else. Mrs. Maynard had once dined
and slept at Lovemere Hall, and of the delights
of this visit she had a lively recollection.
It was the first time in her life she had
eaten off silver plates and experienced the
unwonted consciousness that a powdered
flunkey was stationed motionless behind her.
It grieved her sorely to think that the acquaintance
had not since progressed, for she
would have much enjoyed talking about ' My
friend. Lady Darlington or ' What we do at
the Darlingtonss.' Of course, at Dronington,
where every single soul knew what his neighbours
did, it was perfectly patent that Mrs.
Maynard' s first peep into high aristocratic
circles had been her last. Naturally, too,

this conviction lent a subacid flavour to her
remarks.

How vulgar — how stuck-up of Dorothy to
be sure — how clear it is that she must be completely
spoilt, and have her head turned by the
fine marriage she made !' ejaculated Sophie;
when she receives a titled lady and refuses
admittance to her old and tried friends. I
am sure / shall not take the trouble to stand
up for her any more. I dare say she fully
deserves any unhappiness Mr. Chester may
have caused her — if that is so. But we have
not heard both sides of the case yet. What
good can there be in people who despise the
society in which they have been brought
up ? Dorothy is, after all, only middle-class,
decidedly middle class; and no talk of lords
and ladies can ever alter that''

Thus Mrs. Maynard, in her righteous
indignation against the assumption of unbecoming
airs ; though it would have seemed
to her the inmost natural thing in the world
had she been admitted to Lady Darlington's
intimacy, even though the privilege should
have excluded her from the society of old and
tried friends. Providence was very unjust in
its dispensations, she reflected. What natural
affinity was there between good looks, fine

eyes, and the post of nursery governess or
drudging wife to a parson, the only things her
superior advantages had sufficed to procure
for her ? Everyone could see that she was
fitted for a higher sphere, the wife of a dean
or a canon perhaps — they held receptions
and saw fine company. But then Charles
was so unworldly and so simple-minded.
There was not much chance of his being
made a bishop or even a dean, though if
preferment had been granted to the merits
of a wife, Sophie would undoubtedly have
deserved it, in her opinion.

KEITH TRIES HIS HAND AT CONSOLATION.

HEN Sarah informed Dorothy that
Lady Darlington was below, and
wished to speak to her, Dorothy's
first impulse was to refuse,
^ She seemed very particular set on seeing
you, ma'am,' said Sarah, reluctant to deliver
an unwelcome message to so fine and pleasant-spoken
a lady.

^ I don't wish to see anyone. I have already
told j^ou so.'

'Very well, ma'am, only her ladyship will
be sore put out, I reckon.'

Do as I tell you,' answered Dorothy,
thinking to put a stop to the discussion

Sarah then unwillingly departed, for it
seemed to her an incredible piece of folly on
the part of Dorothy to deny herself to a real
lady, who had driven many miles in her pony-carriage

along a muddy road (it had rained
heavily in the night) on purpose to speak with
her. However, she soon returned, announcing
that Lady Darlington would take no denial, and
desired leave to come up into Mrs. Chester's
bedroom, if she were not feeling well.

Then I suppose it must be,' said Dorothy
resignedly. ' Show her ladyship into the
drawing-room, and say I will be with her
immediately.'

Mrs. Chester glanced in the mirror, noticed
that, though pale and sad-looking, she was
neatly and fastidiously equipped as usual, and
descended to the drawing-room. Lady Darlington
stood, as she had done on the occasion
of her last visit, in the middle of the empty
space, looking about her. She was dressed ina
thin tight-fitting serge gown, ornamented
with red braid.

Dear Dorothy !' she exclaimed when the
door opened, receiving her friend with outstretched
arms and one of her own impulsive
kisses ; ' I knew you could never have the
heart to turn me away from your door !'

I have seen no one said Dorothy quietly,
when they were seated.

'No; but you will do so now. You cannot
be allowed to mope like this; solitude

never cured sorrow yet. But tell me — have
you quarrelled with your husband, and w^iat
is all this I hear ? What reason had you to
run away ? though, indeed, to my mind,
nothing can justify a woman in leaving her
husband — unless, perhaps,' she added meditatively,
'he beat her. I don't think I could
stand bruises and black eyes. But probably Mr.
Chester has been ill-advised. Would you like
me to speak to him ? I am quite sure that he
would not lift a finger against you, he looks far
too gentle.'

I never said my husband was in fault ; I
don't accuse him, remember ; I don't blame
him ; he has always been kind to me.'
Dorothy's voice was steady, but the rosy
colour flew to her cheek, and something in
her throat seemed to rise and choke her.
But there are many other reasons. We are
not suited. Perhaps I was jealous and exacting.
I did not understand '

No, dear, naturally. You were so very
young. But you do quite right not to abuse
him, as some women in your position would
do,' said Lady Darlington, fondly patting
Dorothy's hand ; ' because, of course, when
you make it up again, as you will do some
day, it might be disagreeable to remember the

VOL. III. 5

spiteful things you had allowed yourself to
say

' I shall never make it up said Dorothy,
more steadily ; ' but no one must say a word
against Keith in my hearing.'

What does she mean?' thought Lady Darlington
to herself, much puzzled. She could
understand a good lover, or a good hater, but
not a mollusc-like kind of indifference which
forbade evil-speaking, and yet would not
decide to kiss and make friends. ' At any
rate you must come and pay us a visit,' was
the audible conclusion of her meditations,
cheerfully delivered; 'that is the object which
brought me over here to-day. Darlington and
I both hope to see you — will you drive back
with me now, or shall I send the carriage for
you tomorrow?'

Neither, thank you. How good you are tome,
dear Lady Darlington ! Please don't think
I am ungrateful, but indeed I intend to lead
quite a different sort of life now, something
very quiet and humdrum, so that visits to fine
luxuriant houses would not be at all compatible
with such a life, and might make me
feel discontented. I must no longer look upon
myself as the wife of a rich squire, who needs
only to express a wish and it is immediately

gratified, but just as a poor woman who lias
to earn her bread.'

Nonsense ! m the first place, you must not
call me Lady Darlington — I mean to be Nina
to you always, whatever happens, even should
you be in the workhouse. In the second place,
if you choose to earn your own bread (which,
though it sounds a fine romantic notion, I
don't believe you will), you can't dispense with
friends, and I am your very best friend.'

Herewith Lady Darlington kissed Dorothy's
pale soft cheek, and looked expectantly for her
answer.

Don't tempt me, Mna. I should like the
plan immensely, you know ; at least I should

like to be with you but how can I? Look '

she drew from her pocket, as she spoke, the
draft of an advertisement to be inserted in the
Slowchester Beacon stating that a young lady
well grounded in all the branches of an English
education would be glad to give daily
lessons to young pupils ; ' and besides this, I
must pass the Cambridge examination now,
and for that I shall have to study hard. All
these months of idleness and holiday-making
have, I fear, unfitted me for wholesome work.'

'Your husband cannot leave you to starve —
teaching is no better than starvation,' said her

5—2

friend impatiently. 'It would be an unheard-of
thing' on this part — in fact, impossible. Darlington
must speak to him.'

Keith is certain to offer me money answered
Dorothy sadly, ' but, my dear, no
woman can take any money from the man she
is leaving ; it would seem as if he had compensated
her. No ! I will not touch a farthing of
his.'

Fiddlestick ! it is your duty. You are a
great deal too high-strung — besides, one must
live. At any rate, this decides me to insist on
your coming to Lovemere; and once there, we
will talk over everything.'

Please do not ask me.'

Why, what a perverse strange little thing
it is ! I really don't know how to take you,'
said Mna, who was accustomed to get her
own way easily, putting on a pretty pout.

Well, then, you agree with me. I am not
fit for company at present. You had far
better leave me to myself. I give you my
promise that I will come and see you some
day, when all my plans are settled, and I am
sure of myself.'

Are you not sure of yourself now?' asked
Lady Darlington.

For all answer Dorothy put her arms round

the kind little lady's neck, and laid her face
on her shoulder, while big tears rolled slowly
from her eyes.

Poor dear, poor dear ! there — don't cry so !
I love you very much, Dorothy.'

Lady Darlington stroked her hair with
placid affection, much as she would have done
to one of her own little girls in the event of
her having tumbled down and injured her
head or her hand.

And now,' said Dorothy presently, lifting
her face and wiping away her tears, ' now I
feel much better. I hate myself for being so
weak — it is so silly to break down, but your
words upset me. Is not marriage a hard nut
to crack? it seems as if one could never understand.'


Love is the only key to its puzzles,' murmured
Lady Darlington softly.

Yet even love does not always seem to
lead one right.'

Li the end it will, I am sure,' said Lady
Darlington, with conviction.

Do you think perfect happiness is ever attainable
for human beings here on earth?' said
Dorothy, looking wistfully out of her large
eyes.

Oh-dear, yes !' cried Lady Darlington

quickly, remembering Lord Darlington and
the children, and her own peaceful home.

I used to think once,' continued Dorothy,
in a dreamy way, ' that just to have something
to love in the world was all that any one
could want. Sometimes I fancied it need not
even be beautiful or grand or clever, but just
an embodied dream of one's heart, to which in
full sympathy it could go out. I remember
loving a little ugly dog like that once, till it
was shot by a gamekeeper for poaching — but
now it seems to me as if to love were not
enough, as if there must be some answering
worth to call out affection.'

^ Of course one can't love without an object;
but when one has a husband it is all right.
How I wish, Dorothy, I could make you see
things with my eyes !'

So do I ; but nobody ever could. I don't
believe I know anything about the matter,
nor that I shall ever learn to love rightly.'

One can always do one's duty, I am sure
it is very simple ; but you read too much.
I don't believe in books; they only muddle
one's brain and hurt one's eyes. I never
could read by candlelight.'

Am I muddled ?' asked Dorothy, with a

smile.

'I'm not sure you haven't a bee in your
bonnet,' said Lady Darlington, gravely contemplating
her friend's sweet face; 'but just
now you look tired and ill. Will you really
not come with me ? Then I am afraid I must
go. You will write and propose yourself — do.
You must not disappoint us. Darlington is
as keen for your visit as I am.'

Yes,' thought Dorothy, when Lady Darlington
had driven off, ' perhaps I do muddle
my brain. I feel wrong all round now ;
very likely I have sat too long in the
house.'

This was true, for she had not set foot
out of doors since her arrival, a week ago.*
Just then the dinner-bell rang, and put a stop
to her meditations ; for Dorothy tried, in all
such small ways as early rising and punctuality
at meals, to compensate her mother
for the burden of her presence. The early
dinner over, Dorothy ran back to her room,
watched Margaret go out on a shopping expedition,
and Mrs. Strait retire for her afternoon
nap; and then, choosing her time, she succeeded
in leaving the house unobserved, except
by little Snow, who quickly ran after her, wagging
his tail. Motioning him home, she turned
out of the high-road and took the path across

the fields, where it was most unlikely she would
meet anyone.

September had now arrived, with its
autumnal freshness and crisp invigorating
air. Clematis and hanging bunches of ripe
blackberries garlanded the hedgerows over-shaded
by the elder-tree, and the bare stubble
fields were rendered lively by the whirr of
partridge wings. Dorothy stepped lightly
along. Tedious confinement to the house,
added to other causes, had depressed her '
spirits, which regained their buoyancy as she
inhaled the fresh air and raised her head to
the clear sky, across which light clouds floated
daintily.

The path led along a slope, and was
slightly raised. On one side stretched the
expanse of stubble, on the other a deep ditch
bordered by the honeysuckle scented hedgerow
; beyond were more fields, clumps of
trees, and in the distance tiny threads of blue
smoke rising from cottages in the valley.
The silent cheerfulness of nature had already
shed some of its soothing influence over her,
when she perceived a man's lithe figure vault
the stile in front, and rapidly approach.
The truth flashed instantly upon her perception.
It was Keith! And here was she

alone, hemmed in on one side by the deep
ditch and prickly tangled hedge, and on the
other by the stubble-fields, where, even if
she forced herself to run quickly, she could
not escape notice. Keith had recognised her,
too, and hurried his steps.

Dorothy, what good fortune to meet thus ;
now at last I can have an opportunity of
speaking to you ! These misunderstandings
must cease. Listen to me.^ He had by this
time joined her, turned, and strode slowly by
her side; she, faint and trembling, feeling his
presence benumb her. Her swift glance comprehended
that he looked haggard and ill, and
that his toilette showed a lack of scrupulous
care. ' Dorothy ' — by a rapid movement she
thwarted his attempt to take her hand, and
withdrew herself beyond his reach — ' why are
you so hard upon me, why treat me as if I
were a criminal ?'

Are you not guilty then ?' She turned
upon him her sweet moist eyes, full of eager
questioning.

In a fashion, of course I am to blame,
according to the strictest purist notions ; yes,
but the world is not governed by them. Men's
passions are strong, and severity of judgment
is not nice in you Dorothy.'

I do not judge, I only deplore. I cannot
help my feelings.'

I also have suffered deeply, and I cannot
forget you, darling.'

'Have I not suffered?' Dorothy indeed
quivered in every limb ; the loved tones, thrilling
through her, set the gaping wound aching
again acutely.

Then if we both suffer — and now I look at
at you, you are pale, dear — why all this studied
obduracy ? What is your object ? You should
not be so severe on youthful follies.'

Youthful follies !' repeated Dorothy bitterly
; ' I think they are more than that.'

Even if I have erred — I never said I was
good — are you not content with the disgrace
and the scandal you have brought upon me ?
Everyone in the neighbourhood freely discusses
our affairs ; we are the talk of each muzzy
yokel swilling beer in the alehouse — it is intolerable
! Come home now, and let us try to
live more happily together in the future.'

'Impossible!' Dorothy pressed her fingers
together as people do to avoid crying out in
physical pain. ' I could not help you, and it
would do no good. I could not behave to
you as I ought — your riches would suffocate
me.'

And yet you say — at least you said — you
loved me !' He laughed grimly. Dorothy kept
silence. Heaven alone knew how much she
loved Keith even now, and how her heart contracted
occasionally with sharp spasms of
agony. ' This is romantic folly he burst out
harshly ; ' do you know that I can compel you ?
You are my wife — you owe me obedience in the
eye of the law. I have a right to force you todo
so, and by God I will!'

In the eyes of the law, yes,' she answered
quietly ; ' you may have the right, but for all
that you cannot compel me.'

'Why do you irritate me and make me
forget myself ? I beg of you to be reasonable*
Dorothy,' Keith ' said, feeling ashamed of the
brutal passion of this outburst ; 'you exasperate
me, and I say things I ought not. You cannot
tell how much I love you : I was not aware of
it myself till quite recently.' Dorothy still
kept silence; with the umbrella in her hand
she was pushing away little leaves from her
path. ' Dorothy, if you persist in your conduct
you will ruin my life.'

Only your own sin can do that. Why
should you sin — why not give up the money ?'

Give up!' the tongue clove to his mouth,
his dark gleaming eyes expressed the profoundest

astonishment. ' Do you ask this —
give up my money — be a poor man again?'
Yes; poverty is not disgraceful.'
You are a fool, Dorothy — I mean these
are idle heroics. Of course I cannot act in so
impulsive and ridiculous a fashion; besides,
no one (certainly not the individual you
allude to) would make half as good a use of
this fortune as I shall. I can perceive someone
has been trying to mislead you, but then
you are an impressionable woman. Submit
your judgment to mine on matters of business,
and rest content in your own proper sphere,
little darling of my heart !'

How trying for Dorothy were these harrowing
entreaties, and how still more terrible
to hear the sophistry with which Keith palliated
his unrepentant self-indulgence ! As for
the crime itself, she could not prevail upon
her lips to speak of it in faintest whispers, but
far down in the depths of her consciousness it
lay, a hideous bloody phantom. If she went
back to enjoy riches which were the wages of
sin, she would by her participation degrade
him, and ruin his soul for ever, just for the
sake of her own poor love, which could not
deny itself with magnanimity. Again she
wrestled inwardly, and this time the victory

grew more complete. They walked on in silence,
by tacit consent turning at the stile, and facing
in the direction of the Anselm House.

What is to become of you, Dorothy ?' he
began again more gently; 'have you ever
thought of that ? A man may battle through
the storms of life, but a woman must be
wrecked; she needs guidance and shelter.'

There is God for us all.'

Yes, to be sure, God — Providence — what
you please ; but He lets men and women starve,
and does not hinder the wretches who jump ois
bridges to end their silly lives. Providence
shows no particular care for themes

I cannot tell ; but I am very sure of one thing,
we must not do evil that good may come.'

Who wants to do evil ? Why, ever since
I have known you, I have longed for nothing
but the most innocent happiness. Come home
with me, Dorothy; once there, I give you permission
to lecture me as much as you will.'

Oh, Keith!' — it was the first time to-day
she had used his name, and he seized upon
it as a good omen — 'you torture me! We
should only drag one another down. I know
it would be so ; for the sake of our love we
must remain apart.'

Then you are perfectly indifferent what

becomes of me?' Keith strove after a jaunty
manner. ' If you won't give me happiness,
I shall have to get pleasure. How will you
like that ? I don't think it will raise the
tone of my mind much.'

'I am not indifferent; it is for your sake.
Oh, why can you not understand ?'

It would take omniscience to understand
what you are driving at with your cursed
fine feelings!'

'Keith!'

I beg your pardon, Dorothy, for the
expression, but it is true — you are making
me desperate.'

Dear Keith,' she pleaded gently and kindly,
have a little patience. We are both suffering
now, I know ; but surely time will blunt the
edge of our misery. It will be less hard after
a while.'

You are cold and heartless. You talk of
principle and duty, and you calmly break the
most sacred ties. You refuse me the happiness
I have a right to demand, and wish to
drive me out alone into all the temptations
that lie in wait for a man. You speak of
suffering, but you have not an idea of the hell
of misery you are creating for me. If you had
you would pity me.'

I pity you from the bottom of my heart
she said, with a new and reverent sympathy
in her voice ; * but pity can alter nothing.
Retribution will fall on us both — it has come
already.'

Very well !' the pallor of his countenance
grew deadly, and his eyes dilated with sudden
fury. ' Very well, the fault may lie on your
conscience. I will stay and be preached to no
longer. Good-bye.'

He sprang from her side, leapt the stile, and
disappeared from view. Dorothy stood still,
petrified with surprise and alarm. She had
been utterly mad and foolish to expose herself
to a meeting with him. It was evident that
they must not see each other again, till the
soreness of their feelings had diminished, and
the strain of passion was relaxed ; but as long
as they lived in such close proximity, clashing
were unavoidable. Another such interview
would rob her of what little calmness and
strength she possessed. Then to her great relief
she remembered Lady Darlington's pressing
invitation, and decided to accept it without
delay. On reaching home she therefore
sat down and wrote her a letter, begging that,
if not inconvenient, the carriage might be sent
for her on the following afternoon.

THE Darlington AT HOME.

OYEMERE HALL was a square

redbrick house, faced with white

wigs

containing

stone. Two

offices and stables branched outwards
from the main building, and enclosed
the courtyard, making three sides of a square.
The carriage drive, winding up a sheepish approach,
terminated at the foot of a handsome
forked flight of steps, bordered by an elaborate
iron balustrade, resembling the famous horseshoe
staircase of the palace of Fontainebleau.
The windows at the other side of the house,
which were those of the chief reception-rooms,
looked out upon a gravelled terrace and an
old-fashioned garden, set in a stiff pattern of
box edging, and surmounted by a stone sundial

bearing the motto ' Horns non numero, nisi
Serena.' An exceedingly appropriate inscription
in a happy family circle. Beyond the
garden, divided by a thalia, lay the park, a
wild expanse of broken ground, covered with
bracken, and intersected by fine old trees.
Deer browsed among the fern, reposed under
the shade of the old chestnuts and limes, or
grouped themselves into lively moving patches
in the sunshiny clefts of the dingle. The house
was very old, and the panted frescoed ceiling
of the central hall was very old, and the antique
draperies of silk and worsted, and silver
and gold embroidery of the massive bed-furniture
were very old ; but this antiquity was*
the pride of honest Lord Darlington's life, and
the joy of his heart. People wondered at the
strange old customs of the place : the children
and poor people curtsying to my lord and my
lady even from the recesses of church pews,
the solemnity of the dinner ceremonial, or the
escort of the stockinged footman, carrying
the prayer-books to divine service, respectfully
behind the company. They wondered still
more (remembering their own clumsy servants'
fists, and the chronic necessity under which
they laboured of leaving a good mistress, for
the sake of a little change, once at least in a

VOL. III. 6

twelvemonth) to find year after year the same
quiet-faced housemaid with sleek-braided hair
and spotless print gown ; in their bedrooms
the same china ornaments and blotting-set,
looking apparently as new as ever, and the
chairs and tables in their old familiar places,
as if mathematical calculations had been used
to verify their latitude and longitude. These
institutions had existed from time immemorial
at Lovemere, and not even the advent of a
young and pretty bride had sufficed to change
them.

Lord Darlington was as tenacious of Conservative
prejudices as any fervent Roman
Catholic of the honour due to his especial
saint. Occasionally an old chintz was replaced
by a new one, or a pair of curtains by one of
a more modern pattern ; but these changes were
very gradual, few and far between, and only
consummated after grave thought and deliberation.
The traditions of orange jelly, pot-pourra
spiced ale, and damson cheese, for
which the housekeeper kept special recipes,
were religiously handed down without alteration
from one generation of servants to the
other. Needless to add that the retainers, of
whom there was a goodly company at
Lovemere, grew fat, and early in life lost

their hair and acquired a respectable obesity ;
nor that they eventually, after some years'
faithful service, in which they had attended to
their own and their master's interests, set up
housekeeping and babies in a nest of comfortable
little cottages, which formed a kind
of outlying colony on the estate. There was
a finer staff of powdered menials in Lord
Darlington's establishment than in any of
the other county mansions, a greater variety
of silver dishes, massive plate, and cumbersome
magnificence ; but then he himself
was so genial, and his wife so pleasant, that
the formality thus engendered never proved
burdensome.

At the present moment a family party was
collected at Lovemere, consisting of Lord Darlington's
sister and her husband. Major and
Mrs. Hartshorne ; of Lady Darlington's aunt,
Miss Judy Mytten; and of her brother, the Hon.
Hugo Limber. Lord Darlington's sister was
older than himself; she had once been pretty,
but was now only ordinary, her face being
of that conventional type which, when the
freshness of youth has departed, presents no
individuality or attractiveness whatever, and
renders it difficult to specify the colour of a
person's hair or eyes. At the time of her

6—2

marriage she lead innocently believed it to be a
love-match, but subsequently love evaporated,
leaving only heart-burnings in its place.
The couple were not rich, overburdened with
children, Mrs. Hartshorne delicate, and the
Major cantankerous. But no disadvantages
wearied Lord Darlington's patience and sense
of family ties. Major and Mrs. Hartshorne
regularly paid visits of considerable duration
to his house, and as regularly were received
with unvarying cordiality.

The Major, on his retirement from the
army, had carried his military notions of
order and discipline into the bosom of his
family. Mrs. Hartshorne consequently suffered
under what might be termed a mild
domestic despotism. His natural temper,
which was choleric, became atrabilious and
peppery under the infliction of stupid cooks,
who dropped the fat into the fire and under -
roasted the mutton, butlers' ill-kept books
and unaccounted-for bottles of wine, and
stablemen's delinquencies in the matter of
leathers and brushes — for he prided himself
on taking the keenest interest in these subjects.
Occasionally Mrs. Hartshorne, weary of the
subject, ventured to suggest that she would
have no aversion to undertaking the troublesome

duty herself; but the Major interrupted
her with an angry ' Nonsense, my dear ! women
always make a mess of everything, and I must
know best, having managed the canteen for
fifteen years!' Indeed, except in their own
peculiar province of child-bearing and infant-rearing,
about which the Major was perfectly
ready to offer valuable suggestions, he believed
women to be good for nothing. The good
purpose Mrs. Hartshorne apparently served
now was that of patient souffre-douleur for her
husband's fads and fancies, bred of an
enlarged liver and want of contradiction.

Lady Darlington's aunt. Miss Judy Mytten,
was prim and precise, and had not a pound of
spare flesh on her bones. She had sandy
hair, almost invisible eyelashes and eyebrows,
and was as indefinitely colourless as the most
respectable and transparent family ghost,
especially when arrayed in the skimpy garments
of washed-out chintz and pale lavender
she preferred. She was also a teetotaler, and
entertained a partiality for schoolboys, idiom
she delighted to invite to her cottage and
regale with lemonade and cheese-cakes, a
magic-lantern, and a trickle of little songs,
whose burden ran thus :

Sparkle, sparkle, little spring j
Sparkle on for me.'

Precocious Etonians profited by her hospitality,
pocketed the half-crown with which she
sent them home, and expended it next day
in the purchase of brandy-balls and a sporting
newspaper.

The Hon. Hugo Limber was a handsome
six-foot ' barbarian,' who prided himself on
never looking into a book, and was as easy-tempered
as his sister. By the superhuman
efforts of a renowned crammer, he had been
pushed neck and crop into the army, wherein
subsequent campaigns he had distinguished
himself by a certain brute courage which
extorted admiration from the generals and
respect from his comrades ; but at home he
was indolent and silent, and could only be
roused into energy by a good hunting
run or a sparring match. Into this party
Dorothy, feeling very shy and strange, was
suddenly thrust. Her arrival had been announced
by Lady Darlington to the company
at breakfast, by whom the news was variously
received.

'Left her husband, did she?' ejaculated
Major Hartshorne. ' God bless my soul, what
are the women coming to, with their ideas of
emancipation!'

She is very pretty said Lady Darlington
to her brother.

She is quite safe from my attentions, then;
don't put her next me at dinner, Mna — there's
a dear — for you know I can't bear strange
women.'

Poor thing, I dare say a little kind and
serious talk would be the best thing to improve
her,' piped Miss Mytten, running over
in her mind the temperance tract most suited
to her requirements.

^ All I ask,' said the hostess again, in he:
quick bright manner, * is, that you will all do
your best to be kind to her and enable her to
feel at home, as she is my particular friend.' •

Dorothy arrived about tea-time, looking
very neat and pretty, in a black gown and quiet
bonnet. She was received by Lady Darlington
and Miss Mytten, the rest of the guests
being variously employed, some in ridding
themselves of their wet boots after shooting,
others — to wit the Hartshorne couple — refreshing
themselves by a quarrel, found highly tonic
and appetite-giving, when administered just
before the evening meal.

Lady Darlington kissed her friend tenderly,
and Miss Mytten' s heart warmed to the pale,
quiet girl. Here, certainly, was no wine-bibber,

such as her soul abhorred, but rather one who
having met with early disappointment, might
prove a shining light to the society of total
abstainers.

Dorothy, somewhat tired after her long
drive, and oppressed with the scrutinizing
glances of numerous servants, the grandest of
whom had escorted her through the various
halls, passages, and reception-rooms into the
presence of her hostess, would gladly have
forthwith retired to her room without further
ceremony; but this idea was nipped in the bud
by the sound of a knock at the door, and the
apparition of a nurse, who promptly pushed
in first Baby John, curly-headed, blue-eyed
and tottery, dressed in a short white frock
and shorter sleeves, tied up with scarlet ribbons,
which exposed the fair white flesh of his fat-cushioned
neck and shoulders ; then, in rotation,
Letty, in a white frock and blue ribbons,,
finally Hetty, bringing up the rear by reason
of seniority. Baby John gave a kind of
chuckle, darted rashly forward, forgot his
limited powers of locomotion, toppled over
and fell flat at his mother's feet, who, picking
him up and pressing him in her arms, exclaimed,
' Isn't he a clever little fellow, and
doesn't he walk well, Dorothy ?'

Does he never hurt himself when he falls ?^
asked Mrs. Chester, who was a novice with
babies.

Never ! he is much too clever for that —
aren't you, my ducky darling?' said the fond
mother.

Letty and Hetty, piqued at being neglected
when a pleasing shower of caresses was going"
forward, now snatched at their mother's gown
and struggled to take her hands, crying out :

Aren't we darlings too, mamma ? We want
to be darlings.'

So you are, dears — so you are!' said Lady
Darlington, putting down Baby John, who
stood with legs apart and a decidedly doubtful
equilibrium, on the hearth rug, sucking hi
thumbs.

Having now leisure to notice Dorothy, and
remembering that perhaps she might not care
so much for these maternal displays, Lady
Darlington offered her tea out of fine old
Worcester cups, and poured out thick yellow
cream from a massive Queen Anne cream-jug.

Dorothy accepted the tea gratefully, but

drew down upon herself a mild little sermon.

from Miss Mytten on the superior merits of

tea versus wine.

Tea over, and a romp with the children

satisfactorily accomplished, in the course of
which they pulled down their mother's hair,
scratched their fingers with her brooch, and
threw over a vase with flowers, they were
regretfully despatched to bed, and Lady
Darlington now proceeded to accompany
Dorothy to her bedroom, a pleasant apartment
in which everything was the perfection of order.
Here she again kissed her friend, saying :

By-the-bye, dear, what made you change
your mind so suddenly about coming to us ?
Only yesterday you told me that nothing
should induce you to leave home.'

That is true, and you must think me very
capricious ; but I shall run the risk of that,
however. The fact is, I have since discovered
that there is sometimes courage and prudence
in flight.'

What ! did he pursue you ? Then he must
really love you !'

I met him by accident: we had a very
painful interview ; and I thought it best to
place an impassable barrier between us. He
will not seek me out here, if you do not disapprove
of my intruding on your hospitality.'

You are quite right, and very welcome.
But now, dear, whatever you do, don't be late
for dinner. Darlington can't bear that. Two

bells ring, you know — one for dressing and
the other for dinner. Shall I send my maid
to help you? No? Well, as you please. I
am so very glad to have you !'

When the voluble little lady had departed,
Dorothy felt more solitary and depressed in
the surroundings of her smart room than she
had ever done in her small chamber at the
Angel House. The falseness of her position
revealed itself to her so clearly. What business
had she, the plainly reared daughter of a
poor widow, to whom grandeur was no necessity,
to marry among fine folk ? They could
not understand her ways, nor she theirs ; and
the simple rule of right and wrong, which had
served her honestly at home, under altered
circumstances was become strange and distorted;
like objects viewed through the wrong
end of a kaleidoscope. Must the punishment
of an egregious blunder, committed in early
youth, be eternal — must solitude, despair,
and regret be her companions for the remainder
of her life? The horrible secrecy
imposed upon her by her position haunted
and tormented her till she almost believed
herself the slave of Fate — destined perpetually
to be swept and swayed before the blast of a
ruthless and despotic will. Morality pointed

sternly in one direction, affection impulsively
urged her in another, while religion mysteriously
kept silence. Perhaps she had been
mistaken; perhaps the more natural and more
womanly plan would have been to indulge
the promptings of love to the uttermost — to
stay with Keith, to comfort him with her presence,
to let herself be • adored, to share the
consequences of his guilt, to palliate his sin,
and guide his faltering steps towards heaven.
He declared that innocent happiness was all
he desired; innocent happiness she could give
him in the future, and surely the past was not
her immediate concern. Not ? Wherein consisted
innocent happiness while the blood of the
victim cried out to Heaven ? Yet she could understand
that even sin might possess a delicious
delirium — a swift and exquisite rapture, for
which expiation were scarcely too high and
terrible a price to pay.

For it was certain that her soul was fainting
within her, and her courage failing even
now. To be misunderstood and unfairly
blamed by everyone for the remainder of
her days, was the hard lot she meant to
choose; had she sufficient strength to undergo
so cruel a martyrdom ? Why not choose
happiness ? One look, one kiss — and she

could be again fondly clasped in Keith's arms
and taste the bliss of love; but she must not
call things by a wrong name. This was not
innocent happiness, and the sting of the matter
lay in her knowledge of evil. The angel with
the flaming sword stood ready to banish her
from her garden of Eden — from her fool's
paradise.

The dressing-bell broke the thread of her
thoughts, and, jumping up with a shudder,
she shook off the uncanny whisperings of
the subtle temptation. Lord Darlington took
her in to dinner ; and whatever hesitation
Captain Limber may have felt with regard
to her, was dispelled when she took her seat'
beside him, in her nun-like black dress with
the white tucker. Before the end of dinner
they conversed as old friends ; and Lady
Darlington had thrown at her brother sundry
encouraging nods. Fortunately for Dorothy
the evenings was short. Lord Darling-ton
sleepy after his long day in the open air and
heavy trudge through the turnips, swept the
party off to bed at an early hour. Previously,
however, Lady Darlington sang a ballad, in a
feeble voice, at which the Major wished and
showed, and wondered what people could see
in such mawkish stuff, and why they could

not content themselves with real sterling

tunes, like, for instance, the ' East Beef of

Old England,' or the * Old English Gentleman;'
he hummed to himself:

His gun it was old-fashioned,
A regular flint and steel,
Wide muzzled and a killer,
It was heavy in the heel.'

A rubber of whist followed, for sixpenny
points, in which Dorothy had the Major for a
partner, and bore the brunt of his sallies and
commands with remarkable patience. It is
not perhaps quite so complimentary to the
Major to add that after all these varied
emotions she laid her head on her cool white
pillow with a profound sense of rest and
thankfulness, hailing silence and solitude asher
best friends.

THE NEW GOVERNESS.

HE is really not a bad little creature,'
said Mrs. Hartshorne, on
the morrow, referring to Dorotliy,
a confab being held over the
library fire respecting the absent guest, in the
fashion customary to country house visiting,
where each person's peculiarities or faults form
the staple of talk for the remainder of the
company.

A deuced fine woman, my dear, though
she dresses like a sister of charity,' amplified
the Major, benignly warming his hands under
his coat-tails, for the day was frosty and
somewhat chill. ^ She is a sensible creature
enough — did not revoke once at whist, and
took my corrections very properly and gratefully,
as a well-behaved and modest young
woman should. No woman can play whist,

but at least she can attend when she is taught.
I could never teach you Clara.'

Clara wisely kept silence; she hated whist,
and took pains not to learn, thereby confirming
the Major in his low opinion of woman's
capacity for the game.

why, you talk as if she were a poor
governess, instead of the wife of a very rich
man,' said LadyDarlington, with a merry laugh.

I suppose he will never consent to take
her back again — at least I presume not — but
most men have no dignity,' remarked the
Major pompously.

It's far more likely that she will never
consent to return to Azm.'

By Gad ! who ever heard of such a thing ?
What are the women coming to — leaving their
lawful husbands, and gallivanting about as
if the world belonged to them !'

If the husbands behave badly, what else
would you have them do?'

Mrs. Hartshorne sniggered under her breath
at this question, put innocently enough by
Lady Darlington.

The Major privately thought there was a
great deal to be done, and that in such a case
the old custom of corporal punishment might
not inconveniently be introduced ; for he respected

the well-known adage — ' A spaniel, a
wife, and a walnut tree ; the more you beat
them, the better they be.' He believed in the
value of most time-honoured institutions, the
verbal inspiration of the Bible, and the value
of the Apostolic injunction, 'Wives, submit
yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto
the Lord

Lady Darlington laughed outwardly at his
solemn utterances, but in her own heart she
also was troubled about Dorothy.

Lord Darlington had casually said to his
wife, just previous to starting for the day's
shooting: 'Look here, Nina! that girl is too
pretty and too young to be running about the
world alone ; get her to go back to her husband
if only for the sake of respectability.'

It was easy enough to enjoin this, but not
so easy to carry out the command. Lady
Darlington doubted whether she possessed the
influence attributed to her. Though her heart
was warm and loving, her powers of reasoning
and logical argument would in these days of
female orators have commanded but the veriest
modicum of attention.

What shall I do ? she asked therefore,
somewhat plaintively, of her brother, whom
she had inveigled for a few minutes' talk into

VOL. III. 7

the conservatory, while Lord Darlington was engaged
in solemn colloquy with the stud-groom.

Hugo was always ready to listen, provided
he might smoke, though he was not always so
ready to answer.

What about ?^ he asked. ' Your little
friend ?'

Yes; do help me — suggest something.'

Make her play lawn-tennis on the asphalte
court, or ride to hounds — nothing is so good
for the spirits.'

^ Hugo, don't be foolish ; you know this
affair is very serious. I am afraid, if it is not
patched up somehow soon, it will end in a
real separation; and that is utter destruction
as far as the woman is concerned.'

Naturally ; the world always shoves all the
blame upon her, whether she deserves it or
not, poor little soul!'

'Always,' said Lady Darlington, quietly
accepting this irrational view of the respective
responsibilities of men and women.

Where is she, by-the-bye, just now ?'

Playing with the children in the nursery.
Now does not that show a sweet and womanly
disposition, and prove what a quantity of real
good she must have in her ? But though she is so
nice and very serious, I can't make the slightest

impression upon lier. She used to be so
fond of Mr. Chester, and thought him a perfect
paragon ; but nothing will satisfy her now but
the idea of going out as a governess. Just
think what a pity it would be — and she so
attractive !'

^ Some fellow will fall in love with her, and
then there will be a pretty kettle of fish !' ejaculated
Hugo from amidst volumes of smoke.

And that would be worse.'

Worse than what, Mna? She is in a mess
now. I can't for the life of me think what
has come to Chester. He seemed a good sort
of fellow enough; rather haw-haw, and th{!t
sort of thing, but a gentleman; and Johnnie
Coote is devoted to him.'

Coote is with him now, is not he?'
Yes ! A capital chap Coote, and a rare
good judge of a gun, and the quickest eye in
the world. I had a letter from him to-day,'
said Hugo, taking it out of his pocket.

What does he say?'

Well, it's all about the sport he's been
having ; there's nothing much about Chester
in it, except just this — ''My host is still
down in the dumps, but I do my best to liven
him up." '

There ! you see they are both of them

7—2

miserable cried Lady Darlington impulsively.
It really looks as if a good fairy were all that
was required just to step in and say, '* God
bless you, my children.' "

You might be the good fairy yourself.'
I ! How ? Quick ! Tell me, Hugo.'
Keep her here as your governess, and
make her life a burden, until she Lavishes herself
home again.'

I never could be unkind to her, Hugo.'

^ Oh, you need not trouble ; leave that to
the servants — they understand it. A governess
is neither fish, flesh, nor fowl, so everyone
gives her a pinch, just to see what she is
made of.'

^ Our governesses were never pinched, I am
sure; mamma would not have allowed it.'

Why, Mna, that's a figure of speech ; but
trust the servants to bring her down a peg.'

If I thought it would do any good,' said
his sister slowly ; ' but I should not like her
to be miserable.'

It would only be the same sort of thing asa
dose of physic ; you feel awfully bad at the
time, but afterwards you are as brisk as a bee.
Well, good-bye, Mna; think over what I've
said. I can't stop any longer, for Darlington

will be waiting. Take care of yourself, little
girl.'

The position of a dependent — it sounded
nasty, certainly. Lady Darlington did not
exactly know what governesses felt, but she
had a pretty shrewd suspicion of it : cold
suppers, badly blacked boots, and a great deal
of fatigue, annoyance, and loneliness, she was
aware, would be some of the incidental disagreeable.
Still, if in the end such an
arrangement were conducive to Dorothy's
happiness, it might be worth trying. Lady
Darlington, stepping back into the drawing-room
to ring for the cook and order dinner,
decided she would make the proposition. Her
diplomacy was of the most elementary kind.
Fortunately it needed but little to insure a
quiet tete-astute with Mrs. Chester. Luncheon
was a ladies' meal, and devoted to the children,
who dined at that hour. Hetty and Letty
feasted royally on roast partridges and bread-sauce,
which required to be chopped up small ^
even then a considerable portion being deposited
on the respective pinafores, which seemed to
possess a perverse inclination to ruck up or fall
down or get in the way of the spoons with
which the girls fed themselves, while their large
heavy-lashed eyes roamed sportively round the

table, watching everything with the greatest
interest except their own occupation, which
should have reigned paramount in importance.


Here, dear Letty, take care ; that was too
large a mouthful. Some more jam with your
pudding ? — Eat a little faster, dear. [Neo,
Hetty, you have had enough!' were some of
the fond mother's staccato interjections.

Hetty pouted, while two crystal drops
oozed from her lashes.

Well, don't cry, then. Please, Aunt Judy,
give Hetty another jam-puff.'

Hetty shouldn't cry for . tarts ; that's
naughty!' said Aunt Judy reprovingly, holding
up one skinny pale finger.

Hetty would have cried still more at this
lecture, and was already preparing to droop
the corners of her mouth in harmony with her
sense of injury, but as at that instant the
jam-tart was placed on her plate, she wisely
decided to swallow the affront as well, and
make the best of her time before the ladies
rose to depart.

Grace said, pinafores cheerfully removed,
and the children having run upstairs as noisily
as though the partridge and tarts had flown
to their heads, Lady Darlington aired her

diplomacy and made her little plans for the
afternoon. *

Admit Judy, will you take Clara Harts -
home to see the new school? And then, as I
have some letters to write, and shall not be
ready to go out quite so soon, perhaps dear
Dorothy will not mind waiting for me, and
we can take a turn round the garden?'

Dorothy responded to the invitation with
alacrity, and, punctually to orders, awaited
her hostess in the large painted hall.

We will go to the garden,' said the latter,
when she came down, dressed in her dainty
tight-fitting jacket and jaunty hat, ' because
we can go alone there; and if we drive, I shall
have to take a groom. Darlington is so particular;
his mother never went out without a
servant at her heels, so he thinks it is necessary
for me to do the same. Of course it's a
bore; but he is so kind, I don't like to object.'
While she spoke, she took some formidable-looking
keys from a basket that stood on the
table. ' These are the keys of the garden and
park; you know everything is locked here, for
fear of tramps.'

Are there many tramps, then ?'

Not more than elsewhere ; but it's another
old custom Darlington likes to keep up.'

By this time they had reached the large
kitchen-garden, a model of its kind, sloped to
the sun, intersected by broad gravel walks,
and borders of sunflowers and dahlias, slightly
touched by the night's frost.

'Oh, the poor flowers!' said her ladyship
tenderly; 'what a pity it is when these horrid
frosts come ! I am sure nobody likes them;
and later on they stop hunting, and make us-all
cross.'

You are never cross, I am sure,' said Dorothy,
stooping to pick a piece of mignonette.

Sometimes ; but now, Dorothy, let us talk
business. Are you happy here ?'

Very,' said Dorothy, with a sigh.

Of course I take the expression as qualified
and are you still anxious to be a governess
?'

Yes,' Dorothy answered, with another

sigh.

I ask, because you know I have for sometime
thought of getting a governess for Hetty
and Letty. Poor angels, it seems hard to
make their dear little heads ache with learning;
but Clara says they ought to begin to read.'

And you were going to ofl*er me the
post?' Dorothy raised her head, and her eyes
sparkled.

If you will take it.'

You dear Mna — that I will ! Why, you
are a regular good fairy to offer me the wish
of my heart ! I am fond of children, and I
know I can teach at least the alphabet — and
then I should be near you — and it would not
be quite such wretched exile. .Thank you
dear ! But I forgot — we shall no longer be
equals. I shall be your paid dependent, Lady
Darlington.'

In the eyes of the world, perhaps ; but when
we are alone — always my own dear friend.'

They walked a little way in silence after
this. Lady Darlington's sense of the proprieties
being somewhat outraged at the offer
she had herself made. Was it, she inwardly
questioned, quite respectable for a real lady to
demean herself by taking a salary ? Of course
this was a unique occasion, but might it not
be quoted against her in the future, and cause
her some vague detriment? Dorothy, on her
part, was thinking that a definite aim, even so
small a one as teaching spoilt children their
letters, would prove a perfect godsend to her
in her restless and miserable frame of mind.

How fortunate it is for us both that you
are hooky ^ said Nina presently, * as I am nota
bit so.'

Do you never read, then?'

Never ! I have no time.'

'But you must have occasional spare
moments ?'

No. I have such a quantity to do. First,
you see, there are orders to give to the cook
and the butler; then letters to write, invitations
to send, clothes to choose for the children;
then I must take walks, and besides that, I
run up and down to the nursery twenty times
a day. Oh yes, the mistress of a house is
very hard-worked, I can tell you ; besides, I
consider reading waste of time — one can be
better employed than in reading novels !'

You might read history.'

My dear, I left the schoolroom years ago.
That is all very well for you, who seem to
crave after " ologies," and such like ; but
where, pray, is the use of history — to me at
least ? It only teaches one about a number of
men and women, who were kings and queens,
and statesmen and generals, and lived years
ago, before there were carpets and windows,
or French cooking, or even baths ; who were
uncivilized in their habits, and had plenty of
bad qualities, and killed one another, and
quarrelled, and made lots of mistakes, just
as we do. I can look round among my

friends and find plenty of frightful examples,
quite as useful as any in history, I can assure
you

But it is interesting to trace the rise of
institutions, and study the progress of the
human mind, of art, science and letters.'

That does not interest me. If the institutions
are there, and are good, I profit gratefully
by them ; but I don't wish to pry into
their origin any more than I care to pull up a
seed to see how it is growing. I never wish
to know what my food is made of, nor what
poison I am unconsciously imbibing, nor the
number of bones in my body, nor the Latin
names for plants and flowers, which smell
sweet and please me just as they are; and I
abhor the chronology of the Saxon Kings.
My own home, my friends and family, my
duties, are quite sufficient for me ; and, indeed,
so they ought to be for any sensible woman,
unless she is a burrowing bookworm.'

You are not flattering to me; but I
suppose you would like the girls taught
history ?'

Poor darlings ! — very little of it goes a
long way. Books have not given you happiness,
Dorothy.'

By this time they had reached the garden-gate;

and Lady Darlington suggested the
advisability of their return, as the children's
tea-time was approaching.

Considerable astonishment was expressed
by the company when informed that Mrs.
Chester had accepted the post of governess to
Lady Darlington's children.

Nursery governess, you know, my dear, I
call it, with those babies !' said Mrs. Hartshornee,
lifting her eyebrows ; ' my nursery -
governess — and I had several, and know the
tricks of the tribe well — never dined downstairs.'


But Mrs. Chester's birth and position will
make a difference,' remarked Miss Mytten
sagaciously.

I don't know. If I were Mna, I should
make her keep her place; a false position is
always productive of discomfort.'

Dorothy, however, saved her friends any
trouble, for she stoically grasped the necessary
facts; requested to be allotted the governess's
apartment at once, vacating without a murmur
her fine visitor's room, and passed her evenings
in the schoolroom, only consenting to
relax this rule on Sundays, when sacred music
was played in the drawing-room, and Lord
Darlington read prayers to the whole retinue

of servants. The latter soon set themselves,
according to Capta Limber's prediction, to
pull Dorothy down a peg. The footman
passed her with a supercilious stare, the butler
forgot to hand her wine at dinner, the housemaid
grumbled at the extra work entailed by
carrying up the governess's supper-tray, and
the nurse invented every possible pretext for
detaining the children in the nursery. But
Dorothy was firm. If the children were well,
they must not miss their lessons ; and the
poor little things, though carefully instructed
in the art of secret mutiny by the nurse, and
having come prepared to be naughty, soon
recognised her mild rule, and stayed, magnetized
by her sweet voice and manner, to learn
industry and goodness. Dorothy herself,
quiet and peaceful in her new avocations,
forgot some of her troubles in the exercise of
her monotonous and soothing employment;
the evenings she devoted to study, and the
long walks she took with the little girls kept
her in good health and revived her spirits.

Lady Darlington, according to her brother's
directions, trying, in spite of herself, to keep
up the distinction of employer and dependent,
ran in very frequently to enjoy a chat with
her governess — to consult her about a dress

or a flower, or to order her out into the park
to catch a glimpse of the hounds. Not the
least happy portion of the day was the hour of
(Schoolroom tea, when the children, established
at the table in their high chairs and pinafores,
solemnly munched bread and butter; Dorothy
pouring out the tea, and Mna with Baby
John on her lap talking indefatigably. The
plan invented by Captain Limber, with
Machiavellian design, seemed to answer perfectly.


I really think,' said Lady Darlington to
her brother, after some days — ' I really think
Dorothy is too happy, and that she will never
want to go home again. She seems quite
contented.'

Trust her to want to go home again,' said
Captain Limber. ' She is a good-plucked un,
I allow, but she will hanker after liberty at
last. Fancy being penned up all day with
those brats !'

They are very good children,' answered
his sister, bridling.

So they may be, but they are mischievous
imps, all the same; and you won't make me
believe that a pretty girl like that can care to
pass all her life teaching the alphabet, and
never seeing a living soul but you.'

Lady Darlington thought it unlikely, but
she was learning to distrust her own judgment
with regard to Dorothy, who had already disappointed
so many of her previsions. For
herself, she could not have existed a day in
dudgeon with Lord Darlington. If he had
frowned, she must have laughed at him ; if he
had turned coldly from her, she must have
thrown her arms around his neck. Quarrelling
was but the prelude to reconciliation,
and the taste of snarling made kissing all the
sweeter.

KEITH TALKS POLITICS.

T is time now to return to Mr.
Chester, and to the events that
followed his wife's departure. He
had been stung and wounded by
her conduct more than by any occurrence of
his life; that she should have the courage to
leave the shelter of his roof, and subsequently
show neither regret nor affection, touched him
to the quick. Reproaches and recriminations
he would have thought natural, but dignified
silence and firmness, the offspring of duty,
astonished and found him defenceless. He
had believed in the power of her love; he had
not reckoned on the strength of her conscience.
And now, out of perversity, just because
he had lost her, he wanted her back
impatiently.

While he was thus fuming and fretting,
Coote arrived, full of concern and real sympathy,
which he found it impossible to put
into words. Condolences were always difficult
— how much more so in a delicate matter
like the present, when blame and palliation
alike seemed to jar.

Keith was moody and gloomy, given to
honos fits of silence or snatches of feverish
talk — a very trying companion. Coote was
bright, genial, and interested in all the affairs
of the place — in the farm, and the hounds, and
the shooting. He thought it his duty to
discourage confidences, believing in the efficacy
of oblivion wrought by physical fatigue and
occupation. The gamekeeper was kept on the
alert, the fields were thoroughly shot over,
the partridges had a rare bad time of it — but
Dorothy's name was never mentioned. The
two men smoked and played billiards ; occasionally
Keith touched his violin while Coote
made up his game-book: but none of these
insidious devices for killing time dispelled the
gloom from Keith's brow, or witched away the
stern lines that had gathered around his
mouth. He was beginning to age. There
was no doubt of it; and his complexion grew
shallower. One evening — it was the evening

VOL. III. 8

after his encounter with Dorothy — he broke
out:

Johnnie, my boy, this is a miserable life !
I don't think I can endure it much longer.
It is bad enough to be tricked and fooled by a
woman: those things made me smile formerly,
now they madden me. The worst of it
is, Johnnie, I did love her. She may not
have thought it — for I have such a cold undemonstrative
nature — but I did love her. I
loved her little fair head, so trimly braided,
and her gentle quiet ways, like those of a soft
dove nestling in one's bosom ; and now — I
miss her, I want her, and she is gone forever
!'

Time is a great ally,' quoth Johnnie, puffing
formidably.

In some things, yes ; but I fear Dorothy
despises me — she thinks the very worst, she
puts the hardest construction on all my doings.
Just imagine being despised by a woman; it
is far worse than to be hated !'

You are fortunate not to be hated as well.
I think you managed badly, Keith.'

^I know I did — disgracefully. I ought to
have kept her affections, such a simple little
thing as she appeared — but I thought her love
was proof against all my errors. That conscience

of some women is a damned sort of
thing, Johnnie.'

Yes, Johnnie supposed women had sensitive
consciences — one must humour them.

You queer fellow,' Keith laughed drily ; ' I
wonder much what kind of harmony will exist
between you and your wife. She will rule you,
I'll be bound.'

If she rules pleasantly, she may.'

I suppose I must make up my mind to this —
eh, Johnnie ? " Homme propose, femme dispose."
I had meant to lead a humdrum life, but that
is all knocked on the head now. Find me an
occupation, Johnnie ; I must have something
to do. You suggested marriage once — that
has not answered, so try again. I give you
another chance. What am I good for still V

Why give up so tamely ? I think you
might and ought to get back your wife.'

^1 might f no doubt, by an exercise of authority;
but I have no fancy to play the despot. A
patient victim at my side would bore me. I
had sooner be free and alone.'

'Well then, in other ways. There's the
farm — Flint is an old-fashioned duffer — I was
talking to him to-day ; all his theories are
exploded now. Why not ride about and
visit your estate — steam-plough your land — go

8—2

in for grazing and high farming — make acquaintance
with your tenants, breed prize
short-horns V

No, I hate farming ; it means arrears of
rent, constant complaints of floods or sheep-rot
or pleura-pneumonia, draining and building,
and all kinds of expense.'
'Music?'

Music needs a listener, and I have none
and recalls memories of associations which I
wish to forget; besides, music emasculates,
and I must grow strong

There you are right. I never had much
of an ear for music myself, though I like well
enough to hear my sisters strum. Shooting
and hunting?'

^ Both excellent recipes for a good night's
rest, but not otherwise absorbing.'
Travels — politics ?'

Politics ! Ha ! perhaps you have hit it. I
might care for them; they mean excitement,
vigorous thought — worthy of a man.'
Pity you are a Liberal !'
^ Great pity, isn't it? But politics shall never
destroy our friendship; wee will keep the two
separate — as separate as peace and love.
Politics ! The great game of chess played by
statesmen, with nations for their pieces ; a

science that prates of patriotism, progress, enlightenment,
truth, justice, liberty — I know it
all; haven't I written articles innumerable for
the Universal Review ? That is what we say.
What we think is, politics is a game of brag
and lying, played with the sham counters of
deceit, mean shifts, low ambitions, dishonest
dealings, paltry evasions, knaves outwitting
one another for chain, and lauo^hinof at honest
fools. What say you? It might stir a man's
nerves and bid him live. Ambition is the
masculine of love; it contains pith and marrow.
I have a mind to try it.'

By all means,' responded Johnnie, enchanted
to have found a spur for his friend's
laggard energies.

Johnnie, how I envy you ! You are
content with a little — I never am! I have
always been striving for some good which,
Ashen I have attained, has eluded my grasp.
Pleasure, popularity, riches, marriage, have
disappointed me in turn — nothing has contented
me yet.'

You exact too much, I think. There is.
no such thing as perfection — so many people
are all the pleasant, because they are not
perfect.'

Sagacious boy! you speak wisely, and I

am going to behave wisely. It is a pity I did
not marry one of your sisters, Johnnie

*By Jove it is, Keith! They are such
good girls.'

Keith made a grimace.

I don't think I should have got on with a
good girl ; and now I am going to be a statesman,
plot deeply, plan craftily, and study the mob's
caprices, so that eventually / may rule while
the people think they are ruling me.'

If you were a Conservative, you would not
need to be insincere.'

^ I am not insincere ; but no man is such a
fool as to bring up a two-year-old sharp on its
haunches with a severe curb the first day he
breaks it in. The people, like the young horse,
must be educated.'

We have the education, and their business
is to follow our lead.'

The days for that are past, Johnnie ; the
people will soon be our masters, for all we can
spell, if we do not make haste to keep ahead of
them.'

It is gentlemen, fellows like you, of old
family and great associations, that do the
harm, pretending that you are what no gentleman
can be — a Radical.'

I don't pretend J and I am not a Radical.*

You are drifting that way, at least.
Forty years ago you would have been a
Chartist.'

*To confess the truth, I never cared to
embrace the dull old party of respectability ;
it freezes the blood in one's veins. I had as
soon be an automaton.'

'Take care you are not a puppet in the
hands of the great unwashed, which is worse,'
retorted Johnnie, rising to light another
cigar.

Keith did not answer, as he would have
done formerly, with a maxim of La Eoche-
foucauld's. He needed none of the old
Frenchman's bitter sarcasm to serve as* a
fillip. He was sour and cynical enough himself
now in all conscience, and he felt, if he
did not express in the words of the philosopher,
On donne des conseils, mais on inspire pas
la sagesse pour en profiter.'

Johnnie had very good-naturedly put off
his own annual party for the 1st of September,
and contented himself with the society of his
friend and some very indifferent partridge-shooting,
walking after dogs in the old-fashioned
style, instead of enjoying the
well organized drives and heavy bags which
at home would have fallen to his lot. Yet it

must be confessed that there was a selfish side
to his good-nature, for was not the brilliant
Margaret residing in the village, and was it
not tacitly accepted that he should make an
almost daily pilgrimage to the Angel House,
to inquire for the latest news and ask if
Dorothy showed signs of relenting ? And
when it chanced that there was no particular
news, and gossip was slack, what more natural
than that he should linger a while talking and
advising with Margaret ; or that occasionally
she should put on her bonnet and walk part of
the way with him in the bright autumn sunshine
?

A teasing, tormenting girl was Margaret —
never soft, never sentimental, but as crisp and
sparkling as crackling snow, as refreshing as
the rush of a mountain torrent. She astonished
Johnnie, and kept him spell-bound. His sisters
were very different, so quiet and proper ; yet
she lived more in the country than they did,
and had never even been presented at Court.
Withal she was exceedingly practical — said she
did not believe in love, and would prefer to
repent in a coach-and-six — ' for repent I suppose
one must, whatever one does, and I
should like it made as easy as possible.'
Margaret had recognised the error of her ways

since the day when she had sneered at her
mother for talking of marriage as a profession.
She had discovered that not only was it an
end in itself, but a stepping-stone to all the
pleasures she coveted — play-going, pretty
dresses, fun, and good dinners, and lively
company. When she was married she could
have all these ; ergo, she would make haste to
get married. But the only eligible young man
that presented himself was Johnnie, and he
solemnly informed her that he hated going to
balls, and intended to marry a sober wife,
who would be contented to live in the
country.

I hate the country said Margaret, in her
gay aggravating manner ; ' I hate the little
lambs in the green fields and the lowing of
sows, and the muddy roads and the nightingales'
sonofs — I have had so much of them. I
want to go to Paris and London, and see the
shops, and buy whatever I like.'

You would soon get tired of it.'

Never ! I could walk up and down Regent
Street all day, and only want to go home
when I felt hungry.'

There is nothing to be done in a
town.'

Nothing to be done ! When there is

dancing, and dining, and flirting! I adore
flirting.'

You don't mean it ; you only say so to
tease me T

^ Why should it tease you ? I suppose it is
no business of yours whom I flirt with!'

Flirts are horrid !'

^ Prigs are worse ! Mr. Coote, you are fast
becoming a prig and a lecturer.'

Miss Strait, you are fast becoming giddy
and impertinent.'

I had rather be giddy than stupid. The
one amuses, the other sends you to sleep.'

No one could sleep in your company.'

Thank you, Mr. Coote ; that is a compliment
— the first you have paid me to-day; it
means that I am exceedingly agreeable.'

You may put that construction on it if
you like.'

I shall not fail. Why, appreciation on the
part of others is the only reward I ask for my
pains,' she said, laughing.

On one occasion, as they walked and talked
thus, they were met by Mrs. Maynard, who,
having first drawn herself up a little stiffly,
then shook hands cordially with Margaret,
and finally threw one of her bewitching looks
at Johnnie, a habit which she found irresistible

in the presence of a young man. But those
looks were wasted upon him now ; he noticed
that her eyes were large and languishing, the
lashes dark and curved, and the lids drooping,
but these beauties no longer thrilled him. She
was a pretty woman, certainly, but she did not
appeal to his imagination nor his fancy.

Is it true Mrs. Maynard exclaimed,
almost before she had finished her greeting —

is it true that your sister has gone out as
governess to Lady Darlington ? I heard the
news just now from Mrs. Horsfall, who had it
from her husband ; but I really could not
believe it. It seems so strange — so eccentric
!'

It is quite true,' answered Margaret coldly.

My sister dislikes idleness.'

'Well, there were other things for her todo.
But, of course, it is not my place to
advise, though I must say the position of a
governess is exceedingly trying. I am qualified
to speak, for unfortunately I was a governess
myself for a little while, and I detested it
thoroughly ; so will your sister very soon, you '
may be sure. However, people must buy
their experience, only dear Dorothy is the
very last person suited for such a thing — so
very exclusive and particular as she always was.

If my sister had not been suitable, I don't
suppose Lady Darlington would have engaged
her,' said Margaret, tossing her head pertly.

Of course, we all know Mrs. Chester is
very clever.'

Certainly !' remarked Johnnie, coming to
the rescue.

' Dear me ! No one ever disputed it. She
never cared to talk to us — we weren't intellectual
enough for her. Many a time I've
said to my husband — who you know is very
fond of reading books written by the Fathers,
and very big ones they are — " Charles dear,
our companionship is not enough for Dorothy.
Don't ask her to tea ; she needs the society
of men, literary men." '

I am sure my sister never complained of
her surroundings,' said Margaret tetchily.
She was too much of a lady to turn up her
nose at anyone.'

If she didn't turn up her nose (perhaps
she couldn't, as it was a Greek nose), she
looked it in her eyes. She was sad-looking,
and girls of that uncommon appearance always
have a yearning ; they never settle down like
commonplace people. Well, she flew at high
game, and it has not answered; perhaps the
governess plan will do better, but I am afraid

not. We are all so concerned about her, you
know — her sorrows have quite cast a gloom
over everything.'

Margaret moved impatiently.

It is true, I assure you,' pursued the implacable
Mrs. Maynard. * Mrs. Parkinson
cried about it the other night, and quite
forgot to stroke the cats every five minutes,
as she generally does. Well, well ! Girls
never know their own minds. But I am
keeping you V Neither made a motion of
dissent. ' You were going for a walk. Are
you making a long stay here, Mr. Coote ?
Perhaps some day, as you are fond of a stroll,
you will find your way to our poor house. It
is small, as you know ; we are not fine people,
but we shall give you a hearty welcome.
And how is Mr. Chester ? The whole affair is
deplorable, isn't it ? We are so very sorry
for him.' She passed on, smiling and bowing.

What a detestable woman ! How I should
like to strangle her !' cried Margaret, when
they were out of earshot. * To listen to her
talk is like playing on a comb — there is something
rasping about her. She sets your teeth on
edge with her eternal smile, and her soft voice,
and those manlike simple glances she throws
while all the time you know she is tearing

you and your dress and your belongings and
your character to shreds.'
I suppose she is jealous ?'

Of what ? Such a creature to be the wife of
a clergyman ! — there is not a drop of Christian
charity in her composition. I cannot understand
how the Vicar can endure her. He
must really be a very good man.'

She has quite upset you, Miss Strait — you
have turned pale. How I wish we had not
met her !'

That tongue of hers stabs. Poor Dorothy,
I believe she hates her. Whatever I may say
in haste sometimes, I am very fond of my
sister, and I cannot bear to hear her discussed.'

Certainly not, and you are so warm-hearted.
I wish — I am so sorry,' repeated Johnnie
with concern, holding Margaret's hand as they
now stood just outside the entrance to Blackness,
on the spot where they habitually parted.
"' I am so sorry — Margaret, let me walk home
with you.'

How ridiculous you are !' she said with a
laugh, one of those merry heartless laughs
which he dreaded and yet loved to hear, they
were so infectious, but so hopeless. No girl
could be even in the least in love who laughed
thus, and Johnnie was beginning to wish she

were a little less composed and confiding.
He lead called her ' Margaret ' for the first time,
and she had not even seemed to hear.

Do let me, dear" Margaret. I should like
to walk back again, it is quite early.'

For all the village to remark that we are
seeing one another home, like drunken
men. No thank you, dear, dearer, dearest Mr.
Coote.'

You are very cruel to laugh at me.'

'You would not have me cry with you?
Goodness knows there is enough sorrow in the
world !'

I had not finished telling you about my
home and the girls ; I want you to know my
sisters.'

I know — one is tall and dark, and the other
has red hair ; one visits the poor, and the other
paints on china ; and one is called Dolly, and
the other Agatha. Why, Mr. Coote, you have
said it all before.'

Let me say it again then.'

Not to-day. Please to let go my hand —
there is some one coming. Good-bye, Mr.
Coote.'

Well, if it must be, good-bye, Miss
Strait.'

• And next time bring the heads of your

Kettles Wife,

conversation dotted down on paper, the ages
and birthdays of your sisters, etc., and then
you won't forget to tell me,' Margaret cried
over her shoulder, with another laugh.

DOROTHY KEEPS HEE OWN SECRETS.

breakfast.

Chester means to stand for Slow-chester
at the next election said
Lord Darlington, reading his
letters while he partook of a hearty
I never thought he was at all
in that line ; should have imagined him to be
too indolent. Horsfall says they are to have
a big meeting in the Corn Exchange, and that
Chester is to speak on the Irish question.'

What the deuce can he know about it V said
the Major, sprinkling the kidneys on his plate
plentifully with cayenne pepper.

'As much as his neighbours know, I suppose,'
observed Hugo quietly. * It is easy enough to
be a Radical ; you have only got to abuse
everything and everybody — just drawing the
line at the Queen — and say the army is going

VOL. III. 9

to smash, and that the taxes must be reduced.
You are sure to hit the right nail on the head
that way. You need only find fault ; you
needn't suggest a remedy.'

Has Mr. Chester quite recovered his wife's
loss, then V asked Mrs. Hartshorne, who had
drawn her knitting from her pocket, as soon as
she had consumed the tea and toast which
formed the staple of her matutinal meal,
the clicking of her knitting-needles constituting
a kind of feeble protest against the greedy
appetites of man. In such like petty
revenges, to which, however, no one ever
paid attention (the Major having been known
aggravating to remark that he believed
knitting assisted his wife's digestion), Mrs.
Hartshorne found compensation for the despotism
under which she groaned.

Probably,' answered Lord Darlington. ' The
whole thing was a mistake, and I suppose they
were not really suited to one another.'

She is the best of governesses,' said Lady
Darlington warmly.

And the worst of wives,' grumbled the
Major.

I don't see why you should say that ; we
really don't know the real facts of the case.'

When a woman keeps her own secrets, they

are generally secrets that tell against herself,'
snapped the Major.

I am sure I never keep secrets from you,
dear,' remarked Mrs. Hartshorne amiably.

I was not referring to your affairs, Clara ;
I wish you would not be so confoundedly
personal. Only a clever woman can keep a
secret.'

Clara's eyes filled with tears. She had cultivated
a habit of keeping nothing to herself, in
the hope that this show of catholic trust in her
husband would gratify his vanity ; and now
he actually asserted that only clever women
kept secrets. Lord Darlington kindly took
the sting out of the Major's remark by
saying :

Well, I agree with Hartshorne — women
who have secrets are not pleasant companions.
I always abhorred mysteries, even in story-books,
where one expects to find ghosts in
cupboards, and secret drawers, and wills stuffed
behind pictures, and such like trash. I like
plain above-board everyday things ; no blind
fences, where you can't see what you're riding at.'

Shall I tell Dorothy about her husband
standing for Parliament V asked Lady Darlington.


Certainly, Nina ; let us have no secrets,

9—2

But doesn't lie correspond with him ? She
knows all about it already, I should think.'

No ; I am convinced she never writes. I
am only thinking it might make her unhappy ;
she will imagine he has consoled himself.'

'And a very good thing too said the Major
dogmatically, ^ as long as she persists in playing
the fool.'

I wish you would not be so bitter,' said
her ladyship, almost angrily, ' when you
know how fond I am of her.'

Well, my lady, I never approved of your
romantic notion of keeping her here,' remarked
Lord Darlington, taking a great
draught of cold water at the sideboard, the
usual termination to his copious breakfast ; 'the
kindest thing you can do, is to pack her back
again to her husband.'

Hugo advised me,' said her ladyship plaintively.


Then Hugo must stand the consequences,'
said Lord Darlington, stumping off to have
a look at the horses.

Lady Darlington turned to her brother :

Now, Hugo, it is too bad of you not to say
a word. Did you not advise me V

I did,' said Hugo unconcernedly, ' on the
principle of the apprentice in a pastry-cook's

slip : if you give him enough tarts, he'll have
such a sickener that he'll never eat any more. I
suspect six months of drudgery and school work
will cure our pretty friend of having her own
way. And for my part, I'm awfully glad Chester
is going to stand, though I hope he won't get
in ; there's always a row at a contested
election, and a likelihood of the soldiers being
called out. I should like to get a chance of
punching some of the fellows' heads.'

In the course of the afternoon Lady Darlington
mounted to the precincts of the schoolroom.
All was quiet there. The two little
girls were in the nursery having their hair
brushed and their hands and faces washed ; the
cloth for tea was partly laid ; Hannah had gone
down for the toast and eggs, leaving the
kettle singing on the hob ; and in the window-seat
sat Dorothy in her plain grey merino,
reading. She put down her book on her employer's
entrance.

You will try your eyes, Dorothy ; the red
light of the setting sun is the very worst light
for reading.'

I was only just finishing a chapter. The
children will be here directly, Lady Darlington;
shall I fetch them V

No, no ; can't you realize that I sometimes

want a chat with you, Dorothy V said her ladyship
impatiently, seating herself in the window-seat
; then, taking Dorothy's hand in hers,
drawing; her down beside her : ' I have heard
some news of Mr. Chester to-day.'

Have you indeed V Dorothy's delicate
colour flickered on her cheeks, and she kept
her eyes bent down.

Should not you like to hear it V

As you please.'

'* As you please," you quaint creature ! why,
I wish to please you. Does it distress you to
hear about your husband, and have you really
ceased to care for him V

It does not distress me.'

Well, then, listen : he has begun to take a
part in public affairs — speaks at a meeting in
Slowchester to-day, and intends to become a
candidate for Parliament.'

Will he succeed V

I don't know ; I hope so, for your sake.
But do you reconsider that a wife by his side
to help him canvass, to share his hopes and
fears, and cheer him in his anxious hours,
would materially assist success V

It might do so under some circumstances.'

Dorothy, have you no heart ? Do you never
feel that it is sweet to be loved ; you seem to

like my children ; have you never thought that
you could have some of your own to love and
caress you V

God forbid !' ejaculated Dorothy.

My dear child, make a clean breast of your
sorrows to me ; tell me what it is that stands
between you and your husband. I swear I
will not betray your confidence ; trust me —
tell me all

Lady Darlington said the governess,
rising and clasping her hands before her, * I
came here to teach your children, and to be
their governess. Have I failed in any way —
are you not satisfied with me V

Perfectly ; but, Dorothy *

Then I must beg you not to urge me anymore.
Each has a right to live his own life as
best he can ; you cannot judge for me. I will
do my duty to you, but I cannot allow you the
privilege of dictating to me about my private
affairs. I will not be unnerved by entreaties
and persuasions ; believe me, it is hard enough
to do my duty, Lady Darlington.'

Yet surely it might be made pleasant to you.
I am your friend — I mean kindly by you.'

Were the path made pleasant, it would no
longer be duty. If it distresses you to see me
here, to know that I am the one suffering

person in a house where everyone is happy,
let me go and earn my bread elsewhere.'

Dorothy, how can you speak so ! You
know I will not part with you. Dear Dorothy,
you are so changed. Look at me, darling T

I am changed, I know,' said Dorothy
gently, ' but not in my feelings for you ; those
feelings are strong and sure. Do not believe
I can ever forget your kindness, and your
real loving sympathy. You took me in, and
helped me when appearances were against me,
and many another would have turned away,
and feared to meddle. I am grateful in my
own way, but pray do not try to shake my
determination.'

I have not got your force of character,'
said Lady Darlington sadly, ' and I could not
keep my sorrows to myself as you do.'

Dorothy smiled — a sweet pathetic smile.

May you never need to do so !'

Mr. Maynard is coming here tomorrow,'
said her ladyship, still lingering ; * he wishes
to talk to me about some charitable scheme.
Would you care for a few words with him ?
Perhaps you might be induced to give him
your confidence, though you will not trust
me.'

It is not that I do not trust you,' said

Dorotliy, opening the door for Lady Darlington
to pass out — ' it is not that. No, thank
you ; I had rather not see Mr. Maynard. He
was always opposed to my marriage, and he
would say I richly deserved my fate.'

I scarcely think so ; he is too charitable.
And you will not be persuaded to come into
the drawing-room to-night ? I expect Lady
Lancelot and her daughters ; it might cheer
you.'

Dorothy shook her head, and the little
lady, baffled in all her kind schemes, retreated.
Dorothy closed the door after her, and returned
to the window-seat, but the engrossing
book had lost its charm. She turned the
pages, but their meaning was sealed to her.
Hannah presently appeared, bearing a tray.
Soon the fragrance of tea and toast filled the
room, and the little girls trooped in merrily.

Muffins ! oh, how nice ! Mrs. Chester, do
come and look ; let us make haste to eat them
before they are cold.'

Dorothy drew her chair near the table, and
proceeded to dispense tea to her charges, who
chatted and asked questions, nowise daunted
by her rare and absent replies. But when the
cloth was removed and the gay infants had run
ois to their mamma, and the schoolroom was

again still and quiet, and the lamp beside her
her only company, helpless loneliness oppressed
her ; she laid her arms on the table and
sobbed. She dared not entertain the smallest
hope of Keith's innocence ; he had tacitly
confessed his guilt by denying nothing, and
attempting no exculpation. He must have
known that the bitter knowledge was gnawing
at her heart, yet he had not offered her one
word of hope or comfort ; he had called crimea
youthful folly, and flippantly declared the
world was not governed by purist notions ; he
had persisted in keeping riches wrongfully
acquired, and had sneered at her romantic
folly in wishing to renounce them. And yet he
was still Keith — still her love — her own choice
her husband — her all ! Some day, possibly,
contempt would step in and bid her forget ;
but as yet her heart beat only with tenderest
pity. She had thought he might be suffering,
crying out for her in despair, longing to
retrieve ; and just now she had learnt that he
was busily working in the world of politics,
drawn into a new vortex of business and
interest. What did her great love signify
to him ? He had won it and cast it away.
What did he care that she was only a poor
lonely governess, breaking her heart for him ?

Perhaps, though, her harshness had been at fault :
he had pleaded and she had refused. It washer
own blunder, but she had always despised
people who rebelled against the inevitable :
plainly there was nothing to be done now but
to bear her lot with patience and be silent.
Where had she read, 'Divine justice is patient
because it has eternity behind it V She had
no eternity to help her.

The next day was fine. After luncheon,
Dorothy's pupils went for a drive with Lady
Darlington and her guests, and the governess
remained alone. She walked now every day
from necessity, until the habit had become
endeared to her. So she put on her bonnet
and went out as usual. September was nearly
over ; the air was frosty, and inclined her for
exercise, and she determined to leave the shrubbery,
and pursue the high-road, which was
dry and pleasant. She had not long passed
the lodge gates, when she caught sight of a
man sitting by the roadside. Believing him
to be a tramp, she scarcely noticed him, when
he quickly rose to his feet, and confronted her.

Joynte !' she cried, under her breath.

He answered, with his usual jaunty assurance,
though his appearance was considerably
more sickly and poverty-stricken.

^ Mrs. Chester, I was on my way to see you.'

What — did — you — want V she could only
articulate slowly.

Fear and surprise had robbed her of the
readiness of speech ; and the scene in the
gondola at Venice, the nightmare of so many
sleepless nights, recurred with fresh horror to
her memory.

Nothing unusual ; just the same old story
money. I'm as poor as ever, you see.'

He took up a flap of his ragged coat and
showed it to her.

I can do nothing for you.'

Oh, indeed — you can't ? You said so once
before, but on that occasion you also said you
would speak to Mr. Chester, and never kept
your word. I always keep my word. I told
sou I would dog you, and here I am — with
some trouble, too. I had to come over to
England with what little cash I could scrape
together. Fortunately the lottery had been
favourable. I called at Blackness, rang the
bell boldly, was told by an insolent flunkey
that you were here (that fine park is Lord
Darlington's, isn't it V) ; and then my good luck
favoured me, and I met you. Shall we walk a
little together while you tell me what you are
going to do for me ?'

I can clo nothing for yon said Dorothy,
whose blanched lips quivered visibly — ^^ nothing.
I am not with Mr. Chester now. I am the
governess here.'

^ The deuce !' A shrill whistle broke from
Joynte. * Then you hate him now as much as
I do ? Wasn't your marriage legal ? Did he
play you a trick ? Ha ! that's good !'

I do not hate Mr. Chester. He is my
husband.'

'You're not going to turn a soft idiot,
are you, when he has treated you so badly ?
I thought you were a woman of spirit.'

Spirit does not consist in trying to injure
those we love. That would be cowardice.'

As you please, Tm not going to split fine
words with you, bub Mr. Chester has behaved
like a cur. You must hate him as much as I do.'

Mr. Chester has not treated me badly.
If I am not at present living in his house, it
is because I do not choose it.'

Like some one else better — eh V

How dare you say such vile things 1'
Dorothy's eyes flashed. * How dare you come
here to poison my peace and destroy my love !
What am I to you, that you should utter
your false and horrible insinuations in my ears ?
I'll listen no more. Go away !'

Tut, tut, ma'am ! no offence — only I'd just
like you to say plain out if you are a friend oran
enemy. It's about time for this absurd
humbug to cease. Are you going to give me
my rights, or not V

^ I cannot give you your rights. Why don't
you ask a lawyer to advise you V

Of course. I'll go to one at once. I'm a
poor beggar now, but I can have plenty of
money some day ; and then, when all the
world knows that Mr. Chester mur '

Stop ! What do you want — money ?
How much will content you f

That depends — a couple of hundred might
not come amiss for a little while.'

If I can — I have no money, but I will see
what is possible. Will you leave Mr. Chester
in peace ? How can I have any security that
you will not annoy him again — that you will
go out of the country V

Ah, now you're speaking like the real lady
I always thought you. You don't love Mr.
Chester, but you don't wish to see him
worried ; it is a proper feeling enough. Get
me the money, as I know you can, and you
shall not have cause to complain.' He pointed
to a distant spire. * There, in that village,
at the Green Man public-house, I'll wait fora

few days. If the money is not forthcoming
then, Mr. Chester must look out.
And of course, ma'am, you'll be sorry.'

I can rely upon you V she asked, wrapping
her cloak more tightly round her.

As sure as I'm a gentleman.'

She waited to hear no more, but struck
quickly in at the lodge-gate. Joynte did not
attempt to follow her. Once more within the
safe precincts of her schoolroom, she breathed
again; yet there was no time to reflect or
decide, for the little girls had returned from
their drive, and waited for their lessons to
begin. It was only in the watches of the
night, when she lay awake tossing restlessly on
her bed, that her wild unruly thoughts formulated
themselves into a concrete shape and
that a reasonable way of escape presented
itself to her perplexed mind.

Some days after writing to Margaret to
announce her intention of taking a governess's
post at Lovemere, she had received
a letter from Keith, enclosing a remittance of
£200. It was a kind letter, and though she
had not answered it, she remember every word.

I cannot let you earn your bread, my
darling,' he said, ^ as I hear from Margaret you
intend doing. No one shall have the power to

say I neglected yon, or failed in what is a duty
and a privilege. If you will not love me, you
must at least accept from me what is right
and fitting, as long as you are my wife. Some
day, perhaps, you will learn to feel more
kindly towards me.'

She had shed many tears over this letter,
kissed it, and finally buried it in the deepest
recesses of a drawer, firmly determined never
to avail herself of his generosity. Yet the
thought of his care touched her ; it was not
indifferent to him if she felt privations or
inconvenience, for he had taken thought and
trouble for her welfare. The money she could
never touch, but the feeling that had prompted
him to send it was indeed precious to her.
And now, to save his honour and his peace,
to save him from shame and disgrace, she
might surely use the money — his money ! And
the longer she pondered, the more some inner
monitor whispered to her that she was right.
A sense of composure stole over her gradually,
wrapped in which her eyes closed gently, her
limbs relaxed, and she fell asleep.

SUNDAY AT LOVEMEEE.

HE next day was Sunday. Impossible
to put her plan in action, for
her time was too completely taken
up ; but early on Monday she resolved
nothing should prevent h er seeing Joy ante.
The schoolroom breakfast took place later than
on weekdays, and was succeeded by a repetition
of the Catechism and Collect for the day. At
half-past ten a bell rang, summoning the household
to prepare for church ; and a quarter of
an hour after another bell rang, at the sound
of which the church-goers were marshalled in
the hall ; and Lady Darlington, preceded by
the footman and prayer-books, conducted the
procession to divine worship. Dorothy shrank
from this to-day, for she knew guests had
arrived, strangers to her : Lady Lancelot, her

VOL. III. 10

son Lord Lancelot, and two daughters — fine
people, who, perhaps knowing her history,
would stare at her uncomfortably. But there
was no way of escape. For the governess to
eschew morning service without reason would,
she knew, be considered unpardonable — a
governess being required to set the example
of piety and early rising. Moreover, Dorothy
particularly disliked claiming any privilege
which would not have been accorded to an
ordinary teacher. So she took her prayer-book
in one hand and Hetty's little fingers in the
other, and descended the slippery oak staircase
while the bell still clanged out its
loudest.

Lady Darlington was already in the hall,
and a gaunt elderly lady in silks and feathers,
with two tall girls, one plump and pretty, the
other faded-looking, having a discontented
droop of the mouth. The party collected
rapidly. The Major and Mrs. Hartshorne and
Lord Darlington appeared from opposite doors,
but Lady Darlington still waited, looking
round expectantly.

Is not Hugo coming V she said, ' and Lord
Lancelot V

Hugo is not coming,' promptly answered

Mrs. Hartshorne. * He and Lord Lancelot
have arranged to stay at home and smoke.'

Mrs. Hartshorne disapproved of Captain
Limber, who was good-tempered and careless,
and laughed when the Major fussed. ' A
pagan idler,' she called him, and hated him
accordingly, so she was not sorry to have the
opportunity of publicly mentioning this lapse
of propriety.

I wish he would come,' said Lady Darlington.


It is no use,' observed Lady Lancelot,
whose voice had a rasping quality. ^ You cannot
get young men to church, do what you
will, unless they are married, and go to please
their wives. Lancelot is hopeless. I have
ceased to worry about him. Better let them
alone.'

Lady Darlington bit her lip, and, slipping
her arm into that of her husband, walked on.
The guests followed, not seeming to notice the
presence of the plainly clad governess, humbly
bringing up the rear with her pupils. That
they had, however, noticed her became evident
from a whispered remark Miss Alice, the
plump and pretty girl, threw to her sister.

Look, Julia — is her hair dyed, do you
think V

10—2

Whose V answered Julia crossly, trying"
to get her hands into her long Swedish gloves
as quickly as possible.

Why, the covey's, to be sure.'

I should think so, horrid creature ! Fancy
her daring !' replied the sister nonchalantly.

Dorothy heard, and the colour mounted to
her cheek.

The walk was short, but the service long and
tedious, an old-fashioned performance in the
matter of nasal twang, hoarse clerk, wheezy
harmonium, discordant singing, and dull
preacher. The occupants of the Darlington
pew — a square, lined with red baize, and furnished
with round and well-stuffed hassocks —
looked at one another, yawned, dreamt, or slept.

Dorothy mentally compared the dry performance
with the Vicar of Dronington's impassioned
address, his carefully trained choir,
and the devotional frame of mind in which she
had frequently revelled. Yet religion surely
consisted in far other things than in a well-ordered
service and a fluent speaker ; surely,
with all the need of spiritual guidance and refreshment
she experienced, prayer and aspiration
should have been more possible. The Miss
Lancelot were content to smile and whisper
together about a frightful bonnet in the next

pew — such flimsy mental pabulum sufficed
them. The familiar ' And now to God' had
been uttered, the worshippers rose gladly from
their knees, the pew door was thrown open respectfully
by the attendant footman, and the
party filed out again through the little churchyard.


On their return luncheon followed almost
immediately, at which Dorothy sat in constrained
silence, the little girls on each side of
her giving her ample occupation in attending
to their wants and teaching them to behave.

You had a dull sermon I suppose, as usual,
said Captain Limber to Miss Alice.

'Yes, very dull,' she said heartily.

I never go to church here ; it is too slow. I
don't mind an anthem at Wells Street in the
afternoon ; you see everyone you know there.
But a country service is absurd for educated
people — it is really only good for clodhoppers,
to keep them out of mischief.'

We always go to St. Faith's, in London.
Have you ever heard Mr. Unction ? he is delightful
; preaches sweetly, and has such lovely
eyes. He works like an apostle, but he is ho
delicate he is always ordered abroad in the
winter.'

Miss Alice sighed at the idea of her favourite

preacher's state of health, and vigorously attacked
her slate of roast-beef.

I must say,' remarked the Major, in a loud
voice across the table, ' there's nothing like
church to give one a good appetite. I never
miss it, on purpose.'

How coarse !' whispered Miss Alice to her
neighbour, sending round her plate for another
slice of beef.

We must take a walk this afternoon,*
answered Lord Darlington, who had just sat
down after a prolonged and heavy spell of
carving. ' Lancelot, I must show you my new
hunters ; and perhaps you'd like to go to the
farm, and give me your opinion about the
shorthorns.'

Delighted, I'm sure,' said his lordship
whose eyes were fixed on Dorothy.

May we go too. Captain Limber V asked
Alice sweetly ; ' or are you going to be horrid,,
and make it only a man's party V

Never mind, you come ; it is all right,' he
answered promptly.

When the little girls had finished eating,,
they ran off with their governess, and Dorothy
heard no more of the company till tea-time,
when Lady Darlington, carrying Baby John,
appeared in the schoolroom.

You must come down as usual, you know,
Dorothy she said. ' I expect you to-night.
Miss Alice Lancelot plays beautifully ; you will
like to hear her.'

Dorothy essayed an excuse — said she was
tired, that dinner would be late, that there
were already so many ladies ; but Lady Darlington
would accept no refusal. With a
heavy heart Dorothy arrayed herself, put on
her eternal black gowan with the lace tucker,
and about nine o'clock took her place in the
drawing-room. It was empty ; the piano
stood open, the lamps were lit, the atmosphere
warm and scented with hothouse flowers, the
glow of wax candles bright and cheerful.
Dorothy stood warming herself by the fire,
when the dining-room doors flew open, and
admitted a stream of gaily dressed ladies, who
rustled, laughing and talking, through the
rooms, till they reached the spot where the
governess waited. Lady Darlington came forward,
and spoke kindly.

My children's governess,' she said, presenting
her to Lady Lancelot, who put up her
eye-glass, and observed :

H'm ! I suppose you don't teach those
infants much set — is it your first place X

Dorothy ignored the impertinence, and

quietly answered that the little girls did not
do many lessons.

Well, well said the majestic dowager,
girls learn a vast deal more than they need
nowadays ; it is a fashion, like any other. I
set my face distinctly against a higher education,
universities and colleges, and such-like
stuff. It unseen women; they don't have
finer children, or rear them any the better.
Indeed, I believe all these follies prevent a
woman nursing her baby. It stands to reason,
brain work injures the health. I suppose you
have passed examinations V

No,' said Dorothy, ' not yet.*

H'm ! they won't do you much good.
My girls were educated quietly at home
by a governess ; they can speak French and
German, play and sing. What more does anyone
want V When Lady Lancelot had delivered
this diatribe, she turned on her heel
and walked away.

Dorothy took refuge on an out-of-the-way
sofa, behind a book of photographs ; and the
ladies continued to discuss their dress, their
servants, and their acquaintance, till the
monotonous hum of conversation lulled
Dorothy into forgetfulness. She began to
dream; she thought of Blackness — of its orange-scented

conservatory, whence had been culled
her bridal blossoms — of the snug little blue-room
where Keith loved to smoke — of his dark
eyes flashing, softening, and melting when they
rested upon her, conveying a world of tender
meaning — of his kisses. Then suddenly she
woke up to the sound of his name pronounced
by a gentleman who stood talking near her
sofa with Lord Lancelot. Absorbed in her
own meditations, she had not noticed their
entry, nor the louder buzz of voices, and the
more marked mixture of gruff and shrill tones.
They had all dined well ; wine had cheered
men's spirits and brightened ladies' eyes.

So that fellow Chester has been speaking
at Slowchester.' The speaker was a red-faced,
blowzy squire, who, in preparation for the morrow's
hunting, had come over to dine and sleep.

Yes,' answered Lord Lancelot. ' From all
accounts, he is a bit of a scamp.'

What has he done V

No one knows exactly, but all sorts of queer
rumours are about. His wife, a pretty little
woman, ran away from him some months after
they were married.'

Looks bad, doesn't it ? What became of
her V The squire's broad lips moistened at
the prospect of a dainty piece of scandal.

Don't know, I am sure. She is a friend
of our hostess here ; perhaps she can tell us.'
The two men turned ; Lord Lancelot caught
sight of Dorothy's crimson cheeks and bent-down
head. ' By Jove,' he added, ' we must
take care what we say ; I had no idea the little
governess was so close behind us.'

The talking was presently drowned by Miss
Alice's fair fingers, who, by dint of considerable
solicitation, had been persuaded to take
her seat at the piano. She played without
music, displaying her fine plump arms, and
rolling her blue eyes round the room in search
of admiration. As soon as she had finished,
Captain Limber approached.

Miss Alice, will you play something from
Faust T Oh, I forgot — it is sacred night here ;
rather a bore, isn't it ? Will you give us
See the conquering hero comes"? that will be
something stirring, at least.'

Miss Alice obeyed : she had a perfect
repertoire of music carefully prepared for the
occasion of her visit. After a little more playing
she prettily urged fatigue, and retired to
the sofa where the governess sat, feeling sure
that in so quiet a corner flirtation would be easy.

Don't you play ?' she asked good-humouredly
of Dorothy.

Not at all ; but I like hearing you. You
play well, and have a good touch.'

I was taught by Paper and several other
masters ; but practising is a dreadful bore,
especially in cold weather, when your fingers
are numbed, and masters are so exacting. But
then to be musical has its advantages, for if
tiresome people you don't like want to talk,
you can just thump them into silence.'

It must be a pleasant gift.'

Yes. If you are fond of music, I'll play
to you tomorrow in the schoolroom. I suppose
the piano there is shocking ; but I don't
mind for once.'

She threw her head back with conscious
pride, and fanned herself energetically. In a
little while, according to her calculations, sure
enough Captain Limber languidly strolled upto
her, and took the vacant chair at her side.

Dorothy GIVES CAUSE FOR SCANDAL.

N Monday there was to be a favourite
woodland meet of the hounds. The
ladies and gentlemen staying at
Lovemere departed at an early hour,
on horseback and in carriages, amidst much
din and trampling of hoofs. Dorothy lunched
alone with her pupils, and late in the afternoon
found a pretext to run to the village. The
precious envelope containing £200 pressed
closely to her bosom, and her heart loudly
beating, she reached the Green Man, where,
however, Joynte was not visible. She had
reckoned on finding; him waiting; for her, and
felt considerably embarrassed at the presence of
;Some tipsy-looking men slouching about near
the door of the bar, with pipes in their
mouths, who observed her with impertinent

curiosity. She did not like to speak to them,
nor could she very well have asked for Joynte,.
not knowing under what alias he might be
staying at the inn. To her great relief, just
as she was turning away to address a servant -
girl who had come out with barley in her
apron to throw to a swarm of cackling fowls
following at her heels, Joynte sauntered up.

Good-afternoon ma'am,' he said, lifting his
ragged hat with the old jaunty deference.
'You've kept your word.'

Here is the money,' she said shortly, slipping
the envelope into his hands ; ' it is all I
have. Don't waste it ; you cannot get any more.
And remember that you have solemnly promised
me never again to molest Mr. Chester ;
it is on this sole condition that I have brought
the money.'

I know,' he chuckled ; ' it's hush-money.'

I don't understand what you mean,' she
said, feeling hot and conscious. ' Can I trust
you ?'

All right — you're a little brick of a woman \
Yes, shake hands.'

Very unwillingly did Dorothy put her
fingers into his skinny yellow hand ; and at
that instant, while she was debating: how
much longer conciliation was necessary, a

carriage rolled by. Its occupants were ladies :
one of them turned her head — it was Julia —
and cried to her companions :

Dear me, mamma, how funny ! Look, there's
the governess talking to such a queer man at
the public-house ! What a strange friend for
her to have !'

^ So she is,' said her mother, turning her
head also to investigate the strange phenomenon
; ' how very improper ! I will not fail to
inform Lady Darlington of the fact. I am sure
she cannot know what kind of person she is
harbouring under her roof and putting in
contact with her innocent children.'

Dorothy in her excitement had never
noticed the carriage, and was perfectly unaware
of the storm brewing for her as she bade
Joynte farewell, and tripped home with a
lighter heart than usual. Lady Darlington,
duly apprised by the ladies of her governess's
supposed delinquency, listened in surprised but
polite silence.

I think you must be mistaken,' she said,
when she had heard all. * My governess is a
perfect lady ; in fact she — ' Lady Darlington
stopped ; this was not the moment to declare
Dorothy a runaway wife. 'I am sure she
would not be likely to converse with common

looking men at the door of a public-house.'


We saw her though, I assure you said
Julia eagerly ; ' and she was very intimately
talking with a man who was holding her hand
as if he was very fond of her.'

Julia, my love,' said Lady Lancelot reprovingly,
' this is not at all a proper subject for
you to discuss.'

Very well ; I will inquire into the truth
of it, you may be sure,' said her ladyship decisively.


I do hope you will,' cried Julia, who had
had a disappointment, with the result that it
had soured her and given her a taste for
hearing about scandal and peines de coeur.

I wonder Lady Darlington does not see
that that governess is much too pretty,'
said Lady Lancelot to her daughters, when
they were alone. ' She will be flirting with
Captain Limber next, I suppose.'

He does not admire her,' said Alice contemptuously
; ' and he does admire some one
else. Why, he rode with me nearly all
day.'

The governess is a humbug,' snapped
Julia. * I hate those downcast eyes, and the
ridiculous affectation of modesty.'

Oh, she's a good little thing enough,' said
Alice, with mock generosity.

I don't believe she is a girl at all,* pursued
her sister. ' I heard one of the children call
her Mrs. something, but I could not catch the
name. So she must be a married woman.'

And probably separated from her husband,'
snorted Lady Lancelot. * How shocking, to
keep such a person about one's children !
Elderly unmarried women, reserved and serious,
make the only possible governesses. Now,
Alice love, do take off your habit and resta
little before dinner. I will send you up
a cup of tea. You look very tired, and will
be too pale to-night for the yellow gauze.'

Very well, ma,' said Alice obediently, well
aware that the maternal anxiety about her
health arose from no higher motive than the
agreeable probability of Captain Limber's supposed
intentions.

Lady Darlington's kind, rosy face had
seldom worn so serious an aspect as on this
very afternoon, when, questioning Dorothy in
the schoolroom about the truth of the occurrence
at the Green Man, she elicited a confirmation
of Miss Julia's statement.

I can't imagine how she knew it. I never
saw her, I am sure,' said Dorothy quietly.

But it is perfectly true that I was talking to
a man on business this afternoon near the
public-house ; and that he was — well, rather
shabby, certainly.'

And you shook hands with him ?'

I did.'

And you are not ashamed to look in my
face and tell me so ? How could you do such
a foolish thing ! But, of course, you can give
a satisfactory explanation. Who was he ?
what was his business ? was he a beggar ?
Pray tell me all, that I may clear up this
wretched affair, and satisfy Lady Lancelot's
shocked proprieties.'

Her vulgar curiosity, you mean.'
Dorothy, proceed. I am waiting.'

I am sorry I cannot satisfy you ; but this
is my secret, and I will not reveal it.'

Another secret I Oh, Dorothy, you make
me very unhappy ! What will people think —
what will they say V

I regret much to make you unhappy, but I
-don't care a jot what people say.'

Dorothy, you are defying the world. It is
a rash act, which never succeeds.'

I am not defying the world. But if the
world persecutes me, will insist on prying into
and carping over my affairs, will credit me

VOL. III. 11

with neither virtue nor judgment, takes a
malicious delight in sneering at my misfortunes
— what must I do ? Suffer and be still,
I suppose — and perhaps thank people for
taking so kind an interest in me V

Sorrow is making you unjust. Lady
Lancelot does not even know who you are,
I carefully abstained from telling her, for fear
of rousing any prejudices against you. Your
friends care for you, dear, I can assure you.
And now, will you not tell me who the man
was ? Was he a beggar V

No ; he was not exactly a beggar.*

A very disreputable person then. Was he,,
perhaps, an emissary sent you by your husband
? He would not employ such a man, I
am sure. If this is so, I forgive you for
concealing it. I can understand your
scruples.'

^ - * No, no, no ! I will say nothing !' cried
Dorothy, fearing lest by some mischance
Lady Darlington should guess the approximate
truth.

Her ladyship's face clouded, the dimple in
er firm, well-chiselled chin grew more distinct.


'Very well, Dorothy, I will not press you
any more. Only remember, if I do not know

the truth, I shall not be in a position to shield
you from my friends' insinuations.'

No ; and then, I suppose, your friends will
lecture you — will insist that I am a disgrace to
you, and you will yield — you will ask me to
leave and I shall have to go elsewhere 1'

Dorothy spoke vehemently, for she felt
strongly. Her gentle nature revolted against
stupid injustice. Lady Darlington did not
immediately answer. Perhaps she felt that in
playing the Quixotic part of friend, she had
drawn upon herself a sad incubus. Good-nature
is sometimes very inconvenient, and
the same temperament which inclines to
easy amiability, tempts people to shake off
the after consequences when they are found
troublesome.

Well, it is no use talking about it anymore,
is it V said Dorothy presently, growing
more composed. ^ These things only make one
angry. When you wish to get rid of me, I
hope you will tell me so plainly ; but till
then you must trust me, and not torture me
with questions.'

Lady Darlington went away unsatisfied.
Her simple faith in Dorothy's truth and innocence
was shaken, doubts crowded upon her,
flashes of conviction tormented her : a belief

11—2

that possibly Keith's iniquities had been
exaggerated, that generosity alone kept him
silent about his wife's desertion, that it was
not his fault if she were cast adrift on the
mercy of kindly disposed friends, took root in
her mind. Who, indeed, ever heard of a
woman not loudly proclaiming her own
wrongs, when she had any ? Dorothy's
silence utterly condemned her. Lady Darlington
became more and more convinced that
Lord Darlington's injunction to avoid meddling
between husband and wife was salutary.
Gladly would she now have restored Dorothy
to her people were it but feasible, for her love
had received a severe shock.

Dorothy's own feelings were strangely composed
of fear, bitterness, disgust, and regret —
bitterness against the cruel position in which
she was placed through no fault of her own ;
fear for Keith's future ; disgust at the crime
itself and the deadly consequences of shame
and misery it entailed ; finally, regret for her
own snapped happiness and broken trust.
Keith had dawned upon her lowly sphere in
the first days of their acquaintance like some
young god. He possessed so much charm,
such beauty, such distinction ; he spoke glibly
of art, of letters, of the engrossing subjects

towards which her fancy and imagination
aspired. He came from the great world,
from the world of statesmen and philosophers
and historians, from the whirl of a more active
existence, which had inspired the pens and
pencils of great men; he lifted her horizon;
he showed her vague glimpses of a great
Beyond, into which she might wander at his
side. To crown all, he had given her his love,
and she had loved him truly, passionately,
merged herself entirely in him. And now
the second self had proved false to her, and
she must bar his memory from her heart,
shut out the sound of his name from her ears,
banish the taste of his kisses from her lips.
The cold, pale spectre of Duty must be her
only bedfellow.

Has anyone learnt the desperate struggle
it involves, deliberately to close the door of
the spirit upon all that is sweet and pleasant
in life, to rein up the imagination, to forbid
regret, and tightly clutch only the harsh and
painful task set before one, because it is right
so to do ? If he has done this without one ray
of hope, or spark of divine light to cheer him
on the exposed path; if, fainting by the way,
he has risen wearily again and again, stumbling
and struggling upon his feet, and pressed

on darkly towards the dim unknown ; if he
has done all this, he will know something of
Dorothy's condition. ' Mine own familiar
friend.' The stabs of enemies are small and
trivial indeed, compared with the silent desertion
of a friend in whom you have believed
blindly, with all your heart and soul. Dorothy
knew that from this time forward Lady Darlington's
heart was estranged from her, and
the knowledge hurt her deeply.

On the following day she had occasion to
walk to the farm, in order to give the bailiff's
wife a small parcel intrusted to her by her
employer. Having delivered herself of her
errand, she was returning through the shrubbery,
when the pleasant fumes of a cigar
floated towards her on the air. Her heart
beat at the prospect of confronting some of
the guests, who alone were admitted to this
private portion of the grounds. But it was
too late to turn back; the person, hid by an
adjacent holly bush, must be close to her.
Dorothy's natural reserve and shyness were
now considerably enhanced by the sense of
her loneliness, and of the distrust and suspicion
with which most people might be supposed to
regard her.

The intruder, to her surprise, turned out

to be Lord Lancelot. ^ Ah !' thought Dorothy,
he will not trouble me ; I shall simply bow
and pass on.'

Up to this moment Lord Lancelot had never
directly addressed her, though she had several
times, both at luncheon and in the drawing-room
on Sunday evenings, caught his eyes
fixed very determinedly upon her. They
were eyes she disliked — very bold and sparkling,
and yet sly and watchful. He was a
well-looking young man, with a pleasant address,
and an air of self-satisfied smugness.
Why, indeed, should he not have been well-satisfied
? He was young, considerably spoilt,
the owner of a fine property, only burdened
by his mother's large jointure and his sisters'
small fortunes ; a man who might throw his
handkerchief to any girl, and find her pick it
up gratefully. He was in the best of humours
now, for, though Dorothy did not know it, he
had planned this meeting, having watched her
go out, and was delighted with the success of
his manoeuvre. He took the cigar from his
mouth, threw it among the bushes, and lifting
his hat, smiled at the governess.

So you have been taking a walk. A nice
day for a walk, isn't it ? getting a little chilly,
though V

I have been on a message for Lady Darlington.'


^ That must be very good for you, after
sitting so much upstairs over the children's
lessons. Don't you find teaching very tiresome
V ,

To her surprise Dorothy perceived that he
had every intention of bestowing his company
upon her, for he had turned, and now walked
beside her.

I think you were going the other way,' she
thought it necessary to remark. ^ Please do
not let me detain you.'

Thank you ; for a constitutional one way is
as good as another. I suppose it is getting
late, too. Pray do you often walk alone V

Not often.'

^ No more do I. I object to my own company.'


Dorothy not answering, he continued : ' I
often think how very dull you must be here
Miss — Miss — ' but she would not help him.
You don't look suited for a governess ; you
seem sad. I am sure your pupils are tiresome;
little children are a dreadful nuisance
I think. And you look very sad when you
sit there in your corner, so reserved and
quiet, while the others are talking and laughing

all round. May I sometimes come and
talk to you V

That would hardly be possible, I only seethe
guests at luncheon-time.'

But you take lonely walks. I could meet
you, and we could spend some pleasant hours
together. I should like to cheer up your life
a bit.'

Thank you, you are very kind,' Dorothy
answered coldly.

'Don't walk so fast, please — what a desperate
hurry you are in ! It is not yet dark,
and you will not be missed.'

It is quite time to return. I am expected.'

Why, what a little slave to duty you ate,
to be sure ! I should not have thought Lady
Darlington could be such a despot as to forbid
a pretty girl like you the smallest enjoyment
at least you need not tell her ; we can keep
our little secret, can't we ? There is not a bit
of harm in it, you know. Stay a little, my
dear ; I have a great many things to say tO'
you.'

Dorothy flushed angrily at his familiar
speech, and instead of delaying, hastened her
steps.

You need not be angry and put on offended
airs. I assure you I take the very greatest

interest in you. I did so from the first. Of
course, I never spoke of you to my sisters, for
I know how jealous women are of each other ;
but you are far prettier than my sisters, and
it is a real shame you should have to work.
I can't think how your mother can allow it —
you have a mother V

Dorothy was longing to shake herself free of
this persistent young man, who quickened his
steps to keep pace with hers, and only talked
the more. She mistrusted his suave confidential
manner, and his unmistakable glances
of fervent admiration annoyed her intensely ;
but she had never before been exposed to such
persecution, and she was too shy to behave
with downright rudeness. However, she
resolved to try a blunt speech or two, in
the hopes of disgusting him.

Lord Lancelot, you are mistaken ;' she
stopped and looked him straight in the face.
I really have no wish to talk to you. What
satisfaction can it give you to know that you
are harming my reputation and wasting your
time with a poor governess ? Pray continue
your walk in the direction in which you were
going, and leave me to return alone.'

You are much prettier than anyone else
in the house. You do not expect me, surely,

to devote myself to Miss Mytten or Mrs.
Hartshorne — women who give one the blues to
look at ? Besides, where, I should like to
know, is the harm of passing half an hour
with you ? You are too careful, my little girl.
I suppose you have never spoken to a man
before, as you are such a little wild thing ?'

What was Dorothy to do ? In order to release
herself, must she confide her secret to him ?

Be a little reasonable. Listen — I should
like to walk here every afternoon for the next
two or three days. I can easily manage an
excuse to get off shooting, or else go home a
little earlier. Will you come out and meet me
here? I want your advice on many points,
for I perceive you are a very sensible little
person.'

Lord Lancelot, for whom do you take me V

*For a very pretty girl,' he promptly
answered. * A girl '

I am a married woman !'

You !' (His surprise was genuine.) * Then
why the deuce did you not tell me so before f

I would have told you had you asked me.'

Even so.' (A light dawned upon his mind, '
and his eyes sparkled more brightly.) * That
changes nothing ; you must be separated from
him !'

Circumstances have separated us

Well, in Ills absence, is there any objection
to your spending a few moments in the presence
of a man who admires you extremely V

Because I am not ugly, is that a reason
for you to insult me ?' cried Dorothy, tears of
annoyance starting to her eyes.

Ton my word, you are the first woman
who has told me that to admire was to insult
her ! I adore you — there! You may take my
word for it.'

This is mean of you — ungentlemanly !
See, there are more ladies on the terrace. If
you do not take care, they will observe us.'

By Jove, yes! — there are some people
approaching. Perhaps I had better leave
you, dear little piece of prudery ; but we will
finish our discussion another day. I intend
to convince you that I love and respect you
beyond the power of words. Good-bye,
sweet girl !'

This had indeed been a week of bitter
humiliation to poor Dorothy. Yesterday mistrusted,
to-day insulted ! For the future, she
resolved never to take an airing except when
accompanied by her pupils.

There is the governess !' said Miss Julia
to her mamma, as they passed the terrace.

I have just seen her whisk in through the
back entrance, as if she had been doings something
she was ashamed of ; and yes, there, I
see a man going off in the opposite direction.
She has met him again, this time in the
shrubbery !'

Scandalous indeed !' answered the dowager.
It is fortunate we are not staying long, or
your morals, dear child, would be contaminated
!'

No, really, ma ; that is not likely !' said
Julia scornfully ; ' such a low creature *

Of whom are you talking V said Mrs.
Hartshorne, who, strolling on in front with
Miss Mytten, had caught up an interesting
scrap of gossip.

'Why, of the governess. She seems a
depraved person !'

Who— Mrs. Chester V

The governess I mean. Is that her name V

Yes, Mrs. Chester. Lady Darlington
brought her here out of pity.'

Ah, that accounts for everything — a runaway
wife, who has loosened all ties of
religion and nature ! How could we be so
blind ? But I do think Lady Darlington
might have confided in us !'

Nina is very funny about it. You know

she is devoted to Mrs. Chester — a stupid, pale
little thing 1'

^ I thought she was supposed to be a beauty
said Julia.

Well, she has a charming face,' interposed
Aunt Judy, who had taken no decided
part in the controversy, and was rather
inclined to like Dorothy for her amiability in
the matter of temperance tracts. Twice, too,
she had observed her not take sherry at
luncheon, unaware that this abstinence was
owing to the butler s omission.

But is she a lady ?' said Julia ; ' fancy
going out as a governess, if she is ! I should
not care for it ; she must have a low mind to
leave a nice home and go and teach other
people's children for wages.'

From all I have observed, I should say
Mr. Chester was perfectly right to send her
packing.'

I thought she left of her own accord !* Miss
Mytten opened her meek grey eyes in astonishment.


She says so, but I fancy he tells a very
different story.'

You could not expect her to speak the
truth, if it told against her.'

And herewith it was unanimously decided

by the ladies that Dorothy had been expelled
from her husband's house, and was in fact a
very reprehensible character, whom Lady Darlington
ought on no account to be allowed to
harbour.

THE GOVERNESS IS DISMISSED.

^^^^ HE little girls again walked out with
i"^^ their mamma on the morrow.
Dorothy did not stir therefore, but
kept carefully within the precincts
of her schoolroom, where at least she was
secure from intrusion. For in her doubtful
position it behoved her to avoid all occasion
of giving offence. She wished earnestly not to
fly in the face of conventional morality ; and
where she had already overstepped the bounds
of rigid propriety, sheer necessity alone had
compelled her to do so. Two days elapsed.
Hannah, when she brought the supper tray,
informed her that the company were beginning
to leave Lovemere. Lord Lancelot, for aught
she knew, might be among these departures,
but she was soon destined to be disabused of

this hope by the sight of a small note lying
in the corner of the tray, to which Hannah
pointed with a grin.

*for you, ma'am she said ; ' his lordship's
valet gave it me.'

Dorothy, disgusted at the maid's knowing
look, laid the note carelessly aside until she
was alone, when curiosity impelled her to
open and read it.

"Why are you coy and silent, dear one ?'
his lordship wrote encouragingly. * I have
waited and wandered about to catch a glimpse
of you, till I am tired. Darlington asked me to
stay on, and I accepted solely in order to se
you. Don't be invisible — come soon, or write
to me ; my valet is trusty, and I have " tipped "
the maid. I count the hours until we meet

again.

Your devoted slave,

Lancelot.'

Dorothy read these words with kindling
cheeks and rising anger. How dared he
insult her ? Her pride suffered ; she chafed
against her helplessness, for it is always
harder to be silent than to speak. Ah, if
Keith were but here ! ■ Yet, for his sake, all

VOL. III. 12

this pain and humiliation must be borne — she
must not fail in her courage or her endurance
now, or else he, as well as the rest of the-world,
would despise her.

It is astonishing what an excellent tonic is
pride — how it braces the nerves and cheers
the heart. She put the note in her pocket,,
resisting, on second thoughts, her longing ta
throw it in the fire. Nothing further occurred
until the next day, when, the afternoon being
rainy, Dorothy helped her pupils to enjoy
a good game of battledore and shuttlecock in
the large hall, and Lady Darlington passed
through. The children sprang gaily to her
side, clinging to her skirts while she kissed
them fondly. A sudden thought seemed to
strike her as her eyes rested on the governess,.
and she said :

Come in here a moment, please ; I want to
speak to you.*

Whence comes the sudden intuition which
clutching at our hearts with the cold grasp of
some uncanny monster, warns us that the
crisis of our fate has come ? Dorothy mentally
resigned herself to the endurance of
some new misery as she followed Lady Darlington
into the drawing-room and carefully
shut the double doors behind her. Lady

Darlington was evidently discomposed ; she
moved to the window, pulled up the blind,
walked back to the chimney-piece, stirred the
fire, then, with her back to it, spoke, while
Dorothy waited, standing patiently. Without
any effort now, Lady Darlington dropped
easily into the dry tone of an employer
towards her dependent.

I am sorry to have to speak to you again ;
it is very distressing to me,' she began.

In what way have I failed V asked
Dorothy, clasping her hands together and
speaking in a studiously composed voice.

As you always fail, as you have failed ever
since I made the unfortunate suggestion that
you should become my governess.'

The suggestion once so cordially made was
now deemed unfortunate. Dorothy noted this
bitterly.

I believed, when I first knew you, that
you were innocent and upright, that your conduct
resembled your face, pleasing and ladylike.
I approved of you, I pitied you. Now
I begin to fear I was mistaken in all my ideas,
that you have deceived and imposed upon me,
and that you are unworthy of my affection.
You have constantly refused to enlighten meas
to your reasons for leaving your husband.

12—2

I dread to think that perhaps the cause of your
reticence was purely personal. You had done
wrong, and — you did not wish to confess it

Dorothy drew herself up and clenched her
hands together firmly.

I deny that you have any right to question
me about my private affairs

And have I no right to question you as to
the reason why you meet low and disreputable
company outside public-houses, why you hold
rendezvous with my guests, and receive clandestine
notes from gentlemen V

Lady Darlington, I '

Don't prevaricate — don't make matters
worse. I hnmu that Lord Lancelot has written
to you.'

You are quite right — he has. Here is his
note. If he were not your friend, enjoying
your hospitality, I should have already
appealed to you to protect me from his
insults.' Dorothy handed the crumpled note
to Lady Darlington, blessing, as she did so,
the impulse which had prompted her to keep
it. ' You will see that he reproaches me for
not responding to his invitation.'

Lady Darlington read the note without
relaxing a line of the severity of her countenance.


The terms in which he addresses you are
familiar,' she said. * You have met him
already, and I cannot suppose that, without
encouragement on your part, he would have
dared to write to you. I am grieved and disappointed
in you. I thought at least you had
right principles and steadiness of conduct, but
I hope for the future you will profit by this
lesson, if, as you say, Lord Lancelot's attentions
are distasteful to you, and be more
careful.'

I cannot behave differently.'

Then, Mrs. Chester, I fear our connection
must cease. I regret it extremely, but '

As you please. Lady Darlington,' responded
Dorothy coolly. Not for worlds would she
have begged for indulgence, stooped to plead
extenuating circumstances, or disclosed aught
of the heaving billows of yearning love and
outraged self-respect which surged within
her.

Lady Darlington hesitated a moment, looked
at Dorothy, read nothing in her face but a
quiet impervious expression — defiance, she
thought it — and moved away.

When shall I leave V said Dorothy, following
her.

Whenever it suits you,' answered Lady

Darlington, with her fingers upon the handle
of the door.

'That will be at once, then.'

Very well.' And Lady Darlington shut
the door sharply behind her.

Left alone, Dorothy's self-control, hitherto
buoyed up by pride, forsook her. She dropped
upon an ottoman and gave helpless utterance
to a series of long drawn sobs — sobs that
shook her fragile form, and were caused by
grief, though no tears followed the physical
spasm of relaxed nerves strung up to impossible
tension. There was but little of
conscious sorrow, of mental conflict, in this
show of emotion, but a good deal of purely
bodily pain, the pent up stream of long suppressed
energies of revolt and despair forcing
a way for itself. As the sobs subsided and the
trembling ceased, she heard a low and rather
cracked voice at her elbow say, * Don't, my
dear, pray don't cry.' The voice belonged to
Aunt Judy, who possessed a noiseless and imperceptible
style of locomotion, enabling her
unnoticed to enter a room, almost as if a
ghost had suddenly sprung up beside one.
Dorothy took down the hands which covered
her face, gulped back the last of her sobs, and
looked blankly at Aunt Judy.

You've been very bad, dear said the old
lady, ' but you won't cry any more now, will
you ? I can't bear to see people cry — it gives
me a headache, and then I always begin to
.smell perfumes, as I did when my poor mother
died. Here, dear, take a peppermint lozenge ;
it will do you good.'

Dorothy silently refused the proffered
delicacy.

You won't — well, then, what is it ? A
girl like you ought not to be so unhappy ;
leave that to your elders. Would it comfort
you to read this tract, " Heaven our Home '?"
It is very nice, though, perhaps, rather
more suited to widows. But it is a great
favourite of the poor people — they always
like it.'

She held out the tract doubtfully towards
her, some instinct whispering that Dorothy's
grief lay too deep to be reached by tracts.

Dorothy took the tract, unwilling to hurt
the old lady's feelings, and while she pressed it
between her finger and thumb said :

I am going away ; Lady Darlington is displeased
with me.'

Dear, dear !' Aunt Judy executed a succession
of noises expressive of her sympathy, like
those used by coachmen for encouraging their

horses. * Dear, dear me ! I am very soit}%
very sorry indeed.'

I don't know that there is any cause for
regret. Lady Darlington will easily find a
better governess to replace me — a more learned
one, I mean.'

Dorothy was anxious not to be again misunderstood.


Oh ! but indeed the little girls were very
fond of you — they had begun to behave so nicely
and besides, it is for yourself, child, I am
sorry ; you look so young and so '

Aunt Judy was puzzled how to describe the
innately refined and distinguished air which
had captivated her from the beginning.

Where are you going ? What are your
plans f

I have none yet.'

Are you going home ? That is the very
best thing.'

No. I am not going home.'
I mean to your mother's house.'
No.'

But, child, you can't wander out into the
wide world by yourself. Have you money V
*No.'

Good and powerful friends, perhaps V
No. Not any to whom I should like to apply.'

Your mother, surely V

My mother is not rich. I do not wish ta
be a burden to her, and there are reasons why
I cannot live in her house.'

'Child, child, you are very foolish!' warned
the old lady, shaking her head judicially ; 'but
stay, why don't you consult the clergyman —
what of him ? Mr. Maynard is such a goodman.'


Mr. Maynard V

Dorothy's cowardice had deprived her
hitherto of his good offices. She dreaded
his stern, piercing eyes — eyes that read the
weaknesses and vacillations of a man's spirit
keenly, yet were balanced by the kindly
sensitive mouth, from which poured freely
balm and consolation. She shrank lest,,
knowing nothing of her circumstances, he
should solemnly enjoin her to return and
reconcile herself to her husband. The clergy,
as it was natural, enforced submission to
lawful authority. The marriage vow of
obedience had not yet become obsolete ; and
Mr. Maynard's own conception of duty and
self-denial was already so exalted that any
lapse in others, and those his parishioners
and his penitents, would scarcely be tolerated.
Yet, armed with a clergyman's recommendation,

it would be easy for her to find work,
if not in Slowchester, where perhaps her name
and story would be known, yet in London or
some more distant place.

You have evidently never thought of him,
my dear,' said the cracked voice, growing
more cracked in the intensity of its ardour.
I am sure you would find religion very consoling;
and it is much easier to do what is
right when some one shows you the way.'

That is true,' said Dorothy quietly. ' I
think I had better consult Mr. Maynard.'

^ I believe he is coming either to-day or
tomorrow. I overheard Lady Darlington
saying something about it ; but perhaps you
had better not mention it. I should not like
my name brought in.' Aunt Judy's whole
voice and appearance was so exceedingly
deprecating, that it might have seemed as if
she existed only on sufferance.

Thank you. Miss Mytten, I will be careful
not to mention your name. I am so much
obliged — so grateful for your kindness.'

*And dear, you won't take to stimulants
when you feel weak and disheartened, will
you ? Promise me — for I have known several
nice young women go to utter destruction
m that way — if you are faint and want a

fillip, a refreshing cup of tea, or some soup
with a thin slice of dry toast, is really far
more wholesome and efficacious.'

I will follow your advice, but indeed I am
not easily tempted in that way.'

You are temperate, certainly ; but, my dear,
none of us know whether we can resist temptation
till we are tried, and there is always the
chance of falling.'

'Yes, truly,' answered Dorothy, as she
hastened to leave the drawing-room before
the reappearance of some of the company.

The change in Lady Darlington's sentiments
grieved and astonished her not a little.
Had she possessed greater experience of life,
she would have known that easy good-humour
and a genial temperament are frequently
allied to unreasonable caprice, and an exaggerated
sensitiveness to the opinion of others.
That keenness of sympathy which comes
from thorough understanding; of the wants of
others, needs the rough training of sorrow,
the pruning of want and anxiety, before it
can bring forth mature and lovely fruit.
Lady Darlington acted according to her
lights ; she believed Dorothy's conduct to be
reprehensible, and her love could not stand
against her disapprobation.

Dorothy Lad made known through Hannah
her desire to see Mr. Maynard, and the following
day found him a visitor to the quiet schoolroom.
His deep sonorous voice and self
assured manner — the manner of a man who
is at one with himself in the pursuit of a
pure and lofty aim — soon restored her peace
and comfort. He asked her no questions, he
distressed her by no blame, he uttered no
loud regrets at the shipwreck of her worldly
fortunes ; he simply accepted the facts laid
before him, and kindly sought to make the
best use of them.

I was half afraid of speaking to you,' she
said at last, when his gentle fatherly manners
had set her quite at ease, and her eyes were
again familiarized with the firm jaw, broad
forehead and spiritual eyes, the tall massive
figure and sombre priestly garb.

*Why — my child,' he answered, leaning
forward a little, and knitting his eyebrows to
assist vision ; ' because you were in trouble ?
That is the very time to seek your pastor.
What does George Herbert say, '' A pastor is
the deputy of Christ for the reducing of man
to the obedience of God'' Times of sorrow
are generally times of obedience. You do
not feel inclined to rebel at present V

I feel weary said Dorothy.

The light of the small lamp that stood on
the table between them fell on her fair face,
drawn and pinched in pale anxiety. The
Vicar looked searchingly at her. Perhaps he
read God's ploughing in the drooping lines.
He only said :

And what is it you wish me to do for you V
Find me work, plenty of work — something

to keep me from thinking.'

You are not afraid of discomfort? — here
you have had luxury and ease.'

I am not afraid of discomfort.'

Very well. You prefer to live in Slow-chester
V

*Yes. I should think lodgings are cheap
there.'

I am sure I can promise to find you houseroom
where you will be quiet and cared for.
And I imagine it will not be difficult to
procure you lessons. You can teach German V

Oh yes. And French too, though I don't
speak it very fluently.'

That will do. ' Take heart, child. All
shall be arranged for you. And when that is
done, I will write.*

With a quiet and grateful heart Dorothy
leant on the Vicar's promises. Soon she

should taste independence and feel herself
of some use in the world. Lady Darlington
let her alone now : she never came to the
schoolroom ; the old chats were abandoned —
a frigid good morning was all the greeting she
vouchsafed Dorothy on her entrance, and the
family luncheon was passed, on the part of
the governess, in complete silence. Dorothy
rejoiced. It was better so — there would be
nothing to regret. The fine house, the dainty
food, she had appraised at their right value.
Her hostess's good-will she had treasured
beyond its deserts, but her eyes were now
opened, and she could leave without a sigh ora
tear.

In less than a week Mr. Maynard wrote,
saying he had engaged a lodging at Slow-chester
and procured two private pupils —
more would no doubt follow. Thus Dorothy
left Lovemere Hall, never, as she supposed,
to return to it again.

I am sorry for the poor girl,' Lord
Darlington remarked to his wife, on the eve
of her departure ; ^ she looks worried.'

It is her own fault. Why did she behave
with such levity V answered Nina, who now
entirely shared the views suggested by her
friends.

Raphael DINES.

London.

'Y DEAR KEITH,

Is it possible ? You are
parted from your wife, that sweet*
pretty creature whom it was a joy
to behold, and who seemed to love you to
distraction ; and you have embarked on the
stormy sea of politics, in which there are a
great many fish to be caught, but very few
big ones worth the trouble ! Well, I never
fancied your marriage to be a wise speculation
— there was too much heart and too little
head about it ; but I certainly credited you
with enough worldly wisdom to avoid making
it 2l fiasco. I have heard no authentic details
of the affair — gossip generally lies ; still " II
n'y a pas de fumes sans feu," and I suppose

^"iometliing is true. Mon cher ami, in that case
I am sincerely sorry for you both. Why not
come to town and see me ? Hugh Vennaker
and I — you know him ? the best fellow on
earth ! — are living together in a cock-loft —
very hard-working and cheerful and happy.
He is a dear, good soul, and we have not
quarrelled once yet.

I am getting on famously with the Universal
Review. It is now '^ lance." The
first number came out last Saturday, and we
sold an unprecedented quantity the first three
days. To be sure, sixpence for a compendium
of universal information, heterodox opinions,
and useful knowledge, is but a small sum.
The public think so too, and have responded
nobly to our efforts. Besides the Review,
I am constantly writing leaders, enforcing a
number of opinions entirely contrary to my
own, so that occasionally I am a wee bit confused
as to my own intellectual identity ; but,
que voulez vous f one must live — or die, for the
matter of that. In my hours of recreation I
compose, and think of nothing but quavers,
with just a crotchet or two now and then byway
of relief. Besides, " j'ai fait des vers, j'ai
fait I'amour." Neither of them pay, and there
is nothing worth but friendship ! You, my

dear Keith, are my friend, and included in the
category of desirable good things. Come,
therefore, to town at once. Let us eat drink
and divaguer together. My compliments to
Coote, ce head chasseur, if he is with you. I
think of calling my new volume of poems
'' Poppies and Peonies. '^ The title is good, I
think. To be sure, poppies induce sleep, and
there is no use in drawing public attention to
the fact that one's works are drowsy, and
peonies remind one of a fat, red-faced woman.
Still, one may serve a worse purpose in life
than that of giving rest to one's friends.

And now, Keith, once again I conjure you
to " come with the lute, come with the lay ; ''
by which I mean your violin, your low spirits,
and your dyspepsia. I am sure you must bea
victim to the latter, for worry disturbs the
digestion. I Ions; to see if I cannot cure the
dyspepsia and the heartache together.

Ever thine,

Eaphael.'

Keith was alone when this letter arrived.
Coote had reluctantly departed to the sedate
charms of mother, sister, and home-shooting,
and the atmosphere of Blackness was distinctly
depressing. Chill October had begun

VOL. III. 13

her sad reign ; sodden verdure infected the air
with a rank odour; muddy lanes became
sloughs of despond ; chill mists crawled
insidiously along the meadows and rose from
the borders of the fairy lake, veiling the prospect
with a shroud ; the sheep, damp and
wretched, endured a sullen existence among
the saturated pastures, bending their heads
patiently. The sky was grey ; dead leaves
dropped noiselessly from the trees, as though
ashamed of their tedious existence ; mornings
of chill white frosts were succeeded by rainy
afternoons ; silence and damp reigned supreme.
A vista of the charms of foreign cities rose in

contrast before Keith's mind, Florence, Eome,
Vienna or Paris with its gay theatres, brilliant
cafes, and joyous, laughter-loving citizens,
filled his memory.

He was sick to death already of the petty
routine of a country gentleman's life, of the
road-meetings and board-meetings, of the dull
heavy peasants and still duller middle-classes.
His ears ached with the lengthy orations of
village politicians, to which his pretensions asa
candidate for Parliament obliged him to
listen with some show of patience ; he was
satiated with the dry statement of facts and
grievances, the shibboleth of party to which he

was entirely indifferent, and which he was bound
incessantly to deliver. He was weary of
thundering against Tory blunders, Tory
iniquities, Tory wars ; he would almost have
compounded for more Irish rebellions, heavier
taxation, and more honourable but expensive
campaigns, could he thereby have secured
eternal silence on these subjects. Palis's offer
sounded tempting: even in London, smoky and
murky enough at this season, there would bea
stir of human life, noise, the cheerful light of
gas, distraction from his own thoughts. Indeed,
there was not a bit of good in a fortune, if
a man spent it all in the society of clowns and.
green fields. As a young diplomat with a light'
purse and abundance of good looks, he had enjoyed
life more vividly : women courted him,
men envied him, the routine of dissipation left
him no time to brood, but to please Dorothy he
had consented to lead a domestic life, and to
bury himself in England. What had been the
result of his concessions, of his weak love ? — she
had left him ! And why had she done this ?
Just because some exaggerated rumour of his
past life had reached her knowledge. Were
men then expected to be saints ? Marriage
condoned and whitewashed all former transgressions
; and if women could not 



stand this, it was because they were fools.
Laying this sweet unction of content to his
soul, Keith determined to leave his electioneering
alone for the present, and to join
Palis in London. A taste of town life would
arrest the progress of the rust which he
felt gathering round him.

This decision was promptly acted upon.
Blackness was left to the care of Mrs.
Nutmeg and her satellites, who were paid to
feel no ennui at living; in the country all the
year round ; and Keith, attended by le Goui,
took train to town. Palis had carefully
ordered dinner, in anticipation of Keith's
arrival ; and the first meeting of the two
friends took place in the comfortable club
coffee-room, which at this season of the year
looked somewhat deserted.

" Mulligatawny soup — codfish — hashed-venison''
' read out Keith from the bill of fare.
You've done well, Eaphael, upon my word !
I suppose you think country air means country
appetite. I have none, I beg to warn you !'

Keith's face relaxed involuntarily at sight
of his companion's joyous features, and of the
business-like way in which he began to use
his knife and fork. This was different already,
and more lively than that dreary dinner at

home, when le Goui waited decorously mute
behind his chair, and every mouthful was
watched in the hushed silence of the diningroom
by the immaculate footman, with the
irritating air of a connoisseur.

Are you not aware that I am in low spirits,
and, according to all precedent, am bound to
refuse my food V

In that case there will be the more for me,'
said Palis, munching systematically.

^ I suppose you consider me a fool to have
thrown away all my advantages as I have
done V Keith said, dinner being somewhat
advanced.

That depends upon whether I consider the
possession of advantages — which I suppose is
your euphemistical term for a wife — desirable
or not. In my case I should distinctly say
No ! " in your case, " Yes ! " Mrs. Chester's
beauty and gentleness predisposed one in your
favour. One said to one's self, " If she likes
him, there must be good in him." Voila ! Have
some venison — it is excellent ; just kept long
enough !'

Do you think my wife's desertion will influence
my election V

There is no knowing. The English are
queer : they have a culte for domestic life in the

abstract ; in practice, they are dissipated and
unfaithful, like other nations. In England
you may do what you like, provided you
respect les convenances. Unfortunately, you
have rubbed up the prejudices of the
vulgar.'

How was I to know that Dorothy would
take the strong line she did 1 I would have
wagered my life no person would succeed in
shaking her faith in me. Indeed, the whole
business is wrapped in mystery.'

I suppose it was that affair of Miss Phaer's
that disgusted her. She must certainly have
a very jealous temperament to be envious of a
dead woman. Did she know nothing about it
then, and why didn't you tell her when you
married ? If you want a woman to believe a
story, you should always tell it yourself, with
your own accents.'

Not exactly ; she got scent of an old affair,
something to do with a girl of low origin,
whom I tried to pension off a dozen times, and
who was always annoying me.'

And the upshot of it is, you have lost
your wife, and have not got rid of the annoyance.'


Exactly ; I have lost my wife, unless she
returns to me.'

Of lier own accord, that is unlikely.
What is she doing now ? '

Living as governess with Lady Darlington.
The little witch has such independence,
such daring. I like her the better for it. Still,
it is very inconvenient when women take the
bit in their mouth. She wouldn't accept my
money or my company. I sent her a cheque
though, the other day, which indeed was a part
of her own allowance ; but I dare say she will
not keep it. She says she wishes for no communication
with me ; she told Margaret the
thought of me made her unhappy. Yet, contrary
to the ordinary habits of her sex, so far
as I know, she has never let fall a single word
of complaint or blame of me to anyone.'

Then she loves you ! My dear fellow,
there is not a shadow of doubt of it, she loves
you.'

And leaves me V

Bah ! that is the natural instinct of women
flight ; they mean nothing by it.'

It's damnably irritating to be snubbed by
a woman,' said Keith meditatively, ' especially
when she is your wife.'

Keith, I am afraid you are deteriorating
greatly,' said Palis suddenly, in a very grave
voice.

^ Very probably — the fates are against me.'
Then, do you wish it V

What nonsense ! Does a man ever wish to
go to the bad, though occasionally he finds the
journey imperative V

Keith !' Palis leant his elbows on the table
(they had now reached the stage of pears
and walnuts), and looked portentously solemn.
Keith, why should you do yourself injustice?
Your heart is not in this political work ; you
don't care for it ; you don't believe in it. You'll
fail.'

I shall pretend to care for it.'

That will not do — even in business, honesty
is the best policy. For myself, I make it a
rule never to tell an unnecessary lie. Your
whole life is a lie !'

Eaphael !' Keith's eyes flashed.

It is not worth your while to be angry,
because I don't mean to quarrel with you ;
besides, it is just the difference between us, the
fact that you are indifferent and nonchalant,
while I am all industry and effervescence,
that attracts me. I look upon you as a study.'

A study in black chalk, then,' said Keith
gloomily. * I'm so bored, so listless, no, hang
it ! I'm so miserable, I should like to cut my
throat.'

If you are miserable, I have hopes of you.'
I once thought there was nothing so pleasant
as to be rich pursued Keith, in a monotone.
' Now I have the fortune, I don't care
for it.'

You care for your wife f

'If she would be pleasant and good-tempered,
and not give trouble — yes. I can't like
people who give me trouble. Jealous women
are so fatiguing ; you never know what will bethe
next grievance. Idiots ! As if a man
must not always come back to his wife in the
end, if she will only give him time. Dorothy
had no patience.'

Evidently for once you behaved well, and*
got punished for your pains. You are certainly
to be pitied. I don't see my way to
the right prescription for your case, yet I
scarcely think political life will prove the
plaster — rather a blister, I should think. To
begin with, why are you a Liberal V

Why are you V

*That is different. I am a poor devil — a
journalist, a Bohemian. I like onions, and
am happy in a garret. You are rich and you
are a patrician. You enjoy a, palace and nice
scents. The instances are not parallel.'

As well have a set of opinions from which

radiate warmth, change, movement, something
that stirs a man's ambition and his
energies, as stick to an antiquated and lifeless
creed, of which the doctrines lead to sheer stagnation,
and are advocated by an order which
will soon be obsolete. I pity the poor from the
bottom of my heart, I admire the working-classes,
because I know I could not behave as
well as they do, and I would gladly relieve and
assist them wherever practicable.'

Very fine sentiments, but the difficulty is
to get them to believe you. Working-men
have not much faith in swells. They imagine
that you pet them as a hobby, and that the
ideas they look upon as matters of life and
death are only an occasion of emotional pastime
and excitement to you.'

I dare say ; one is generally misunderstood.
But I can conceive it must be unpleasant
to be cold and hungry. Besides, in the
region of practical politics I see an end to
ennui. I should like to fight against absurd
class interests and foolish superstitions in the
interest of humanity.'

Humanity ! A grand word ! what does it
represent ? In all classes of society the same
petty aims, the same selfish desires, the same
feverish excitement about trifles. No ! I ama

Liberal, not from high principle, but because,
as the world is certainly tending in the direction
of free-thought and democratic institutions,
it is well to row with the stream. But
you don't want success ; you have bread
already, you have no ideal goal for which
men will fight and die, you have no particular
wants ; and yet you are a Liberal — the
thing has no meaning. Your wife perhaps
might have helped you, but she is gone ; after
all, I do believe, Keith, there is nothing to be
done for you.'

Leave me alone now, like a good fellow,*
said Keith, rising impatiently, * and let me goto
the smoking-room. A cigar will be exceedingly
soothing after the way in which you have
peppered me.'

Palis had a reason in speaking thus plainly.
When a high-bred horse is tired, it will still
respond to the spur ; and to prick Keith into
regret seemed the most profitable way to
amend the future. To be miserable meant a
step on the high-road to happiness. * Car les
extremes se touchent.'

THE Wanderer.

ND now ensued a period of calm and
repose for Dorothy, such as she
had not tasted since the early days
of her marriage, when love had
spoken in its blithest accents, lulling her into
deceptive security. The Vicar had exactly
comprehended her sentiments'; he had hired
for her two small rooms, plainly furnished, in
one of the quietest streets of Slowchester.
Three mornings in the week were given to
one pupil, two afternoons to another ; thus
affording her one afternoon for leisure, study,
or relaxation, besides the evenings, which she
was free to spend as she pleased. The people
of the house in which she lodged, simple folk,
were evidently accustomed to the ways of
poverty ; they expressed no surprise at her

laborious industry, nor did they resent the
economy she practised. The few pounds her
purse contained, and the small salary earned
at Lovemere (punctually paid her before departure
by Lady Darlington, as though in so
doing she had wiped off all debts of charity),
sufficed for present wants. She was as happy
as it was possible to be, parted from her husband,
and oppressed by the heavy cloud of
loneliness. She bravely struggled to keep her
thoughts from straying towards that husband,
the memory of whose words, looks, and caresses
still had power to distress her.

Occasionally Margaret, like a bright meteor,
broke the darkness of her solitude; but distance
was a hindrance to her visits. The Vicar came
frequently, and once Mrs. Parkinson arrived
with a packet of tea-cakes and some warm
muffatees hand-knitted in her own leisure-hours.
To this kind friend Dorothy spoke as
freely as she dared. Mrs. Parkinson's active
sympathies, always responsive, went out specially
to the poor girl in her struggle with
poverty and isolation. She approved, strengthened,
and advised her.

Depend upon it, Dorothy,' she said, * it is
a capital thing for a young woman to learn
self-reliance. I don't pity you a bit, my

dear. You have health, strength, and capacity
for work, and you are really far better off
than if you were an idle fine lady, yawning
from sheer lassitude and want of honest
occupation.'

Such speeches suited Dorothy. Mrs. Parkinson
believed in her, and that thought alone
brought infinite comfort. Her mother, on the
contrary, had given her but a frigid support.
On receipt of the Vicar's intelligence she wrote
a long rigmarole of lamentation, taking a
lachrymose view of Dorothy's conduct, and
concluding by assuring her that it was a
married woman's duty to forgive injuries and
to bear children, and exhorting her to forsake a
celibate life of toil which could certainly not
be deemed correct or advisable.

The days passed thus in contented duty for
Dorothy, while Keith lingered in London,
seeking to drown regrets and remorse in the
pursuit of pleasure.

Living amongst people poorer than herself,
Dorothy found many opportunities of helping
them either by small gifts, kindly actions, or
pleasant words ; and Mr. Maynard, noticing
her tact and gentle ways of dealing with the
crotchety self-respect and rugged pride of the
pauvres honteux, was led to employ her as

his almoner and assistant. The fine ladies
who listened to his sermons at Dronington,
coming to hear him out of curiosity, and
dropping a tear out of politeness at the contrasted
picture of their own luxury and the
wants of their poorer brethren, entrusted him
with various sums for distribution ; thus, as it
were, ' hedging ' their account with heaven.
When the sick and needy at home were provided
for, some of the isolated cases of silent
wretchedness in Slowchester were relieved
from the good Vicar's store.
The winter promised to be a severe one ;
already snow lay deep on the ground, and it
was not yet Christmas. Dorothy intended to
pass a few days with her mother at this
festive season, but the inclemency of the
weather seemed as though it would oppose
a barrier to her designs. She stood one
evening at the window pondering these things,
and pitying all poor wretches who were homeless,
while she gazed at the dreary landscape
and slow-falling flakes, with her hand on the
tassel of the blind, ready to pull it down and,
shutting out the cold, once again light her lamp
for the evening's study. At that momenta
tall figure strode up to the house and rang
a loud peal at the bell.

Mr. Maynard ! You here at this hour,
and in this weather I' Dorothy cried, when the
door of her room opened and disclosed him
standing on the threshold, dropping flakes
of half-frozen snow hanging from his soft felt
hat and thick overcoat, and melting into icy
streams upon her tidy carpet.

I want you — I want you at once,' he said,
without further greeting. ' Put on your
bonnet immediately, and come with me.'

Is it to visit some poor person V she asked
doubtfully, feeling sorry to leave her comfortable
fireside on such a night, even for an errand
of charity.

Yes, yes — of course !' he said, imperatively
waving his hand. ' Make haste ! there is no
time to lose.'

Dorothy ran lightly upstairs, and soon returned
equipped in walking gear.

Where are we going V she said, tripping
quickly by his side in the deserted street.

The evening was bitingly cold ; blasts of
icy sleet-laden air eddied around them ; the
crisp snow crackled under their feet. The
heavens were dark and lowering ; only the
few twinkling lights in the gas-lamps and
among; the windows served as cheerful beacons
to guide their path. It was not a night to

turn your worst enemy out of doors ; and yet,
even as Dorothy questioned the Vicar, an
answer came — an answer in the shape of a
dusky mass, a mere bundle of rags, as it seemed,
lying on the snow close to the blank wall of
an outhouse, and which more careful investigation
showed to be a woman — a woman with
a narrow stream of blood flowing from her
mouth, and oozing slowly along the glistening
snow. Her head was thrown back as though
from exhaustion ; her eyes were half closed ; her
knees drawn up under the miserable clothes
she wore, in search of warmth. The Vicar
stooped and lifted her head gently on his
arm.

Poor thing ! she is worse than when I
passed before and came to fetch you. She
could speak then ; now she seems unconscious.
Could you help me to carry her, do you think ?
See — I will take her head and shoulders, and
you her feet. It is not far, and you are fairly
strong.'

They managed it according to his directions,
and carried her up into Dorothy's little parlour,
where they laid her on the sofa. The
warmth seemed to revive her ; she moved and
moaned a little, and presently unclosed large
senseless eyes.

VOL. III. 14

Now you stay with her and bring her
round said the Vicar, ' and I will run for the
doctor.'

Dorothy knelt by the side of her strange
guest, a vast compassion stirring at her heart,
while she tried to read the outcast's story in
her face. She was not handsome now ; want
and misery were too deeply inscribed on lineaments
which, clothed with rosy flesh and
healthful colouring, might have been good-looking.
Prominent cheek - bones, sunken
eyes, a drawn mouth, lips blue with cold,
whence at intervals came a short hacking
cough, gave but a poor impression of the girl,
large-limbed and broad-checked, who in her
youth passed as ^ a fine creature.' Dorothy
was not familiar with the marks of destitution
carried to the verge of death, and the sight
of it distressed her. She was glad when
the Vicar returned, bringing with him a
doctor.

Dying of consumption !' the latter said,
after careful examination. ' She must remain
where she is ; have food, warmth, and quiet.
I can't do much for her. She may linger
some time, or go out like the snuff of a
candle T

The Vicar, to whom these sharp, curt words

were addressed, puckered his brow thoughtfully.
After a while, he crossed to where
Dorothy stood bending over the sick woman,
and, in a quiet tone of decision, said :

You will keep her here, my child.'

But ' The excuses died on Dorothy's

lips. Was she, friendless herself, to refuse
hospitality to one more friendless still ?

She will want very little ; we can make up
a bed here, and she must immediately be relieved
of her wet things.'

Dorothy obeyed. The Vicar's commanding
influence precluded all objections. She fetched
everything that was necessary, helped the
doctor to make the bed to his satisfaction, and
undress the patient. She was soon rewarded
by the sight of the sick woman lying calmly
on her pillow, while, thanks to the doctor's
sedatives, the dry cough became less distressing.


She will do very well now,' said the
doctor. ' Please to sit up with her and watch,
in case there is any return of haemorrhage ;
she may be feverish too, and need drink. I
will call in tomorrow morning.'

Thus saying, he departed, taking the Yicar
with him ; and Dorothy remained alone, to
bear the burden of her new duties. The night

14—2

to her mind was interminable, though it passed
uneventfully enough. The wind howled in
the chimney, the sleet beat violently against
the window ; sad thoughts oppressed hers
shadowy visions passed before her eyes, phantoms
rose to haunt and cibber in her ears. The
little room, in which a bright fire burnt peacefully
on the hearth, grew alive with silent
presences ; she could not feel alone, for the
air teemed with them — hobgoblins of fancy,
of fear, and of imagination. The invalid
never spoke, though Dorothy, lifting her head
quickly, sometimes thought she caught the
sound of broken words. She only turned and
moaned, and moaned and turned again, and
coughed. Sometimes her breathing, growing
lower and more inaudible, seemed to stop ;
then, when Dorothy leant forward in terror
to see her worst fears confirmed, it came again
in long-laboured gasps. Towards four o'clock
Dorothy fell asleep in her armchair, waking
with a start to find the cold light of day
rapidly extinguishing the tiny flame of the
night-light, which sputtered violently, as
though objecting to the process, and the sick
woman's eyes, wide open and now strangely
brilliant, fixed keenly upon her.

'Are you feeling better?' said Dorothy,

rousing herself from the cold torpor which had
seized her. * I think you have slept V

How did I come here V said the woman,
in a harsh, strained voice — ' how did I come
here ? who brought me ? Are you really
Mrs. Chester V

• I am really Mrs. Chester,' said Dorothy,
surprised at the woman's knowledge. ' You
were taken very ill in the street ; the Vicar
and I carried you in.'

Oh 1 you carried me. The Vicar is the tall
parson, I suppose — a lean scarecrow.'

He is the clergyman. But you must not
talk any more now. Are you thirsty ? I will
make you some tea directly.'

You carried me in,' repeated the woman
slowly. * I should have died if you hadn't.
Did you know me V

No, I certainly did not. I think you must
be a stranger here.'

• Don't try and deceive me, Mrs. Chester,*
the woman cried, suddenly waking into
energy. ' I hate you.' Then, exhausted with
the effort, her head dropped back on her
pillow, and a violent fit of coughing overtook
her.

Dorothy supported her, kindly pressing her
hand.

I want to tell you ' the woman gasped

for breath ; her weakness was very great.

Not now.' Dorothy imposed silence. * Not
now ; you are not fit for it. Presently, you
shall say what it is troubles you.'

Believing with ready tact that the sight of
strangers or gaping maidservants would only
still further distress her charge, Dorothy performed
the necessary offices in the sick-room
herself. She lit the fire, put away the lamp,
and made the kettle boil. The invalid lay
still, following her about the room with her
sharp looks, but spoke no more. Neither did
she refuse the warm cup of fragrant tea which
was offered her ; and the quick spark of hatred
which lit up her restless eyes at Dorothy's
approach, gradually faded before her steady
gaze into a kind of weary content. When the
doctor paid his visit, all was tranquil in the
sick-room : Dorothy sat sewing, the invalid
seemed asleep. He expressed approval of
every arrangement, and noted a slight improvement
in the condition of the patient.

You will continue the nursing, I presume,'
he said ; and to Dorothy's question as
to whether she could leave her charge for
some hours, he said, * Yes, without fear.'

Of course I shall be back for dinner, and

leave the medicine by her side ; but you
see, I have pupils, and they cannot spare
me

Exactly. You are rather young to live
alone ;' and the doctor took a rapid survey of
her face — a doctor's survey — including doubt,
observation, final diagnosis.

While this short conversation took place,
the invalid offered no protest, neither did she
express any wish, but watched the pair closely
with the furtive glance of some wild animal
seeking a device to escape from its captors.
Nevertheless, the soothing influences of kindness
and consideration appeared after a while
to soften the ruggedness of her savage nature,
Mrs. Chester being careful never to relax her
attention, to attend as punctually to the
invalid's wants as if she were a queen, and
to trouble her by no impertinent curiosity.
That she was ill and friendless constituted
all-sufficient claims upon her nurse's devotion.
The invalid appeared gradually to gain
strength ; she could eat better, coughed less,
and sat up for an hour or two occasionally.
One day, seated in the cushioned armchair,
after some silent observation of Dorothy, who
placidly hemmed a pocket-handkerchief opposite,
she broke out :

I suppose you are what is called a good
woman !'

This was uttered defiantly, almost as if the
proposition might fairly challenge contradiction.
Dorothy smiled a little.

I suppose we are none of us goods

Well, any way you are better than I am —
so the parson would tell us.'

I do not know what you are, and it is not
for me to judge.'

Shall I tell you, then ? I've been what the
world calls bad and unlucky — very unlucky,
certainly. I've been mad and vindictive ; I've
had murder in my thoughts, and never done
a good thing in my life. Now, Mrs. Chester,
aren't you going to shrink from me V

Why should I ? perhaps you have been
sorely tempted.'

Ay ! that I have. But parsons tell you
temptations have nothing to do with it ; if you
fall, you're a sinner. Once a sinner, always a
sinner — you can never be the same as other
folks.'

I do not think Mr. Maynard says that ; he
is very kind to those that have done wrong.'

Well, it is not for him I care, but for you,
who sit there with your calm, pretty face, and
are good to me, while I hate you.'

This is the second time you have said
that. Have you any reason for hating me V

Did you never hear of Judith, then V

Never.'

Dorothy quietly broke off a new piece of
cotton, and began threading her needle afresh.

Have you never heard of Joynte — Elias
Joynte V

Dorothy started. The woman, with malicious
delight, noted the change that came
over her face, the tender rose of her cheek
fading away into deadliest white.

Joynte !' the needle, threaded, dropped
from her shaking fingers. * What have you todo
with him V

Well, nothing much rightly ; only we were
friends at Venice, and we used to dog and
watch you when you went out looking so
grand and happy. You look different now —
you're not grand, and I don't think you're
happy, or you wouldn't sigh so often when
you sew.'

Go on,' urged Dorothy huskily ; feeling that
if the blow must fall, it had best fall speedily.

Joynte told you his story, I know ; and I
told mine one day to your husband too, but I
suppose he never repeated that. You've heard
all about Miss Phaer and her sad death, but

perhaps you don't know I was really the cause

of it;

Here a fit of coughing stopped her utterance.


Dorothy rose quietly, handed her a glass of
water, and resumed her seat. Her feelings
resembled those of the condemned criminal
who hears his doom drop slowly from the
grave lips of the presiding judge.

Well, you see' — Judith's voice had become
hoarse and toneless ; she could scarcely speak
above a whisper — * I loved your husband once,
a long time ago, and I have never forgotten
that he deceived me. I told Miss Phaer of
his treachery, and she broke with him ; and
then I swore I'd tell you. Now you know all
about it, and why I hate you. Won't you
leave me, and send me packing V

Dorothy did not speak. Her head dropped
on her arms, which were crossed on the table
before her. When she lifted her face it was
tearless, white, and rigid, as though death had
left its mark.

Were you not sorry to have done this
thing,' she managed to say quietly — ' to have
spoilt that poor girl's life V

Sorry ! He had ruined mine 1'

But she was innocent.'

*That was her affair. She had to suffer
because she loved him

And now, now you have spoilt my life ;
and you will die, perhaps soon, with all these
sins on your conscience

I told you I was shamefully bad, and that
you would turn me out.' Judith appeared to
glory in her wickedness.

I don't know. I can't think — I had rather
not blame you ; but, oh, promise me to tell
no one of this dreadful thing, no one — do you
hear V

She had seized Judith by the wrist, firmly,
almost harshly. Her gentleness froze into
cold severity.

I don't want to tell anyone else ; it was
you I meant. And now, I suppose I shall be
dead soon ; you had better by far have left me
to die in the street.'

I am glad you did not die in the
street.'

Glad ! when I've done my best to make
you wretched ! Well, you are a rum un !'

After this Judith subsided into a kind of
torpor from exhaustion ; she neither seemed to
care nor to understand, nor to realize the
effect of her disclosure. Dorothy gave her
nourishment, and helped her back into bed as.

kindly and heedfully as usual ; but the last
string of hope seemed snapped within her.

Mr. Maynard called in the evening. He
spoke hopefully to Judith ; then, looking at
Dorothy, remarked that she was pale and tired.

You must not overdo yourself, my child,'
he said kindly ; * surely it was about this time
you had thought of paying your mother a
Christmas visit. You must not lose your
holiday. Why not take it at once V

And what will become of her V

Dorothy pointed in the direction of the bed.
Her own personal feelings, she felt, must not
interfere with her strict duty towards her
neighbour.

I will get her a nurse. The doctor says
there is no immediate danger ; she only wants
watching. Come now, your lessons are over
to-day. Pack up at once. Go home tomorrow,
where you are anxiously expected, and return
on Monday ; that will include Christmas-day,
and enable you to pass it with your mother.'

Very well, Mr. Maynard ; in that case I
will go.'

There was no chance of meeting Keith, for
he was, she understood, in London. She felt
the need of rest, and her heart yearned with
a child's helpless longing for home — for her

bright little bedroom at the Angel House, and
for a taste of Margaret's hearty hugs. She
was weary of the hopeless struggle of life,
sick with loathing of the knowledge of evil,
eagerly desirous to breathe again an atmosphere
of purity and sweetness, to plunge, as ina
cleansing bath, into the very monotony of
goodness. The old familiar sights and sounds
the village life, Mrs. Strait's grumbling,
the creak of the old clock on the stairs, Sarah's
forgetfulness, little Snow's joy — rushed to her
mind, seen through a halo of affectionate
association and coloured by the rays of grateful
memory. Early next day, Dorothy left
Slowchester, committing Judith to the care of
an elderly pleasant-faced nurse.

REST FOE, THE WEARY.

HAT Christmas holiday proved a
moral and physical blessing to
Dorothy. From the very beginning,
pleasant homely sights met
her eyes, and affectionate hearty greetings
fell on her ears. At the door of the Angel
House, whither she had walked from the
station — a boy carrying her small trunk
behind her — Snow ran out and welcomed
her noisily, in true canine fashion; circling
round and round her feet, at the imminent
risk of being trodden on ; dancing in front of
her on his hind - legs with the grace of a
courtier in a minuet; barking till he gasped
for breath; then taking wild leaps in the air,
catching at her dress, licking her hands, and
expressing, by the most extravagant airs and

gestures, his delight at her return. Next
came Sarah, curtsying and smiling ; Margaret,
just within, radiant and laughing ; and
behind, her mother, softened and kindly.

Poor child — poor child !' she said, kissing
her — absence having cast a pleasing veil over
Dorothy's shortcomings — ' you look pale !
Now you are at home, we will soon get up
your colour again.'

Margaret said nothing, but threw a passion
of love into her silent clasping.

Home ! Oh yes, it was sweet to be at home
again. Dorothy looked round the quaint room,
which still kept its own peculiar charm ; each
nook and chair seeming an old familiar friend.
Then she sat down, and a sense of beatitude
stole over her. Margaret, on the hearth-rug,
little Snow in her lap, chatted unceasingly ;
her sister, reticent by nature and grown more
so from her solitary life, spoke rarely.

But her lips and her eyes smiled without
stint, as she enjoyed the rest. Latterly her
nights had been broken, her days full of
anxious labour and hurry, while she strove to
combine the opposite duties of teacher and
sick-nurse, so as to neglect neither ; now, at
least, nothing was expected of her. She could
just be still. During the next few days,

Dorothy visited Mrs. Parkinson and her cats,
and was treated to a full and particular
account of all her benevolent schemes, and of
the virtues and misfortunes of her various
proteges ; read the newspaper daily to her
mother, whose eyes were beginning to fail, and
who liked the sound of her soft, clear voice ;
and shared in endless talks with Margaret,
who was never tired of talking of Johnnie
Cortes' perfections, and of the thrilling adventures
of flood and field to which he
treated her. All these various items went to
make up recreation for Dorothy ; true recreation
— fresh life and vigour for body and soul.
The Christmas services, too, were a special joy
to her. Not that her theological views had
gained in depth or lucidity, or that she was a
more fervent Churchman in the technical
sense ; but simply because she was unhappy,
and it was comforting to hear of a divine love
which was said never to fail.

The Vicar took for his text on Sunday,
John vii. 17 ; ^ If any man will do His will, he
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of
God.' Doctrine, perhaps, she might never
understand ; metaphysical problems worried
and disheartened her. But to do God's will did
not seem so very difficult, now more particularly

that she had given up all idea of happiness.
For Keith's sake she would do her duty, and.
God, who was love, could not blame her for
loving him still. Peacefully as a little child,
she laid her head upon the pillow that night,
and dreamt that in some blessed region, faraway
from all misunderstandings and regrets,
she and Keith were walking together in a
garden, hand in hand. The dream was so
vivid that she could smell the scent of roses
quite sweet and strong when she awoke. The
next day she was to return to Slowchester.
Mother and sister tried in vain to break her
resolution. The sick-nurse was there in lor
place, they urged ; the woman was no relation ;
she was no worse, or news of it would have
reached Dorothy ; the pupils were not expected
to resume their lessons for some days.
Where was the use of hurrying back just now,
too, when the rest and change were really
benefiting her ? But Dorothy had a kind of
conviction that rest, to be true rest, must be
wedged in between two layers of hard work.
She had still her task to do, and it could only
be done at Slowchester.

I have had a real holiday,' she said, kissing
Margaret, while happy, grateful tears rose to
her eyes — * a real holiday, and I will come

VOL. III. 15

again soon. You would spoil me if I stayed
too long ; and next time, perhaps ' — this with
a special intention—' you will have something
nice to tell me.'

Margaret blushed and laughed, reluctantly
allowing her sister to go free.

Dorothy had started on her journey after
luncheon, so that it was dark when she reached
her lodgings. She let herself in with her latchkey,
and bade the boy put down her trunk in
the hall as quietly as possible ; stealing on tiptoe
into her parlour, lest Judith should be
sleeping, as she often did just before tea. To
her surprise, on crossing the threshold, she
heard a faint sound of whispering voices, in
one of which she could distinguish the deep
and low tones of a man. It was not Mr.
Maynard, nor the doctor ; neither of them
wore a dark brown tweed suit and such neat
boots. The nurse, too, was absent, and it
seemed that Judith was conversing alone with
a strange man.

Dorothy leant a little forward, and could see
that the man had dark hair, and stood rather
awkwardly with his head bent down, as men
do in moments of strong emotion, when they
feel a great deal and are ashamed of showing
even a little. Judith was speaking now. Her

Voice was very weak, and broken by constant
short coughs. Dorothy could not distinguish
the words, but she could see that her visitor
pleated up the sheet into little puckers with
one hand impatiently while he listened, and
thrust the other into his breast-pocket. Presently
he moved his head a little, and she
recognised the pallid profile for that of Keith.
Her first impulse was to flee away at once ;
her next, as she was already well within the
room, to shrink back into the gloom of the
window-curtain. There was just a bare chance
he might not notice her. But even the slight
movement of the curtains had aroused his
attention.

Judith ceased to talk, and seemed to be
dropping ofl" into one of her usual stupor.
The hot, emaciated fingers, which she had
clasped round Keith's hand, relaxed their
hold when he said * Yes, yes !' impatiently to
a question she had asked him, and now she
neither stirred nor spoke. Keith moved away
-quietly from the bed, and came close to where
his wife was standing.

Dorothy !' he said hoarsely ; ' Dorothy !'
He looked so sad, so thin, she thought — he
stretched his hands towards her so pleadingly,
she had not the heart to turn away from him.

15—2

Oh, how she longed to comfort him — to throw
her arms about his neck and whisper in his
ear she loved him ! He drew a little nearer,
emboldened by her silence ; he took her hand,
pressed it in his, caught her waist, and strained
her to him.

Dorothy ! Dorothy !' he repeated.
He kissed her lips, her eyes, her hair ; it
seemed as if the hunger of his love could
never be appeased. She strove vainly — the
whole of his movements had been so quick —
to raise her head and release herself.
Not here,' he murmured ; ' not here !'
He dragged her gently into the little passage,
now nearly dark, and pulled to the door
of the parlour behind him.

My dear one, you must never leave me
again. You are the best little woman in the
world, and I want you.'

That narrow dark passage seemed to her
then to be the fittest shrine for love. How
sweet his voice was, how loving his touch t
For one brief moment she would indulge this
exquisite joy. Soon, very soon, they must be
parted.

My little one, did you think I could leave
you for ever ; and had you ceased to love
me V

Oh Keith, do not speak so ; it is not
right

Not right that I should love my wife V

It makes it so hard,' she said, leaning
pantingly against the wall, and pressing her
hand to her side.

I want you to go away with me at once.
Come, let us go !'

Dorothy's eyes fixed themselves on the
parlour door. The look was unmistakable.

'She is dying,' he said; 'well, after — you
will come V

And help to ruin and degrade your life.
If we were together you would be happy — perhaps.'


Yes, why not V

Keith was ready to urge anything, to make
any promise, so that he could once more get
back his power over the stubborn yet fragile
little creature at his side.

'Then you would forget everything — all
the sin — and the shame — and keep the
money V

Is that what troubles you V he said
quickly, sternly knitting his eyebrows ; ' if we
were poor, would you love me then ? I would
do all I could to please you.'

I always love you.'

Well, but I mean, show your love in some
practical way — come back to me, for instance.
Will you promise, Dorothy ?'

The passion of love contradicted was sa
strong within him at that instant, that he
felt almost capable of a great sacrifice.

If you repent and give back the money —
yes she said slowly ; ' perhaps it would be
my duty

For God's sake don't talk in that cold way
of duty. 1 want your love, not your duty.
Kiss me again, dear ! Trust me — I shall not
deceive you. Now can you say yes V

He held her cold hands in his, which were
burning. In his agitation he pressed her
closely against the wall, and looked at her
with strange wild eyes.

Keith, do not look so — you hurt me.
This is not the moment to decide so quickly.
Ah, give me time. I am not sure that I can '

The power of will seemed to have forsaken
her. Those kisses had charmed away her
heart, but she made no sign of yielding, for a
dumb consciousness clove to her brain, whispering
: * Don't give way — don't, or you are lost. '

If you hesitate, you can't love me — I feared
so, Dorothy. You are utterly cold and selfish ; a
man would be an idiot to care for you. And I^

like a fool, thought for a moment of giving
up everything for you.' He tossed her hands
from him. ' Take your own line then ; go
your own way ; I suppose in some fashion you
get your reward. I will not trouble you
again.'

She heard a sound in her buzzing ears, as
from a long distance. Was it the front-door
slamming; ? And then came silence — darkness
it was good so. Oh, how her head ached,
throbbing as if knives were piercing her
temples ! Then a sudden ray of light, accustomed
steps, a homely figure.

Jane, is it you V she asked, staggering
forward.

Yes, ma'am ; it is time to light the gas.
Why, whatever is the matter ? you do look
rashly V

The surprise, the sudden emotion, had indeed
completely overcome Dorothy. The
whole thing seemed a dream : her husband's
presence in the little lodging, his passionate
words, the kisses he had showered on her
lips and hair, his low-whispered hoarse entreaties
; then the temptation, his few short
sharp reproaches, and again silence. She had
sent him away somehow, she never really
knew how; and he had taken his dismissal

and was gone, and it was extremely unlikely
that lie would ever seek her again. She sat
down on a low chair in the parlour, whither
Jane had assisted her.

Jane, who was a hard - working general
servant, on twelve pounds a year, and kept
her little brothers and sisters by her earnings,
wondered to herself what it could be that
made ' the quality ' unhappy, seeing they had
enough to eat and drink, and a fine silk gown
for Sundays. It must be some rottenness in
the blood, she supposed — a kind of thing by
which the injustice of life was made straight.

Dorothy was roused from her deadness of
mind and body by Judith's voice.

Here, come here !' she said. ' Do you know
your husband has been to see me ? did you
wonder why V

Dorothy nodded, for the effort to speak
seemed too much exertion.

I made parson send for him. I'm dying, I
know, and I wanted to speak to him. He
was to have come yesterday — the parson
thought you'd be away — but something kept
him. May be you met him just now ; I don't
know how long he has been gone, for my head
is bad — I can't remember. I told him — what
was it I told him V

That you forgave him ?' suggested Dorothy,
thinking the contrary proposition far more
likely.

No, it wasn't that. Yes — I remember I
said you were good, and I didn't hate you now.'

Did you V

Such comfort as it was possible for Dorothy
to feel in the thorough wreckage of her life
came upon her : this poor outcast at least
was her friend ! When we have once been the
victims of misconception, and have shuddered
under the cold blasts of the world's stupid
hate ; when our souls have been crushed to
the ground in the bitterness of humiliation
how gratefully do we snatch at the smallest
crumb of kindly appreciation, how the heart
leaps up, the spirits revive, at the word of
praise or affection, enabling us to piece together
some of the fragments of our shattered
self-respect, and build up again our fair
character with the arm of Hope !

Is it right now V said Judith, after a
pause. Her mind was evidently confused,
her wits difficult to rally. ' Are you friends ?
I've done my best. All my life — the very
worst ; and now at last, when I'm dying —
my best.'

Thank you for what you tried to do — it

was kind The words stuck in her throat.
No one's kindness could avail her now.

Do you know what I've found out V asked
Judith again. ' You said the parson's name
was Maynard V

Dorothy thought the question so irrelevant
that she feared Judith's mind was wandering.

Maynard. Yes ; he lives at Dronington.'

Maynard ; yes, that's it. He's married,
and his wife's name is Sophie V

Yes. Who told you this V

I know it — the world's small enough. I
had one sister, andwhen I went to work in
London, a lady who thought her pretty and
genteel gave her some schooling and started
her as a governess. She wrote and told me
she was going to be married to a clergyman,
and I was to be sure and never trouble her
again (she knew nought about Mr. Chester,
but only that I had done wrong), for he was
a very good man and wouldn't have anything
to do with such as me. I remember now,
the name was Maynard.'

Mrs. Maynard your sister ! I can scarcely
believe it !'

Why ? Because she's well off, and I'm only
a wretched girl ! Well, the same mother bore
us — a farmer's wife, too, who kept her maidservants,

and a horse and gig to go to market.
In those days many folks said Sophie was no
prettier than I was, though she was always
like a cat that licks itself to keep itself clean,
and won't so much as cross a muddy road.
Sophie always held her head high, even when
mother died, and we hadn't either of us a
sixpence.'

Does Mr. Maynard know this V

Yes, I told him ; and I mean she shall know
too.'

Why not leave the past alone ? It can da
you no good. You have not seen your
sister for years, and it would merely distress
her now.'

I want to see her,' repeated Judith with
dogged insistency.

She was not fit to argue with, and, seeing,
that there was no more to tell, Dorothy retreated
to the fire with her needlework. And
this woman was Mrs. Maynard's sister ! Sophie
knew of her sad fate, and had deliberately
turned her off, lest the knowledge of her relationship
should injure her own prospects.
How true it was that she was like a cat objecting
to wet her feet 1 Sophie always thought of
her own pleasure and comfort first, and seemed
anxious to convey the impression that she was

destined for better things than her surroundings.
Dorothy had fancied that, a lady by
birth, adverse circumstances alone had forced
Sophie to become a governess. Now the truth
came out. Born a farmer's daughter, she had
been given her ' schooling ' by the kindness of
a lady ; while her sister, friendless and alone
in the temptations of a large city, had succumbed
to a less fortunate fate. The ways of
Providence were strange, certainly ; but it
seemed as though people's sins did find them
out at last, retribution falling in some swift
recondite manner just when they least expected
it.

What would Sophie say now ? and had she
trusted her husband ? Evidently not, and, if
so, would not his wrath be great and justifiable
? But then Sophie would coax and flatter
him, cringing with frank humility, and say she
had not meant to deceive him, and was so
sorry ; but what could a poor creature do
when she had relations who were a disgrace to
her ? and she had feared — had thought it
might turn her dear Charles's heart away from
her — her dear Charles who was all the world
to her. She did not care about public opinion
not she, but she did care about Charles, and
what might distress him. Dorothy pictured

the scene to herself — the fawn-like glances
and the sweet little caressing ways, and how
Sophie would take her husband's hand, as if it
were something too precious for ordinary use,
and stroke it and handle it reverently, and
then put it to her lips quite softly. Would
these cajoleries disarm Mr. Maynard, and
would he believe that in so attractive a form
there could lie hidden no scheming, sly, and
vulgar little soul ?

Dorothy asked herself these questions,
vaguely seeking for an answer, as she sat
hour after hour by the fire — now rising to
put fresh coals on ; now giving Judith, who
was very restless and feverish, some cool
drink, or else smoothing out her pillows ; now
listening to the roaring of the winter wind,
or thinking of her home, of little Snow's
loving ways, and Margaret's merry disposition.
In the middle of the night the patient suddenly
started up, and said in quite a loud
voice :

She shall know it. Sophie shall know it.
She is a hypocrite and a liar !'

Hush, hush !' said Dorothy, jumping up
and running to the bedside.

Judith's eyes were closed, and she was
breathing heavily. Her lips moved, however.

and Dorothy, bending anxiously over her,
thought they shaped the word ' Forgive.'
Was it the niggard mercy of earth or the
bounteous pardon of heaven the poor girl
craved ? Some listening angel, hovering near,
heard the faint cry, and lifted the weary, sin-laden
soul on the wings of Love, away from the
shadows and the storms, to that divine abode
where the lonely find a home and the clouds
of darkness disappear in the radiance of the
Everlasting Light.

MRS. MAYNAED OBJECTS TO HER RELATIONS.

WON'T believe it— I can't believe
it I' Sophie stamped her little foot
with rage.

My dear, what is the use of pretending
the non-existence of facts we know
perfectly well are true V

I don't see why you should say such disagreeable
things to me.'

I would not say them if it were not
necessary,' answered the Vicar, quietly divesting
himself of his slippers and putting on his
walking-boots.

It's very well for you, who fast on Friday
and get out of bed in the middle of the night
to say your prayers, and have worked yourself
up into a state of fishy asceticism, to say that
such disagreeable things are to be faced. It

is much pleasant to forget them. And after
all, I'm only a woman, and you're very hard
to me.' Sophie screwed a few tears out of her
handsome eyes, and wiped them up with a great
flourish of her pocket-handkerchief. ' You're
always talking of duty. Don't I teach in the
school and attend church twice on Sundays ?
and didn't you prevent my going to hear the
Opera Company the last time they were at
Slowchester because you said it was Lent ?
I'm always giving up and denying myself, and
losing any little bit of enjoyment I might
have ; and now you want me to go and see a
dying person.'

She is your sister, Sophie.'

She is a disgrace to me, and I have not set
eyes on her for years.'

Had you told me the truth I should have
sought her out long ago, and perhaps saved
her, body and soul.'

I really think people should look after
themselves. Why should one always be running
to save their souls ? Judith had the same
chances as I had ; and you see /, did not turnout
a disgrace.'

You never told me the truth,' her husband
said, with a bitterness very foreign to his
habitual gentleness. * You said you had not a

relation in the world, and that your father had
been a medical man at Cheltenham.'

Well, perhaps to say Cheltenham was a
mistake. What put it into my head was the
fact of meeting you at Bath, and knowing
that people go to both places for their gout ;
but if I had said, " My father was only a
small farmer," you would very probably not
have married me, and I did so hate being a
governess. One must do the best one can for
one's self.'

Now that Sophie had been found out in her
untruthfulness, there was a frank cynicism
about her confessions that considerably startled
the Vicar, and gave him a deep insight into
the chasm of want of principle which lay
beneath the outer crust of propriety and
virtue she had hitherto so successfully maintained.


And so you married me to better yourself,
as the servants change places,' he said, with a
gathering sternness in his voice.

'Yes, as you say, to better myself.' She
laughed a little, as though the drollery of the
speech tickled her ; * and because, of course, I
liked you very much.'

You were utterly unfit for a clergyman's
wife.'

VOL. III. 16

Well, dear she answered, with exceeding
suavity, ^ I thought you were the best judge
of that ; and after all, a clergyman's wife takes
no vows.'

She is bound to be a helpmate to her
husband.'

So I am. I teach those dirty little
children.'

And this is why you have always shown
such reluctance to the duties connected with
the service of God,' pursued the Vicar reflectively
; ^ why you have been so indifferent and
so lax with regard to the welfare of others —
because you had sold yourself to me, and you
found the bargain a dear one.'

I wish you would not say such nasty things
in that hard, uncomfortable way. Why, of
course, all girls marry in some such fashion :
their relations or they themselves look out fora
suitable young man ; and when they have
found him, they marry him — if they can.
After all said and done, Charles, you were not
such a great catch. '

Sophie laughed consciously, as she sat at
the breakfast-table, playing with her cup and
teaspoon, and watching her husband's preparations
for going out on his pastoral rounds.
She was looking extremely pretty this morning,

with her dark eyes, and the sly smile gathering
round her mouth ; in her deshabille of pale
lavender cashmere trimmed with coarse whitewashing
lace, which, though it cost only about
twopence a yard, gave her a very elegant and
ladylike appearance. She was endowed with
a Frenchwoman's natural talent for dress —
whatever she put on suited her ; and though
she spent less money than most of the ladies
of Dronington, she yet contrived to have a
very different and more stylish air.

Mr. Maynard had hitherto been proud of
her cleverness and economy, and of the deft
transformations she could effect with the commonest
of materials ; but now, as his eyes fell
on the dainty little figure, his lip curled in
disdain. Righteous wrath smouldered within
him, the wrath of the man of God denouncing
the luxury and vices of the doomed
cities.

Are you going with me to see your sister V
he asked grimly.

Not to-day, Charles, please she said with
a little shudder. ' It all seems so horrid — give
me a little time to realize it — that she should
have been picked up in the street ; taken in
by strangers — a pauper, in fact !'

'Yes, and will have a pauper's funeral

16—2

unless her sister pays for it !' lie said with
emphasis.

Oh, Charles, I hate talking of funerals !'

Yes ; you hate death and gloom and hardships,
and everything but sin — and forget that
the wages of sin is death !'

Charles !' She covered her face with her
hands.

When I compare you with Dorothy, and
remember what her conduct has been ; how
she has nursed and tended the poor creature ;
giving up her nights and her precious hours
of daylight to the care of a perfect stranger —
I see the difference between high principle
and heartless frivolity.'

Oh, you always preferred Dorothy ! I
wonder you did not marry her instead of me ;
you could have pruned her down into monastic
pattern easily enough,' said Sophie, with acid
ingenuousness.

It is not fair to Dorothy to leave the whole
burden on her shoulders, poor child. She has
had a hard life of it hitherto ; and now you
must take your share of the nursing for the
rest of your sister's life.'

His voice was so stern, and he looked at
her so decidedly, that Sophie felt inclined to
scream or to run away. Just as she was

meditating whether a faint or a fit of hysterics
would be the most desirable termination to the
discussion, the maidservant, entering, handed
a telegram to Mr. Maynard.

When he had opened and read it, he said,
in a hard dry voice, to his wife :

There, you are lucky ! You are saved the
trouble and annoyance of nursing your sister.
She is dead !'

Sophie took the unfolded paper he offered,
her, and read these words :

From Mrs. Chester to Eev. C. MAYNAED.
Judith breathed her last this morning at
six o'clock. Come at once.'

What are you going to do V said Sophie, ina
tone of suppressed relief.

I will start immediately. I can just catch
the 9.50 train to Slowchester. I suppose you
have no wish to accompany me ? Your sister
shall be buried here in my churchyard, and I
will erect a marble cross over her grave.'

But you won't tell people ' askeil

Sophie tearfully.

That she is your sister ? Certainly.' Thereupon
Mr. Maynard took up his gloves and
hat, and departed.

Sophie was ready to choke with annoyance.
Of course she conch not be expected to
mourn — why should she ? Judith had been
dead to her these many years, and now all
the village would know her history and her
name — 'Judith Shames.' Such a vulgar,
common patronymic, when Sophie, now
that she had altered it from the original
Sophia, sounded so pretty and genteel.
Secrecy was not possible, she knew. Charles
was so foolish, so unreasonable, so high-strung,
he would be certain to insist on their wearing

mourning and refusing dinner invitations.
However, she determined to obviate these
difficulties as far as was possible ; so she went
upstairs, put on her black Sunday dress and a
thick veil, and stepped across to Mrs. Parkinson's.
That good lady was kneeling on the
floor, engaged in feeding her cats, and binding
up the wounds of a rough terrier dog by
the fireside, when she arrived.

See, Sophie,' she said, ' this dear dog has
been caught in a rabbit trap ; his poor paws are
so badly cut. Look how grateful he is, and
how he licks my hand ! There, Snap, there I
clown, my good fellow ! Sit there, dear,
wherever you can; don't step into the cat's
milk, or on the kitten's ball.'

Sophie, holding up her skirts with an air of
ineffable disdain, at last succeeded in finding
an empty chair, and began dolefully :

'Mrs. Parkinson, a great trouble has befallen
me !'

You don't say so, my dear — what is it ?
Your maid going to leave again ? What
servants are coming to, I declare I don't
know. Now, Snap, be quiet, and let me tie
this bandage round your poor paw.'

Mrs. Parkinson's hands were so engaged
with dog ointment, lint and basins, that a
salutation was out of the question ; but she
noticed, as she lifted her eyes for a moment
from her task, her friend's long-drawn countenance
and sombre dress, and exclaimed again :

Good gracious, you haven't lost a friend V

A near relation,' blubbered Sophie, who
had her ready tears always well under command.


Why, I didn't know you had any relations
!' blurted out straightforward Mrs.
Parkinson, looking up with increased attention.


I had one. I never talked of her — for, alas !
she was a constant sorrow to me, poor girl.'

Well, if she is quietly and decently buried,
I suppose it's almost a relief then,' said Mrs.

Parkinson, returning to her surgical operation.


She is not buried yet ; she only died this
morning.'

Good gracious ! and you never went to
her V

I knew nothing about her. Charles is
gone to see what can be arranged about —
about the funeral, and all the dreadful things.
He would not let me go ; he knows how
sensitive I am.'

I should say you take it all pretty quietly.
Was it a sudden death V

No ; it was consumption.'

Oh, ah r ejaculated Mrs. Parkinson curtly.

She is at Slowchester. She had grown so
poor — so very poor, and dared not tell us, for
fear we should be unhappy ; but at last the
poor thing got to Slowchester, and there in
the cold bare highway '

^ The street, I suppose you mean.'

Charles found her. He got lodgings for
her, and it seems Dorothy Chester, who was
staying there, and a nurse, were very kind to
her.'

Dorothy always would be kind to anyone.
God bless her ! But how came it you did not
go and try your hand at nursing V

We did not know — we had no idea it was
my sister

Humph ! I suppose the fact is you had
disowned her. People generally do disown
troublesome members of their family.'

It is very sad ; and she is to be buried
here, and have a nice marble cross, and we
will plant some violets and crocuses for the
spring. You'll help me to make wreaths, you
make them so beautifully.'

^ Yes, yes ; shovel her under ground with
plenty of fuss, she'll trouble you no more
now.'

*How unfeeling you are, Mrs. Parkinson!
my poor sister !'

Not a bit of it, my dear. I was thinking
of a similar case I heard of only the other
day, where the parents had turned off their
daughter, and the poor thing threw herself
into the Thames. It was very unpleasant for
the family, for of course there was an inquest,
and the magistrate made disagreeable remarks.
What is your sister's name V

Judith — Judith Shames,' said Sophie, bringing
the vulgar name out with as much delicacy
as possible. ' And now, dear Mrs. Parkinson,
I want you to let this be known in the village,
and also how sorry I am — in fact, I'm so upset

I can scarcely tell what I am saying. And
Charles too, with all his parish work, this
additional anxiety coming upon him '

Dorothy seems to have relieved you of
most of the anxiety hitherto

Oh yes, dear girl ; she's quite a sister of
charity now — likes being kind and helpful, asa
kind of penance and self-denial. Poor thing,
her life hasn't been a success, you know. She
has been foolish, very foolish ; and I think
it's hard upon Mr. Chester, too.'

^ Now, Sophie, I won't hear a word against
Dorothy. It's my belief, if ever there was
a real live angel without wings on this earth,
it's that blessed child. It goes to my heart to
see her growing paler and thinner every day.
We shall have her buried next, and a nice
marble cross put over her grave, and the
heart that cruel people have broken.'

I am quite innocent of that, Mrs. Parkinson,
at least,' said Sophie, rising. ' If Dorothy
would have taken my advice — but she never
did, and people must buy their experience.'

As your sister did,' said the old lady
quietly.

Sophie's good temper was imperturbable.
For all answer she kissed Mrs. Parkinson,
stooped down and patted the wounded dog —

who growled slightly at her, as if scenting the
approach of a wolf in sheep's clothing — and,
lightly and gracefully as she had entered, left
the cottage.

She wants me to tell her story for her,
does she V mused Mrs. Parkinson, as she called
her cats to her side. * Wants me to make it
all sweet and fair and correct for her, does
she ? Well, then, I shanty

Therewith Mrs. Parkinson gathered up her
lint and her bandages, and went into the
greenhouse to look after her silkworms.

Naturally Judith's story created some excitement
in Dronington. A thrilling episode, sin
which a starving outcast, a pretty clergyman's
wife, the interesting ill-used Dorothy, and her
handsome scapegrace husband all played a
part — not to mention the officiating clergyman
— was indeed a set-out for gossiping
tongues ; the fact of Keith's visit to Judith
being variously interpreted — some supposing
that she had tried to act as a kind of mediator
between himself and his wife ; others asserting
that — well, of course, it was no wonder, Judith
having been no better than she should be.
Others scented some further fascinating intrigue,
while many unimaginative people
declared all the details a tissue of lies. It

was far more likely that Mr. Chester never
visited Judith at all, but only went to his
wife's lodgings to implore her to return.

The funeral, too, afforded no clue, nor did it
satisfy curiosity. Neither Mrs. Maynard nor
Dorothy were present. The Vicar officiated m
full canticles as Mrs. Strait irregularly
termed it, and the procession was of the
most simple and unostentatious character.
Only two wreaths graced the coffin — one of
white camellias, contributed by Sophie ; the
other of violets, sent by Dorothy. A few
days afterwards a plain white cross crowned
the recently upturned sod, on which was
inscribed in neat letters :

JUDITH Shames,
Born 18—. Died 18—.

THOU KNOWEST."

Altogether the gossips of Dronington considered,
with truth, that they had been cheated
of their honest rights.

After the excitement of these events, things
returned to their normal condition. Dorothy
continued in her little lodging at Slowchester,
diligently teaching her pupils and fitting herself
by earnest study, Sophie wore black,

which suited her very well, and stayed at
home for the space of a few weeks, receiving
only intimate friends, and talking much of
The great trial my poor sister's death was tome
— so unexpected and so sad !' Only in the
Vicar's sermons could a marked difference be
detected. They were sterner and more uncompromising
in their eloquence, frequently
directed against the sins of slander, lying,
and uncharitableness, which he vigorously denounced
as pet children of the devil ; urging
his hearers, at the risk of their salvation, not
to delay, but to prepare for the advent of the
day of wrath, ' which cometh as a thief in the
nights



WHICH TREATS OF HUNTING.

HEN Mr. Maynard's message reached
him, Keith had just returned to
Blackness, with the intention of
spending only a few days there,
preparatory to a longer departure. The message,
vaguely worded, merely stated that his
presence at the bedside of a sick woman (address
in Slowchester subjoined) was urgently
needed. Keith's thoughts at that instant
ranged far from Judith, whom he still believed
at Venice, and the urgent message naturally
represented itself to him as in some way
connected with Dorothy. His anticipations
were not unfounded, for his painful interview
with Judith presently revealed that to gentle
Dorothy's good offices she owed the peace and
comfort of her declining days. Palis's drastic

treatment and sarcastic remonstrances had not
been administered ineffectually. Keith experienced
a faint kind of regret for his past
life, which the sudden shock of Judith's
dying presence considerably intensified. He
was fortunate in possessing most of the world's
highly prized gifts, yet he was not a happy
man ; and in this state of mental discomfort,
a discomfort which he did not care to explain
to himself, the idea, almost contemptuously
disposed of, occurred to him, that reconciliation
with his wife might possibly bring
him the coveted happiness. He was prepared
to go a certain length towards confessing and
repairing his mistakes, provided she would
meet him half-way ; and his smouldering love
burst into an ardent flame when Dorothy,
looking prettier and nicer than ever after her
short and refreshing holiday, again stood
before him. Her resistance to his overtures
therefore surprised and irritated him extremely.
What on earth did she want ? Judith and
her sad story would soon be laid in the grave
there would be an end of that. The whole
affair had been so extremely unpleasant, that his
wife might be quite sure he regretted it as much
as she could possibly do ; and his intentions
for the future being excellent, and his love

this time really sincere, Dorothy might surely
be satisfied. Instead of this, she had inexplicably,
and without reserve, thrust him from
her, paying no attention to his fair promises.
Those absurd fine feelings of women were
really impossible to deal with. He left Slow-chester
in a state of fury. But gradually,
as he cooled down, he began to see this thing
in a different light. It was scarcely probable
that now, Judith, the last obstacle to their
happiness, being removed, Dorothy would perpetually
continue obdurate, especially if he
remained near her, so as to seize the first
favourable opportunity of renewing his protestations.
If, on the contrary, he went abroad
again, she would perhaps gradually forget
him, and learn to live alone. In addition, his
social and political prospects imperatively
demanded that he should not leave England
again under a cloud, which (if Lady Darlington
and the county people took Dorothy's
part) would be of such impenetrable denseness
as to defy any future efforts to dispel. He
had no inclination to be regarded in the light
of a pariah, and shunned by all decent people,
and he wished to enjoy his riches with their
attendant advantages of respect and consideration.


In fact, an atmosphere of regard and adulation
was as necessary to his moral health as
sunshine to his physical well-being. These
and other reasons (Keith knew nothing of the
coolness that had arisen between Lady Darlington
and his wife) combined to induce him
to alter his plans, and to decide upon remaining
at Blackness, and telegraphing to Johnnie
Coote to bring down his horses, and come and
do a month's hunting with him.

Thank goodness,' he reflected, as he despatched
the invitation, ' Coote is a matter-of-fact
fellow, who will neither talk sentiment
nor reproach me for my stupidity !'

Coote, shrewdly arguing that the plan would
aflbrd him good hunting quarters and opportunities
for seeing Margaret, readily accepted ;
and January found him, his horses, his stud-groom,
and stablemen, comfortably settled at
Blackness.

Of course you'll hunt, old fellow ?' he said
to Keith, in the course of their first tete-astute
evening.

Well, I really hardly know how I can
manage it. I don't possess any hunters, and
it's rather too late in the year to buy them.'

Not a bit of it ; I'll lend you a couple till
you can get some. I should think you are

VOL. III. 17

just about my weight ; and I have not a doubt
that, as money is no object, you will very
soon have no difficulty in finding any quantity
of perfect animals ready to your hand. '

This suggestion coincided with Keith's
views, whose desires at that moment were
limited to forgetfulness of annoyances ; that
forgetfulness (not always easy of realization)
seemed most likely to be attained in the
pursuit of sport, hard exercise, and an obstinate
search after horses. Coote made it a
rule never to lose a single chance of hunting:
no meet was too distant for him, no day too
long, no sport too tedious. He talked sport
indefatigably for twelve hours out of the
twenty-four ; and the remainder of the time,
when he was not dressing, Margaret, who
just now fascinated him, increasingly occupied
his thoughts. He had, to his great delight,
discovered that the ambition of her life was to
ride ; and that she was not quite a novice,
owing to the fact of Mr. Horsfall's good-nature
in lending her his steady hunter during
the summer months. Coote possessed an old
horse, called * Perfection,' who was as quiet
as a lamb and as keen and clever as a cat.
He tried him with a lady's saddle and a rug,
and the result proving satisfactory, invited



Margaret to ride him. The ride was repeated
with increasing success, until she became conversant
with the horse's temper and manners.
By degrees, Johnnie taught her to make
Perfection jump little fences and to ' lark'
across the fields. Soon Margaret, enchanted
with her prowess, set no bounds to her ambition,
and demanded to go out hunting.

But you would be tired. You don't know
what it means to jump and gallop for thirty
or forty minutes ; it requires good wind, and
to be in thorough condition.'

I am as strong as possible — never tired
responded Margaret.

You might tumble off — have a nasty
spill, and perhaps get laughed at by some
cad.'

Should I V said she, putting her horse
cleverly at a small fence by the roadside,
which he popped neatly over, and back again ;
returning quietly to Coote's side.

Perfection is a rare jumper, that's certain,*
said Coote admiringly ; * and you'd look very
nice out hunting, on his back. The old horse
has never carried a lady before, and 111 be
bound he'd be as proud as a peacock.'

Will you let me ride him, Mr. Coote ? Oh
do, next Tuesday, at Haddington ; that's only

17—2

two miles off, you know. Everyone will be outdo
now !'

Johnnie looked at her sparkling eyes, and
her steady graceful seat ; he was proud of his
pupil, whom he had taught everything, even
to the proper way to put on her hat and hold
her hands down in workmanlike style. Of
course he would have no objection to letting
the world see and admire her also ; more
especially as it was quite certain the old horse
could not make a mistake.

It is " yes," I. am sure !' she cried triumphantly,
stooping down to pat the animal's
sleek neck affectionately. * I knew you
couldn't refuse. And you, dear Perfection, how
I shall love you if you carry me well !'

i/*,' sneered Johnnie, * that's a nice way to
speak of him ! as if he could do anything hut
carry you well. Do you think I'd let you get
on his back otherwise. Miss Strait V

Margaret flashed back a happy look at him,
tasting the pleasant sensation that she was
precious to both horse and master. The next
difficulty was to gain Mrs. Strait's consent.
She had allowed a few quiet rides, thinking it
as innocent a way as any other for the young
people to meet ; but when it came to hunting,
which meant galloping about in a state of

disorder and breathlessness amongst a heap of
rough men, it was a very different matter.
Hunting was ungenteel and fast, she was sure ;
and Margaret would get a red face and a pain in
her side. Besides, Mr. Coote was not a proper
chaperon.

Oh, mamma, Mr. Horsfall will be out, and
he is a discreet old married man ; and I daresay
Keith will take care of me, and he of
course is our relation by marriage ; and if
Lady Darlington is riding I can put myself
under her wing. It can't be unladylike, when
you know she hunts at least twice a week, and
the Countess of Flamborough too.'

Then you must only go as far as the meet,
and ride quietly along the road,' urged her
mother, relenting at the thought of a real
Countess hunting.

Yes, mamma ; but if the hounds go away I
must follow a little, or I should see nothing.
The rest of the people will do it.'

With the carriages, you mean, my dear ?
Well, I suppose as long as you keep near
some of the ladies and the elderly people there
is no harm in thaL^

Mr. Coote will tell me what I am to do.
You see, if I am riding his horse I must conform
to his directions.'

Yes, I suppose you must,' said Mrs. Strait,
not without some troublesome conscientious
scruples, which she endeavoured to still by
reflecting that Margaret was so petulant and
self-willed there was no use in resisting her.

A happier little woman never breathed
than Margaret, when that eventful Tuesday
dawned. The weather was damp and still,
auspiciously ominous of a good scent. Margaret
knew all about it, for she had heard the
thing frequently discussed by Johnnie. She had
breakfasted, and stood in her neat habit,
flicking with her whip against the windowpane,
and wondering when Johnnie would
make his appearance. He had promised to
call for her at a quarter past ten, so that they
should have time to ride quietly on, and seethe
field assemble. At last, after a considerable
period, in which her impatience waxed
greater and greater, she spied him coming
down the road, riding a good-looking thoroughbred
chestnut, with rather a vicious head.
Behind him came a groom on Perfection,
who carried a lady's saddle, and stepped along
as sedately as any park-horse. Margaret flew
downstairs and met Mr. Coote at the gate.

I am all ready,' she said ; * I thought you
were never coming.'

Mrs. Strait now emerged, with castings
flying ; and Sarah followed, full of excitement
at the idea of her young mistress's tour
de force. Margaret soon mounted her horse,
and lightly waving her hand to the bystanders,
trotted off beside Coote.

Now mind you follow me,' warned her
companion. * Don't be in a hurry at your
fences ; don't pull at his head — leave him
alone. Perfection knows his business, and the
best thing you can do is to sit tight and
trust to his honour. I'm horribly bored at
having to ride Eed Miner to-day — Saladin was
lame, and I couldn't have him — he has a nasty
temper, and pulls a bit ; if he is tiresome you
had better not follow me, but stick to Chester,
who is very well mounted.'

I shall stay with you,' said Margaret,
prettily defiant. ' I look upon you as my
riding-master, and you must get all the credit
of my performance to-day.'

I should mind nothing if it wasn't for this
confounded brute. I know he'll pull my arms
off ; though if he is in a good humour, nothing
can beat him, and there isn't a fence too big
for him.'

By this time they had reached the meet,
which was in the centre of a large field.

Numerous carriages were collected there —
Lady Darlington herself driving a pony-phaeton
with a pair of handsome brown cobs.
In the middle of the hounds was Lord Darlington,
on a big bay, talking to a couple of
farmers. All about were dotted horses —
some led by grooms, others capering or fidgeting,
to the disgust of their riders. Margaret
stayed modestly in one corner, observing
everything with eager eyes, and Keith took
Coote's place beside her for a few moments.

Who is that black-eyed girl on the remarkably
good-looking horse V asked Lord
Darlington of Mr. Horsfall, who rode up at
that instant. * She is a stranger ; I haven't
seen her out before.'

Don't you know ? That is Mrs. Chester's
sister, and there's Keith Chester talking to
her. I think Mrs. Chester was with you as
governess for some time after that unfortunate
quarrel with her husband, was she not ? But
her sister is quite a different sort of girl —
much more cheery, and handsomer, to my
mind.'

How can she afford a hunter ? I thought
the family were so deuced proud, they would
take nothing from Chester ; he seems on capital
terms with her.'

That is a bit of bravado on his part, I
suspect, to show that the fault was not on
his side, and that the family are friendly with
him. As to the horse, I know him : he belongs
to young Coote, who I fancy is rather
sweet in that quarter just now.'

H'm !' said Lord Darlington, touching his
horse lightly with the spurs ; * it's their affair,
not mine. Come up, Vixen. Hark forrard,
my beauties !'

He moved on at a gentle trot, the pack
following at his heels, to draw the outlying
gorse covert. Almost immediately a view
holloa was raised, the fox stole away, and tip
hounds in full cry pursued him.

Then ensued the usual scene of confusion.
Johnnie, followed closely by Margaret, squeezed
his hot pulling chestnut as quickly as he could
through the plunging, pushing mass of riders,
and jumping a small hedge, out of the road,
galloped recklessly across the next field.
Eed Miner, seeing the way clear before him,
settled down in his stride, and after a little
ceased to snatch at his bit. Johnnie improved
the opportunity to look round in search of
Margaret, who he feared might have been
separated from him by the crowd. No ! She
was close up behind him, her horse going

nicely and smoothly, taking the fences easily
in his stride, and she herself sitting firm as a
rock.

The pace had been good hitherto, the field
was tailing off, but now the hounds began to
falter. A little encouragement from the
master soon set them right again, and they
sped away across a heavier line of country to
the left, intersected by brooks.

This will pound a good many of them,'
thought Johnnie. * I only hope it won't do
for me ; Eed Miner is not to be trusted.'

They were all together now, a small compact
knot of good and forward riders, Lord
Darlington, Keith Chester, Johnnie Coote,
Mr. Horsfall, Margaret, a hard-riding farmer's
wife, a youth on a thoroughbred pony, and
one or two miscellaneous horsemen. The fencing
grew more and more difficult, the country
intricate, and places uglier; occasionally they
came to stiff stake-and-bound fences, having
wide ditches and a bad take-off. At one of
these, Mr. Horsfall's horse slipped, and fell
heavily in the ditch beyond, without injury,
however, to his rider. Lord Darlington, turning
to see if he were hurt, noticed the prominent
position occupied by Margaret.

'By Jove!' he muttered, *how well that
girl goes ! She is riding a clinker !'

They were now approaching a wide brook,
with sedgy rotten banks.

'This will settle her,' further decided his
lordship ; * she is sure to turn back, and not
face it.'

Coote thought differently. He struck the
spurs into his horse and sent him along at a
good pace ; but Eed Miner threw up his head,
swerved a little, took the brook sideways, and
dropped his hind-legs. In a moment horse
and man splashed and struggled together in
the water.

Go along as hard as you can !' shouted Lord
Darlington, seeing Margaret, nothing daunted,
prepare to ride at the brook. She tightened
her reins as she had been told, and struck
Perfection with her whip. He gathered himself
together, went at the water as straight asa
die, and cleared it safely.

Well done, young lady !' cried the master ,^
fairly stirred into enthusiasm. ' Very well
ridden ! and very well done !'

But Margaret turned pale as she beheld
Johnnie's catastrophe.

Oh dear, he will be drowned ! Some one-save
him ! do take care, Mr. Coote !'

You need not be afraid — he is all right,' said
Lord Darlington, laughing as he rode off ; * a
bit of a wetting won't hurt him.'

Johnnie scrambled out at that instant,
hatless and dripping ; and immediately, from
a reaction of sentiment, Margaret laughed
immoderately at the ridiculous spectacle.

'You are not hurt, I am glad to see, so
don't mind my laughing. We must go home
at once.'

Eed Miner, with drooping head and heaving
flanks, presented, indeed, so melancholy and
penitent an appearance, that Johnnie, after a
careful survey, decided that though inglorious,
this was about the only alternative. One
small grain of comfort was afforded them by
the fact that they had had a splendid run, that
Margaret's horse had carried her beautifully,
and that the hounds soon after crossed a railway,
crawled slowly up a steep chalk hill,
finally running the fox to ground in a hole.
Having obtained a distant view of this uneventful
termination to the day's sport, Coote and
Margaret quietly trotted homewards.

I think hunting the most delightful thing
in all the world !' said Margaret, when they
stopped to walk their horses up a hill.

So do I,' ejaculated Coote. ' " Hunting is

the sport of kings, the image of war without
its guilt, and only twenty-five per cent, of
its danger." One thing more makes it quite
perfect.'

And that is '

Your company ! Margaret, I wonder ' —
he stopped, and bit his moustache — ' I wonder
what you would say if I asked you to be my
wife V

I should prove a very expensive one,' she
answered, smiling ; ' for now you have given
me a taste of such enjoyment, I couldn't da
without a hunter, I am afraid.'

You shall have two, and welcome, dear
Margaret ; and ride all mine into the bargain,
if you like,' he said promptly, putting his
big brown hand caressingly over hers. * You
have made me the happiest fellow on earth.
I shall never forget the meet at Haddington
as long as I live ; and what's more, I'll forgive
that beggar Eed Miner for making a fool of
himself and giving me a spill, just because it
gave me the chance of riding home with you.'

She laughed.

'Mind you don't catch cold, because then
you'll hate me !'

I never could hate you, darling. Why, I
do think you're the greatest duck I know ; and

I'm awfully fond of you ! Do you think

I might • Yes, I'm sure there's nobody

looking — I must just give you a kiss !'

Certainly not. There's a dog and a man
in that field ; and — and I'm rather cold. Let
us trot on again.'

Well, anyhow, if you won't give me a kiss
now, I shall take an extra allowance as soon
as ever I get a chance ; you may rely upon
that, Margaret — my own little Margaret !'

A VIOLINS BROKEN STRING.

|0 you're engaged to be married,
Johnnie ? Well, I wish you
joy, and hope it may turn out
well.'

I am certain of that,' answered Johnnie,
stretching himself contentedly, with a decided
consciousness of success about him which
seemed to reach even to the tips of his evening
shoes. * I am as sure of Margaret as I am of
myself.'

And what will your mother and sisters say,
do you think ? They will not like turning
out of their old home for a new mistress.'

No.' Johnnie gave a momentary rueful
sigh. ^ I suppose they won't ; but then they
always knew it was to come — and my mother
is sure to get on with Margaret, and she always
wished me to marry.'

You think it is a case of " every dog must
have his day" — "le roi est mort, vive le roi."
Your mother is anxious and willing to abdicate.
I don't know whether the certainty that a
disagreeable thing must happen makes it
always the pleasant to bear. I should say
it intensified the evil by the extra power of
one's imagination. But if you are quite certain
that everything is for the best in this best
of worlds, I have no more to add.'

My mother is no fool. She was well aware
I should not remain a bachelor all my life, and
she will be delighted at the prospect of grandchildren.'


And suppose she is not ?'

Suppose — suppose nonsense !'

Johnnie's fair face flushed a little. Of
course, mothers always rejoiced in their sons'
happiness. Then some wicked demon whispered,
* Not always in the happiness other
women gave them.' Even mothers were
sometimes jealous, and picked unnecessary
holes in their daughters-inlaw. Well, it could
not be helped. At any rate, Johnnie's mother
had a good jointure, and he should do all in
his power to make her comfortable. His
mind presently reverted to more agreeable
topics.

^I think I shall hand over Perfection to
Margaret,' he said reflectively, rolling a
cigarette between his fingers. * She will
never get a horse to carry her better.
Didn't she ride him splendidly to-day,
Keith?'

Splendidly !' said Keith, thinking of something
else.

How soon do you think we can be married
V pursued Johnnie, who generally rode a
subject to death.

Why, you only proposed to her to-day —
coming home from hunting, according to your
own account. You must not show such indecent
haste. Take plenty of time about it, and
then perhaps you will not be so unlucky in
your venture as I was. Marriage certainly is
a lottery.'
Keith 1'

Johnnie leant forward, an eager question in
his eyes, which he hesitated to put into
words.
Well V

I wonder if you'll be angry if I say some ,.
thing that I've longed over and over again to
say, and never dared, for fear you should think .
me impertinent V

What is it ? I promise not to be angry.'
VOL. III. 18

Keith, indeed, showed no signs of irritability
to-night — whether owing to the combined
soothing effects of fatigue and a cigar, or else
to the softer and sadder memories evoked by
the mention of Johnnie's love affair, reminding
him of the happiness such things had brought
to him also, it is impossible to tell. Suffice it,
he lolled in his armchair with languid ease,
looking as though no mere words could rouse
him into an expression of anger.

Couldn't you have cleared up that misunderstanding
with your wife ? It was only
a misunderstanding — a little quarrel, surely

I am not so sure of that. She disapproved
very' strongly of — well, of something in my
past life, of which I take a more lenient
view. I dare say she was right, but she never
would listen to anything. I think she hates
me r
And you. You don't hate her V
Keith smoked on silently.
No,' he said slowly, after a pause ; ' do
you know, Johnnie, it sounds a strange thing
to say, and it is certainly not like my usual
disposition, but I think I like her better
than ever I did. She has behaved with such
firmness and consistency throughout, and one
can't help respecting a woman who does that.

They are not the usual qualities of her sex. Of
course, now I have lost her, I feel I was a fool
to let her go

Could I — I mean could anyone do any
good? You know I should be awfully glad to
try my best, and with Margaret perhaps I
should have a chance.'

Thanks. You mean well, I know ; but I
am afraid matters are past mending.*

Did you ever hear why Lady Darlington
quarrelled with her V

Quarrelled ! Lady Darlington with
Dorothy V

Yes, you knew she had left Lovemere V

Of course I knew that ; but I thought
that was because she disliked being a governess.
I had no idea of any other reason.'

There was another reason — Horsfall told
me. Shall I go on, or will you be angry V

I told you before I should not be angry ;
go on.'

Well then, Horsfall says — I declare I don't
know how to tell you — there was some secret
she would not confide to Lady Darlington,
though she pressed her ever so often : something
about a man — a shabby sort of fellow —
whom she used to meet clandestinely. People
said he was her lover.'

18—2

Confound you, Johnnie, how dare you say
such a thing !'

I told you you would be angry.'

No, no, I'm quite calm ; but it's impossible,
I tell you — quite impossible. Why, I know
the purity of her little soul too well. She
would shrink from such a thing with horror ;
besides, she adored me. I tell you it's impossible.
You've made a mistake ; you must
have misunderstood. Horsfall made a mistake.'


I am sorry to say I am sure I did not
misunderstand him. Horsfall is a gossiping
idiot, but he spoke pretty plainly. I had
hoped you would be able to clear it all up by a
word — that you would have the clue.'

Keith jumped up ; he was irritable enough
now. He walked backwards and forwards in
extreme agitation, his face working and contracting
painfully. Johnnie almost regretted
his interference.

By Jove, it's horrible — it's disgusting !' interjected
Keith, in sharp broken tones ; * they've
maligned the purest woman on earth. So good
so innocent !' He struck his fists together
fiercely. ' The whole pack of them be hanged
for blackening my little darling's character !
My poor little girl !' Johnnie privately thought

that the poor little girl might have been easily
saved these troubles, had not Keith's conduct
driven her to prefer solitude and calumny to
the advantages of his society.

She suffered, Johnnie — I'll be bound she
suffered horribly, and all alone too ; there
was no one by to give her help and comfort.
And I, her husband, who ought to have been
at her side, she thought of as the biggest
wretch of all. Johnnie, my boy, this is
indeed retribution !'

Keith sat down and covered his face with
his hands ; his shoulders heaved, a deep sob
burst upwards. Johnnie was much concerned ;
he had never thought Keith would feel anything
so much.

Keith,' he said, ' don't take it to heart so.
It's only gossip ; you mustn't believe it.'

Believe the gossip, no,' said Keith, rousing
himself, but speaking low and hoarsely. ' I
never believed the gossip for a moment, but
it's her suffering that maddened me. I
brought it all upon her, you know ; if it
hadn't been for me she would never have
left Blackness, never have gone out as a
governess, never have offended Lady Darlington.
If you only knew where she is living
now — such a miserable place — a little lodging

at Slowchester, with only one sitting-room to
eat and live in !' Keith glanced around at his
own cosy room, with the print-hung walls and
china ornaments, the blooming hyacinths in
big jars, and the luxurious chairs. He sighed.
Johnnie, Td give worlds to undo it all. And
the pity of it is, I ca7it. One's actions are
irrevocable, and we ourselves only mortal.'

I suppose the man she met had nothing todo
with — your past life V suggested Johnnie,
seeking a practicable exit from the imbroglio ;
it wasn't for your sake V

My sake ! no one that / know would
trouble her.' And even as he spoke the
words, Joynte's insistence stamped itself on
his memory, and he recalled Dorothy's distress
at her broken promise. Yet she could surely
not have met him here. Why, he was rapidly
gambling and drinking himself to death in
the late summer at Venice. His presence in
England was extremely unlikely. Then again,
why should he pursue her to Lovemere ? Why
not rather have addressed himself to Keith,
and worked upon his fear of revelations ? But
if it were not Joynte, then indeed his
sagacity was at fault. A spasm of savage
jealousy seized him. Could those clear eyes
have lied — that sweet mouth deceived ? The

temptation only lasted an instant, and then
the image of his wife emerged, pure and
lovely, from the darkening clouds of jealousy
and distrust. * I must find out about that
man,' he said aloud. * I must clear her
character ; the poor child has been tortured
enough.'

I would not think about it any more,* said
Johnnie, whose preconceived notions were
utterly upset. * I should try and forget it all
if I were you. I only thought, possibly you
might have known about it ; but if you don't
why, things are just where they were, and
you can do no good.'

I beg your pardon ; things are not where
they were before. I did not know that my
wife had been unjustly accused. I did not
know she had been turned out of the Darling-tons'
house — dismissed herself, I dare say they
would call it, in order to justify the proceedings
; but the fact remains the same : she has
been insulted and ill-treated, and 1 am determined
to know the reason, for she is still my
wife /'

His voice rose as he said these words, his
eyes gleamed, and the hand that held his
extinct cigar trembled visibly. Johnnie's
attempts at soothing were about as ineffectual

as an offering of barleysngar to a savage dog.
Everything seemed to intensify Keith's wrath ;
he could not sit still, but marched up and
down the room.

Do sit down urged the placid Coote. ^ You
prowl around like a lion — it's fatiguing.'

I feel like one, or rather like a tiger,' he
answered curtly. ' I should like to spring
upon and rend the person who maligned that
poor child.'

'* ' It's no use getting in a rage. You had
better try to be calm.'

How can I be calm, when I think — but
you're right ; my feelings will alter nothing.
Oh, Johnnie, what a lucky fellow you are ! all
your life has been simple and straightforward.
You don't know anything of the depths of
passion to which some men sink — of the weakness
that comes over one sometimes.'

The prowl had merged into a slow steady
pacing. Keith was gradually mastering his
emotion. His violin lay on a chair near.
Presently he took it up and began to play,
with some vague idea, perhaps, of exorcising
the devil that raged within him. Softly and
dreamily the bow swept the strings, breaking
into the first bars of Svendsen's * Romance.'
The wild and plaintive air, with its strange

and charming harmonies, at first calmed his
irritation ; but as he played, pain mingled with
the pleasure, and the long-drawn sweetness
vibrated acutely on his senses, as when some
nerve is rudely handled. The music brought
back visions — a soft clasping hand, pleading
trustful eyes, golden sunset splendours covering
sea and land, or moonlight rays touching
the tremulous waters into magic silver — all
was peaceful, tender, and divinely quiet ; but
as the discords sharpened, like some weird echo
from another world came memories of desperate
bitterness, jealousy and hate, of sparkling
Marchesa primed with lying words of
flattery, of disappointment and regret. The
strings seemed swept by gusts of passion, wild
and uncontrolled, recklessly scattering all beauty
and goodness. A string snapped suddenly with
a loud, jarring crack, and struck Keith hard
across the face. He put the violin down
hastily.

Deuce take it !' he said ; ' I can't play.
There is no music in my soul to-night.'

It has made quite a red streak across your
cheek,' said Johnnie, at the sound of the
broken string rising to look.

Branded me I' sneered Keith.

Not quite so bad as that ; but it's a nasty

mark. Are you coming upstairs now ?
Haven't you had enough ? I am dead tired,
and ready for bed.'

I have had enough, as you say, and feel
precisely the same as you do — dead tired —
especially of myself. If only one could sleep
it away — this sickening disgust of life !'

Don't talk like that, Keith. You'll feel a
different man tomorrow.'

To * feel a different man ' was precisely
Keith's unspoken wish. That individuality,
which most of us strive and struggle hard to
keep, sometimes turns into a ghastly phantom,
clogging our steps and paralyzing the
forces of our will. Keith had reached that
melancholy stage when he preferred almost
any company to his own.

Johnnie, shouting a cheery ' Good-night 1'
slammed-to the door of his own apartment,
and retired to enjoy some well-earned sleep,
and to dream of Margaret and his new-born
happiness. Keith could not sleep, and had no
happiness to dream of. He paced up and
down his bedroom for some minutes thoughtfully,
till the walk culminated in a strong
desire to try reading as a panacea for wakefulness.
No book was available that he cared to
read, and the magazine, in which he had glanced

at an interesting article on the history of
ancient glass, lay on the table in the sitting-room.
Taking up his candle, he started inquest
of it. The blue room felt stifling when
he entered it. He had forgotten to put out the
lamp, which was still alight, spreading a circle
of mellow rays around. A smell and thickness
of tobacco-smoke infected the air with the
odour of a tap-room. The chairs, scattered
about in disorder, were pushed aside as he had
left them. On one lay the violin with its
broken string. He set down the candle, lifted
the blind, and opened the French window.
The night was calm, the heavens clear, the
stars innumerable.

Every one of those is a world,' he thought,
as he looked upward, ' and perhaps contains
millions of eager souls ; and yet, miserable little
emmet that we are, we each fancy our own
self the special object of Divine interference !'

He let fall the blind, leaving the window
ajar, and walked back to the table. By the
side of the magazine he had come to fetch lay
a volume of La Kochefoucauld.

I wonder if he would have any comfort forme
now,' thought Keith, opening it, and turning
over the leaves casually. He read at random,
drawing a chair near, in which to seat himself.

" Jl ny a que ceux qui sont reprisals qui
craignent d'etre deprives." *' Notre sagesse
n'est pas moins a la merci de la fortune que
nos biens." " On pardonne tant que Ton
aime." If Dorothy had really loved me, she
would have forgiven,' he mused, reading
further : * " La promptitude ^ croire le mal
sans Savoir assez examine, est un effet de
I'orgueil et de la paresse. On veut trouver des
eoupables, et on ne veut pas se donner la peine
examiner les crimes." ** C'est une grande
folie de vouloir etre sage tout seul." '

Here was no comfort : worldly maxims only,
head lacking heart ; a universe governed by
reason and self-interest, without one spark of
kindly feeling ; a mass of self-deception. And
this was the philosophy on which he had
formed himself, these the maxims he had approved
so highly ; these painfully elaborated
futile theories of life, they had brought him
to this, loneliness — remorse — ennui ! What
did refinement and taste avail, or to be a
judge of bric-a-brac, and a connoisseur of old
pictures, if no faith dwelt in his heart, and
life was rotten at the core ? He sighed for a
guide, for a rock, something on which to
anchor firmly his failing courage and his
crumbling principles.

He looked up from his book listlessly, seeking
inspiration ; and as he looked, he saw a
face at the window he had just unbarred,
putting aside the blind. Not an answer to
his unspoken prayer. A face, cold, white and
deathlike ; the face he saw sometimes in his
dreams, and oftener in his fancy — the face of
Joynte !

Speechless he stayed, watching Joynte's

hand, then his head, finally his whole body,
emerge from the window, and step into the
room. This was no phantom of an excited
brain, but the man himself, more haggard and
wretched-looking than ever.

What brings you here V said Keith, when
his accustomed self-control enabled him to
speak with tolerable composure.

To see you and have a talk.'

Joynte's steps were somewhat unsteady :
he snatched at a chair near. Keith stood
firm and collected.

'You're drunk !' he said, realizing his
advantages.

Not very ! Fm sober enough to hear
all you have to say. My presence is a surprise
to you, I suppose — a pleasant surprise?
I'll warrant your good lady said nothing
about me ; she's a close un, she is.'

What do you mean V inquired Keith,
ominously quiet.

Mrs. Chester begged me to keep her
secret ; she was afraid you wouldn't be so
generous if you knew of her helping me.'

Do I understand you to say that you took
money from my wife ?'

Joynte nodded, ' Hush-money !'

Do you know, I've a mind to knock you
down now, you scoundrel I We're alone here ;
not a soul would hear your cries — the servants
sleep sound !'

Joynte drew back nervously ; the light in
Keith's eyes was dangerous.

What good would it do you to hurt me V
he whined. * Look here, Mr. Chester ; I am
tired of the life I am leading. I want to
reform. Those lotteries are the deuce ; you
can't count on them at all. Let's come to
terms. I've met a clever lawyer fellow, and
he is going to act for me — take up my case,
get me back my fortune. He says we have
plenty of right on our side, and that you've no
claim to the fortune of the girl you murdered.'

Keith moved again, and threateningly lifted
his arm. Joynte backed a little.

There, let me finish. I know you won't
care to face exposure ; no one does. Even if

I fail, you would be done for ; besides, it isn't
at all pleasant, having all your private affairs
raked up and brought into the light of day.
Now, will you make terms ? Be reasonable.
Hand over the half of the fortune. My lawyer
shall draw up a deed. I'll sign it ; and we'll
cry quits !'

You wretched sneak cried Keith, ' 111 do
nothing of the kind.'

Not for Mrs. Chester's sake V

A sudden idea seemed to strike Keith.
What did you say to her then ? Did you tell
her that — what you said just now — about Miss
Phaer V

Joynte laughed uneasily. ' I can't exactly
remember what I said — a fellow is not in the
witness-box always. But I can tell you she
seemed to know all about it. She's mighty fond
of you too, with it all. Your good looks
have served you well.'

She knew all about it, and you told her.
Get out of my sight this minute, or I'll
strike you — I will ! Get out I'

Joynte gained the window pretty quickly,
Keith coming close behind him, in no humour
for trifling.

Get out of my sight — get out !' he repeated.

You shall hear from my lawyer,' said

Joynte, with as much dignity as his hurried
exit would permit.

I don't care a fig for your lawyer. Make
haste, get out with you — go !'

Joynte fled. Keith watched him cross the
terrace and disappear among the shrubs. He
closed and barred the window again ; his breath
was coming quickly, his head swam. He put
his hand out, caught at a chair, and sat down.

The scoundrel !' he said between his teeth.
It's all plain enough now. She believed him,
she thought me a murderer T His limbs
seemed to shrink together as he sat bowed
down like an old man, his head between his
hands. What should he do ? What could he
do ? ' My little girl,' he moaned ; *my poor
little girl.'

This was the supreme bitterness. That he
had been bad and foolish, and that she, the
woman he loved, no longer believed in him.
She had shrunk from him and left him, and
she had paid money that the world should
never hear of his guilt. She had hid his sin
in her own heart, but it had stung her like the
viper cherished in a man's bosom.

THE GRAVE OF ALL THINGS HATH ITS VIOLET.'

EITH appeared at breakfast next
morning looking pale and haggard
What is the matter ?' said
Johnnie, checking himself in the
midst of a joyous whistle as he noticed the
expression of his friend's face. ' Aren't you
well ?'

Quite well, but I'm worried. I've heard
something.'

Heard something ! Why, you haven't
begun to read your letters yet.'

Johnnie pointed to the pile which lay beside
Keith's plate with their seals still unbroken.


'No ; I've thought of something. I must
go and see my wife to-day.'

VOL. III. 19

Ah, that will be a very good thing. I trust
you will make it up with her.'

I have very little hope of that ; but you
may be sure I shall do the best I can. I have
not forgotten what you said to me last night.'

'What — that about Horsfall? Well, if it has
done any good, I'm glad I told you. I was
afraid I had done wrong. You looked so
strange after.'

A man may well look strange when he
hears '

Keith stopped and gulped down some tea.

I shall spend the morning with Margaret,'
presently observed Johnnie ; ' my horses are
all stumped up and want a rest. Besides, I
ought to make my offer formally to Mrs.
Strait to-day, I suppose.'

Keith thought with bitterness that it was
barely a year ago since he, with a light heart,
satisfied vanity, and an elastic step, had gone
to make his offer also. He was bent on another
errand to-day -; a more unpleasant errand ;
perhaps also a fruitless one.

I suppose you will be home to dinner,'
said Johnnie carelessly, stretching across for
the newspaper. ' By Jove ! that fellow has
won the walking match ! I never thought he
would.'

Yes ; I imagine I shall be home to dinner.
It's only eleven miles to drive to Slowchester,
and I have ordered the dogcart.'
■ ' Good luck to you then, old fellow, and
may you be as fortunate with Dorothy as I
hope to be with her sister said Johnnie,
putting his hands in his pockets and breaking
into a whistle as he dawdled oiF.

Bowling along in a swift dogcart on the
straight high-road, Keith found ample leisure
for his reflections, and for the preparation
of many convincing and eloquent speeches,
Which he, like the rest of men, would never
utter when the crisis arrived. How should
he begin? He disliked long explanations and
many words. If people did not understand
one another at once, endless speeches never
assisted them. Would not the best and most
persuasive way be just to fold her in his arms
and say, ' I am come back. You have misjudged
me, but I am ready to atone'? But
then he had already used words and gestures
to that effect, and she had simply loosed herself
from his embrace, and bestowed him to
leave her. What if she were to do so again?
True, at that time she did not understand —
he had not explained ; now, with his recently
acquired knowledge of her thoughts, and his

19— -2

own excellent resolutions, surely it must be
different.

He touched this willing horse with the whip ;
an unruly impatience urged him on ; the
road was so long, the time so tedious till he
could see her and make everything right. He
drove straight to the inn at Slowchester, left
his groom and trap there, and proceeded on
foot to the little lodo-ino;.

The answer to his question, ' Is Mrs. Chester
at home ?' struck him at once with an ominous
chill :

She will not return till one o'clock.'

I must see her. I can wait,' he urged.

The maid hesitated.

It is all right. I am Mrs. Chester's husband.'


*Yery well, sir. Then will you step this
way? But I'm afraid you will have at least
an hour to wait.'

^ I can wait.'

The little sitting-room had resumed its
normal aspect ; the bed used by Judith was
removed, and the spare, shabby furniture
looked shabbier still in the grey daylight.
Keith noticed that there was no fire in the
grate. It was laid ready, but the fact that the
poor teacher could not even afford the smallest

unnecessary luxury touched him with resentful
compassion. He found a match, stooped
down and lit the fire. There ! that was
better. He had done something for her
already. It seemed like the first step on the
road to expiation.

The cheap prints and common green reps
curtains jarred sadly on his taste ; the room,
too, looked stiff and tidy, and not a bit as if
Dorothy had ever lived in it. He glanced at
the small table in the window : some snowdrops
and violets were in a glass, a pot of
hyacinths stood near, and a photograph. He
took it up ; yes, it was his. Ah ! that was
more like her, the dear child ! She treasured
his memory then, she thought of him still.
This discovery cheered him amazingly, and
he waited with tolerable patience by the side
of a bright fire, till the grating of the latch-key
in the lock reached his quick ear, and announced
her approach.

She came in rapidly, and walked up to the
table before she observed him. She was
dressed in grey, and had some books tied up
with a strap, an umbrella, and a bunch of
violets in her hand.

Keith !'

She started back violently.

Don't be frightened, dear lie said gently.
I am come to talk to sou about — a matter of
business.'

With rapid regret he realized that to gain
her attention he must talk of practical
matters, not of sentiment.

She turned quietly to close the door, which
she had left open in her surprise, put down
the books and umbrella, keeping the violets
in her hand, and stood a few paces off, prepared
to listen. Her manner was perfectly
quiet and composed ; her face sad and
serious.

You are thin, Dorothy,' said Keith. 'You
look tired ; you work too much.'

I have had a hard morning,' she said,
smelling at her violets.

It distresses me to see you look so tired.'

She gave him a little sad smile.

^ I suppose you did not come to talk about
my looks.' Keith felt himself denied even the
expression of concern. ' What was the business
you mentioned just now?'

I have many things to tell you ; but first,
promise me that you will listen — that you will
not want to run away directly.*

No, I shall not run away ! I must have
some luncheon presently, and then return to

my pupils. See, there's the clock — I can give
you ten minutes.'

How changed you are, Dorothy I' he said
in a tone of surprise (men are always surprised
at a woman's indifference), as he listened to
her self-possessed talk and the absence of sentiment
she displayed.

He little knew that only this very morning,
as she walked along the muddy street, under
the leaden February sky, she had repeated to
herself with an accent of despair the words of
a song —

Hush ! a voice from the far-away :
Listen and learn," it seems to say ;
All the to-morrows shall be as to-day.
The cord is frayed, the cruse is dry,
The link must break and the lamp must die,
Good-bye to Hope — good-bye — good-bye !" '

feeling their strange appropriateness to her
present fate.

But Dorothy knew that for her own sake
she must keep up a barrier of calm indifference,
or her heart might speak, and then — no, it
would never do.

"What was the business 7 she urged again.
It was not about money, I hope, for you know
I do not need any,'

It had something to do with it, certainly.

T want to ask you — low came you to give
Joynte money ?^

A pink flush overspread her cheek, reaching
even to the neck, half concealed by the strings
of her small grey bonnet.

Who said this ? Do sou know whether it
is true?'

' I know it is true — and I know what you
thought — it was a mistake. I didn't hear till
yesterday that Lady Darlington had insulted
you — that you had suffered for my sake; and
I felt then I must come and tell you how
grieved I am for this — that you — Won't you
relent — Dorothy ?'

She dared not trust herself to speak, for
she had caught the deep pain in Keith's
voice, and the tremulous fall, almost a sob,
with which the sentence ended.

After a moment's silence, she said :

And you want me to '

Yes — to remember that we are married ;
that we are one in the eyes of the world —
and that I love you very dearly.'

And will that compensate for all the wrong
that has been done?' she said very softly.
Will that change anything — even if I loved
you ?'

I give you my word, Dorothy, I am innocent

of that — that grave charge — of what you
thought. How could you ? I am not — a
murderer P

The word was said almost in a whisper ; and
yet to both it seemed as if the sound of the
syllables echoed round the room with the clear
blast of a trumpet.

They were sitting now — he in the uncomfortable
armchair beside the fire, she in a
smaller one near the table, against which she
gently swung and tapped the violets as she
spoke :

Joynte told me nothing she said dreamily.
What I know, I read in a letter — the letter in
your bureau. It seemed — very clear. He
was there, and saw it all.'

'You mean Joynte — but that is a lie!' he
said eagerly.

'A lie that he saw it?' she said, grave reproach
speaking in her eyes.

That is to say, what he inferred was a lie.
Miss Phaer poisoned herself. I had nothing
to do with it. I never dreamt of such a thing.'

But you brought the poison ; she poured it
into the glass, and — and you never called for
help.'

Dorothy's timidity had given place to a keen
lucidity of apprehension. She spoke in clear,

concise tones, like a counsel disentangling
evidence.

I will tell you he said quickly. ' Miss
Pliaer had found out about Judith. She was
fearfully jealous. We had some terrible scenes
together. She vowed she would never see me
again ; in fact, she had written to forbid me
her presence any more. I was mad and
miserable, I had no money — I was in debt.
I counted on my marriage to retrieve everything.
My father was just dead, the estate
heavily encumbered. When Ida said she
would not marry me, I felt such a hateful
existence was no longer possible. I bought

some poison

Yes. Go on.^

Dorothy's eyes dilated with agonized suspense;
with parted lips she hung on every
word, clasping her slim fingers together
tightly, as though trying to control any expression
of feeling.

I went to Miss Phaer through the little
garden-gate, of which I had still kept the key,
so that no one should see me enter. I told
her I should kill myself unless she relented.
She refused. I poured out the poison, meaning
to swallow it. At that instant something
stirred outside. I went to the window to

see if we were watched. When I turned
round again, Ida, mistaking it for water, was
drinking the poison. I lost my head. The
terrible consequences, the suspicion that would
fall upon me — fear, horror, overwhelmed me.
What could I do ? No one could save her;
the poison was swift and certain. I had taken
care of that. I fled. That is my crime.'

Do you expect me to believe this — this
horrible story?' said Dorothy coldly.

Keith leant back in his chair. He was
ghastly pale, and wiped the drops of perspiration
from his forehead.

By all that is most holy, I swear it is true !'

Yet, knowing of this wrong, that you had
been the involuntary cause of her death, you
still took her fortune, depriving Joynte of his
lawful inheritance.'

He was a lunatic and a scapegrace, and
the will leaving me the money was indisputable.'


Legally, perhaps, you were right ;
but '

Dorothy, I have repented. God knows
the money has not brought me happiness.'

Joynte has claims still '

He would drink and gamble everything
away.'

But you may make amends. Oh, that
money! the very thought of it stifles me !
There must be some way of compensation.'

I have suffered a great deal, but I am glad
now you know the truth. It is a load off my
mind. It is not quite as bad as you thought,
darling ; is it ? You will not let it part us ?
You will have patience — teach me to make
amends.'

She sat there cold and unmoved. What
amends could anyone make ? Death had
stepped in between. He stretched forward as
if to take her hand ; but he did not take it —
he only bent his head down and touched it
reverently with his lips. The humility of
the action struck her. It was not like Keith.

You are innocent, you say T Her voice
sounded weak and tired. ' Then what has
happened ? Have I dreamt it all — the shame,
the misery ?'

No, it was not a dream — a mistake, dear,
only. Try and trust me.'

She looked at him with slow, piercing eyes
eyes that looked beyond and far away from
the pale agitated man at her side, to the old
Keith, the handsome, clever ideal of her young
fancy. What had she to do with this Keith ?
It seemed to her as though they were both of

them shadows, without life or meaning,
speaking in cold, hollow voices, moving noiselessly
in the scenes where their prototypes,
passionate and loving, had lived and suffered.
Nothing seemed to move her in this phantom
state. She could look on and listen ; it did
not concern her. What could she care ? She
was dead already, and slipping away into
chill, shadowy space.

Help me to retrieve, Dorothy,' the voice at
her side said again. ' Is there not happiness
in pity?'

It had come to this ; he asked for pity !

I must think,' she said quietly, statuesque
in her still composure ; ^ I must think. It is
so strange ; I must get accustomed. Leave
me, please.'

When may I come again ?' he said, insisting
with a persistence which gave her no
sensation but that of unwelcome fatigue.

I will write to you. Good-bye,' she said.

He took his hat and made a few steps
towards the door ; then he stopped, turned,
and broke out passionately:

Dorothy, remember my life is in your
hands ; and I do love you !'

His eyes sought the bunch of violets, which
lay on the floor, dropped by her when she rose

suddenly to bid him good-bye. He picked it
up, and held it silently.

They are dead,' she said, still in her
dreamy voice — ' like everything else I cared for.'

They will revive in water, and our happiness
will come back again too — if you will
only let me love you,' he answered, putting
the violets in his button-hole.

When he was gone, she remained standing
there, in a kind of weary dream, motionless,
with her hands hanging listlessly at her side.
Keith had asked for impossibilities ; he had
asked her to piece together a broken life — to
restore a shattered love. Did she not love
him then ? — yes ; she must always love him.
The feeling had got woven into the very fabric
of her life ; but yet there was something
different. She cherished her ideal love carefully
in a secret shrine, where no rude eye
dared to pierce ; but she shrank with a keen
sense of pain from the love that, no longer
safe and guarded, could be transformed into
an everyday article of ordinary feelings, commonplace
words, flimsy quarrels, and insignificant
caresses. Suppose she learned to despise
him ? Ah! she had eut her haunting fear
into words after all ; and then perhaps the
love would slip away from her, too, and she

would have nothing left. Was there no one
wiser than herself to advise and help her ?

It's lunch-time, ma'am !' Jane's voice
said, breaking upon her reverie, as she thrust
a somewhat grimy face in through the doorway.
' Shall I bring in the tray ?'

Yes ; you can bring it,' said Dorothy, returning
with a sudden thrill to common things.

All the day long she went about mechanically,
giving her customary lessons, explaining
and reiterating with unfailing patience ; but
the shadows and the perplexity clung about
her always. She could not sleep at night ;
for, when she closed her eyes, she saw before
her in the thick darkness Keith's discomposed
features — his dilating pupils, and his sensitive
nostrils ; she heard his broken voice, and
the passionate words, 'I do love you, Dorothy !'
She wished to do what was pleasant ; she
meant to do what was right. But it was
there precisely that her fine perceptions failed
her. What tuas rio:ht to choose — T3eace and
solitude for herself? sorrow and disappointment
for Keith ? or else to share the burden
bravely with him, and try what could be made
of their wrecked happiness ? This seemed an
affair of duty more than of feeling : in which
direction lay the duty ? There was the knotty
point. Perhaps Mr. Maynard could solve the

difficulty : lie who saw everything irradiated
by the light of his own holy enthusiasm.

Not many days after, one Saturday afternoon,
the Yicar, responding to her wish as
expressed in the little urgent note she had
sent him, sat by her fireside.

You sent for me,' he asked, when he had
drunk his tea, and a constrained silence fell
upon them ; ' did you want to speak about
yourself ?'

I wonder — I wonder if crooked things can
ever be made straight ?' she said irrelevantly.

Are you speaking of yourself, or of
others ?' he said, looking; straight before him
into the ruddy caverns of the fire.

Of others.'

Do you lush to help them ?'

Yes,' she answered, after a moment's hesitation.
' Yes, I think I wish to help them ;
but life seems so difficult !'

It is difficult,' said the Yicar; ' it is meant
to be difficult and full of hard problems; it is
not meant to be a bed of roses.'

I thought it easy once,' she said, with a little
touch of regretful bitterness in her voice; 'but
I have found out my mistake.'

You loved things not people,' he said
quietly; ' there lay your mistake.'

How do you mean? I do not understand.'
Lie fixed lier serious eyes upon Ms calm face.
You loved the brightness, and the happiness,
and the feeling of expansion that came
to you like a revelation ; you delighted in
your own appreciation of intellect and the
sense of shared sympathy.'

Yes, I wanted to be happy,' she said with
a sigh; ' and I was happy, too, but it did not
last.'

Those were the tidings I speak of : you
loved them first, and then you loved the
people who procured you those enjoyments;
and now that you have lost your playthings,
and the unconscious gladness that permitted
you to prize them is gone, the people in their
turn seem different.'

But if they are — ^if one has worshipped a
false ideal, must one continue to worship it
for ever?'

There is no for ever in this world. You
need not worship an ideal if it be a false one,
but you can learn to feel tenderness for the
real thing, that which is true, and has its
beauty too, as well as the other.'

But if it is unworthy T she said in a low
voice, with her eyes bent down on the gaudy,
common carpet.

VOL. III. 20

Then make it worthy he said, his face
lighting up with a flash of spiritual fervour.

They did not speak again immediately;
they were both thinking deeply. Dorothy
was repeating to herself, as if it were a lesson,
But can I — can I — is it possible?'

Suddenly she spoke.

I suppose religion ought to help one, but
even that is compassed with difficulties. If
one asks questions and speculates, people call
one unorthodox; and they talk of doctrine as
if it were some strange, erudite riddle.'

" If any man will do His will, he shall
know of the doctrine whether it be of God," '
repeated the Vicar slowly, as though in response
to his own thoughts.

Ah ! I see,' she said, the shadow passing
away from her eyes, and some of the listless
languor fading from her face; 'you preached
about that once at Christmas, I have not
forgotten — it is in the doing that the knowing
comes to us. Thank you, Mr. Maynard; you
have answered my question.'

There was some sweetness left in life after
all, then; the pain of endurance led by hard
and jagged steps to the glorious rapture of
sacrifice; the flowers might bloom again —
upon a tomb !

MAY-TIME.

R. FLINT stood on the steps of
Blackness when Keith drove up,
moody and ill at ease.
'What is it, Flint? I don't
want to do business to-day.'

One moment, Mr. Chester, please ; I am
sorry to trouble you, but if you could spare
me one moment, just one, I have something
important to say to you.'

Chafing at the agent's importunity, Keith
led the way into the blue-room.

Now, what is it?' he said, leaning languidly
.against the chimney-piece.

The fact is,' said the agent, seeming considerably
perturbed, ' an unpleasant circumstance
has occurred. I want to ask you if
you know anything of a man, a stranger to

20—2

the people here, who was found dead on the
railway this morning, crushed by a passing
train. In his pocket was discovered this
letter addressed to you, and I brought it at
once to save time and find out if you can give
us any information respecting him. He was
evidently drunk, and in that condition got
upon the line, for an empty brandy-flask was
lying by his side.'

Mr. Flint held out a letter. Keith opened
and read it. When he had finished, he said,
without emotion:

I knew the man : he was half-mad, a dangerous
kind of fellow; in fact, was once shut
up in a lunatic asylum: latterly he had taken
to gambling and drink. It was a very natural
end to his career.'

Even as he spoke, a sickly smile passed over
Keith's face at the ghastly irony of fate. Only
this very morning Dorothy had entreated him
to make amends, to restore the fortune to
Joynte; and now the latter lay crushed and
mangled, a soulless corpse, silent in the eternity
of the irrevocable. He crumpled the
paper between his fingers. ' There is nothing
in this,' he said ; ' it is only a line to ask
me to see him.' Joynte must have written
the letter before the nocturnal interview, and

kept it in his pocket when it was of no further
use.

Had he any relations, do you know — anyone
that should be communicated with?' said
Mr. Flint, thoughtful and business-like.

None that I know of. He was an
American.'

His name?'

Elias F. Joynte.'

Thank you, Mr. Chester. I do not think
I need detain you any longer. I shall let you
know when anything further is required of
you.'

Mr. Flint bustled out, and left Keith leaning
against the mantelpiece, with as set and still
a face as the marble itself. The nightmare
that had haunted his life was dissolved;
no one could harm him now; his claim to the
money was not likely to be disputed ; he was
in peace, alone, alone with the ghosts of the
past. Would they gibber and haunt him
again with pale beckoning fingers and dry
mocking lips, or were they laid in the grave
of their dead hopes for ever? Then his
thoughts reverted to Dorothy, to the woman
who loved him in spite of everything ; for he
knew, yes, he was sure she loved him — her
sad eyes, her trembling voice revealed it.

Would this make any difference to her f No
restitution was attainable, no public obloquy
likely now ; and if she pardoned — oh, there
could be no if surely ! — then his life could be
radically changed, spiritually transformed in
the vivifying warmth of her love, and the fatal
memories float away — far away on the ocean
of time. He must write to her at once and
tell her; yes, he must write.

It was the month of May. The warm-scented
atmosphere was full of the odour of
lilacs and thorn ; butterflies danced and hovered
over the sunny grass-plot, rejoicing in their
little harmless lives, and the lark lifted his
song to heaven.

Dorothy paced slowly in the garden of the
Angel House, thinking not wholly unpleasant
thoughts; for a sweet smile curved her sensitive
lips, and her fingers moved caressingly
over two letters she held open in her hand.
We may peep over her shoulder and read
them :

^ Dear Dorothy' (said the pink missive),
We parted somewhat coldly, I remember,
but you are too good and sensible to bear
malice. I want to tell you how sorry I am I

ever misjudged you ; but it was really owing
to your extraordinary secrecy and reserve, for
I do think you might have trusted me. I
understand now that the shabby man you met
at the Green Man public-house — an action
which shocked dear Lady Lancelot so much —
was an old hanger-on of your husband's,
whom you assisted with money, which was
very charitable and pretty of you ; and had
you only said so straightforwardly at once, of
course no one would have dreamt of finding
fault with you. Lord Lancelot, too, has since
told me that he was mistaken in his idea of
you, and that you were rather prudish than
otherwise in your behaviour to him ; he • has
asked me to make his humble apology to you
if he gave any offence. At the time he met
you, and paid you some silly compliment or
other, which you know is a way men have, he
was not aware you were Mr. Chester's wife.

After this explanation, which I trust is
sufficiently satisfactory, let us be friends
again; and when your husband and you are
reconciled, and living happily at Blackness —
which I hear is a probable contingency —
both Buffie and I hope you will pay us a visit.
Mind, it must be a very long one, for we
shall have a great deal to talk about. And

now, my dear Dorothy, believe me to be,
as always,

Your very affectionate friend,

Nina Darlington

The other letter contained only two lines,
but Dorothy's eyes lingered over them
strangely :

Dorothy,

When may I come ? You said you
would write. I am waiting.

Keith.'

Slowly and meditatively Dorothy again
read these brief words, in which she recognised
the passionate hope of a man's life. It
was the anniversary of her wedding-day: just
so had the larks sung; just so had the lilacs'
scent stolen over her quickened senses ; just
so had she waited — then.

She had written ' Come.' And even as she
read the letters traced by his hand, he might
be near ; his steps would not lag now, she
knew ; the little gate would open with a
click. She looked up. Yes ! He was there,
standing with the sunshine beaming on his
grave features, their delicate beauty refined by

mental pain, and the dark eyes glowing hopefully.


She held out her hand to him, and he took
it silently, leaning over it with a kind of
reverent courtesy.

Mine, Dorothy,' he said in a low, vibrating
voice ; ' mine really, at last !'

She looked at him, her eyes shining clear
with tremulous love, as of one who had
travelled far into the land of sorrow, and seen
the beckoning star of hope that lies beyond
the shadows. Her lips moved. He bent to
listen.

" If any man shall do His will, he shall
know of the doctrine whether it be of God"" '

THE END.

BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD AND LONDON.

S. & H.

ARE NOW APPEARING IN THE

nS2r~v

I.

BELINDA. By Rhoda Boughton, Author

of ' Cometh up as a Flower ' Good-bye, Sweetheart !'
Second Thoughts,' etc.

II.

JANE STEWART. By Mrs. Linn Linton
Author of * Patricia Kimball,' etc.

III.
UNSPOTTED FROM THE World.

By Mrs. G. W. Godfrey, Author of * Dolly,' 'The
Beautiful Miss Roche,' etc.

BESIDES ESSAYS AND SHORTER STORIES.

Monthly at all Booksellers', price One Shilling.

«(

One can never help enjoying I ' Who does not welcome " Temple

Temple Bar'" — Guardian. | ^a;-.?"'— John Bull.

LONDON :
RICHARD BENTLEY & SON, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

0112 04641401
