HttlL .J-hhcu M*n<L FietJt**

TALES

OF

WOMAN'S Trials.

BY

MRS. S. C. HALL.

NEW EDITION WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.

PHILADELPHIA:

J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY.

1889.

»

INTRODUCTION.

It is very pleasant to me, after the years that have

elapsed since the "Tales of Woman's Trials" first found

favour with the Public, to be called upon to write an

Introduction to a new edition — the sixth edition — of a

book with a title that ray worthy publisher thinks too

grave for the "taste of the times," but to which I cling

with the affection that can be felt only for an old friend.

I cannot therefore change it : the Tales are " Tales op

Woman's Trials," and so they must remain.

Yet those who take the book in hand to read it, must

be by no means under the impression that it is all

gloom : far, very far, from it. There are few of these

stories, — few, indeed, of any of my stories — that "end

badly."

Trials are often Triumphs : so I have endeavoured to

depict them. Happiness is sure to arise from reckoning

our troubles less, and counting our blessings more. Daily

iii

experience gives force to the emphatic lines of the poet,

that trials which seem to us "afflictions," are not really so:

But oftentimes celestial benedictions

Assure this dark disguise."

My stories are, I believe, calculated, — certainly they are

intended, — to afford cause for cheerfulness, and not gloom

not for murmuring, but for thankfulness and gratitude

to the Giver of all Good.

CONTENTS.

L

DBAWH BT XBOBATEH. )ifl»

THE GOVERNESS J. Noel Palm J. G. Nicol . . 1

11.

GRACE HUNTLEY E. it. Ward. . . J.Q. Nicholls . . 55

m.

THE WIFE OF TWO HUSBANDS . . . /. Franklin . . . J. 0. NickoUt . . 86

TV.

THE FORCED BLOOMS H. C. Shout. . . W.j-G. Meatom . 138

V.

THE MOSSPITS J. Gilbert . . . . J. Baiting 164

VL

THE OLD MAID /. Noel Talon . . G. Jiahiel 201

VII.

THE USES OK ADVERSITY F. W. Hulme . . W.frQ. Meatom. 228

VHI.

THE MERCHANTS DAUGHTER . . . E. Corbould . . .J. Ratlin 268

IX.

THE PRIVATE PURSE /. Noel Palm . . J. 0. Nichols . . 285

X.

THE CURSE OF PROPERTY /. Franklin . . . J. 0. Nicol . . 318

XI.

Drawn BT EKGBAVEB. rial

LOST BEAUTY J.Noel Palm . . O. Dalael . . . . 34J

Nil

THE WISDOM OF FORETHOUGHT . W. Weir W.^G. Meatom. 353

XIH.

THE DAILY GOVERNESS F.W. Sulme . . W.#- G. Meatom . 387

XIV.

THE MOTHER F.W. Topkam. . W.^G. Meatom. 396

V V.

THE YOUNG PERSON R.R. Milan . . G. Darnel 426

XVI.

BEAR AND FORBEAR F.W. Holme . . W.&G.Meatom . 438

THE GOVERNESS.

PART THE FIRST.

•JKSfS^; HEAD my advertisement thus: — 'Wanted — a

»3S IsR Governess,' " commenced Mi's. Gresham, who had

t^vlii 'rt cased upon her sister, Mrs. Hylier, to consult 

■*-'"-^ morning the important document ; Mrs. Gresham

and Mrs. Hylier being both in want of resident governesses to

educate their children. A visitor was also present, a Mrs. Real,

n

confessedly the " most clever woman " of the neighbourhood —

an astonishing manager : but although the ladies desired her

advice, they were somewhat in dread of her sarcasm.

Mrs. Gresham had repeated, " Wanted — a Governess," when

an old gentleman, a Mr. Byfield, was announced. The trio of

wives and mothers looked at each other, as if to say, " What

a bore !" — and then Mrs. Hylier rose gracefully from her chaise

Icngue, and, smiling sweetly, extended her hand, and welcomed

Mr. Byfield with exceeding warmth of manner ; while Mrs.

Gresham and Mrs. Ryal declared aloud their delight at being sq

fortunate as to meet a neighbour they had so rarely the pleasure

to see.

The party thus assembled were all inhabitants of the bustling

yet courtly suburb of Kensington ; and Mr. Byfield, being a rich

and influential though a very eccentric man, was sure of the

deference which people of small means are too prone to exhibit

towards those whose fortunes ure ample. .

Do not let me interrupt you in the least, Indies," said

the old mau, quietly taking his sent near the window. " Mr.

Hylier promised I should look over these pictures by daylight;

and when you have talked your own talk, there will be time

enough for mine." The ladies, one und all, declared their conviction

that his " talk " must lie more pleasant aud instructive

than theirs. He smiled — shook his head — touched his hat

(which he had laid at his feet), as if to say he would either go or

have his own way: and so Mrs. Gresham recommenced reading —

Wanted — a Governess. Any lady possessing a sound English

education, a thorough knowledge of the theory and practice of

instrumental aud vocal music, and a perfect acquaintance with

the French, Italian, aud German languages ; also with tee rudiments

of Latin "

Latin I" interrupted Mrs. Ryal. " Latin ! why, what do you

want with Latin for a pack of girls ,"

I thought," answered Mrs. Gresham, meekly, " that as there

ure but three girls, Teddy might do his lessons with them for a

little while ; and that would save the expense of a tutor."

Oh, very good — very good," replied Mrs. Ryal ; " the add

also, Greek : if the governess is anything of a classic, you'll get

both for the same money."

Thank you, dear Mrs. Ryal ; how clever you are ! G-r-, there

are two 'sees' in Greek? — also the rudiments of Latin and

Greek."

I beg your pardon once more," said the provokingly " clever

lady ;" " but make it Greek aud Latin ; that is the correct way."

,: Greek and Latin, and the principles of drawing — if her character

will bear the strictest investigation, may hear of a highly

• respectable situation by applying to Z. P.*

Post-paid," again suggested Mrs Ryal.

Of course," continued M rs. Gresham ; " and as the lady will

be treated as one of the family, a high salary will not be given."

Well," said Mrs. Ryal, " I think that will do. You have not

B]>ecined writing and arithmetic."

"English education includes that, does it not?"

Why, yes ; but you have said nothing about the sciences."

The children are so young."

But they grow older every day."

Indeed that is true," observed pretty Mrs. Hylier, with a sigh

and a glance at the pier-glass. "My Helen, though only ten,

looks thirteen. I wish her papa would let her go to school; but

one of his sisters imbibed some odd philosophie notions at school,

so that he won't hear of it,"

Certainly," observed Mrs. Ryal, " I will never again take a

governess into my house to reside — they are all emigrants. One

wtiß imprudent enough to wish to get married, and expected to

come into the drawing-room when there was company of an

evening. Another would have a bedroom to herself; though,

I atnare, no one could object to sleep in the same room with

my cmti maid. Another — really the world is very depraved —

occasioned a painful difference between Mr. Ryal and myself;

and let that be a warning to you, my dear friends, not to admit

any pretty, quiet, sentimental young ladies into your domestic

circles. Mr. Ryal is a very charming man, and a good man ;

but men are but men, after all, and can be managed by anyone

who will flutter them a little. Of course, he is a man of the

highest honour ; but there is no necessity for having a person in

the house who plays and sings better than one's-self."

Oh, my dear Mrs. Ryal !" exclaimed both voices, "you need

never fear comparison with any oue." The jealous lady looked

pleased, but shook her head. " Well, at last I resolved to be my

own governess — with the assistance of a young person, who comes

daily for three, and sometimes I get four, hours out of her ; and

she is very reasonable — two guineas a month, and dines with the

children. She is uot all I could wish. Her manners are a little

defective, for she is not exactly a lady. Her father is a very

respectable man, keeps that large butter shop at the corner — I

forget — somewhere off Piccadilly ; but I prefer it, my dear ladies,

I preferred — she does all the drudgery without grumbling. Your

officers' and clergymen's daughters, and decayed gentlewomen,

why, their high-toned manners — if they never speak a word —

prevent one's being quite at ease with them, though they are,

after all, only governesses."

But," suggested Mrs. Gresham, mildly, " lady-like manners

Are so very necessary."

Yes," answered Mrs. Ryal, "so they are ; for you and I "

And children so easily imbibe vulgar habits, that it is really

necessary to have a lady with them."

Well," said Mrs. Ryal with a sneer, " ladies are plenty

enough. I dare say you will have fifty answers. What salary

do you mean to give ?"'

Mrs. Gresham was a timid but kindhearted woman ; one who

desired to do right, but had hardly courage to combat wrong.

She was incapable of treating anything unkindly, but she would

be guilty of injustice if justice gave her much trouble ; she

hesitated, because she required a great deal, aud intended to

give very little.

7" cannot give more than five-and-twenty pounds a-year to

any one," said Mrs. Hylier, iii a decided tone. "My husband

says wc cannot afford to keep two men-servants and a governess.

He wanted me to give the governess seventy, and discharge

Thomas ; but that was quite impossible : so I have made up

my mid. There are only two girt ; no boys, like my sister

•»

Gresham's little ' Teddy : ' she can spend every evening in the

drawing-room when wc are by ourselves — have the keys of the

piano and library — amuse herself with my embroidery — go to

church in the carriage on Sunday — and drive at least once

a-week with the children in the Park. There ! " added Mrs.

Hylier, " I am sure there are hundreds of accomplished women

who would jump at such a situation, if they knew of it."

VVashiug included?" inquired Mrs. Ryal.

No. I think she must pay for her own washing, unless there

was some great inducement"

You allow no followers?"

Oh, certainly not. What can a governess want of friends ?

Her pupils ought to have all her time."

God help her !" murmured the old gentleman. The mvrmvr

was so indistinct, that the ladies only looked at each other ; and

then Mrs. Hylier said, " Did you sjieak, sir ? " There was no

answer ; the conversation was resumed with half a whisper from

one lady to another, that perhaps Mr. Byfield was not deaf at

all times.

And what do you intend giving, Mrs. Gresham ?" questioned

Mrs. Ryal.

I have three girls and a boy," she replied ; "and I thought

of forty."

It will be impossible to prevent your governess from talking

to mine, and then mine will get discontented ; that is not fair,

Fanny," observed her sister ; *' say five-and-thirty, allowing for

the difference of number."

And plenty, I call it," said Mrs. Ryal. " What do they want

but clothes? They never lay by for a rainy day. There are

hundreds — yes, of well-born and well-bred ladies — who would lie

glad of such situations."

I am sorry for it," said the old gentleman, rising and advancing

to where the three Kensington wives were seated ; " I

am very sorry for it."

* »

Indeed, Mr. Byfield ! why, wc shall have the better choice."

Forgive me, ladies, for saying so — but still more am I

grieved at that. Permit me to read your advertisement"

•

•

Mrs. Gresham coloured ; Mrs. Hylier had sufficient command

over herself not to appear annoyed ; but Mrs. Ryal, the oracle

of a clique, the "clover woman," who had, by dint of self-esteem

and effrontery, established a reputation for intellectual superiority

over those who were either too indolent or too ignorant

to question her authority, evinced her displeasure by throwing

herself back in her chair, loosening the tie of her borne, and

dressing her lips in one of those supercilious smiles that would

mar the beauty of an angel.

Wanted, a Governess," read tho old gentleman, who frequently

interrupted himself to make such observations as the

following : — " ' Any lady possessing a sound English education'

that in itself is no easy thing to attain — ' a thorough knowledge

of the theory and practice of vocal and instrumental music ' — a

thorough knowledge of the theory and practice of either the one

or the other requires the labour of a man's life, my good ladies —

'aud a perfect acquaintance with the French, Italian, aud

German languages ' — how very useless and absurd to found professorships

of modern languages in our new colleges, when, in

addition to the musical knowledge that would create a composer,

a single person, a young female, can be found possessed of a

perfect acquaintance with French, Italian, and German ! Oh,

wonderful age ! — 'also, the rudiments of Greek and Latin — may

hear of a highly respectable situation, by applying to Z. P., postpaid,

Post-office, Kensington.' Much as you expect in the way

of acquirements and accomplishments, ladies," continued the

critic, still retaining fast hold of poor Mrs. Gresham's document,

you have not demanded a great deal on the score of religion or

morality — neither are mentioned in jour list of requisites."

"Oh!" exclaimed Mrs. Hylier, "they are take for granted.

No one would think of engaging a governess that was not

moral, and all that sort of thing, which are always matters of

course."

To be sure they are," added Mrs. Ryal, in that peremptory

tone which seemed to say, Do you dare to question my opinion ?

" to be sure they are ; and every one knows that nothing can

be more determined with respect to religion and morality than

my practice with my children. Rain, hail, or sunshine, well or

ill, the governess must be in the house before the clock strikes

nine. Psalms read the first thing ; and if they have not got well

through the French verbs, a chapter besides for punishment ;

catechism, Wednesdays nd Fridays ; and the Collect, Epistle,

and Gospel, by heart, every Sunday, after church. I always do

two things at once, when I can ; aud this strengthens their

memory, and teaches them religion at the same time. I never

questioned my governess as to religion — it looks narrow-minded;

and yet mine never dreams of objecting to what I desire."

I should think not." owns Mr. Byfield's quiet rejoinder ;

strange ideas your children will entertain of the religion that

is rendered a punishment instead of >-. reward."

Mrs. Ryal grasped the tassel of her muff, but made no reply.

Oh," he continued, " here is the pith in a postscript — ' As

the lady will be treated as one of the family, a high salary will

not be given.' Ladies ! " exclaimed the old man, "do you not

blush at this ? You ask for the fruits of an education that, if it

be half what you demand, must have cost the governess the

labour of a life, and her friends many hundred pounds. It is

your duty to treat as one of your family the person who is

capable of bestowing upon your children the greatest of earthly

blessings ; and yet you make the doing so a reason for abridging

a stipend, which pays a wretched interest for time and money.

Shame, ladies, shame ! "

The ladies looked at each other, and at last Mrs. Hylier said,

Really, sir, I do not see it at all in the light in which you put

it. I know numberless instances where they are glad to come

for less."

Tears came into Mrs. Gresham's eyes, and Mrs. Rid kicked

the ottoman violently.

"The more the pity," continued Mr. Byfield ; " but I hold it

to be a principle of English honesty to pay for value received,

aud of English honour not to take advantage of distress."

Suppose wc cannot afford it, sir — am I to do without a

governess for my children because my husband cannot pay her,

sixty or seventy pounds a-year • "

But you said just now, madam, that Mr. Hylier wished you

to pay that sum."

Yes," stammered the fair economist, " if — if "

"If you could manage with one footman," said the old gentleman,

" instead of two. In my young days, my wife, who had but

one child, and wc were poor, said to me — ' Joseph, our girl is

growing up without education, and I cannot teach, for I never

learned, but wc must send her to school.' I answered that wc

could uot afford it. ' Oh, yes, wc cau,' she said ; ' I will discharge

our servant ; I will curtail our expenses in every way, because I

am resolved that she shall be well educated, and honestly paid

for.' It never occurred to that right-minded, yet simple-hearted

woman to propose lower terms to a governess, but she

proposed less indulgence to herscl£ Tims she rendered justice.

She would sooner have worked her fingers to the bone than have

bargained for intellect. Ay, Mrs. Ryal, you may laugh ; but of

all meanness, the meanest is that which depreciates mid, and

having no power but the power that proceeds from a full purse,

insults the indigence which often hides more of the immaterial

world beneath a russet gown, than your wealth can purchase."

"My wealth!" exclaimed the offended lady; "your wealth,

if you please ; but though your wealth, and your oddity, and

your altogether, may awe some people, they can have no effect

upon me, Mr. Byfield — none in the world ; every one says you

are a strange creature."

"My dear Mrs Ryal," said Mrs. Hylier, "you positively must

not grow angry with our dear friend, Mr. Byfield ; he does not

mean half what he says."

"I beg your pardon," interrupted the eccentric old gentleman ;

I mean a great deal more. I only wish I had the means of

giving to the world my opinion as to the inestimable value of

domestic education for females. I would have every woman

educated within the sanctuary of her own home. I would not

loosen the smallest fibre of the affection which binds her to her

father's house ; it should be at once her altar aud her throne ;

but as it is a blessing which circumstances prevent ruauy from

enjoying, I would command the legislature of this mighty

country to devise some means for the better ordering and investigation

of ' ladies' boarding schools.' To set up an establishment

for young ladies is very often the last resource for characterless

women, and persons who, failing in all else, resort to that

as a means of subsistence. Such temporary homes should be

under the closest superintendence of high-minded and right-thinking

gentlewomen. I look upon the blue-boarded and

brass-plated schools that swarm in our suburbs," he added, as he

turned away to hide an emotion he could not control — " I look

upon them as the very charnel-houses of morality."

Mrs. Ryal elevated her eyebrows, and shrugged her shoulders,

while the gentle Mrs. Gresham whispered her " not to mid ;

that Mr. Byfield was half-mad on the subject of schools."

Ladies," said the old man, apparently recovered from his

agitation, and in his usually quiet, calm, yet harshly-toned voice;

ladies, you are, in different degrees, all women of the world ;

you live with it, aud for it, and you are of it, but you are also

mothers ; and though your Ellen, Mrs. Hylier, does grow so

fast as almost to overtake her mother's beauty, and you, Mrs.

Ryal, stand in open defiance of vulgar contagion, because you

fear a rival in a well-bred governess, and get more time out of

your daily labourer than you would expect from your milliner

for the same money ; and you, Mrs. Gresham — but I cannot

say to you more that that you all love your children - some

more, some less — still according to your natures you all love

them dearly. So did I mine. My child was all the world tome

! I told you what harper mother did for her improvement

the sacrifice she made. But though wc had the longing to

secure for her every advantage, wo had no skill as to the means

of obtaining the knowledge wc so desired her to possess. Wo

placed her at a ' first-rate school,' as it was called, and thought

wo had dono our duty ; but this going from her home loosened

the cords of love that bound her to us. And when a sudden

stroke of good fortune converted a poor into a rich man.

and wc brought our child to a splendid house, wc found that

our daughter's morals had become corrupted through the means

of her companions — an evil the most, difficult of all for a

governess to avert — and that she had imbibed moral poison

with her mental food." The old gentleman became so agitated,

that he could uot proceed ; and angry as the ladies had been

with horn a few moments before for a plain-speaking which

amounted to rudeness, they could not avoid sympathising with

his feelings.

But wc are not going to send our children to a school,"

suggested Mrs. Gresham.

I know that, madam," he replied ; "but I want to convince

you, by comparison, of the blessings that await the power of

cultivating both the intellect and the affections under your own

roof, and so argue you into the necessity of paying honestly, if

not liberally, tho woman upon the faithful discharge of whose

duties depends the future happiness or misery of those dear ones

whom you have brought into the world. It is now twenty-two

years since I saw that daughter ; I shall never see her again in

this world ; I thought I had strength to tell you the story,

painful as it is, but I have not. I would have done so, in the

hope that I might have shown you how valuable, past all others,

are the services rendered by a worthy and upright woman when

entrusted with the education of youth ; but when I think of my

lost child. I forget everything else. She stands before me as I

speak. My blue-eyed lovely no ; nil innocence and truth —

the light, aud life, and love of that small four roomed cottage;

and then Bhe loved me truly and dearly ; and there again she

is — most beautiful, but cankered at the heart, fair, and frail !

Lay your children in their graves, and ring the joy-bells over

them, rather than intrust them to the whirling pestilence of a

large school, or the care of a cheap governess ! "

He certainly is mad," whispered Mrs. Ryal to Mrs. Hylier,

while the old gentleman, folding his hands one within the other,

walked up and down the room, his thoughts evidently for away

from the three wives, who were truly, as he had said, "mere

women of the world." And yet he was right — they all loved

their children, but it was after their own fashion ; Mrs. Gresham

with the most tenderness — she wished them to be good aud -

happy ; Mrs. Hylier's affection was mingled with a strong desire

that they might continue in a state of innocence as long as possible,

and not grow too fast. Mrs. Ryal had none of that,

weakness ; she did not care a whit whether she were considered

old or young, as long as she was obeyed ; so she determined her

girls should have as little of what is called heart as possible, that

they might be free to accept the best offers when they were

made. She was continually contrasting riches and poverty. All

the rich were angels, and all the poor thieves ; there were no

exceptions : those who married according to their parents'

wishes, rode in carriages, with two tall footmen behind each ;

those who married for love, walked a-foot with draggled tails, aud

died in a workhouse. Of all the women in Kensington, Mr.

Byfield disliked Mrs. Ryal the most, and seeing her at Mrs.

Hylier's had irritated horn more than he cared to confess even

to himself. Mrs. Ryal entertained a corresponding animosity

towards Mr. Byfield ; she had resolved, come what would, to

sit horn out ; " but she was afraid if she remained much longer,

that Miss Stack, the daily governess, whose mother was ill,

might go a few minutes before her time was up, and she had

more than once caught her shaking the hour-glass — so much for

the honesty of one party and tho consideration of the other ;

she knew perfectly well that as soon as she was gone, sho would

be abused by " the old monster ; " for sho was conscious that, if

he had gone, it would have given her extreme pleasure and satisfaction

to abuse him. The old gentleman had not spoken for

several minutes, but continued to walk up and down, pausing

every now and then to look at her. over his spectacles, as if to

inquire, " when do you mean to take your departure? " Mrs.

Ryal was too exalted to notice this ; but after consideration, she

rose with much dignity, shook hands with her two " dear

friends," dropped a most exaggerated curtsey to Mr. Byfield, who.

the moment she was out of the room, threw himself into an easy

chair, and drew a lengthened inspiration, which said plainly

enough, " Thank heaven, she is gone ! "

And now, ladies," ho exclaimed, " finding that you want a

governess, I want to recommend one — not to you, Mrs.

Gresham ; notwithstanding ' little Teddy,' she would be too

happy with you. I should like her to live with you, Mrs.

Hylier."

With me, sir ? Why, after the censure you have passed

upon us both, I should hardly think you would recommend us a

dog, much less a governess."

I expect you will treat your governess hardly as well as I

treat my dog," was the ungracious reply.

Really, Mr. Byfield

Pshaw, lady ! " interrupted the strange old man ;" no words

about it. I have not been so long your opposite neighbour

without knowing that your last governess did not sit at your

table ; that when you had the hot, she had the cold ; that when

a visitor came, sho went ; that she was treated as a creature

belonging to an intermediate state of society, which has never been

defined or illustrated — being too high for the kitchen, too low

for the parlour ; that she was to govern her temper towards

those who never governed their tempers towards her ; that she

was to cultivate intellect, yet sit silent as a fool ; that she was

to instruct in all accomplishments, which she must know and

feel, yet never play any thing iv society except quadrilles,

because sho played so well that she might eclipse the young

ladies who, not being governesses, play for husbands, while she

only plays for bread I My good madam, I know almost every

governess who enters Kensington —by sight ; the daily ones by

their early hours, cotton umbrellas, and the cowed, devoted air

with which they raise the knocker, uncertain how to let it (ail.

Do I not know the musical ones by the work-out boa doubled

round their throats, and the roll of new music clasped iv the thinly

gloved hand ?— and the drawing ones — God help them — by the

small portfolio, pallid cheeks, aud haggard eyes? I could tell

you tales of those hard labouring classes that would make factory

labour seem a toy ; but you would not understand me, though

you can understand that you want a governess, aud you can also

understand that I, Joseph Byfield, hope you will take one of

my recommending."

The sister looked at each other, as well as to say, " What

shall wc do J"

Mrs. Hylier assumed a cheerful, careless air, and replied —

Well, Bir, who is your governess ? "

■• Who she exactly is, Mrs. Hylier, I will not tell you ; aud

she does uot know, though she imagines she does ; what she

is I will tell you. She is handsome, without the consciousness

of beauty — accomplished, without affectation — gentle, without

being inanimate —and I should suppose patient; for she has

been a teacher in a school, as well as iv what is called a private

family ; but I want to see her patience tested."

Is she a good musician ? "

Better than most women."

"And a good artist?"

That was not in the bond ; but she does confound perspective,

and distort the human body as excellently as most teachers

of — the art that can immortalize "

My dear sir "

Ay, ay ; half-a-dozen chalk heads— a few tawdry landscapes,

with the lights scratched out, and the shadows rubbed in — a

bunch of flowers ou velvet, and a bundle of hand screens "

My dear sir," interrupted Mrs. Hylier, " these sort of things

would not suit my daughters ; what they do must be artistic."

Then get an artist to teach them ; you go upon the principle

of expecting Hertz to paint like Eastlake, and Eastlake to

play like Hertz. Madam, she is a well-informed, prudent,

intelligent gentlewoman ; with feeling and understanding ; consequently

doing nothing ill, because she will not attempt what sho

cannot accomplish. She will not undertake to finish (that's the

term, I think) pupils in either music or drawing, but she will do

her best ; and as she has resided abroad, lam told (for I hate

every language except my own) she is a good linguist ; and I

will answer for her accepting the five-and-twenty pounds a-year."

Very desirable, no doubt," muttered Mrs. Hylier, unwilling,

for sundry reasons of great import connected with her husband,

to displease Mr. Byfield. and yet most unwilling to receive into

her family a person whom, judging of others by herself, she

imagined must be a spy upon her menage.

I knew you would so consider any one I recommended," said

the old gentleman, with a smile that evinced the consciousness

of power; "and when shall the 'young person (that is the

phrase, is it not ?)— when shall she come ? "

I think I should like to see her first," answered the lady,

hesitating.

Very good ; but to what purpose ? You know you will take

her."

Anything to oblige you, my dear sir ; but has she no female

friend?"

Some one of you ladies' said a few moments ago that a governess

had no need of friends."

You are aware, Mr. Byfield, it is usual upon such occasions

to consult the lady the governess resided with last; it is usual.

I do uot. want to mist upon it, because I am sure you understand

exactly what I require."

ludeed, madam, I do not pretend to such extensive information

; I know, I think, what you ought to require, that is all.

However, if you wish, you shall have references besides mine,"

and Mr. Byfield looked harder and stiffer than ever. He walked

up to a small water-colour drawing that hung above a little

table, and contemplated it, twirling his cane about iv a half

circle all the time. The subject was ugly enough to look at — a

long chimney emitting a column of dense smoke like a steamer,

and a slated building stuck on no side, being a view of the

Achilles saw-mills," which Mr. Hylier had lately purchased,

a considerable portion of the purchase-money having been

advanced by Mr. Byfield.

"No matter how odd, how rude, how incomprehensible our

old neighbour is, Caroline," Mr. Hylier had said to his wife only

that morning ; " no matter what he does, or says, or fancies ; if

you contradict or annoy horn, it will be my ruin."

Her husband's words were forcibly recalled to her by the

attitude and look of the old gentleman, and she answered — " Oh,

dear no, sir, not at all ; oue cannot help anxiety on such a

subject ; and I must only endeavour to make the lady comfortable,

and all that sort of thing, although I fear she may complain

to you of "

No, no, madam," he interrupted ; "I do not desire her to

be treated in any way better than your former governess ; I wish

to see how she bears the rubs of life ; I particularly request that

no change whatever be made in her favour ; if I wished her to

tie quiet and comfortable, I should have sent her to my gentle

little friend Mrs. Gresham."

Mrs. Hylier bit her lip. " Good morning, ladies ; when shall

Miss Dawson — her name is Emily Dawson — when shall she

come ? "

When you please, sir."

To-morrow, then, at twelve."

He shut the door ; Mrs. Gresham rang the bell ; and Mrs.

Hylier, in a weak fit of uncontrollable vexation, burst into tears.

Did you ever know such a savage ? " exclaimed Mrs.

Gresham.

I am sure you have no reason to complain — if it was not for

the hold he has over Hylier "

I wonder if she is any relation of his?" said Mrs. Gresham,

who was a little given to romance.

"Not she, indeed ; he is as proud as Lucifer, and has money

enough to enable horn to live in a palace."

"Could it be possible that he intends to marry," suggested

Mrs. Gresham.

Marry, indeed ! would any mau that could prevent it, permit

the woman he intended to marry to be a governess? No. I'll

trouble my head no more about it ; let her come ; one is pretty

much the same as another. The only thing that really gives me

pain is, that Mrs. Ryal should have heard so much of it ; shea

regular bell woman ; likes to have the earliest information of

whatever goes on in the world, so as to be the first to set it

going She was the means of the dismissal of five governesses only

last winter, and there is no end to the matches of her breaking.

She will declare the girl is — God knows what— if she finds

all out."

Well," said Mrs. Gresham, musingly, " after all, it is very

odd; only saucy. Mr. Byfield taking au interest iv a governess

al all. Still, I must insert my advertisement, and I think I

might substitute dancing for Greek ; they are about equally

useful, and one must not be too unreasonable."

Very considerate and good of you, Fanny," said her sister ;

•' but believe me, the more you require, the more you will get ;

and I am not sure that Mrs. Ryal was wrong about the sciences.

Every day something fresh starts up that no one ever heard of

before, and one must be able to talk about it ; it is really very

fatiguing to keep up with all the new things, and somehow I do

not think the credit one gets by the knowledge is half enough to

repay one for the labour."

Mr. Gresham says the whole system, or, as he calls it, no

system, of female education is wrong."

"My dear Fanny, how absurd you are ! What can meu

possibly know of female education ? There is my husband,

a worthy man as ever lived, and yet he will tell you that the

whole object of female education should be to make women —

now only imagine what?"

I am sure I do not know."

Why, good wives and mothers."

Both ladies laughed, and then Mrs. Hylier exclaimed, "To

think of my taking any one into my house under such circumstances

! But at all events, I must prepare the children for

their new governess."

PART THE SECOND.

Mild DAWSON had been nearly four mouths in

iSj^Msg her situation ; during that time Mr. Byfield came

IfcgJiSj and went at Mr. Hylier's, as usual ; if he met his

J«jfiaal3 protegee on the stairs, he turned his head another

way ; he never asked a question about her, nor seemed to take

the least interest in her proceedings ; once or twice Mrs. Hylier

(who was proud of her diplomacy) said something leading to

the subject, but Mr. Byfield silenced her in a way peculiarly his

own.

Why does Mr. Byfield turn away from you, Miss Dawson ? "

inquired little Elizabeth Hylier : (children are acute observers :)

"he used to stop us on the stairs, aud call us juvenile jades



now he looks so — and goes on. Are you a naughty girl, Miss

Dawson I "

I hope not, Elizabeth," said the governess.

I am sure not," added Caroline, the elder of the two ; " I

don't think you ever were naughty. When you were a little

girl, you were always too steady — too serious — and " The

young lady paused, and looked earnestly in the face of her

governess ;

Well, my dear, go on," said Miss Dawson, in a gentle

voice.

I would rather not say what I intended, for fear you would

not like it," answered the girl ; " and yet I should wish to

say it."

'' Then do, Caroline."

I meant, too sad to be naughty, or like other girls."

I was uot always sad, my dear ; though, I perceive, I must

not let you see that lam so now, even at times. If you say

your lessons well, and are as attentive as you have been this

morning, I shall be much happier." Caroline Hylier flung her

arms round Miss Dawson's neck aud kissed her, declaring she

would do her best to improve ; and while she was speaking,

Mrs. Hylier entered the school-room ; a cloud of the deepest displeasure

overshadowed her pretty face.

"Oh, mamma!" exclaimed Elizabeth, "Miss Dawson says

that if wc are good, she will be so much happier."

I should have thought," observed the jealous mother, " that

my being happier is of more consequence ; is it not, Miss

Dawson ? "

Certainly, madam," she replied.

I do wish, Miss Dawson, you would not answer me in that

peculiarly sad voice ; and that everlasting mourning you wear —

it makes me heart-broken to look at it."

"It nearly broke my heart," said the poor girl, "to put

it on."

Well, there is no occasion to be sharp about it. I thought

when you received your first quarters salary, you would have

changed it Caroline, take your hand out of Miss Dawson's; I

hate to see that sort of familiarity. Since you have both been

so good, suppose you come and drive with me iv the park."

Oh, thank you, dear mamma ! " exclaimed both the

children, in a delighted tone of voice ; rejoiced to see her

temper changed.

Thank you, that will be a treat ; and, mamma," added

Caroline, " may Miss Dawson come also ? "

Miss Dawson has had her drive this week already," said Mrs.

Hylier, walking out of the room with renewed ill temper.

Let Elizabeth go, and T will stay with you," whispered the

affectionate, though spoiled, child, to Miss Dawson.

No, indeed," she replied, " no, indeed ; it was very kind of

your mamma to ask you, and you will offend her if you do not

go. I have a letter to write, and that will employ me until you

return."

Ah, you say that to make us go ! " said Elizabeth.

For shame, Lizzy ! you know wo never found Miss Dawson

out in the very least little white fib in the world," observed

Caroline.

"But that would not be a fib, would it, sister ?— because

mamma often says those kind of things to papa, to get horn to do

what she wants."

"You are too young, my dear Lizzy, to bo able to judge of

anyone's motives," said Miss Dawson; "and in this instance

may be mistaken. So now, dears, go, and do not keep mamma

waiting."

Some person, who had seen Miss Dawson by chance at Mis.

Hylier's, although she was " only a governess," had been heard

to observe that she was very pretty. Had she not been a

governess, she could not have been looked at without being

admired — not for actual beauty, but for the sweet gentleness of

her countenance, tho purity of her complexion, the open, truthful

outgoing of her fine eyes, and the ease and grace of her

movements. The deep mourning, which had excited Mrs.

Hylier's displeasure, made her an object of touching interest to

all who had any feeling ; it harmonised with the sad expression

of her face ; and two or three ladies, in open defiance of Mrs.

Hylier's well-known jealousy of disposition, had said " how glad

they should be if Miss Dawson would visit their young people "

invitations which she thankfully declined. When she was left

alone — a luxury which her class so seldom enjoy — she opened

her desk, aud, after glancing over some letters, fixed her eyes

upon a miniature she had taken from a secret drawer. She

looked at it long aud steadily, until her-eyes overflowed, and

tear after tear, large round drops, coursed each other down her

anguished face ; then, wiping the moisture from its surface, she

looked again at the picture, pressed it convulsively within her

clasped palms, and laying her head upon them, sobbed as if her

heart was breaking. While sobbing, she slid from her seat upon

her knees ; her emotion gradually subsided. She prayed, rose,

kissed the cherished picture, and murmuring, as she closed the

case, " Mother — my mother !" replaced it iv her desk. Strange

as it may seem, after this agitation she became at once composed

it had done her good ; the petty insults which, cherished

child as she had been for so many years, she felt it hard to endure,

had passed away with the deluge of tears that welled up

from her young heart. She wondered how they could have

grieved her— how she could have felt them — when the superior

bitterness of her mother's loss came again upon her. Small

sorrows place us below the world— a great sorrow above it ; and

she continued a letter, written at intervals, with a quieter and

firmer mid than she had experienced for some days. The letter

was to a young lady, the sister of the curate who had attended

her mother's death-bed : a portion of it ran thus : —

"You ask mo if I am happy : I ought to be happier than I

am. My two pupils are kind, affectionate girls ; and though

somewhat idle, and very ignorant, if I am permitted to manage

them as I desire, I have no doubt they will improve — not rapidly,

but certainly. I never could manage a child until I had obtained

its affections — and the affections of the young are generally

ductile ; but Mrs. Hylier is weak enough to be jealous of

tho little love the children bear me. She does not understand

that it is the only means I have of working out her, or what

ought to be her, intentions. But the truth is, that all she really

desires them to know are a few showy accomplishments. She

came home iv an ecstasy of delight the other evening with a girl

who had repeated some long Italian poem — of which she could

not even remember the name, much less understand the meaning

— in a room crowded with company. ' The girl,' she said,

'had so much self-possession, and her action was so graceful.'

With the same breath she declaimed against a woman's appearing

on the stage. I ventured to observe, that, the child who, at

twelve years of age, could have sufficient confidence to repeat and

act a poem in a crowded drawing-room, would be very likely to

desire to exhibit before a larger audience as she grew older ; but

she could not perceive the analogy, and thought, indeed said, I

was impertinent for making it. Is it not a cause of great regret

that I have never yet found a mother who would act in concert,

with me? I submit quietly to be treated with indifference by

the lady and gentleman, who, when I am in the room, speak and

act exactly as if they were alone, except when secrets are to be

communicated, then they begin to whisper, and then, of course,

I leave the apartment. I find, when with my pupils, a deep,

aud, happily, an absorbing interest, in their improvement ; but,

when that excitement is over, I droop again ; for I am considered

an intruder when lessons are over, and an automaton

while they are in progress. Shall I ever again hear the voice of

encouragement, which makes tho heart bound to its duties —

stall I ever be praised any more ? Oh, do not think, because I

say this, that I yearn after flattery ; Ido not ; but if the parent

knew how kind considerate words increase the desire to bring

the children forward — a smile — a gentle word — a simple 'you

have doue well,' would make the labour, the weary labour, of

thankless teaching a pleasure. Mrs. Hylier seldom finds fault ;

but she never utters a sound of commendation. And yet why

do I complain ? You know that, for three years before my

mother was taken from me, I toiled through the streets of that

distant town, iv the grey mists of the winter mornings, as well

as in the light of tho summer sun, teaching music hcrc and

drawing there — all the ' accomplishments ' in one place, and ' the

sciences ' in another ; and, as I had no protector— a creature to

be insulted by those whose manly garb was certainly no index

to a manly mid ; I was dismissed from one house because the

lady thought me too pretty to come in the way of her sou ;

from another, because I did uot wear caps, and looked too young

without them ; from another, because I would not lunch with

the lady maid ; and yet I bore all this, and more, as you know,

cheerfully, because from six in the evening until eight the next

morning, I had the sheltering bosom of my mother. Tho

abilities she had fostered were the means of supporting her at

the last. Iv those two small cottage rooms / had a home ; there

were her smile, her voice, lur counsel, aud her prayer. I was

some one's first object. She loved me ; the tenderness of her

whole life was poured into my heart, under every trial which a

fatherless girl must endure, who has to grope her way through

tho world's darkness. Oh, my mother ! my mother ! — tears

will blot the page when I write of her ! When I think of her,

I feel suffocated ; and I have no right to repine ; only thus

much — even a little kindness would make me work cheerfully.

With the education, and tastes, and feelings of a gentlewoman,

it is hard to be treated as if I had neither education, nor taste,

nor feeling. The lady maid is a confidant ; the housekeeper a

mistress; the housemaid has half the day to herself; the governess

But this is idle ; my mother would reprove me for

it ; she would tell me to do my duty in that state of life to

which it has pleased God to call mo, and leave the rest to Horn.

You know how she was deserted by her father in consequence of

her marriage ; and, according to her desire, her death was mentioned

exactly as she wished. She thought that if her father

saw it, he would seek out his grandchild. Perhaps he is dead !

at least, no notice has been taken of me ; aud if it had not

been for the chance which threw me iv the way of that strange

old man, Mr. Byfield, I might have been left upon the world

without any occupation. He is certainly a very odd old man ;

he evinced a great degree of interest in me at first, but since ho

placed me here, he has never spoke to me but once. I had

been walking the other morning in the park for more than

two hours with the children, aud being tired, sat down upon one

of the benches, while the children walked up and down with

their cousin, as their mother wishes, nd under the care of Mrs.

Gresham 's French governess ; he came so suddenly, that he

quite took me by surprise. ' Are you growing lazy ?' he inquired.

I answered, 'No ; but that I was not very well.' 'And

have you not found out,' he continued, ' that a governess has no

right to be ill ? ' I answered, ' I knew that ; nd so was ill but

seldom.' 'Do you jest with mc?' he said, stonily. ' No, sir,'

I replied ; ' I speak the truth. If I were independent, 1 would

yield most likely to a pain in my side, or, when my cough keeps

me awake all night, send for a doctor ; the world believes in the

sickness that is heard of, rather than the sickness that must be

examined into — no one sees my illness, so I am ill but seldom.'

And then he looked so penetratingly into my face, and asked

me how I had learned to reason ? and I had it ou my lip to

answer, that I had learned to reason by endeavouring to cease

to feel, but thought the reply would seem pert from youth to

age, so smiled, and held my peace ; and when I smiled, he sighed

so bitterly, and walked away, and then looked back, and returned

and sat down by my side ; then gazing in my face, he asked me

if I had ever told a lie. And I said truly, in the sight of God,

I believed I never had since I knew wrong from right. And

then he answered, that I looked like truth, as all women did

when they lied most. It was unwise, I know ; but I had done

nothing to deserve such an insult, and I told horn so, without

further parley, but as gently as I could, thanking horn for the

kindness he had shown to one who had no friend but God. Will

you believe that he seemed no more moved by what I uttered

than if I had been dumb; only when I had finished speaking,

I could not repress the tears that would come — poor cowardly

tears — I hate them so — those waters of a troubled heart ; and

then, shaking his head, ho said — But I hear the voice of Mrs.

Gresham 's French governess, so must say adieu for the present.

If constant occupation did not increase my weakness, I daresay

my spirits would revive ; for I have a better lot than

many. There is a poor teacher at Mrs. Stonewall's school, and

Ma'amselle Mercier tells mo she has but fifteen pounds a-year,

and remains at school all the vacations, to mend up the house

linen. Adieu."

"Ah! there you are!" exclaimed the light breezy voice of

Mademoiselle Mercier, as she ran up aud kit-sed Emily Dawson

on both cheeks. "Ah ! ma mie, vy you not go a walk in the

Parks? Ah! you English ladies are given to the mopes ; and

yen you have five moments to yourself, instead of enjoy all, you

make sorrow more sorrowful by thinking over horn ! Toujours

gai ! 1 have seen my maman this morning — she come from

Paris to be Bonne in Lady Craig's family, after educating Lady

Craig. She has brought me such a charming parasol; che loves

me so moche, my dear mother ; Ah ! my dear, I beg your

pardon, I forget ; I did not mean to call sour tears, there

Emily. lam a thoughtless girl ; and my mother make me full

of joy. Now, do not cry ; bah ! — there ! I tell you, if you dry

up your nice blue English eyes, I will go and fetch my new

parasol, and ve will walk together in Kensington Garden for half

hour. Madame Hylier, she say to Madame Gresham, they go

three hour drive, and they are not gone two hours yet Do

come Madame Gresham likes me to be with you, you are so

steady. All the company is in the garden by this — and ve see

such nice ladie and gentleman, almost like Longchamps."

Miss Dawson begged to be excused ; she would rather stay

at home ; she had much to do ; was not well ; and urged a

thousand reasons, but without effect. "As you please, my

dear," said the now pouting French girl ; " but it is unkind of

you ; Madame Gresham will not let me go with any other lady,

and I never get a walk. Dat her littel boy is such a plague

veil ve go out — and he is away. Now do come ; it is cruel of

you for fancy to prevent me !" Emily did not continue to

refuse, for she could not bear to be unkind ; and drawing a thick

crape veil over her face, she prepared to accompany the volatile

but kind-hearted Frenchwoman. They were a national contrast,

those two girls ; — the staid, quiet, graceful deportment of Emily

Dawson, and the vivid, tripping, carefully careless demarche of

Colette Mercier — the deep mourning of the English girl, and

the tulip-like garb of the French, in whose dress, though there

were divers colours, there was perfect harmony. " You look pale

and tired already, ma mie," she said to Emily ; " and wc must

not sit down in the gardens, lam told. But it would be most

pleasant, those charming, lovely ladies, and handsome gentlemen,

if they only would look happy ; but they do not — they look

solemn, and walk dead marche in Saul ; and yet, though I am

but poor governess, lam happier than they. There now is an

English governess with her pupils — how sad she look, poor girl !

I will tell you, Emily, vat my mother tell me veu first I came

to Englau', ' Ma chcrc,' she say to me in confidence, 'do your

duty as moche as you can, vitriol killing yourself. Some families

will be very kind and good to you ; and out of seven that I

taught iv myself, one is good to me now, that is Lady Craig ;

but the rest forgot the cares and teachings. If you meet gratitude

— which all who teach deserve from all who learn — turn up

your eyes and bless God, but do not expect it. I know what

j'oung teachers think yen pains have been taken with them, as I

take with you ; they go to situation full of the importance of

their duties. Bah ! till mother's treat governesses like gentlewomen,

and feel that the very best part of what an honest

teacher gives her pupils — tho thoughts of her head and the feelings

of her heart — cannot be paid for, though the mere machinery

of teaching mtiy be remunerated— there can be no reciprocity

between them."

This Colette uttered rapidly, with her strong and peculiar

accent, for her French had a flavouring of patois, of which even

her English partook ; aud she laughed lightly when her speech

was ended. "That," answered Miss Dawson, "is an easy theory,

but a bad practice. No matter how you are treated, your duty

remains the same; it cannot be performed with the same pleasure,

but it is the same ! "

Veil, my dear, so let it be ; torment the flesh off your bones

plague yourself to death — fag, fag— and see ! At the last you

will have no more thanks for your heavy toil than I shall have

for my light labour. Bah 1 half the people do not know the

difference between a good and a bad governess. My mother,

she say, how should they until they are better educated themselves?

Now, there, you act what you call conscientiously ; you

are thin, like a poor rush, and sigh when alone. I take it

lightly; I do not trouble myself; I am fat, and laugh to myself.

If you wear yourself to the bone, what do you satisfy?"

My own conscience," replied Emily.

"Ah! veil, if you go on satisfying your sort of conscience,

you will soon have a bell ring over your grave," replied the

French girl. "Ah ! " sho added, looking under her companion's

bonnet — for they had been walking rather rapidly, and Emily

was obliged to throw up her veil for air — "you smile at that ; it

is not smiling matter to die and be put in the cold ground yen

one is young, and the earth one great garden."

Emily made no reply. " After all," resumed Colette, "I do

not see so pretty pamsol as mine with any lady."

It is very pretty, certainly," said Miss Dawson ; " but I

think it quito time to return home." She was urged to this

remark by the stare of a couple of gentlemen, who, certainly

not unobserved by Colette, had followed them for the last few

minutes, and, despite their rapid footsteps, managed to escort

them, as soldiers do their prisoners, to their door — Emily maintaining

a dignified silence, and Colette divided between her

national love for adventure and a certain womanly disdain of

insulting impertinence, which together — no feeling acting one

moment and another the next — prompted her to give vent to

one or two clever sarcasms, which provoked and amused their

tormentors.

Mrs. Hylier and Mrs. Gresham were at the breakfast-room door

as they entered, and had been evidently watching their return.

I did not know you were going out, Miss Dawson," said Mrs.

Hylier, sternly.

"As the young ladies were with you, I thought I might

accompany Ma'amselle," she answered.

I do not approve of my governess walking with gentlemen,"

continued the lady, apparently unconscious that Miss Dawson

bad replied.

Wot gentleness?" exclaimed Miss Mercier, with an air of

pretty astonishment.

"You know best, miss; but as yon are not in my employment,

I have nothing to say to you ; I can only desire my governess

not to do it again," persisted Mrs. Hylier. " Aud I should like

to know who the gentlemen were."

And so should I, indeed, ma'am," said Miss Dawson, " most

earnestly, though it would be to little purpose — for who would

avenge an insult offered to me?"

Oh ! you should tell your patron sant, Mr. Byfield," returned

the lady, with an insulting laugh aud a sneer, as she entered the

breakfast-room with Mi's. Gresham, slapping the door in the face

of the two girls.

While Colette muttered to herself in French, Miss Dawson

turned slowly round to go up-stairs, and saw the housemaid drawback

her head from over the bauiste.s, while tho footman did

not think it necessary to conceal that he had heard the " blowing

up," as he elegantly termed it, which his mistress gave "our

governess."

Mrs. Hylier threw herself into a chair, and, looking at Mrs.

Gresham, exclaimed, " Well, aud what do you mean to do?"

"Why, nothing, sister; surely the poor girls cannot help it

if impertinent men will follow them home."

■ I know the French girl you have is good for nothing, and

you have suffered her to encroach too much."

I really cannot tell, sister," said the tranquil .Mis. Gresham ;

I had an excellent character with her, and though Mrs. Ryal

did say her accent is bad, I don't think she is a good judge; and

oue may go on changing for ever, just as she does. Since that

underbred daily governess of hers ran off with her own father's

showman, she has tried half-a-dozen ; but, as Mr. Gresham says,

she gives her servants better wages than her teachers, and what

can she expect?"

Again the ladies were interrupted by the entrance of Mrs.

Ryal, just as they bad been when about to advertise.

I feel it my duty, Mrs. Hylier," she commenced, — after the

usual nothings of tho morning visit had been exchanged, — " 1

feel it a positive duty to tell you that all the people of Kensington

are talking about you."

I am glad they are so well employed," retorted Mrs. Hylier,

with a provoking smile.

Then you are easily satisfied, my dear ; but rather, I should

have said, they are talking about your governess, and your

amazing gullibility. Indeed, they are hinting that Mr. Hylier

must have some particular reason for suffering such an inmate.

Why — do — you — know — who — you — have — got — in — your —

house?" These last words were pronounced with peculiar emphasis,

and divided exactly .os they are printed, the lady advancing

her face close to that of Mrs. Hylier, and opening her eyelids so as

to make her round eyes seem half as large again as they really were.

Ve — 8," stammered Mrs. Hylier ; "a go — verses."

"A — nonsense, my dear; she is not a bit better than she

should be."

Few of us are," said the meck Mrs. Gresham, who, somehow

or other — perhaps through the influence of a sensible husband,

whom she was fortunate enough to love very much — was beginning

to think occasionally, aud to compare — the best result of

thought.

Mrs. Ryal looked daggers at her for a moment, and then

continued, " That old Byfield is a wretch."

I always thought so," answered Mrs. Hylier, not willing to

be outdone in suspicion : " I always thought she was his

daughter."

His daughter! that would be milk-white innocence to the

fact — she is much worse."

Impossible!" said Mrs. Gresham.

He could not lie so bad as that," observed Mrs. Hylier.

All men are bad," pronounced the decided Mrs. Ryal ; " all

men are bad, as I tell my husband ; but some are worse than

others."

"You are mistaken — misinformed, I should have said," quoth

the perplexed Mrs Hylier; "he has never taken the smallest

notice of her since sho has been here — never asked why she was

not in the drawing-room. I even, one day, thinking to put horn

in good humour, showed horn a tulip she had worked in that

everlasting tapestry of mine."

'• Well, and what did he say?"

Why, he called it— rubbish."

Sheer art," said Mrs. Ryal.

I cannot believe he would put a person of bad character

over my children," urged Mrs. Hylier.

"Stuff!" exclaimed Mrs. Ryal.

"And the object?"

Ah ! that rests in the secret recesses of the man's own wicked

heart," said Mrs. Ryal, with due emphasis; and then added, "To

get at their motives is hard for us poor women ; but the only

way to get even at their acts, is by putting that and that together."

This was said with an air of peculiar sagacity. "Now,

let Mrs. Gresham ask her popinjay of a governess, if, the other

day in the park, Miss Dawson did not complain of being tired

(now only fancy a governess, whose duty it is, her positive duty,

to walk as long with her pupils as it is necessary they should

walk — only fancy her being tired !— ah !ah I there is a ruse in

the very excuse), if she did not sit down on a seat, and if Mr.

Byfield, who seems so strange aud unconcerned about her here,

did not come up, and not only sit down by her side, but take her

hand ; and then she sulked, aud he went away, and came back

again, and kept her hand in his, and there they sat like two

lovers, in Hyde Park. It is really scandalous to repeat, and

makes my cheeks all over in a glow. Aud to-day, my Mary was

iv Kensington Gardens — Mary, my own maid — aud she saw your

two governesses, ladies, flirting and philandering about ; and

then, who should she also observe, watching the English girls

every movement, but old Byfield. Well, two dandified gentlemen

came up, attracted, Mary says, by the lightness of their

manner, aud followed them home; but not unobserved ; for the

old gentleman, his face purple with jealousy"

Or the March wind," suggested Mrs. Gresham.

Kept at the other side of the way," continued Mrs. Ryal,

with a look of contempt at Mrs. Gresham. " But that is not

all This morning I sent Mary with a letter to the post, and

she overtook Mr. Byficld's man, who was talking at the corner

of Salters to one of the butchers. ' Are you going to the postoffice?

he said. 'Then will you put my masters letter in for

mc?' And so she took the letter — she is very obliging — and

who should it be directed to but Miss Dawson!" Mrs. Hylier

rang the bell, and inquired of the servant if the governess had

received a letter. The man said the three o'clock post had

brought her one while she was out ; that he believed it had not

yet been taken to the school-room ; as it was not in his department,

could not exactly tell — would inquire — went down, and

returned with the letter: it had been left on the kitchen dresser.

The lady found no fault with the servant's unpardonable matter •

tion ; and when he had left tho room, the three ladies declared

it certainly was Mr. Byfield's handwriting.

"Will you break the seal?" inquired Mrs. Ryal, eyeing the

letter longingly.

Certainly not," answered Mis. Hylier.

"Ah !" said Mrs. Ryal, with a sigh, " Mary says true enough,

secrets are secrets since the' packet envelopes came in ; then have

her down, and see how she will look whcu she opens it." Mrs.

Hylier's hand was on the bell, when Mrs. Gresham interposed.

"Sister," she said, "it occupies to me that wc may all be in

error; and if so, how will you forgive yourself for wounding the

feelings of a poor girl ? "

Feelings, indeed! : ' sneered Mrs. Ryal ; " why, I vow she has

bewitched you as well as the men; can any thing be more

evident? — at least, if she is innocent, give her an opportunity

of clearing herself."

The bell was rung ; and the governess, Still smarting under

the lash of the previous insult, was sent for.

The servant returned with an apology — would Mrs. Hylier be

so good as to excuse her for a few moments; the servant added,

that Miss Dawson was crying.

How I have sustained my spirits since she came into the

house is extraordinary," observed Mrs. Hylier, smelling her

vinaigrette; "she is always sad."

She has good reasons, you may depend on it," said Mis.

Ryal, significantly.

I think so too," added Mrs. Gresham, quietly.

Really, sister," said Mrs. Hylier, "to hear you talk of late,

one would think I was a savage. lam sure it is quite enough

to be plagued with great growing-up daughters, without those

governesses ; and if I mention school, Mr. Hylier begins about

morals. I wish you had had Miss Dawson with all my heart."

"My French girl does pretty well; but Mr. Gresham says she

acts from habit, uot principle: and that — but hush" Emily

Dawson entered the room, while the traces of tears were yet

fresh upon her fair young face; the earnest desire she had ever

felt to perform her duty in the highest and most important

vocation which a woman can be called upon to fulfil, had not

only given an elevation to her countenance and manner, but an

expression to her features which never accompanies a small or

sordid mid; aud whatever Mrs. Hylier chose to say when she

was not present, the superiority of mid was so manifest in the

manner of the young governess, that, despite the presence of

Mrs. Ryal, she desired her to be seated, in a tone which signified

a request. Then came the question, Had she met Mr. Byfield

in the Park — sat and conversed with horn? To this she frankly

answered, " Yes," and seemed perfectly unconscious of the

occasion of the smile and sneer that passed between Mi's Hylier

nd Mrs. Ryal. She professed herself quite unable to account

either for the countenance Mr. Byfield had shown her at first, or

his subsequent change. of conduct. "He had," she said, "apparently

befriended her for the very reason which made the world

shun her — because she was friendless and poor." Then Mrs.

Hylier placed the letter in her hand ; with what Mrs. Ryal

afterwards termed "unpardonable effrontery," she opened ft, and

as she read, her countenance became radiant with pleasure.

"Well!" exclaimed tho two ladies, actuated by the same

impulse; " well, have you any objection to our seeing that

letter?"

I cannot show it to Mrs. Hylier," sho replied, with perfect

frankness, " because Mr. Byfield desires me not to do so."

Was ever such hardened impudence I" muttered Mrs. Ryal.

It is very kind — very — I am sure," continued Emily, re-perusing

the letter, aud too much absorbed with and delighted

by its contents to hear the remark Mrs. Ryal made. "It is toe

too much I"

What is?" said Mrs. Gresham

To take a lodging for me at Hampstead, where I am to

remain for a few months, until I get stronger and better — aud

all at his own expense. I remember when 1 would have been

too proud to accept such a favour, thinking I could earn all

I required ; but of late I have been so weak — so" — She looked

from the gentle face of Mrs. Gresham to the other ladies, and,

astonished at the expression of displeasure and scorn of their

countenances, paused, and did uot utter another word.

I think, then, the sooner you leave my house the better,"

said Mrs. Hylier ; " the sooner the better. Oh, what will Mr.

Hylier say?"

"What have I done?" exclaimed Miss Dawson.

Oh, what a world it is — to see such a face as that masking so

much vice!" ejaculated Mrs. Ryal.

Are you aWare what will be said if you place yourself under

Mr. Byfield's protection in this way ?" inquired Mrs. Gresham,

still kindly.

Let her go, by all means — there, you may go — and the

sooner out of the house the better ! Oh ! to think of my having

such a person as this to take care of my innocent children !" and

Mrs. Hylier, overpowered by a sudden fit of material love, fell

into strong hysterics.

Emily walked up-stairs, the open letter in her hand, Miss

Mercier was still in tho school-room.

Ma'amselle," said Miss Dawson, " Mr. Byfield has written tome

that, knowing I am overworked and ill, he has taken for mea

country lodging for a few mouths. You know who he is, and

all about horn 1 "

Aud surely you are not going to accept that !" replied tho

French girl ; "if you do, you lose character at once. No one

every do such a naughty thing as that ; ho must be bad man.

Do, pray, send it back ; young men sometimes make love for

love, but old men always for wickedness ; bah !"

Of all the difficult things in the world, it is the most difficult

for people of the world to comprehend the selfishness of the

good.

I don't know how it is," persisted Ma'amselle ; " you are in

life nearly as long as I am, aud yet you don't know half so

moche. Depend upon it, the old man is a bad man. If you go

into the lodging ho take, you never come out with good character.

Take my advice — I know more than you."

Good-bye, Ma'amsell," said Emily ; " thank you for your

frankness. God bless you ; leave me to myself to think a little."

When Emily was alone, she read the letter over again. The

unaccountable interest Mr. Byfield had taken in her as a

stranger, did not seem so singular as the carelessness he had

evinced towards her for so long a time. Emily Dawson's own

pure mid could hardly conceive the possibility of what she had

heard from Mrs. Hylier and Mrs. Ryal ; but she had often been

astonished at the acuteness of the Frenchwoman's perceptions.

Could Birch baseness be possible 1 Her whole nature seemed

changed in a moment ; she trembled convulsively, fearing she

knew not what ; and, from suspecting nothing, she suspected

everything. Why should Mr. Byfield forbid her showing his

letter to Mrs. Hylier? — why? But her brain whirled— she could

not think. The housemaid entered the room ; she was a kind

girl, and in tears.

Please, miss, my mistress says you're to go to-night,"

gie said.

Where ? " inquired tho governess, in a tone of such utter

helplessness that it touched the poor thing to the heart.

"I am sure I don't know, miss. She said you could be at no

loss for a home; and here's the month's salary and month's

warning money."

Not to Mr. Byfield," sho thought ; " I must not go there ;

they all say that ; and yet this woman turns me out to the very

vice she would have me shun. God help me— l am quite,

quite alone ! "

Master will be in a fine way, tltat I know, when he comes

home," continued the girl, good-naturedlybusying herself packing

up Miss Dawson's wardrobe. "I am sure I hope you ain't going

ito

Mr. Byfield's ; though Im sure there's no harm, yet I hope

you are not, miss. If you wouldn't be above it, my mother hasa

little pretty house at Chelsea, and you might be there till you

could turn yourself about — safe, as one may say ; and if so be

you wish it, I'd lie on my honour and my oath not to tell — not

the old gentleman, nor any one else."

Anywhere, Mary — anywhere," said the governess, listlessly ;

anywhere, away from all I have known in this house "

Elizabeth, the youngest of her pupils, rushed into the room,

and flinging her arms round her neck, sobbed — " You shall not

go, dear Miss Dawson — you slime not go. Mamma said I was

not to come near you, you were so wicked ; but I said I

would."

Your mamma mistakes," answered the governess, not even iv

the anguish of that hour forgetting how necessary it is to make

the parent appear right always, at least in intention, in the eyes

of the child. "She mistakes, dearest Elizabeth; she will not

always think so ; but you must not cling round mc. God bless

you, my dear child ; you did wrong to come when mamma said

you were not to do so. God bless you — be good, be truthful,

and obedient ; God bless you I" aud with a gentle force she

obliged the weeping child to leave the room.

A short time completed her preparations, or rather the preparations

which Mary made for her. It is pleasant nd cheering

to note the kindness which the poor often bestow upon those

who are in trouble. The evidence of the existence of this benevolent

feeling is far more frequent than people imagine. It

does not descend in showers of coin, but in words of kindness ;

and is as pure as the dew which au all-wise nature distils into

the cups of drooping flowers.

Let me tie your borne, miss, and pin your shawl. Law,

how numb your hands are ! Then, you'll go to my mother's, I

think you said, miss, and no one shall know ; shell treat you as

it becomes her like to treat a lady, rich or poor. The cab is

ready. Now, keep a heart : God is above us all. I'll open the

door myself," she continued ; " and the trunk is iv ; and keep

up, mis. — lies are found out sooner or later. Why," she exclaimed,

seeing that Emily paused opposite the drawing-room.

surely you are uot going to be more insulted ? You might aa

well talk to a stone wall as to my missus."

Emily nevertheless entered the apartment, where Mrs. Hylier

was alone, pondering, in no pleasant mood, over the occurrences of

the past hours — thinking how she had acted in decided opposition

to her husband's desire, who willed it that Mr. Byfield was never

to be contradicted, at least in his home ; and though she was half-convinced

of Emily's unworthiness, sho knew how hard it would

be to convince him. The pale girl walked silently up to where

Mrs. Hylier was seated. " I come," she said, "to bid you

remember what I say — that you will (heartless as you are) repent

the injustice and insult you have heaped upon the head of

a houseless, homeless orphan. You have done me cruel wrong by

your suspicion, and you send me forth to make the suspicion

real ; but God, who is above all, will save me yet 1"

She spoke these few words in the tone of a breaking heart, and

without further word quitted the house. During the short time

of her residence there, she had conferred more lasting service

upon Mrs. Hylier's children that they had ever received before

she had sown healthful and truthful seed. Not content with

teaching by lessons, she had hallowed every tree, and leaf, and

blade of grass, with a history. A new existence had dawned

upon their minds : they understood why their hoop rolled, and

why it came to the ground ; they understood why morning

followed night, and why the heat was at noon the most intense.

They had learned more orally than they had ever learned from

books. Poor Emily knew this ; and as her arm encircled her

trunk, aud her hot fevered breath hung upon the closed windows

of the rattling cabriolet, that was taking her she knew not where,

the words of the French teacher rang in her ears — " Torment

the flesh off your bones — plague yourself to death — fag, fag —

and see I At tho hist, you will have no more thanks for your

heavy toil that I shall for my light labour." " Still," she murmured,

" I have done my duty."

Please, ma'am," said the man to an elderly woman who

opened the door of a small house iv a low suburbs, " here's a

d 2

Lady, like, your daughter in Kensington has sent you, as a

lodger ; and you are to be particular kind to her and shell try

and run down tomorrow night, between lights. The fare is

paid, miss — the young woman paid it. She said she knew you

hadn't changed your cheque."

Mary's mother did not look as good-natured as Mary herself.

But Emily was so bowed down as hardly to observe the

difference.

Well," said the woman to her youngest daughter — " well, I

never saw any one so careless about accommodation. Why, she

said the back would do as well as tho front room, though I told

her she might have either at the same rent ; and if I had not

undressed her, she'd have either sat up all night, or laid down in

her clothes. She's more like a dead than a living woman."

•

PART TOE THIRD.

s£fiJfl9J3 HE next morning the pat, pat, pat, of Mr. By field's

KKiSfaßu cane was heard ascending the steps leading to Mr.

iS^S-i^ Hylier's hall door; his knock had the determined

Sound of " I will come in." " Remember, James," said his

mistress, " popping" her head out of the breakfast-room, " I am

not at home — I shall not be at home all day — I am out fora

week — went down to meet your master last night" James

bowed, and the lady disappeared.

My mistress is not at home, sir," observed the sapient footman.

Mr. Byfield poked horn aside with his cane, and having

entered the hall, said, " I want to speak to Miss Dawson."

Miss Dawson, sir, left the house last night."

Left last night I Then where is she gone ? "

Really can't say, sir ; she's left for good, trunk and all."

'• Left — gone ! but surely you must know where she drove

to?"

The housemaid saw her off, sir ."

Mr. Byfield commanded Mary to appear; but she having

always lived "in the best families," lied with superior firmness.

The very words Miss Dawson said, sir, were, ' Tell tho cab to

drive to Oxford Street, and then I will direct horn the number ;'

these were her last words, sir, and I can tell no more." Mary

was in haste — not agitated by the untruth— so she stayed no

farther question, but dived down the kitchen stairs.

Now," said the old gentleman, " I mutt see your mistress."

Not at home, sir," repeated James.

When will she be at home ? "

Not for a week. She's gone down to where masters stopping."



That's the third falsehood you have told since I came into

this hall, young man," observed Mr. Byfield. "Your mistress

cannot have gone down to where your master is, because business

obliged your master to come to my house this morning,

even before he visited his own ; " and Mr. Byfield turned and

entered tho breakfast-room so suddenly as almost to knock down

the fair mistress of the mansion, who certainly was as close to

the door as if she had been about to open it for her unwelcome

intruder.

Good morning, madam ! " he said, with the exceeding

courtesy of nn angry man, before the storrn that has gathered,

breaks " Good morning. Will you have the kindness to tell

me w/ure Miss Dawson is gone, and why she is gone ? "

Mrs. Hylier suffered Mr. Byfield to repeat his question before

she answered ; she was debating within herself whether she should

assure a tone of indignant aud outraged propriety, or that of

gentle upbraiding; her temper triumphed, and she lost sight of

her husband's interests and her husband's wishes. In loud and

unqualified terms she upbraided Mr. Byfield with what she

termed his sinful duplicity, in forcing a person, whom she called

by no gentle name, into her house ; exhausted a dictionary of

epithets upon Miss Dawson — talked wildly and at random of

depravity — and wound up all by a movement something between

an hysteria and a faint. Mr. Byfield sat — his great grey eyes

dilating and contracting, like those of a cat in the sunshine,

according as his passions were moved ; aud notwithstanding his

age, such was their fire, that they would have scorched the noisy

fragile thug— who had sunk into her luxurious chair, a trembling

heap of mull-muslin and English blonde — if she had had

the moral courage once to look horn fairly nd bravely in the

face. There sat Mr. Byfield, white and motionless — so white,

that the flakes of his snowy hair could hardly bo distinguished

from his check ; his eyes flashing, as I have said, his long bony

fingers grasping either knee, and grasping it so tightly, that the

dark veins stood out like purple ridges on his hands.

Ring the bell ! " she said, at last perceiving that ho took no

more notice of her sobs than he had done of her words : " Ring

tho bell 1 " He neither spoke nor moved ; and at last tho lady

essayed to do it herself. He seized her arm — and Lord Lindsay's

boiled glove did uot press more deeply into the soft arm of

Mary of Scotland, than did the old man's animated bones into

tho wrist of Mrs. Hylier. She screamed with spleen and pain,

but resumed her seat. Aud there he continued to sit opposite

to her, without trusting himself to speak, yet, by his presence,

effectually preventing her moving. Suddenly Mr. Hylier's well-known

knock resounded through the house. There owns a rush

of light young feet — tho echoes of the beatings of anxious hearts

and exclamations of "Oh, papa!" — "Dear papa!" and a

whisper or two, and then Mr. Hylier came in, just in time to

catch his wife, in another faint, upon his arm. Questions

followed ; and the two young ladies were turned out of the

room ; while Mrs. Hylier sobbed and moaned, and called herself

an ill-used woman. At last tho old man, gathering up his energies,

spoke. He stated fairly and plainly, in agitated tones, that

he had placed Miss Dawson with Mrs. Hylier, because he wished

to observe how she would bear the ill and careless manner in

which he knew she would bo treated. It was (he said) of paramount

importance to horn, that he should observe how she bore

up against the disagreeableness of her situation ; it had not

(he continued) escaped horn, that, as long as the impression

remained upon Mrs. Hylier's mid, that it would please horn to

be kind to his protegee, sho was tolerably considerate ; but when

she found that he neglected her altogether — the circumstance

that would have drawn a noble mid to be more gracious to one

so utterly deserted by the world, rendered Mrs. Hylier careless

and unfeeling. Mr. Byfield had his own way of doing everything

; and there is little doubt, from his own statement, that he

would have gone on, heaping mystery on mystery, had he not

been suddenly aroused to a sense of Miss Dawson's uncomplaining

illness, by her appearance iv the park ; and, after much

mental deliberation, he determined — still after his own strange

fashion— to provide her a quiet home, and be himself the bearer

of his reasons to Mrs. Hylier.

I thought," he said, " that fertile as you and your friend

Mi's. Ryal are in attributing impurity to pure motives, you would

hardly have dared to pin a slander upon these white hairs, or

suppose that so single-minded and self-sacrificing a creature as

Miss Dawson would rush into vice — and such vice ! I did

imagine, indeed, that you would have considered me her father ;

but to have thought and acted as you have done — to have turned

her penniless "

•' 1 did not ! " screamed Mi's. Hylier ; " I gave her a month's

salary — I — l " aud then she appealed to Mr. Hylier, to know

why he suffered her to bo insulted ; and, losing all command of

herself, reiterated her opinion of Mr. Byfield's conduct.

•' For shame 1 " said her husband. " Mr. Byfield, I entreat you

to consider how Mrs. Hylier has been acted upon by the misrepresentations

of Mrs, Ryal. She does not think her own thoughts,

or speak her own words."

"Ido I" repeated the foolish woman. "Fit is not as I say

what connexion is he of Miss Dawson's?"

"Her Grandfather !" answered the old man. "And had I

not believed that I could place dependence alone upon a character

that has been steeped to the lips in the bitter waters of the

world's strife — I ought to be ashamed to own it. Why, then,

should I feel such bitterness towards you — pi or thing of a

whirling world ! You ! — upon whom she had no claim ; but

that is false. Madam, there are women in the world who

acknowledge the claim of sisterhood, even when it is covered by

tho rags of shame ; who seek to save — whose hands are filled to

overflowing by the charity which God pours into their hearts ;

whose means, however small, like the widow's cruise, increase by

giving ; whose names will ascend and form part of the glory of

the everlasting heavens, when ours will leave no record save

upon the cold and lying tombstone ! Oh, my God !my God I

why do you not soften our hearts before it is too late ! "

Mrs. Hylier would have essayed, if she dared, to say that she

did not believe he was Emily's grandfather, but she could not ;

and Mr. Hylier, while the old man paced the room violently,

and wrung his hands, whispered her he had but that morning

returned from the neighbourhood where her mother died, and

where her extraordinary and unceasing efforts for the support of

that dear mother, particularly during the last years of her life,

were talked of among a domestic and parent-loving people, as

something so enduring, so patient, so gentle, so holy, as to be

quite wonderful. " And this is the creature," he added, " that

the gossip of a chattering neighbourhood prompted you to insult.

I felt honoured by my friend's desire that I should investigate

for myself, and all I cau say is, that if I had had the slightest

knowledge of her high qualities, she should never have been

treated as she has been."

A lesson I — a lesson ! " said the old man, iv a voice hoarse

with an emotion he used every exertion to control — " A lesson

to us all, Hylier. But now to find my — yes, my child — the

child of my daughter, aud tell her who I am." He again paced

the room, pressing his hands together, and almost convulsed.

May I hope, sir" stammered Mrs. Hylier.

Hope nothing, madam," he interrupted, "as I do, but that

time may be given you, as well as me, to render justice."

And now, if my tale were to end, as made-up stories do, with

a record that tho old man found his grandchild much better than

he had anticipated ; that they lived for a short time happily

together, and then the governess was married to a great lord, to

the discomfiture of all gossips, I should substitute fiction for

fact — which I cannot do. The life of a young woman, devoted

to the instruction of youth, may be likened to those streams wc

read of — springing up wc know not where — which mvrmvr

along, fertilising as they flow ; and the, after trees, and flowers,

nd sightly plants, have sprung up through their unhonoured

influence — behold ! they have disappeared into the bowels of the

earth, and are see no more ! In society, wc constantly meet

young and accomplished ladies ; their acquirements are universally

acknowledged and admired ; until they " came out,"

they were attended to always in their hours of study, of illness,

of amusement, by their " governess." She is gone now ; no one

ever inquires after her. She is gone, if young enough, to

another situation, again to attend upon young ladies in their

hours of study, amusement, and illness — again to lie dismissed

again forgotten. Surely it is a high privilege to be intrusted

with the education of youth — one of the very highest that

a woman can enjoy ; and if sho perform her duty, her services

should never be slighted or forgotten. The " teacher" should rank,

after her own immediate family, in the pupil's affections ; or, if

that cannot be (for wc may respect those wc do not love), in her

esteem ; she should always be honoured, and never permitted to

want ; her importance to society is as vital as the unseen sap to

the blooming tree ; her situation subordinate, her influence

paramount — not in the usual course of influences, but if wc

look back to our own young days, wc shall remember how much

wc learned from some patient teacher that directed us through

after life. Our astonishment is often excited, not by the little

which governesses know, but by their knowing so much. Nevertheless,

until some decided step is taken by the legislature to

regulate not only schools, but the education of teachers, there

must always be a danger of their incompetency to perform at

least a portion of all that is required of them. Still, in nine

cases out of ten, what has been doue for ourselves in the way of

education, has been done by this hardly-used race. Aud, certainly,

Mr. Byfield ought to have been satisfied with what

Emily Dawson had already accomplished, without turning her

over to one whom he knew would try her to the uttermost.

His feelings were hardened, and he was rendered suspicious — by

the past circumstances of a varied life — of there being auy good

in human nature ; his benevolence was often frozen over ; but

when it thawed, the verdure of a generous nature came quickly

forth.

The first step he endeavoured to take was to ascertain where

Miss Dawson now was ; but here he was bailed. The housemaid

had received warning from her mistress the previous night, iv

consequence, she said, of her attention to " the governess ; " and

a few moments after Mr. Byfield had spoken to her, had gone,

as Mrs. Hylier had commanded she should. The other servants

pretended to be, or were, ignorant of her residence ; and there

bad been such firmness of manner iv her falsehood, that Mr.

Byfield believed she had told the truth. The natural impetuosity

of his character was now directed to find her out ; and fancying

she had gone to her old friends, he posted off, leaving a wonderful

story to the good people of Kensington, which was told

in at least twenty different ways, the last being the most extraordinary.



While all was agitation and confusion in her former home —

while Mrs. Hylier reproached Mrs. Ryal, and Mrs. Ryal continued

to assert that, despite all, sue know sho was right — while

Mrs. Gresham's soft heart yielded in all the weak lovingness of

its nature to the conviction that Emily Dawson was a " wonder

among governesses," aud Miss Colette Mercier divided her feelings

as equally as possible between "chare Emily," her new

parasol, her chere uiaman, and a certain leaning towards a gentleman

who always wore " such sweet kid gloves " — while the

servants regretted they had not been more civil, aud the

visitors that they had not been mure polite — Emily Dawson,

overpowered by the weight of an illness she had so long borne

up against, was lying utterly incapable of sustained thought or

action in the small back room of a tiny house at Chelsea.

Mary's arrival was a great consolation to her. She sat by her

bedside " mending up her things," and " quilling her caps," asa

preparatory step to her " looking for a new place." Emily

would have been glad had she talked less ; but as she never

expected an answer, and chattered in a low, sleepy, rippling tone

of voice, it did not disturb her much. She spoke iv what she

considered would be tho most consoling manner, showing how

much better off Emily was "than many a poor lady governess

sho knew long ago." She told of one who, having lost her

health, died in a workhouse, and no no ever looked after her ;

of another, who was tho only comfort and support of a blind

father, who would sit holding her hands in his, running his

fingers over the arm worn to a shadow, listening for the doctor's

tread, aud turning his sightless eyes to his face, as if trying to

read an opinion it gave the good doctor pain to pronounce. And

then, how she did pray that God would take her father first ;

but the prayer was not heard, for she died, and every morning

the father crawled to the churchyard. Tho little children would

frequently go out of their way to guide horn to his daughter's

grave; and at last he died upon it, without a complaint; and

the coroner returned a verdict— " Died by the visitation of

God;" but she knew it was by the visitation of sartine.

Another young person " passed by them every morning ; there,

that was her walk, she knew it by the halting, as sho was lame,

though for all that, she got over many a mile in a week. She

had a turn for languages, and taught a great many at a shilling

a-lesson, and had constant employment ; and one sister instructed

in music, and another in dancing. They worked very hard, and

did not earn much, but they lived happily with one another, and

liked it better that going out for good, though Miss Fanny (the

dancer) was fearful she couldn't teach this last winter, from a

wheezing she caught from damp feet, as she could not afford to

ride. Indeed, Mary declared, iv her time she had seen much

misery under a thin silk gown ; poor ladies were obliged to seem

rich, for if they did not dress "respectable," no one would have

them, though they hardly paid them enough to cam salt. Miss

Dawson was happy, compared to many she knew. It was a pity

that tradesmen did not keep their daughters to the shop instead

of giving them notions above one thing and below another.

Making them governesses half times, was little better than

making them slaves. Miss Dawson ought to bless her stars ;

for as soon as her cold wore away, she'd be sure of a good

situation.

And she would have talked thus much longer, had not her

mother called her out to inquire, if she knew " what property the

poor lady had," as a doctor ought to see her ; and Mary, good-natured

girl, spurned the question, yet coincided in the opinion,

saying she was no expense to there, for she neither eat nor

drank ; and if she had, she had wherewith to pay — it may be

remembered that Mary did not particularly adhere to truth — and

that the doctor had better come at once ; she would go and fetch

him — and so she did ; and when he heard her cough, and saw

the flush upon her check, aud her lain noise with the dews

of that English disease to which thousands are sacrificed, he

blistered her chest to relieve lor breathing, ordered her a light

diet, and particularly recommended Italy, the south of France,

or Madeira ; and that to a governess, with three pounds five

and sixpence in her purse, and no friend !

Oh, I shall soon be better, sir," she said — " very soon. I

have been much worse ; a few days' rest and quiet will quite

set me up."

Send to her friends," said the doctor to Mary.

Lord, sir ! " replied Mary, opening her eyes, " sure she's

only a governess I "

Let any one recal the sick-bed of a beloved object suffering

from hectic fever ; how wearing that everlasting cough, which

only ceases, to begin again ; how sad, after you have drawn the

curtain, softened the night-lamp, and given the composing

draught, with au earnest prayer to Almighty God that the

patient may enjoy sleep, how sad it is to hear the hack, hack, of

the gasping chest breaking up the false repose, and then to know,

by the movement and the sigh, that the poor patient has turned ;

and though the pillows are down, and tho sheets cambric, aud

though thoughts and hands of tenderest love have smoothed

then., and poured out the most soothing and reviving perfumes

that still, though there is little positive pain, there is no rest;

and you are called; —that sweet silver voice steals its melodious

way from your ear to your heart ; the church clock has struck

two, and the watcher's eyes are heavy, but the eyes of the

watched are bright ; aud she will have you open the curtain,

and she talks of things to come in this world— of the springtime

and the summer, and of when she shall be better, and of

how pleasantly the autumn will pass at the sea-side ; the summer

will fly quite away with her cough, and then she shall so enjoy

the autumn ! And while she talks, her thin pure face aud

glorious brow, round which the damp air clings, rests on your

bosom, and you know that it is now December ; but that autumn,

summer, spring, will never again be gladdened by that hopeful

voice ! Nothing can bring her back the ease of body which the

poor cat enjoys before the tire ; tended as she is, by the watchful

love of a whole house, she knows not rest. How much more

must the governess have suffered in that small room, upon a

hard bed, shaken by kindly but rough hands, believing that if

God prolonged the life which, despite our sufferings, wc all cling

to, it would be ended — where ? Alas I no hospital will open its

doors lo consumption; the lagging, certain, wearing, wasting

complaint, engendered by our shivering atmosphere, of which so

may hundreds, especially governesses, perish, finds no public

friend in charitable England. 1 But it was not only the wretched,

unrelieved weariness, and pain of body, Emily suffered ; it was,

that she had been hooted forth characterless ; she, the pure,

high-minded, upright, honourable girl, trembled lest she was

sinking into her grave tainted ; that she would meet her mother

with the mark of shame which passeth not away upon her brow.

The notion haunted her ; the thought of it would not let her

sleep by night or by day ; she said in the morning sho would be

better by the evening, and in the evening she would be certainly

better in the morning ; for sho was of a hopeful spirit ; and her

I rejoice to bo enabled now to correct this statement ; thoro it an hospital

for consumption ; at Old Brompton too ; I soe it from my room-window every

dny, and bless God who prompted high, though comparatively humble, minds,

to romovo from our country, and, for over, a coop reproach.

disease — slow, pallid, traitor it is — encouraged hope. Several

days elapsed, and her little money, despite Mary's exertions, was

nearly gone. With the high-toned generosity of a noble mid,

she would not write to her friend of her distress, for she knew

she had not the means to relieve her ; aud why should sho make

her unhappy ? She did write, though, a little every day, resolve

mg to scud tho letter off when she was better. The doctor saw

she grew rapidly worse, more rapidly than usual, for her mid

was goading the disease to double speed ; her money was gone,

though Mary stoutly said it was not, and showed her silver,

which the girl had pledged her own Sunday shawl to obtain.

In the meantime Mr. Byfield was driven almost to madness.

What would he not have given to have had the power of recalling

his former harshness ? — how he deprecated the bitterness

which mado horn change even his name, that his child might

never hear of horn I How cruel did he deem what a little time

before he would have called his consistency I how did he mingle

tears with his morning and evening prayers, and in positive

agony call upon his wife to forgive horn his forgiveness towards

his child ! Ho found no trace of his granddaughter in her native

place, and in London - he was bewildered by the difficulties he

experienced everywhere.

Mary had only been a few weeks at Mrs. Hylier's, and had

covered her retreat with what she considered admirable skill.

The abruptness and violence of Mr. Byfield'a manner frustrated

his own plans ; but fortunately, Mrs. Gresham, who had taken

from the first a warm interest in Emily, was more successful.

She mado inquiries with a woman's tact, and at last communicated

the good news, that she had traced Miss Dawson to Mary's

house. The old man entreated her to accompany horn there, and

she consented. Mary's mother had become very discontented

at her lodger's poverty, and mother and daughter were in loud

altercation ou the subject, when Mr. Byfield, unable to restrain

his impatience, thundered so loudly at the door, as to bring all

the inhabitants of the street, to their windows.

"I tell you, sir, I know nothing about her. How should

II" exclaimed Mary to Mr. Byfield, who could only get his

stick through the open door, for she held it close with a considerable

share of strength. " It's no use your coming in ;

she's not here ; and if she was, what is it to you, you old

sinner ? "

I tell you," said Mr. Byfield, " she is my grandchild. God

help mo ! " muttered the old man, as he leant against the doorpost

; " God help me! that rough girl guards her honour more

carefully than I did."

"That's impossible!" answered Mary. "If you was her

grandfather, you'd never have sent her governcssiug to Mrs.

Hylier, I know."

I am here, Mary," said the gentle voice of Mrs. Gresham ;

and it is quite true that Miss Dawson is Mr. Byfield's granddaughter."



Mary opened the door with what, in the poor, is deemed

impertinence," iv the rich " self-possession," os if nothing had

occurred ; curtsied them in, and hoped that Mr. Byfield would

not think the worse of her ; she was a poor girl ; and though

great folks might live without a character, she could not

Mrs. Gresham told Miss Dawson of her true position, as delicately

aud carefully as it could be told ; and accounted for the

old man's strangeness by expressing the desire he felt to see,

himself, how she would bear the rubs of life. She thanked God

earnestly for the disclosure. The old man knelt by her bedside,

and called her " his child" — " his dear child" — " his only hope

and comfort on this side the grave." Alas ! people who are

liberal of the bitters of existence, should remember, that poison,

even unto death, may steal into the cup.

Iv a few hours, Emily was removed upon luxurious cushions to

the house of which she had become the honoured mistress ; even

Mrs. Hylier sent her little girls to minister to her comforts; and

Mary was, of course, with her. A sudden spirit of sisterly love

and tenderness sprang up amongst those who had been accounted

censorious and malevolent ; and the surrounding maids, wives,

and widows became animated by a most extraordinary longing

to inquire into the state of Miss Dawson's health. They ascertained

what Mr. Byfield's name had been, and that he had

changed it to avoid his daughter's recognition. This knowledge

afforded them satisfaction ; they did not even venture to

censure the unpardonable harshness of a father to a child,

though some of the more independent Spirits among them

insinuated, that "it was at least very strange, and carrying

resentment farther than they could have done." Mrs. Ryal

was the only one who remained firm to her first "principles,"

and opinions.

Every thing that skill could suggest, or luxury invent, was

resorted to for the relief and comfort of the long-neglected girl.

The great physician of the day told her grandfather, who stood

before horn with clasped and trembling hands, watchful eyes and

ears, drinking in his words, that when she was able to be removed,

he would recommend the Both of Italy. This was in

her dressing-room — a room hung with pale pink silk, where the

softest breeze whispered its way amid crowded exotics, and the

very light of heaven stole through tinted glass ; where the old

man himself removed his shoes before he entered, lest tho

smallest noise might disturb the creature cushioned upon satin,

who, only a few weeks before, was expected to brave cold winds

and everlasting fatigue. The reaction upon the grandfather's

mid amounted almost to insanity. The stern, bitter satirist

had melted into a found old man, who seemed absorbed in having

once more something upon which he could safely pour out his

long pent-up affections.

The physician again felt her pulse, spoke a few kindly words,

and departed. So softly did Mr. Byfield follow horn down stairs,

that he did not even hear his foot-fall ; but he arrested his

attention when in the hall, by pressing his arm. "Sir, sir," he

said, in a trembling tone ; "in here — speak softly — she does not

like noise. You said, when sho was able, wc were to go to the

south of Italy. Now, how soon will that be ? Wc have had

some sharp north winds — those keep her back ; but will it be

when the wind changes ? "

Not so soon as that, my good sir ; but I hope soon — indeed

I hope it — sho has interested me much. You must keep her

quiet — perfect repose — she must speak as little as possible ; she

n

must not exert herseW in the least ; her lungs have been overworked."



God forgive roe ; they have, they have ! "

"Wc must watch the symptoms, aud act accordingly."

"Certainly, sir; but you say this climate is uot fit for her?"

"It is not ; but she cannot bear exertion yet. Good morning,

my dear sir ; I will try and be here tomorrow precisely at the

same hour."

You do not trifle with me, sir, do you ? — raising hope to

destroy it ? " inquired the old man, almost fiercely.

I have raised no hope," returned the doctor. "If she bears

removal, it must be to the south of Italy." Mr. Byfield caught

at the back of a chair, and gasped for breath ; at last he repeated,

" If — if; you said if. Is there any doubt, then ? "

The agony of despair in the old man's face compelled the

doctor to lay down his hat ; and seat, himself by Mr. Byfield's

side.

"My dear, good sir, I never deceive ; and I hope you will

nerve yourself as becomes a Christian. All things are possible ;

and everything shall be, indeed of late has been, done to overthrow

our insidious foe. If I had seen her sooner" — tho old

man started as if au asp had stung horn ; " though, indeed, that

might not have availed much," continued the ready doctor ; " she

is young — the summer before her — let us hope for tho best ;

but, frankly, the Symptoms are against us."

But sho said she was so much better this morning ? "

It is a cause of exceeding thankfulness to find her so cheerful."



And a good sign, sir ? "

The sign of a good mid," replied the doctor, evasively.

Mr. Byfield was gratified by the idea. " And so she has — an

angels mid," he answered. " Perhaps you can tell me tomorrow

about Italy, sir. I have worked hard all my life, aud have

been a thriving man — more rich than people think, sir. I will

heap gold upon that table, so that you cannot move it, if you

but save her life."

What an extraordinary development of character I " thought

the physician, as his carriage rolled away ; " why, a tithe of this

care would have saved her — ay, six months ago ! "

And where have you been, dear grandpa ? " said Emily, ashe

stole into her room, to sit and look at her : "where have

you been ? "

Hush ! you must not talk ! " he said.

Oh, but I may ; a little under my breath. I used to be

obliged to talk, but now it is a pleasure. Do let me mention

what wc spoke of yesterday — the nice alms-houses you said you

would build for aged governesses. Oh, how glad I shall be to

see the first stone laid ! When shall it lie ? — Next August, on

my birth-day? — Or, come here, I will speak very softly, if you

will not be angry. My poor mother ! She used to be so proud

of her governess-child ! Will you lay the first stone on her

birth-day ? Thank you, dear grandpa I Bless you ! I shall

not want to go to Italy ; that will cure me ! "

It was beautiful to observe, that, though this creature loved

life as a young bird loves to poise upon its feeble wings, she did

not fear death. Ab her frame decayed — as she wasted into

a shadowy outline of what all those who had known her, now

declare had been so lovely, her mid became more buoyant —

purer it could hardly be — though more ethereal, when her cough

permitted short snatches of sleep. She seemed as if, through

these thin eyelids, she gazed upon all the mysteries of au unclouded

world ; a perpetual smile parted the pallid lip, like the

division of a lily-bud ; and when she awoke, it was to confer

fresh interest on the things of life.

Poor Miss Mercier would kneel for hours by her side, and

smile and weep by turns. "It did her good," she said ; and she

said rightly ; such secures do good — they strike upon the heart ;

there is no deception in them.

Do not weep for me," said Emily ; " I shall be better soon.

Every day I become better ; and if I could only make you feel

the importance of your duties, I should be so much happier. I

am changed, though, a good deal. Were I to teach again, 1

would try and interest my pupils more about Hereafter than I

did. I would talk to there much more about the heavens, those

B Z

lightsome heavens where the just are made perfect ; it is so

happy to think of their radiance, their glory, their eternity ;

and to think of this beautiful world, iv which I once sorrowed

and laboured, and yet loved ; for surely it was created by God

as a place of passage, where the good may have a foretaste of the

happiness prepared for there hereafter I "

She would talk thus to all, pouring forth the very sweetness

of wisdom ; so that people wondered how she had gained such

knowledge. Her two former pupils could hardly be separated

from her ; aud though her grandfather manifested much impatience

at being disturbed from her side by auy oue, still he was

80 proud of her sweet mid, that he could not refuse them

admission, but made up for disappointments by stealing into the

room during the night, and watching or praying while the

heavy-eyed nurse slept. Each day the physician came, and each

day the old gentleman would follow horn outside the door, and

inquire, as though the question were still new, " When will tho

time come? When may wc go to Italy?" And the doctor would

reply, with a kind look, " Not yet."

To all beside — except herself — it was evident she was dying :

it is almost too hard a word to apply to such a passing away ; it

was as if a rose dropped leaf by leaf, until the last few petals that

remained trembled on the stem. She said, every day, she was

better — much better : she had uo pain now ; aud she should

soon be able to drive out iv the warm sunshine. Her friend, the

clergyman's sister, came to her from the country. And the

clergyman himself, he who had attended her mother's death-bed,

prayed beside hers. It might have been that the young man

loved her; but she never dreamt he did — never. She talked

a great deal of the post and future, and of what blessings would

arise from a higher-toned education. And one morning in particular,

when the doctor called, he reproved her for wasting her

strength in words. Again Mr. Byfield followed horn outside the

room, aud tho physician led horn into another apartment, and

closed the door.

My dear sir," he said, " our dear patient is very weak

to-day."

She said she was better," replied Mr. Byfield.

She is not : her mid is purer, aud higher, and holier than

ever ; but she is sinking."

Not unto death ? " muttered the old man.

The physician turned away ; he could not bear to look upon

the features of the old man — " God bless you, sir ; you have

a great consolation ; everything has been done that could lie

done : I wish I was as sure of heaven as she is. Good morning —

be composed."

The old man turned away — he was alone — he sank into a

chair ; burst after burst of tears convulsed his frame. It was

nearly four hours before he could enter her room again ; he saw

she was greatly changed in that short space of time, and yet she

hailed horn with her feeble voice, declaring she was better. He

motioned Miss Mercier, who had been with her, to leave the

chamber. He took her hand iv his, gazed earnestly into her

face, and sank upon his knees.

It is not time for prayer yet, is it ? — it is not night yet ?" she

said. " But pray, dear grandfather; it is always time for prayer."

"I am going," he answered, "to pray to you. Listen ! Hereon

my knees, I do entreat your pardon ; an old man, whose

harshness deprived you of your mother — whose harshness has

abridged the length of your sweet life. I did not intend to try

you beyond your strength, but I ought to have known better.

I chained you with those hands to the galley, when I should

have given you freedom. Can you forgive me, Emily ? And

when you meet your mother, will you ask her not to turn from

me in heaven as I turned from her on earth ? "

The poor girl was deeply affected ; she threw herself feebly

forward, and clasped her arms round his neck, and pressed her

check to his. She poured forgiveness and blessings on his whitehead,

and fondly pushed back the silver hair from his brow. He

replaced her on her pillows, but the exertion had shaken the

sand in the gloss of life : it was passing rapidly.

You will be kind to those I love," she said, " and truly forgive

those who were harsh to me ; and you will be very good to

poor Mary : and — oh, heavenly Father, receive my spirit !"

These were her last words. The old man, frantic with grief,

despatched the nurse, who had just entered the room, for help ;

and when she returned, the dead face of his grandchild was

resting on his breast ; and he held up his finger, and said,

Hush I hush 1 " as though she slept, which he believed she did ;

aud all night long he remained in the same position, murmuring

every now and then, as if soothing a slumbering infant.

The old man is still living, but his mid is gone ; aud his

heart is iv her grave, — which he persists in saying was dug

by his hands.

GRACE HUNTLEY.

BffiffiTj ' w '^ "B ner Grace," said a pale, delicate-looking

k\-mK Jr y oua S woman to her husband, as she raised the

rin^y' white flannel hood, that he might gaze upon the

. .x . -. Features of their new-born babe. "Abel, I never

expected to be the mother of a living child ; but God has been

merciful ; so wc will give to her tho gentle name of Grace ; and,

dearest, let us pray that, in all the troubles and trials of life, not

the name merely, but the spirit may dwell with her I"

It was only a few weeks afterwards that the grave closed over

the fair young mother ; but the blessing wherewith she had

blessed her child had been heard and registered in heaven.

You are not angry with me, dear father — not angry with

your poor Grace — aud you will forgive Joseph Huntley ! 0 ! "

added the girl playfully, "if wc youngsters could but get your

wisdom, without your wrinkles, what wonderful creatures wc

should be ! "

My child, my child I age will bring wrinkles, as autumn

brings withered leaves ; yet wisdom doth not always come with

years. But our hearts do not grow old, girl ; so I forgive you !"

And Joseph too, father?"

The schoolmaster (for such was his calling) shook his head.

Of als the youths it has been my fortune to instruct, I never

met with so wilful a boy as Joseph Huntley."

He is not a boy now, father ; you forget he is now out of his

time."

"So much the worse. His master, worthy Matthew Green-shaw,

tells me he spoils more mahogany than any apprentice that

ever entered his house ; and you know, Grace, the desk he made

as a present for me last Christmas, tumbled to pieces the second

time I leant upon it."

Dear father, you lean your elbows so heavily ! But Joseph

has made you such a pretty ruler of cherry-tree wood !"

I believe he is a kind-hearted fellow ; but, dear Grace, a kind

heart alone will not insure prosperity; there must be forethought,

and industry, aud discretion. And truth to say, I fear your

heart is too much set upon this same Joseph Huutley. Whatever

he does, you view in one light and lin another. I would

not judge harshly, my ('.ear child ; yet do I wish it had pleased

God your mother had lived : it is uo easy thug for a man to

bring up a daughter, and make her learned in woman's craft, aud

other matters meet for her to understand. A pains-taking

schoolmaster, like myself, has but small opportunity of cultivating

a knowledge of female sentiment ; yet have I not been a bad

father, for never did 1 harbour the thought of giving a second

mother dominion over you ; aud, albeit you are not skilled iv

the arts of cross-stitch, back-stitch, or Quakers hern, which our

good neighbour Mrs. Craddock so exceedingly laments, yet is our

house clean and well-ordered — and few girls comprehend better the

first four rules of arithmetic, or can write a fairer hand, that my

own Grace." The simple-minded man looked upon his darling

child for a few moments, while a feeling of pride irradiated his

countenance ; a change, however, soon passed over it, a change

striking, yet not uncommon — a change from pride to piety ; his

eye moistened, and his voice faltered, as, laying his hand upon

the beautiful head of his only oue, he continued : " And when I

am laid in my grave, Grace, you will remember that your poor

old father taught you more that mere writing and ciphering ;

you will remember our quiet evenings, when you sat upon this

footstool, aud wo conversed together on the piety of the Danish

Canute, who showed unto his courtiers the vanity of earthly

grandeur by a very simple expedient ; — ou the dignity and purity

of our English Alfred, whose virtues were so happily tempered,

so justly blended, that each prevented the other from exceeding

its proper bounds ; — or on the grace and beauty of Cornelia, who

regarded her noble children as the richest jewels a matron could

possess. You will also call to mid passages of our sublime

Milton, which you learned as a recreation from graver studies ;

but, above all, my child will bear iv her memory our holy aud

simple Sabbath enjoyments — the free, unfettered day, rightly

appreciated only by those who toil wearily through the week —

the clear breezy morning— the early prayer — the walk to the

village church — the evening sacrifice in our own cottage Ah !

I could never read the story of Joseph and his brethren, or the

sweet reply of Ruth to her mother, without weep ng; aud you,

too, Grace, — caa you ever forget the parable of the five wise

virgins? How often have I prayed that the Lord, when He

came, might find us watching ! And surely my prayers were

heard, for you are a good girl, Grace — although something wilful

in the matter of Joseph Huntley, who, by the way, I see coming

over the meadow. Perhaps he can mend my desk."

Then you forgive horn, father 1 "

Forgive horn ! — why, yes ; for, to own the truth, I forget

what it was I was angry about ! Do you remember ? "

"Oh 1 never mid, dear father, never mid ■ " aud Grace

kissed her father affectionately, but too well pleased that his

memory was somewhat, aud uot unfrequently, treacherous concerning

late events.

It would, iv all human probability, have been far happier for

Grace bad her mother lived. Abel had spoke truly in saying

he had but small opportunity of cultivating a knowledge of what

he called ■' female sentiment ;" and though he formed his daughter's

mid to the best of his ability, yet he formed, or rather

directed it, so as to draw forth the higher and nobler faculties,

while those that are called into action by the every-day and

homely occurrences of life were, comparatively, neglected. It was

fortunate for Grace that she was wholly exempt from those small

vanities which so often obtain dominion over females who acquire

only a moderate degree of information. But she was preserved

by the halo aud protection of pure and self-denying religious impressions.

There are those whose apparent belief emanates from

circumstances — the seed is scattered by the way-side, and the

fowls of the air may pick or uproot it. But the religion of the

schoolmaster's daughter was not of this kind. Tho seed had

been sown in good ground, and its fruit was peace, hope, love,

aud a tender caring for others — the only unquestionable proof

of true charity. She was, as her father has said, wilful in the

matter of Joseph Huntley, and it was as regarded horn that

a mother's watchfulness was more especially needed. That the

old man was dissatisfied with the person ou whom her affections

had been placed was evident, since observations such as those I

have recorded were of frequent occurrence ; yet parent and child

differed in the conclusions drawn from the actions of the lover :

aud no wonder. Acquainted with the schoolmaster's abstracted

and peculiar habits, young Huntley was less careful before horn

than before Grace. Now, a mother would have had sufficient

skill, had she perceived his evil propensities, to exhibit them

palpably in the presence of her daughter ; well knowing that

railing at faults the existence of which is not credited, is the sure

way to confirm affection iv a youthful bosom-the generous

mid being always roused at the bare idea of injustice. But

worthy Abel Darley had no notion of such management ; he

satisfied his conscience by frequent allusions to Joseph faults,

and then, imagining he had been too severe, he would, in nearly

the same breath, lavish praises on his virtues.

As the lover entered the schoolmaster's cottage, it was impossible

not to admire his manly form and excellent carriage. Considerably

above the middle height, his head well placed, and his

finely-developed features set off to every possible advantage by

a scrupulous attention to neat and even gentlemanly attire,

Joseph Huntley might well have been pronounced the handsomest

youth in the village of Craythorpe. When he took off his hat,

however, there was invariably mingled with admiration a seeling

for which it was difficult to account. Those skilled in physiognomy

would have observed that his forehead was too low, and

that a peculiar contraction of the brows denoted the vicinity of

stormy passions ; the mouth was mean in expression, but as it

usually extended into a smile, discovering even and beautiful

teeth, the defect escaped general notice ; and Joseph Huntley

was accounted, as I have said, the handsomest youth in the retired

village of Craythorpe. What he was in reality, actions will tell

better than words ; but my readers must permit me to remind

them that, in books as well as in actual life, it takes time for

character to unfold itself.

About fifteen months after Abel Darley nat complained of

Joseph Huntley 's bad workmanship and careless habits, his zeal

for his daughter's happiness triumphed over his fears, and he

gave all that he valued upon earth into the keeping of one she

loved, "not wisely, but too well."

The father shuddered involuntarily, and turned pale, as he

presented her hand to the gay bridegroom ; and all present were

dismayed by an oversight of the sexton, who opened the prayer-book

at the funeral, instead of the wedding, service. The clergyman

had absolutely read the first few words before the error was

discovered. Old women grouped in the churchyard to talk over

the unlucky omen ; and the bride's companions blessed her with

a tearful earnestness, rarely to be seen among the youthful at

a rustic wedding.

Alas I for the loneliness of the father's hearth, when it is

deserted by a beloved, an only child ! Often did Abel Darley

list his eyes from the Bible, whereon (perhaps for the first time

since his fire-side was first left desolate) he looked without

receiving instruction — often did he raise them from the sacred

page, and gaze upon the long candle, wondering why it waxed

dim — and then, remembering that the hand which trimmed it

was away, and another's, sigh heavily, and pore again over tho

book, without, however, brightening the light, or calling to the

little serving-maiden to do so for horn ; — then, when the clock

chimed ten, he read aloud os usual the evening prayer, and commenced

the simple hymn that consecrates the name of Kenmore

that the mitre which crowned his brows He had taught

Grace, when a child, to sing with horn, alternately, a verse of

this gentle strain ; and when he finished the line —

Beneath thine own almighty winnie

paused for a few moments, expecting to hear her voice, so

low, so soft, so like the murmuring music of a 3'oung bird's

warbling before it knows its own power of song ; then, as if the

truth came suddenly upon horn, that her melody had gone to

delight another's dwelling, the old man burst into a flood of

tears, aud, covering his face with his hands, wept long and

bitterly, even to the solitary hour of one, when, like a troubled

child, he retired to his bed, aud sobbed aud slumbered until

morn.

Grace, what are you in such a bustle about ? " inquired her

husband, as she busied herself with more than usual diligence

to set all thugs in order in their clean aud cheerful-looking

cottage.

Grace silently pointed to the watch that hung over tho

chimney-piece.

Well," replied he, " and what then ? I see it is rather late ;

but this is Sunday, and wc who work must have a holiday

sometimes."

And so wc should, Joseph. But do you not hear — "

What ? "

The church-bell ? "

Well ? "

Come then, dearest, and make haste, or wc shall be late, and

that will not be right."

"Then, I suppose, it will be wrong. But I do not think

I shall go to church to-day."

"My dear, are you ill?" inquired his wife, looking affectionately

in his face.

Never was better ; but I don't feel inclined — is that so very

extraordinary 1 "

Oh, Joseph ! you will surely not stay from church ! — what

would the clergyman think ? — what would my father say ? You

will not suffer me to walk all through the lanes by myself, dear

Joseph I "

But you are not obliged to go. It is very proper to attend

church ; but to tramp such a distance through all weathers ! —

why it rained almost tho whole night I "

"It is beautiful now ; the air is so clear, and the birds are

singing so gaily I 0, do come 1 "

I will not ; so do not tease me ; I must take a long walk

after dinner."

Dear Joseph," she continued, kissing horn, though her eyes

were filled with tears, "and must I, indeed, go by myself?"

If you go, you must most certainly," ho replied, returning

her caress at the same time with all his usual affection.

It was the first solitary walk she had taken during the last

Even months — since her marriage, in fact j and she thought

that, considering her situation, it was rather unkind of Joseph to

permit her to go alone.

Almost every tree — certainly every stile she passed - was

hallowed by some remembrance connected with the playmate of

her childhood —the lover of her early youth — the husband of hei

affections. When she looked on the dew dancing amid the

delicate tracery of the field-spider's wcb — when the joyous

whistle of the gay blackbird broke upon her ear — gazing silently

on all that was really fresh and beautiful in nature — she felt

that, instead of warming, it fell chillily upon her heart. And

yet all was as usual — the bright sun, and the Smiling landscape.

Why, then, was she less cheerful ? She was alone I

No one she loved was by her side, to whom to say, " How

beautiful ! "

The knowledge, the painful knowledge, which this, and a few

other similar circumstances, conveyed to Grace, as to the real

state of her husband's religious sentiments, made her a wiser buta

sadder woman. Conscious that he had deceived her in one

instance, she dreaded to ask herself if the deception extended also

to minor matters. He no longer deemed it necessary to keep up

even appearances, and not unfrequently jested at the simplicity

of his wife's once believing horn " a sant; " although, when she

first became a mother, he seemed pleased and amused with the

infant, and either was, or affected to lie, touched by the earnest

prayers and supplications she poured forth, that the child might

be blessed, and become worthy of the name and calling of a

Christian.

Had Grace made a parade of her feelings, her husband, judging

from his own, might have doubted their sincerity ; but he only

heard them when she thought horn hushed in sleep. At the

midnight watch, when she trimmed her lamp, and looked into

the peaceful face of her little one, so tranquil in its slumbers,

then her prayers were not loud, but deep ; for a tender mother's

hopes, as she gazes on her child, are ever mingled with fears —

fears which nothing can dispel, except a true and perfect trustfulness

iv the all-watchful care of a benevolent God. It may be

that, as with the woman iv Scripture, her first entreaties have

been unanswered ; yet is she not weary ; her voice neither falters

nor fails ; the heart is still petitioning, and the pious mother's

prayer floats upwards — on, on, from sphere to sphere — until it

reaches the throne of the Great Omnipotent, whose dearest

attribute is mercy !

I have said that his wife's material tenderness affected a heart

which every-day occurrences continued to steep more deeply in

hardness and sin ; for the progress from idleness to comparative

.want, from want to vice, whether slow or not, is sure ; and even

a disinclination to employment, where there is nothing but

industry to look to for support, is in itself a crime that heralds

the approach of crimes more consuming. So that, when the

momentary excitement to good feeling was past, Joseph Huntley

relaxed into a cold indifference towards those whom it was his

duty to cherish.

The rapidity with which love may glide from the heart of

a man is a moral phenomenon for which it would puzzle philosophers

to account. The brief space of a few months not unfrequently

converts the devoted into the unkind, or — to a delicate

mid, still worse — the neglectful, husband. Grace knew that

Joseph circumstances, when they married, were prosperous ;

but very soon after she was made a wife, a change came over all

things — gradually it came, as a small cloud increases to an overwhelming

tempest In his business young Huntley might have

been distinguished ; but the orders he received were slighted for

the boon companions of the village ale-house ; and debts accumulated,

which there was no money to pay.

What sort of bread do you call this ? " inquired Joseph,

Somewhat sulkily, of her who hud prepared a homely cake, and

baked it over the ashes, for his supper.

It is nice wholesome food, Joseph, for I made it myself.

You used to like my cakes."

But the flour is coarse "

Grace did not reply.

Did you hear me say the flour is 'coarse ? "

It is not as fine as usual, for I brought it from my father's

he gave me some ; and — and — "

■ And what, Grace ? — women are seldom slow of speech''

"The baker, love, has asked so often for his bill, that, as you

told me I should have money tomorrow to pay horn, I did not

like to get anything more till then."

"Tell horn tomorrow that I cauuct pay horn for a month;

and manage, at the same time, to have properly bolted flour to

make your cakes. This eats like saw-dust."

"My dear, dear Joseph I I really cannot put the man off.

I promised faithfully, as you told mc. I will work night and

day, Joseph — I will do anything you desire ; but do not make

me the instrument of falsehood — indeed, indeed, it will break

my heart 1 "

Her husband looked for a moment into her face ; but his

countenance expressed uo sympathy with her honest feelings.

Grace, you are a fool ! What does a little longer credit

signify to such a man as Mealbag? Or — hark ye, Grace — what

does it matter if, like my betters, I, one of these days, give leg-bail

for my debts, or sleep three months iv a well-guarded house,

commonly called a gaol?"

The colour faded from the young woman's countenance as she

returned her husband's gaze ; another moment, and the warm

red blood rushed back to her check, and her fine eyes brightened

with an expression that his could not encounter.

What 1 " she exclaimed, vehemently, " turn rogue, Joseph !

be pointed at as a dishonest tradesman ! — cheat those who

labour for their food. If anything has occurred, not brought on

by your own carelessness — do not frown, I did not mean that —

if anything has happened, no matter how it has been brought

on, to prevent your paying, and that soon, take all — take everything

— the bed from under us — the gown I wear — all, all I have

in the world ; — sell, and pay — pay to the last farthing. — I can

work ! Oh, yes ! I could beg — starve ! — but I could not bear

any oue to call you rogue ! — or our child, Joseph — our dear,

dear child — a dishonest man's son ! " She clasped her boy to

her bosom ; and then, again looking on her husband, threw

herself into his arms, aud pressing her check, moist with tears,

to his, murmured, " But you did not mean it, Joseph — you

could not mean it — you never could mean tltat I You only said

it to tease, to try me ; but it was very cruel of you 1 Just say

you did not mean it"

What a fuss about a simple word I Why, girl, you are more

silly than I took you for I Mean it ! — no, no I But, Grace,

you need not have turned so suddenly on me, even if I did

mean it. I have heard of women who would bear much more

for their husband's good than that."

For your good, Joseph ! " she replied passionately : " 0, yes !

for your good I would bear anything ; but it could never be for

your good to have your name joined by dishonesty to dishonour.

Say you did not mean it, and I will believe you — but just say it

again, Joseph — just once more ! Thank you. And now," she

added, drawing a heavy breath, and rising from his bosom, " my

heart is lighter — aud — may I go on?"

Yes."

You will pay the baker tomorrow ? "

I cannot. The money I intended for horn I have been

obliged to give elsewhere."

"What, to the man who sold you the mahogany?"

Yes, and for other little matters ; so, dear, you must put oft

the baker, you see. — Why, my little Abel cannot eat this bread !

One of your sweet smiles will put horn off; — or else you must

borrow the money from your father."

'' I cannot do either," she replied, shaking her head mournfully.

" I promised the baker ; and my poor father has no

money, except a small sum laid by to purchase a new great-coat

and some flannel, for winter : perhaps you could not repay horn

before that season came. But, Joseph, listen — my silk cloak —

what do I want with such finery ? The glazier's wife said she

would give two pounds for a cloak of the kind ; bo let her have

it. I hope you will like me as well in a tenpenny print, particularly

when you see that I have kept my word."

There is something bo commanding, so holy, in virtue, that,

though the wicked may not imitate, they cannot withhold from

it their admiration. As Huntley looked upon his wife, he thought

she had never appeared so lovely. Some of the affection of

earlier and purer years returned warmly to his heart; and, as he

kissed her, words of happier import broke from his lips — " God

bless you, Grace ! I am a sad scoundrel, and that's the truth."

Years rolled into eternity ; the million, indeed, heeded not

their passing, but Grace Huntley had recorded them with tears.

Meanwhile her husband sunk deeper and deeper in vice; yet the

misery that followed schooled her still more in the ways of

virtue. " They are bitter," she would say, '• but perhaps they

are useful lessons." It was sad indeed to know that the hearts

which once were united had severed — and severed — and severed,

until, as with the rich man and Lazarus iv the parable, " there

was a great gulf" between them. At first distrust, next colds'



ness, then reproaches, ended in — but no I they did not hate each

other; she could not hate horn who had received her early and

only love — the man to whom, at God's altar, she had sworn duty

and affection. The heart she had trusted she would have given

worlds to recall to virtue; and the voice which now seldom

spoke but to blaspheme, how she prayed that it might again be

restored to the music of former years — the harmony of kindness

and sweet communion 1 She could not hate horn ; and he, base

and hardened as he was, could uot hate her.

In less than eight years after their marriage, her little family

were entirely dependent upon her for support. The workshop,

filled with implements aud materials for labour, had passed into

other hands ; and the pretty cottage, with its little flower-garden,

was tenanted by a more industrious master. For months together,

Joseph used to absent himself from home, under the

pretext of seeking employment. So ruined was his reputation,

that no one iv his own neighbourhood would entrust horn with

work ; and he was but too willing to follow the wandering bent

of hiß disordered mid. How he was really occupied during

these excursions was a profound secret even to his wife. Sometimes

he returned well dressed, and with plenty of money, which

he would lavish foolishly, iv sudden fits of affection, upon his

children. Ou other occasions, he appeared with hardly sufficient

clothes to cover him — poor, aud suffering bodily aud neutral

misery. Then, when from her earnings he was provided and fed,

he would again go forth, and neither be seen nor heard of for

many months.

When chid by her neighbours for the kindness with which she

treated this reckless spendthrift, she would reply calmly, " He is

my husband — the father of my children ; and, as such, can I seo

horn want ? "

From the very day she had parted with her first portion of

dress to pay the bakers bill, she had toiled unceasingly with

her own hands for the benefit of her family. Mrs. Craddock

could no longer say that she was unskilled in woman's craft ; to

the astonishment, of all, iv a little time she was the most exquisite

gentlewoman in the neighbourhood. Nothing came amiss

in the way of labour. Long before daylight she was busied with

her housewifery — the earliest smoke of the village was from the

chimney of her neat, though plain aud scantily-furnished cottage

; and so punctual was she in her engagements, that " As

true as Grace Huntley " became a proverb in Craythorpe.

Humble yet exalted distinction ! — one that all desire — se few

deserve !

With increasing years, the mid of Abel Darley became more

aud more absent ; nevertheless, though decidedly opposed to all

modern innovations, (whenever, indeed, he could be made to

consider the import of such things,) he still continued to perform

his duty of instructing his pupils on the approved old plan —

that is to say, with a birch rod in the right hand, and a lesson-book

in the left. Yet was the schoolmaster not prone to chastisement,

retaining the birch rather as an emblem of authority than

for use. He had a ferule for big boys, — a fool's-cap for little

ones ; and lavished even more, if possible, than the indulgence

usually bestowed by graudpapas on their grandchildren, upon

the child Abel," as he was wont to call his daughter's eldest

son, who greatly resembled his father, not only in person, but iv

mid. The anxiety this resemblance caused his mother may be

better imagined than described. The small cottage, which, when

Abel was about twelve years old, sufficed for her dwelling, was

nearly at the corner of the village churchyard, and about ten

minutes walk from her father's school-house. A small, green

lane, that skirted the village, led by her door; and it was pleasant

to see the merry, light-hearted boys, full of childish glee, passing

along that shady path, after they had laid down their books, and

given their whole anxieties to healthful play.

Her second son was a delicate aud sickly child; but her girl —

her Josephine, as she was named at her father's request, was the

miniature resemblance of the still beautiful mother. Often had

she watched, till her eyes became dim, and her heart swelled

almost to bursting within her bosom, as her eldest-born led his

little sister by tho hand on his return from school — now chasing,

to give her pleasure, the gay butterfly — then hanging from the

branches of the sweet hawthorn or golden laburnum that fringed

f2

the road, to gather for her the earliest aud sweetest flowers.

"They are so like us!" she would think, — "so like what wc

were ! How well I can remember his father at his age, when

first he came to the school, and used to watch over and play with

me, as Abel does with Josephine 1"

The increasing wilfulness and restlessness of young Abel's disposition

supplied additional causes of sorrow to his anxious

mother. If anything could reconcile her to her husband's

absence, it was the consciousness that, were he living with them,

his bad example would operate but too powerfully on their eldest

son. Yet one better " taught" in the ways of the world, and the

rules of modern education, might have envied Grace Huntley the

skill she manifested in the management of her children.

Had his mother so tutored her son, Joseph Huutley would

have been a different sort of person," said the parish rector, Mr.

Glasscott, one Sunday evening, to his wife, after young Abel had

undergone a long examination, not only in the Church Catechism,

but on the great leading doctrines of Christianity.

True, my dear," replied his lady ; " but there are few

mothers like Grace Huntley, teaching and practising industry in

the most wonderful manner — I may say, disdaining assistance ;

for I have thought that her lip curled with even more pride

than befitted a Christian, when Lady Purcel offered her a dole

of meal and money last Christmas."

"It was independence, not pride. They are, in effect, so like

each other, that the world confounds them ; but in reality they

are very different. Grace Huntley is a Christian, aud a high-minded

woman, whose spirit has struggled nobly through

adversity — subdued, but not broken, by the trials she has

encountered."

It is very long since her husband has been seen in the

neighbourhood."

"So much the better ; yet I have heard his poor wife declare

that it would cost her less pain to close his eyes, and perform

the offices which the dead claim of the living, than to remain iv

the dreadful uncertainty that rankles in her heart like a rusted

dagger."

Poor woman I Has he not been Suspected of crimes that

the law might take hold of ? "

"He has. I trust he may never be brought before me on any

charge of the kind : for her sake, 1 should feel much grieved at

performing a magistrates duty."

On the same evening, Grace Huntley was sitting in the seat

she had occupied iv her father's cottage years before ; and such

were the schoolmaster's abstracted habits, that it is very doubtful

whether the events which had changed the lofty but cheerful

girl into the reserved, and, it might be, cold-mannered woman,

had been at all noted by him. He wondered much why Joseph

left his family ; although he observed, with his usual simplicity,

he never expected to have seen in horn a careful husband : but

Grace was so patient, so uncomplaining, that he believed her to

be happy, and was satisfied.

You are not going yet, ray child ? " said the old man, checking

her affectionately, as she rose to depart.

I must go, father ; the children, you know, are alone."

Poor things I — you ought to have brought them with you.

Ah, Grace 1 it is very cruel of you not to come and live entirely

here — it would be so much better than moping alone."

Grace smiled sorrowfully. "If I had not a home, where he

could be entirely master,' to receive horn, you know, father, he

would never return."

■ And no great matter."

Father, for shame ! — he is my husband 1"

"My dear child, I beg your pardon — I forgot ! You are not

angry ? "

No, my dear father I But it was of Abel I wished to speak ,

he is now twelve years old. I cannot afford, on the probability

of his turning out a genius, to keep horn in indolence ; and

Mr. Oglethorpe's gardener has offered to take horn, in spring,

to"

Take the infant from his lessons in spring 1" interrupted the

old man. " Why, Grace, you are not of the Bound judgment you

were in former times, or you would never dream of such a thing.

The boy is a prodigy — there is nothing he cannot learn. Ido

not despair — wc must never despair — of giving horn such knowledge

as may, in a few years, fit horn, mayhap, for a college gown.

Grace, Grace ! you will bring down my grey hairs with sorrow

to the grave, if you take the child from his studies. I watch for

his step — I love his voice — I feel my own youth renewed when

I look upon him. You must let horn 'bide with his books until

his fifteenth year, at all events ; and then, if he has not accomplished

wonders, make horn, if you will, a hewer of wood, ora

drawer of water ; — but you would not take from me the hope

and comfort of my old age, Grace I "

Father, believe me ! Abel has no taste for books ; they may

constitute his pastime, but will never be his business : actual

labour is the only thing for a mid like his. I cannot afford to

apprentice horn to a substantial trade, so let horn be a husbandman

— he is fond of flowers, and takes delight in curious plants :

it is an innocent and sweet thing to live as a gardener, among

the testimonies of God's goodness ; it will employ his mid and

soften his heart. I have seldom heard of one who spent his life

iv the pure fields, occupied iv training the works of nature to

perfection, who was either mean or wicked."

"Its a gentle calling, doubtless ; but there are higher ones ;

and the ' candle,' saith the Holy Scriptures, ' must not be hid

under a bushel.' "

Well, well, sir, it is not yet spring ; only, my dear father,

do not let horn idle when he is here : there is no peace, no

honour, uo prosperity, for the slothful."

I will— l will make horn industrious; he shall do six sums

tomorrow in fractions, and repeat the multiplication-table as

far as nine times, out of class, twice : moreover, he shall read

the eighth aud ninth chapters of Roman history, with questions,

and write "

A parcel of idle ballads on the back of his exercises," interrupted

poor Grace, taking up a scrawled and blotted copy-book,

and smiling at the list of employments her father had marked

out for her son.

No," replied the schoolmaster, resolutely ; — " no ; albeit,

poetry, such as Milton's, softens and elevates the mid. He

shall write one copy in text, and one in small caps, and do two

exercises : so that will be sufficient occupation for one day to

satisfy you, Grace ; — though, methinks, you might leave me to

decide tho quantity as well as quality of his studies."

You are not offended with me, father ? "

Ah, no, Grace ! you never, my child, gave me reason to be

angry in your life ; yet, when I look at you now — it is very

strange — my heart grows heavy, not light. There, tie your cloak

firmly, my owu child ; and God bless you ! But, as you hope

to lay your dying head on a peaceful pillow, do not send the lad

away. I will make horn work— indeed I will, Grace ; I will take

especial care that he does not idle a single minute of precious

time. Your mother went first ; then you deserted your father's

hearth : but the child Abel — do not bereave me of horn, Grace —

do not leave me to say, like Jacob of old, ' If I be bereaved of

my children, I am bereaved !' "

Grace affectionately kissed her father : and in a few minutes

her hand was upon the latch of her own cottage-door. Ere she

had crossed the threshold, a voice, whose tones could not be

mistaken, thrilled to her heart. It was that of her husband 1

He was standing before the fire, holding his hands over the

flame ; his figure seemed more muscular than ever, but its fine

proportions were lost in the appearance of increased and (if the

term may be used) coarse strength. His hair hung loosely over

his brows, so as to convey the idea of habitual carelessness ; and

his tattered garments bespoke the extreme of poverty. He

turned slowly round, as the exclamation of " Mother, dear

mother I " burst from the lips of Josephine, who had been

gazing from a corner at her father, more than half afraid to

approach him.

One took — and one only, was enough to stifle all reproach,

and stir up the affection of Grace's heart. Want was palpably

stamped upon his countenance ; and, as her eye glanced

rapidly over his figure, she shuddered at the alteration which

a few mouths had accomplished. For some moments neither

spoke ; at last, he advanced aud held out his hand to her :

as he walked, she perceived that his feet were hopeless and

bleeding. All his faults, his cruelties, were forgotten — she only

remembered that he suffered, and was her husband ; and she fell

upon his bosom and wept bitterly.

Whatever were the sins of Joseph Huntley, either before or

after this period of his life, it is but justice to horn to believe

that the tears he that night mingled with his wife's were

those of a contrite heart. When she asked horn how and

where he had spent his time during the past months, he

entreated her to forbear such questions for a little while, and

that then he would satisfy her : but the period never came ;

and the dislike he evinced to afford her any information on

the subject, together with his speedy relapse into intemperate

aud dissolute habits, checked her inquiries, and renewed her

fears for the future well-doing of her eldest son.

In the vicinity of gentlemen's seats, there are always a proportionate

number of poachers ; and it requires more than

magisterial vigilance to restrain their devastations. Although it

was impossible to fix a stigma of this kind on any particular

person in the village of Craythorpe, there were two men, basket-makers

by trade, who were strongly suspected of such practices.

John and Sandy Smith lived together in a wretched hut on the

skirts of Craythorpe Common. No one knew whence they

came. Lonely aud reserved in their habits, they seldom mingled

with the villagers. Little children loved not their approach ;

and the large Newfoundland dog at " the Swinging Hen" would

never form acquaintance with them or their mongrel lurcher :

the latter, to confess the truth, was as reserved as his masters,

and made but few friendly overtures towards the nobler animal.

The only thing connected with the strangers that made a

respectable appearance was a fleet aud firm-footed black pony,

which they maintained and treated with great care, for the

ostensible purpose of hawking their brooms through the country ;

but people did talk ; aud, indeed, it was difficult to account for

various petty peculations that had occurred ; or how the landlord

of the same " Swinging Hen " obtained his exquisite French

brandy. Grace learned with regret that au acquaintance had

commenced, and quickly ripened into intimacy, between her

husband and these men. Joseph was no sooner clothed, and

reinstated in his humble cottage, than his bad habits returned,

and his evil propensities grew stronger and stronger.

Yet the ill-temper so constantly manifested towards his wife

and younger children was never extended to his eldest boy, who,

happy in the removal of all restraint, and heedless of the misery

his conduct inflicted on his aged grandfather, flung aside his

books, and, careless of his mother's injunctions, appealed to

a higher power when he was reproved for his frequently repeated

faults He galloped on the Smiths' pony, and made friends with

their dog Covey ; began by shooting sparrows and tit-mice with

bow and arrows, and ended by bringing home a hare as a present

to his mother, which she resolutely refused to dress, notwithstanding

the entreaties of the sou aud the commands of his

father.

Did you see, or take any Silver away from hence ? " inquired

Grace, who had been anxiously occupied in looking over her

small chest of drawers.

How could wc get at the drawer, mother ? " replied Abel,

quickly, but reddening at the same time

Oh. Abel ! " exclaimed Josephine.

If you have taken the money, tell the truth," enjoined his

mother, in her clear, quiet voice.

Abel made a sign of silence to his little sister. " Why should

I take it ? " he said, sullenly, at last.

"Abel, Abel!" screamed Josephine, attempting to put her

hand on his mouth at the same time, " God will hate you if you

lie ! I saw you take the money — all mother's white shillings ;

but I thought she bid you do so."

Grace turned slowly round from the table ; her face was of au

unearthly paleness : no word, no sound passed from between her

parted lips ; but she stood, like the cold fixed statue of Despair,

gazing upon her children. Josephine rose, and climbing ou the

table, endeavoured to wm her mother's attention. Gerald, the

sickly brother, getting up from his chair, clasped and kissed her

hand. With Abel, there was a struggle — uot of long duration,

but nevertheless powerful — the struggle of bad habit with

good principle ; the latter conquered, and he fell at his mother's

feet.

Forgive me — forgive me ! God knows lam sorry. It was

not for myself I took it — father told—"

"Hush I" interrupted Grace, "do not say that before these"

and she pointed to the children ; adding, with great presence

of mid, "It was your father's money, if it was mine, Abel ; but

you were wrong in not telling me of it. There, Josephine and

Gerald, go into the lane, if you will ; I wish to speak to your

brother."

With almost inconceivable agony, this excellent woman learned

that her son was far gone in falsehood. His heart was opened

by the sight of his mother's distress; aud it takes time to

make a practised deceiver. With the earnestness of truth, he

poured forth the wicked knowledge he had acquired ; and Grace

shuddered, while she prayed that the Almighty would watch

over her son in this sore and dangerous extremity.

And now came one of her bitterest trials. She had guarded

Abel from the effect of his father's sin, as au angel watches over

the destinies of a beloved object,— unceasingly, but unseen. She

had never alluded to her husband's faults, nor even to his

unkindness, before her children ; yet now the time had arrived

when she must rend the veil — she must expose his share : aud

to whom ? — to his own son 1 Now it became her duty — her

painful but imperative duty— to caution Abel openly against his

own father — against his influences aud habits ; and to show the

child that the parent was guiding horn in the way that leadeth

to destruction.

If anything like justice has been done to the development of

Grace Huntley 's character, this sacrifice will be appreciated.

How many a deed of unostentatious but devoted virtue is performed

beneath a peasant's roof — amid the lanes aud alleys of

humble life, unknown to, or unheeded by, the world !

Huntley soon discovered that his wife had been influencing

their child's conduct ; indeed, the sacred law of truth formed so

completely the basis of her words and actions that she did not

attempt for a moment to conceal it.

Then you mean to set yourself in opposition to me ? " he

said, all evil passions gathering at his heart and storming on his

brow.

"Not to you, but to your sins, Joseph," was her meek but

firm reply : whereupon ho swore a bitter oath, that he would

bring up his own child in the way which best suited horn, aud

dared her interference.

"As sure as you are a living woman," he continued — with

that concentrated rage which is a thousand times more dangerous

than impetuous fury — "as sure as you are a living woniau, you

shall repent of this ! I see the way to punish your wilfulness :

if you oppose me in the management of my children, one by one

they shall be taken from you to serve my purposes ! You may

look "for there in vain ; until (he added, with a fiendish

smile) you read their names in the columns of the Newgate

Calendar."

That night, as latterly had been his custom, he sallied forth

about eight o'clock, leaving his home and family without food or

money. The children crowded round their mother's knee, to

repeat their simple prayers, and retired, cold and hungry, to bed.

It was near midnight crc her task was finished ; and then she

stole softly into her chamber, having first looked upon and

blessed her treasures. Her sleep was of that restless, heavy

kind, which yields no refreshment ; once she was awakened by

hearing her husband shut the cottage-door; again she slept, but

started from a horrid dream — or was it, indeed, reality — and had

her husband and her sou Abel quitted the dwelling together?

She sprang from her bed, aud felt ou the pallet — Gerald was

there; again she felt — she called-she passed into the next

room — " Abel, Abel, my child ! As you value your mother's

blessing, speak !" There was no reply. A dizzy sickness almost

overpowered her senses. Wis her husband's horrid threat

indeed fulfilled — and had he so soon taken their child as his

participator fat unequivocal sin 1 She opened the door, and

looked out upon the night : it was cold and misty, aud her sight

could not penetrate the gloom. The chill fog rested upon her

face like the damps of the grave. She attempted to call again

upon her sou, but her powers of utterance were palsied — her

tongue quivered — her lips separated, yet there came forth uo

voice, no sound to break the silence of oppressed nature ; her

eyes moved mechanically towards the heavens — they were dark

as the earth : — had God deserted her? — would he deny one ray,

one little ray of light, to lead her to her child ? Why did the

moon cease to shine, and tbc stars withhold their brightness ?

Should she never again behold her boy— her first-born? Her heart

swelled and beat within her bosom. She shivered with intense

agony, and leaned her throbbing brow against the door-post, to

which she had clung for support. Her husband's words rang iv

her ears — " One by one shall your children be taken from you

to serve my purposes ! " Through the dense fog she fancied that

he glared upon her iv bitter hatred — his deep-set eyes flashing

with demoniac fire, and his smile, now extending, now contracting,

into all the varied expressions of triumphant malignity. She

pressed her hand ou her eyes to shut out the horrid vision ; unda

prayer, a simple prayer, rose to her lips : like oil upon the

troubled waters, it soothed and composed her spirit. She could not

arrange or even remember a form of words ; but she repeated again

and again, the emphatic appeal, "Lord, save mo ; I perish ! " until

she felt sufficient strength to enable her to look again into the

night. As if hope had set its beacon in the sky, calmly and

brightly the moon was now shining upon her cottage. With the

Sudden change, at once the curse and blessing of our climate,

a sharp east wind had set in, and was rolling the mist from the

canopy of heaven ; numerous stars were visible where, but five

minutes before, all had been darkness and gloom. The shadow

passed from her soul — she gazed steadily upwards — her mid

regained it firmness— her resolve was taken. She returned to

her bed-room — dressed and, wrapping her cloak closely to her

bosom, was quickly on her way to the Smiths' dwelling on Cray-thorpe

Common.

The solitary hut was more than two miles from the village ;

the path leading to it broken and interrupted by fragments of

rocks, roots of furze, and stubbed underwood. and, at one particular

point, intersected by a deep and brawling brook. Soon

after Grace had crossed this stream, she came in view of the

cottage, looking like a misshapen mound of earth ; and, upon

peering in at the window, which was only partially lined by

a broken shutter, Covey, the lurcher, uttered, from the inside, a

Sharp muttering bark, something between reproof and recognition.

There had, certainly, been a good fire, not long before, on

the capacious hearth, for the burning ashes cast a lurid light

upon an old table and two or three dilapidated chairs ; there

was also a fowling-piece lying across the table ; but it was

evident none of the inmates were at home ; and Grace walked

slowly, yet disappointedly, round the dwelling, till she came to

the other side, that rested against a huge mass of mingled rock

and clay, overgrown with long tangled fern and heather : she

climbed to the top, and had not been many minutes ou the look-outcry

she perceived three men rapidly approaching from the

opposite path. As they drew nearer, she saw that one of there

was her husband; but where was her sou? Silently she loy

among the heather, fearing she knew not what — yet knowing she

had much to fear. The chimney that rose from the cabin had,

che thought, effectually concealed her from their view ; but in

this she was mistaken — for while Huntley and one of the Smiths

entered the abode, the other climbed up the mound. She saw

his hat within a foot of where she rested, and fancied she could

feel his breath upon her check, as she crouched, like a frightened

hare, more closely in her form ; he surveyed the spot, however,

without ascending further, and the retreated, muttering something

about cries and ravens ; aud, almost instantly, she heard

the door of the hut close. Cautiously she crept down from her

hiding-place ; and, crawling along tbc ground with stealth aud

silence, knelt before the little window, so as to observe, through

the broken shutter, the occupation of the inmates. The dog

alone was conscious of her approach ; but. The men were too

seriously engaged to heed his intimations of danger.

Merciful powers! — had Grace Huntley suffered so long, so

patiently, only to witness such a scene ! She almost wished that

God, in his mercy, had stricken her with blindness ; she prayed

for insensibility — for death — for any thing save the knowledge

uow imparted with such fearful truth. Would that it were

a dream ! But no — the horrid proofs were before her eyes — iv

her ears ; and the one drop of comfort, the only one, was the

information that her sou had returned home by a shorter path

that the ruffians seared yet (oh, tho import, the dreadful

import, that little word carried with it !) — that they feared yet

to trust horn with all their secrets : they feared to bring horn yet

to their den.

Then these is hope for my poor child," she thought, " and

I can — I will save horn!" With this resolve, she stole away as

softly and us quickly as her trembling limbs would permit. The

depredators revelled in their fancied security. The old creaking

table groaned under the weight of food, and ardent spirits ; aud

the chorus of a wild drinking song broke upon her ear as returning

strength enabled her t > hasten along the rude path leading

to Craythorpe.

The first grey uncertain light of morning was visible through

the old church-yard trees, as she came within sight of her

cottage. She entered quietly, and saw that Abel had not only

returned, but was sleeping soundly by his brothers side.

Grace set her house in order — took the work she had finished

to her employer— came back, and prepared breakfast, of which

her husband, having by this time also returned, partook.

Now he was neither the tyrant whose threat still rung in her

ears, nor the reckless bravo of the common ; he appeared that

morning, at least so his wife fancied, more like the being she had

loved so fondly and so long.

I will sleep, Grace," he said, when their meal was finished —

I will sleep for au hour; aud tomorrow wc shall have a better

breakfast." He called his sou into the bed-room, where a few

words passed between them. Immediately after, Grace went into

the little chamber to fetch her bonnet. She would not trust

herself to look upon the sleeper; but her lips moved as if in

prayer ; aud even her children still remembered that, as she

passed out of the cottage door, she had a flushed and agitated

appearance.

Good morning, Mrs. Huntley," said her old neighbour,

Mrs. Craddock. " Have you heard the news ? Ah ! bad people

going "—

True, true ! " replied poor Grace, os she hurried onwards,

I know — I heard it all " —

Mra. Craddock looked after her ; surprised at her abruptness.



I was coming down to you. Grace,' - said her father, standing

so os to arrest her progress ; " I wished to see if there was any

chance of the child Abel's returning to his exercises; as this is

a holiday, I thought " —

Come with me," interrupted Grace, " come with me, father ;

aud wc will make a rare holiday."

She hurried the feeble old man along the road leading to the

rectory ; but returned no answer to his inquiries. The servant

told her, when Bhe arrived at her destination, that his master

was engaged — particularly engaged — could not be disturbed —

Sir Thomas I'urcel was with horn ; aud as the man spoke, the

study door opened, and Sir Thomas crossed the hall.

Come back with me, sir !" exclaimed Grace Huntley, eagerly ;

I can tell you all you want to know."

The baronet shook off the hand she had laid upon his arm, as

if she were a maniac. Grace appeared to read the expression

of his countenance. "I am not mad, Sir Thomas Purcel," she

continued, in a suppressed, tremulous voice ; " not mad, though

I may be so soon. Keep back these people and return with mc.

Mr. Glasscott knows I am not mad."

She passed into the study with a resolute step, aud held the

door for Sir Thomas to enter ; her father followed also, as a child

traces its mother's footsteps, and looked around horn, aud at his

daughter with weak astonishment. One or two of the servants,

who were loitering iv the hall, moved as if they would have

followed.

Back, back, I say," she repeated, " I need no witnesses —

there will be enough of there soon. Mr. Glusscott," she continued,

closing the door, " hear me while I am able to bear

testimony, lest weakness — woman's weakness — overcome me, aud

I falter in the truth. In tho broom-sellers' cottage, across the

common, ou the left side of the chimney, concealed by a large

flat stone, is a hole — there much of tho property taken from

Sir Thomas Purcel's lost night is concealed."

"I have long suspected these men— Smith, I think they call

themselves ; yet they are but two. Now, wc have abundant

proof that three men absolutely entered the house "

There was a third," murmured Grace, almost inaudible.

"Who?"

My — my — my husband ! " and, as she uttered the word, she

leaned against tho chimney-piece for support, and buried her

face in her bauds.

The clergyman groaned audibly; he had known Grace flora

her childhood, and felt what the declaration must have cost her.

Sir Thomas Purcel was cast in a sterner mould. "Wc are put

clearly upon the track, Mr. Glasscott," he said, "and must,

follow it forthwith; yet there is something most repugnant

to my feelings iv finding a woman thus herald her husband to

destruction "

It was to save my children from sin," exclaimed Grace, starting

forward with au energy that appalled them all : " God iv heaven,

whom I call to witness, knows, that though I would sooner

starve than taste of the fruits of his wickedness, yet I could not

betray the husband of my bosom to — to— l dare not think

what ! I tried — I laboured to give my offspring honest bread ;

I neither asked vor received charity ; with my bauds I laboured,

and blessed the power that enabled me to do so. If wc are poor,

wc will be honest, was my maxim and my boast ; but he — my

husband, returned ; he taught my boy to lie — to steal ; and

when I remonstrated-when I prayed, with many tears, that he

would cease to train our — ay, our child for destruction, he

mocked — scorned — told me that, one by one, I should be

bereaved of my children, if I thwarted his purposes ; and

that I might seek in vain for there through the world, until

I saw their names recorded iv the book of shame ! Gentlemen,

this was no idle threat — lost night kiel was tikcn from

me"

I knew there must have been a fourth," interrupted Sir

Thomas, coldly ; " wc must have the boy also secured."

The wretched mother, who had uot imagined that any harm

could result to her son, stood as if a thunderbolt had transfixed

her — her hands clenched and extended — her features rigid and

blanched — her frame perfectly erect, and motionless as a

statue. The schoolmaster, during the whole of this scene,

had been completely bewildered, until the idea of his

grandchild's danger or disappearance, he knew not which, took

possession of his mid; and filled with the single thought

his faculties had the power of grasping at a time, he came

forward to the table at which Mr. Glasscott wus seated ;

aud, respectfully uncovering his grey hairs, his simple countenance

presenting a strong contrast to tho agonized iron-bound

features of his daughter, he addressed himself to the worthy

magistrate : —

I trust you will cause instant search to be made for the

child Abel, whom your reverence used kindly to regard with

especial favour."

He repeated this sentence at least half a dozen times, while the

gentlemen were issuing orders to the persons assembled for the

apprehension of the burglars, and some of the females of the

family were endeavouring to restore Grace to animation. At

last, Sir Thomas Parcel turned suddenly round upon Abel

Darley, aud in his stentorian tone, bawled out, " And who are

you?"

The schoolmaster of Craythorpe, so please you, sir — that

young woman's father— and one whose heart is broken ! "

So saying, ho burst into tears ; and his wail was very sad, like

that of an afflicted child. Presently there was a stir among the

c

little crowd — a murmur — and then two officers ushered Joseph

Huntley and his son into the apartment.

He walked boldly up to the magistrates table, aud placed

his hand upon it, before he perceived his wife, to whom

consciousness had not yet returned. The moment he beheld

her, he started back, saying, " Whatever charge you may

have against me, gentlemen, you can have none against that

woman."

Nor have wc," replied Sir Thomas ; " she is your accuser !"

The fine features of Joseph Huntley relaxed into an expression

of scorn and unbelief. " She appear against me ! Not — not if

I were to attempt to murder her ! " he answered, firmly.

Grace ! " exclaimed her father, joyfully, " here is the child

Abel — he is found !" and seizing the trembling boy, with evident

exultation, he led horn to her. The effect of this act of the poor

simple-minded man was electrical — the mother instantly revived,

but turned her face from her husband ; and, entwining her son

in her arms, pressed horn closely to her side. The clergyman

proceeded to interrogate the prisoner; but he answered nothing,

keeping his eyes intensely fixed upon his wife and child. Iv the

meantime, the officers of justice had been prompt, in the execution

of their duty : the Smiths were apprehended in the village ;

and the greater portion of the property stolen from Sir Thomas

Purcel was found iv the hut where Grace had beheld it

concealed.

When the preparations were sufficiently forward to conduct

the unfortunate men to prison, Joseph Huntley advanced to his

wife. The scornful, as well as undaunted, expression of his countenance

had changed to one of painful intensity ; he took her

hand within his, aud pressed it to his lips, without articulating

a syllable. Slowly she moved her face, so that their eyes at last

encountered iv one long mournful look. Ten years of continued

suffering could not have exacted a heavier tribute from Grace

Huutley's beauty. No language can express the withering effect

of the few hours' agony ; her husband saw it, and felt, perhaps

for the first time, how truly he had once been loved, and how

much of happiness ho had sacrificed to Bin.

'Twos to save my children ! " was the only sentence she

uttered, or rather murmured ; and it was the last coherent one

she spoke for many weeks. Her fine reason seemed overwhelmed.

It was a sight few could witness without tears. The old father,

tending the couch of his afflicted daughter, would sit for hours

by her bedside, clasping the child Abel's hand within his, and

every now and then shaking his head when her ravings were

loud or violent.

-\bout fifteen years after these distressing events had agitated

the little village of Craythorpe, an elderly woman, of mild and

cheerful aspect, sat calmly reading a large volume she supported

against the railing of a noble vessel that was steering its course

from the shores of " Merrier England," to some laud far over sea.

The ocean was calm and clear — so very calm that it reflected, ns

if from a solid surface, every vapour that floated along the

heavens ; it was like sailing into a new world— a creation whose

laws and boundaries must remain for ever unknown to us. How

exciting to imagination ! So many fantastic forms revelled

beneath the transparent crystal, huge rocks looking like castles,

exaggerated by the watery distance ; bleak Alpine landscapes

stretching far away ; and then the monsters of the deep moving

in the solemn majesty of silence! — living things, without one

sympathy for the earth about them ; without a single seeling

that wc can comprehend !— it may be, if our eyes do not weary,

that, in fancy, wc gaze deeper down, and strange unearthly forms

are succeeded by deeps on deeps — the very eternity of waters ! —

where wc can see nothing but the blue abyss ! — down — down —

down lltis a fearful thing to pass over their mysteries — a great

lesson — this teaching ns how little wc really know of what exists

around us— of the marvels that "compass us in on every side,"

of the mighty miracles that are working day by day, night by

night, in the infinity of space. Many of the passengers on board

this vessel laughed aud talked, and speculated on the suture, as

if they already grasped the wealth of the new world, or had

o 2

altogether forgotten the old : the solitary woman continued to

read, and yet there was a sweetness and forbearance in the

expression of her countenance, which gave assurance that she

would close her book and reply, if any chose to question or speak

to her. Two gentlemen, who were lounging on the quarterdeck,

arm-in-arm, frequently passed her. The elder, in a

peculiarly kind tone of voice, said, " You bear the voyage well,

dame ! "

"Thank God, yes, sir!"

Ah ! you will soon wish yourself back in Old England's"

I did not wish to leave it, sir ; but duty compelled mc."

The gentlemen walked on.

Who is she ? " inquired the younger.

A very singular woman. Her information transported for life

a husband whom she loved, notwithstanding his crimes. She

had, at that time, three children, and the eldest had already

become contaminated by his father's example. She saw nothing

but destruction for there ; her warnings aud entreaties being

alike unrewarded: so she made her election — sacrificed the

husband, aud saved the children ! "

But what does she here ? "

Her eldest son is now established in a small business, and

respected by all who know horn ; her second boy, and a father

whom her misfortunes reduced to a deplorable state of wretchedness,

are dead ; her daughter, a village belle and beauty, is

married to my father's handsome new parish-clerk ; and Mrs.

Huntley, having seen her children provided for, and by her

virtues and industry made respectable in the Old World, is now

on her voyage to the New, to see, if I may be permitted to use

her own simple language, ' whether she can contribute to render

the last days of her husband as happy as the first they passed

together.' It is only justice to the criminal to say, that I believe

horn truly and perfectly reformed."

And on this chance she leaves her children and her

country ?'"

She does ! She argues that, as the will of Providence prevented

her from discharging her duties togellur, she must endeavour

to perform them separately. He was sentenced to die;

but, by my father's exertions, his sentence was commuted to

one of transportation for life ; and I know she has quitted

England without the hope of ever again beholding its white

clifla."

THE WIFE OF TWO HUSBANDS.

OW high ho mounts! Hark, Henry ; wc hear horn

still. Sure, then, I can fancy that bird like Hope,

soaring — soaring till be reaches Heaven " —

"Which he will never do;" responded Henry

O'Donuell to his fair cousin. "Do you not see that hawk,

tracing its pathway through the clouds as the greyhound tracks

the hare upon the earth ? " Marian shaded her deep blue eyes

from the rays (if the glorious sun. The song of the bird had

ceased, as it changed its course, descending towards the meadows

for the safety which-the skies denied it. " What a glorious

chase ! " observed the young sportsman, as he watched the issue.

Fire, fire, dear Harry ! " exclaimed Marian. " Ah ! do now !

the monster gains upon the bird ; do fire."

"Nay, Marian, you know uot what sport is," replied the

youth, coolly, and slowly raising his piece. " What a noble

bird he is ! 'Tis a pity to bring horn down till the chase is

ended."

"Fire, Harry, fire," interrupted Marian; "oh fire! There

now, dear, dear Harry. Oh ! the poor lark is struck. Fire,

fire, if you love me ! "

Quick as lightning the mandate of death sent the hawk

tumbling through the air ; and almost at the same moment, the

little singing bird, wounded and struggling, fell on the grassy

turf at the maidens feet.

Had you fired sooner the lark would have been saved ! " she

exclaimed, tenderly taking it in her hand. " Now — it will

never sing again ! — its nest, too, I know is in the furze. What

will become of its poor mate ? — Alas ! my simile was indeed

naught — how unlike Hope is this dying bird! "

Many tears flowed over Marian Raymond's blooming check

as she watched the last agonies of the woodlark : Harry would

have taken it from her, but she retained it to the last, and then

raising a portion of the turf, placed it in its rest. The tears of

youth are easily excited, and flow — without long gathering in

their shining fountains. Their source, at the time of sorrow,

seems inexhaustible ; — yet they soon cease. Aprils sunshine

aud showers convey but little idea of the rapid succession of

smiles aud tears ou a check that has only numbered sixteen

summers. Marian, shaking back the raven curls that clustered

over her white forehead, looked into her cousins face, as cheerfully

as if she had never known a moments grief.

When I go to England, and join my regiment, Maria,"

said Henry, as they proceeded homeward to Castle Raymond,

you will not, I hope, forget me, — years must pass crc I return

but you will still think of me, aud be my little wife — will you

not? "

Maria held down her beautiful head, and made no reply.

I wish you would promise never to love but me, and then I

should go gladly to the wild wars, and return — a general and a

hero."

Return a hero, Harry, and I shall be satisfied."

No, Marian — a general for your sake — a hero for my own."

Selfish boy !— so you prefer the greater glory for yourself."



Not so ; but you must never be a poor man's wife 1 Young

as I am, I know enough of human nature to see that you will

be courted — admired — flattered — and all more for your beauty

than your fortune ; although you are au heiress."

A peculiar expression of scorn, amounting almost to bitterness,

curled the maidens lip, as she repeated — " Heiress I — Oh, yes —

I shall doubtless be au heiress ; but what, Harry, what shall I

inherit ! right noble blood — the cold-hearted cannot expel that

from my veins ; a spotless name — no act but mine own cau

tarnish that. What else ? — Alas ! Harry, the mouldering walls

of yonder castle, which to my ancestors was indeed a tower of

strength, is now but a fitting abode for the wilder inhabitants of

earth and air. My father, with that improvidence which you tell

me characterises the Irish nation, has never retrenched a single

expenditure, even since the Ballamoyle estate was irrecoverably

mortgaged — and at this moment I know he is pressed by incumbrances

on every side."

"Au English gentleman, if so circumstanced, would sell off a

part to clear that which remained."

Marian shook her head. - " Dwelling so much among the

English lately, Harry, has made you alien to our feelings and

our customs : here I stand, the last descendant of the house of

Raymond ; the hills of four counties, that were ours, are insight

; two bright and fertilizing rivers paid us tribute ; and

many hundred men followed us, when needed, in camp aud

field : — behold to what a handful our property, or, what is

nominally our property, is reduced ! the birch wood to the

left — the ruins of Castle Cloyue, with its almost deserted village,

to tbc right — the black bog, stretching in sluggish sloth along

yonder hollow — aud my own beloved mouldering castle, with its

Suffocated moat, its broken windows, its crumbling walls, and its

ivy towers : which, of all the objects I have mentioned, could my

Cither part with ? "

Sir Charles Bamett's agent is instructed to give any sum

your father thinks fit to demand for Castle Raymond.*

And has the Sassenach " — exclaimed the proud Irish girl,

who uot ten minutes before was weeping, as if her heart would

break, over a stricken lark — " has he presumed thus to insult

us ? If the paltry Englishman were but here, I would look

horn into dust, and" —

Ashes," interrupted her companion, with a want of tact that

paid no respect to her excited feelings. "My dear Marian, when

I am a general, you shall come with me to England, where they

value warm commodious houses more than they do old castles,

and —but you are not angry with me again, sweet girl ? Surely

you know I would not willingly cause you a moments pain ;

although I lament — lament most deeply, that your wild enthusiasm

and calculating habits will lead — to much misery."

Thank you for your prophecy, Henry."

"Dearest Marian, — I have named your only fault — aud what

a host of virtues do you possess to counterbalance that, which

experience will soon eradicate — leaving you all perfection ! "

It is strange," replied Marian, after a pause, and with that

delightful naivete which fades from the heart as the blush from

the check, with this sad difference, that when once departed, the

blush returns, the feeling— never ; "it is very strange, that,

while you see so many faults in me, I think you perfect — you

are certainly much wiser — and I know that, when you go, I shall

want a friend so much! — there's my dear father — he it my

friend, of course — yet he talks of nothing but Oliver Cromwell

and the battle of the Boyne — the bane aud glory of our ancestors—

and — I may say it to you, Harry, who know horn 60

well — drinks so much, that he is no heath-friend for a girl like

mc."

Am I a heart-Mend, Marian ? "

Be easy, do. — Then my poor nurse ! — she tells such delightful

fairy tales — but the worst of it is that the half of there are

made up."

I should think they were."

Now, Harry, don't teaze me. — I assure you, Nurse Grady's

mother saw — why, I declare, there goes Busca hot-foot after the

grey cat ! "

And there goes Marian Raymond after both," soliloquised

Henry O'Donuell; " blessed, blessed girl ! — tenderness, love, pride,

and gaiety of soul and spirit, free from every taint of evil, dwell

together in that noble breast : would that I could call you all

mine own — I wish you had not the reputation of wealth, for

then even now you might be a soldier's bride — aud, if so

wedded, how quickly could I wiu a way to riches aud to

honour ! "

The youth folded his arms over his gun across his breast, aud

leaned against a noble oak, which the lightning of by-gone years

had despoiled of its topmost branches. It was a fine contrast —

the tree, magnificent in decay, scorning in its greatness the very

power which had levelled its antlers to the green and humble

plain ; and the youth, whose dark eye drank in the rays of the

setting sun, and whose erect aud finely proportioned figure

told of prowess of uo common order. Youth and age are, either

iv the natural or the moral world, the most interesting stages of

existence ; middle-age is too worldly-minded — too busied with

thought and occupation — too well able to take care of itself —

to create the sympathy wc feel for the young and the very old ;

wc look ou tho former with hope, on the latter with veneration ;

wc pray for both, aud feel equal interest iv the sunrise and

sunset of life.

Henry O'Donnell was rich in all things but the gifts of

fortune ; lie had been brought up by Marian's father as his own

child, and the old gentleman had used his interest to get horn

educated and provided for in the only profession which, according

to his theory, a gentleman could enter. Mr. Raymond was one

of the few survivors of a race of Irish country-gentlemen now, I

believe, extinct He was tall and handsome, though his countenance

expressed bravery, generosity, aud good temper, rather

that intellect or observation ; his forehead was high, but not

broad ; aud his eyes large and lustrous, but deficient in expression;

he was, even in advanced life, .a great adept iv all sports

connected with flood and field — kept a flight of hawks and the

best fox-hounds in the county — until literally obliged to part,

before he mortgaged his best estate, with his splendid pack, from

inability to support them. So he gave them away, and hunted

uo more : poor Marian used to say, he broke his heart when the

plough broke up his dog-kennel ; and I believe she was right — he

certainly drank more claret after dinner than when he followed

the hounds ; and when his wine-merchant objected to his having

auy more pipes of that regal wine, because his bill had not been

paid for more than eight years, Mr. Raymond chastised horn

severely for bis insolence ; and to punish horn more effectually,

vowed a vow, which he religiously kept, never to drink any

thug in future but whiskey punch. Of this most wicked

beverage he certainly drank enough ; aud as it invariably

weakens the intellect, and excites a temporary madness when

indulged in, the old gentleman, kind, considerate, and affectionate

iv the morning, became proud, tyrannical, almost brutal in the

evening. No wonder poor Marian should regret her cousins

departure ; the little acquaintance she had with books and accomplishments,

she owed to Henry O'Donnell. Henry invariably

strung her harp, and corrected her drawings. Her companions

were few, and unsuited to her tastes and feelings; she was refined

both by nature aud habit — for her father, with all his

peculiarities, had a just idea of female propriety. Mr. Raymond's

politics were stern and unbending; offensive from their

violence, even to his own party, and, of course, calculated to

make horn bitter enemies among those of opposite opinions.

Descended from a line of ancestors who had ever directed their

minds to the arrangements of the national affairs, while their

own were considered perfectly beneath their notice, the last of

the name inherited the prejudices and habits of his progenitors

without their wealth ; and truly had Marian pointed out to her

cousin the narrow boundaries of their once wide estates. Notwithstanding

his habits, his eccentricities, aud his increasing embarrassments,

there were many who venerated and esteemed his

good qualities. The Irish peasantry, with all their cunning and

many faults, are, in heart and practice, the most generous people

on the face of the earth — poverty with them is no sin.

Shane," exclaimed a poor woman to her husband, as the

master of Castle Raymond, but indifferently mounted, passed up

the hill of Cloyne, " run out agra ! — here, put on yer hat,

Shane, that ye may have the satisfaction of pulling it off to a

real gentleman — and Shane, take the chiltern out wit ye — now

mid yer bows aud yer curtsies, ye pack o' garters ; always pay

respect to decent blood ; it's but little of it's going these bad

times, and more's the pity. Thank God and the Virgin, wc

want nothing from his honour — but it's a grate satisfaction to

oneself to show proper respect to the gentry, especially when

they're down iv the world." Mr. Raymond passed ou, after exchanging

salutations with the peasant, and praising his children.

His honour's not like himself, somehow," continued the

loquacious dame ; " they say he can't keep on the ould castle,

and that the rain comes in through the roof, — aud Nurse Grady

tells nothing, barring a word now and then — sloe's desperate

cute — only 1 think by her that Miss Maria is over fond of her

cousin, and her cousin of her ; and if so, I don't see why they

shouldn't be married at on't ; if they wait to get rich, they may

wait long enough ; and, sure, two can battle the poverty better nor

one." This is the Irish maxim, aud mwhof Irish misery can be

traced to its influence ; the perfect heedlessness with which the

poor unite hands and hearts has its origin in this pernicious

belief. Her husband perfectly agreed with his wife, although

both were suffering from the effects of the evil principle ; aud

he contented himself with adding, " It is enough to make his

honour look quare, to have that English Sir Charles Barnett

coming here on a visit to his agent, with his dogs, and his

horses, aud his servants, like the Lord Mayor o' Dublin, Nelly,

covered with good and silver, and his outriders, and all iv the

teeth of the countrey — and he nothing but a bit of a banker —

a pen-cutter, after all. Blessed Mary ! if here aunt the whole

gang of there coming up the hill, as sure as mv names Shane

r ;ley."

r And sure, yer not going to salute the likes o' horn," exclaimed

Nelly ; " come in doors, do — here, Paddy, Sorry,

Looney. Natty, Kelly, every child o' ye, whether mine or not,

come off the dunghill, every one o' ye, and in wit ye — sorra a

bow or a scrape shall ye ever make to there that's beneath ye.

There, Natty! if you want to see the fine coach, bad luck to it 1

pull the lock of straw out of the hud wiudey, and ye'll have the

right and the dust together. The poor young lady the most to

be pitied ; she's had no mother over her for many a long year —

babies dear, what would ye do without your mammy f'' Aud

the " babies," fat, rosy, dirty brats, kissed their mother with

more pure affection than the pink-lipped, well-bred offspring of

the great and wealthy deem it right to evince towards their

courtly parents.

If Nelly Riley did not possess philosophy, she was gifted

with forethought; "the poor young lady" was the most to be

pitied, because she had imbibed correct aud just notions, that

enabled her to see the error of her father's ways, without possessing

the power either to alter or improve them. Her calm and

beautiful mother, whose portrait smiled so placidly upon her from

the cold and mouldering wall of their spacious and dreary recept

had taken all things tranquilly ; she loved her

husband, and believed that whatever he did was necessary to

support his dignity. An English lady so situated, would have

considered her life a life of trial ; but Mrs. Raymond took it for

granted that tradespeople who dunned, were very impertinent,

and deserved punishment instead of pay ; that it was not at all

wrong for Mr. Raymond to drink claret to excess, because all

gentlemen did the same; that it would be exceedingly mean to

keep, much less investigate accounts ; and that the entree at

The Castle," and four greys to draw her through the beautiful

woods of her domain, formed the summit of human happiness.

Her body was as fragile as her mid ; she died oue summer

morning in consequence of taking a cold bath instead of a warm

one, and her husband drank a double quantity of claret during

the next three mouths, for sorrow that she had departed, leaving

horn a daughter and not a son. Many wondered he did not

mai-ry again, and it was reported that he had proposed iv a very

high quarter, and been refused : — be that as it may, from the

day she entered her teens, Marian Raymond had been considered

and treated as the mistress of Raymond Castle.

It was about two years after the stricken lark died upon her

hand, that Marian was seated near a small table which supported

her father's elbow; the evening sun had not set, and its beams

scattered a variety of tints over the antique room, whose furniture,

time-worn and moth-eaten, showed harshly in the garish

light : the shadows on the wall looked strange and uncouth, and

the noble old greyhound, crouching at his masters feet, gazed

with " lack lustre eye "up to the face of his young mistress. Poor

Busca had long been blind, but the creature's fidelity was all the

same ; and if he had lost one sense in the service to which he was

so ardently devoted, he gave to the other four work in proportion

to make up for the deficiency. He was swift of foot as ever, his

scent as keen, and his hearing as perfect, as when, iv his younger

days, he accompanied his friend Harry along the vales and over

the mountains of Kerry. Marian sat near the table, on which

were placed the ordinary " materials" for the manufacture of

panels, but they remained untouched, and the master of Raymond's

head leaned upon his bosom ; Marian's eyes were glazed

within their sockets, from whence they looked straight out upon

the landscape, without, it would seem, the power of noting

herb, or tree, or flower ; her hands and arms rested on her lap,

and the paper she had been reading lay at her feet ; her luxuriant

hair burst from the light blue riband that had confined its

abundance, and fell in rich shadowy masses over her neck and

shoulders —-every feature told that she had received a sudden

and fearful shock, and her check and lips were as white as

monumental marble.

The father and daughter continued hi this state of intense

agony for nearly an hour, when the old oak door creaked upon

its hinges, and Marian's nurse entered. In conformity with an

Irish custom still venerated, she had remained iv the house

since her young lady birth, the plague aud amusement of the

servants, and the humble companion, confidant, and adviser of

her mistress.

"Och wirrasthrou ! and is it three? Och, Miss Machine, is it

the truth intirely, that the young masters gone from us ? — I

can't behave the postman's news — and, sure, the whole kitchen's

in a flood o' tears, and everything in the house broken-hearted.

Oh, tell me, Miss, honey, if indeed it's on the paper that Master

Harry's missing!"

Still Marian remained as before ; and Mr. Raymond made no

reply.

Och, ma fourteen, you are, Miss Marian ! Ah ! then, put

the stare out of your beautiful eyes, and spake to your poor

nurse — sure you're the only comfort I have now in the wide

world — Master, spake to her, shell mid you," continued the

affectionate creature, really alarmed at the rigidity and coldness

of the hand which she clasped to her bosom, — " Master,

Master ! Miss Marian's dying — Och, wish, wish, you poor

stupid ould gentleman ! " she added, in an under tone, "What

will I do , — Busca, Busca ! you baste, if you war not blind you'd

call her to yourself, and lick her face, and howl ; for, sure, its

good reason you have, aud yer young master dead." The poor

animal, as if understanding her appeal, raised itself on his hind

legs, placed its fore-paws on Marian's lap, and, turning its

sightless eyes upwards, uttered a bowl so piteous and so mournful,

that Mr. Raymond started from his stupor, and half rose

from his seat. The creature, when its wail was ended, first

licked the hands of its mistress, and placing its face next hers,

uttered a low moaning caressing noise, applying its cold nose to

her check, with a tenderness which, of all the brute creation,

dogs largely possess. This succeeded iv rousing her paralysed

feelings — she folded her arms round the animal's neck, and,

bursting into a torrent of tears, exclaimed, "Your poor master,

Busca ! "

Take away these things, Nurse Grady, and don't let any one

but yourself wait upon us this evening," said Mr. Raymond, as

the twilight deepened.

But, sir, honey, you haven't so much as wet your lips with

the punch ! " replied the nurse in astonishment, seeming to think

by this sign, that he must be ill indeed. " Sure you'll go tc

the bad intirely with the grief, if you don't take a drop now and

again."

I shall do that whether or no," replied the old gentleman,

faintly smiling ; " no, nurse, I have much to say, much to do

to-night, and it must lie said one time or another."

"The only drop o' comfort for us all now is, that he may have

been taken prisoner," said Nurse Grady.

He was too brave for that," murmured Marian, in one of

those low whispers that thrill to the very heart — " too— all too

brave — I might have known it — and often did I pray to the God

of battles to protect " Her voice died away, and though

her utterance was imperfect, still her cousins name mingled with

the tears that came to the relief of her bursting heart.

Let her talk — let her talk — it will do her good — it does

good to man or woman, but especially to woman. Och, but her

trouble is grate, and no wonder. Oh, sir, sir, honey, to think

ho was reared for the slaughter!" said Nurse Grady.

The accounts were but too correct. No trace of Harry

O'Dounell bad been discovered after the fatal battle of Albert,

though a friend, a young ensign, who was by his side during the

engagement, had searched for his body in every direction, and

though he distinctly recognised the spot where, in the act of encouraging

his men, the gallant fellow had been cut down by a

French sabre.

To poor Marian it was indeed a bitter trial ; and though in

after-life she encountered many afflictions, none struck her so

heavily as this ; he was her first, her only affection — in childhood

she had loved horn as a brother, and time had knit their

hearts with love ; to horn all her hopes were directed — he was

the planet round which all her affections, all her thoughts revolved.

Her father had noted the growing attachment, but

considered it a mere juvenile feeling which a little time and

experience would destroy. He had some prudential thoughts, as

regarded his daughter's future establishment, and trusted to

time and absence, — and change — to wear it out. Harry

O'Dounell, his step-sister's child, with nothing but his sword to'

wm bis way to glory, could neither retrieve the Raymond

estates from jeopardy, nor add new honours to the name : he

had, therefore, made up his mid to regard and to serve Harry

as a nephew, never as a son ; and was greatly shocked at perceiving

the effect produced on his daughter by the account of

his death. Though he sorrowed much, he was perplexed and

6orel3 T tormented at the knowledge, which broke upon horn for

the first time, that Marian really loved her cousin — loved horn

with the deep and intense love which dies but with the heart.

The master of Castle Raymond was but little skilled in human

nature, or he would have known that it would have been far

better to have suffered Marian's feelings to calm down into

something like resignation before he spoke to her of any suture

plans, and, above all, of the possibility of her forming another

attachment ; but he fancied that the present was the best, and,

moreover, he had dispensed with his accustomed beverage, and

was not willing to run the risk of keeping a cool head for two

nights, when the sacrifice of one to the god of temperance might

surely be deemed sufficient. Under any circumstances he would

have mourned more deeply for his nephew, though it must be

confessed that the young man's English habits and independent

ideas jarred much with the old gentlemans preconceived aud

hereditary notions : — a certain fearlessness of character having

rendered poor Harry less careful of wounding his uncle's prejudices

than was consistent with bis own interests.

Perhaps, my dear Marian," commenced Mr. Raymond,

perhaps I had better not mention our affairs this evening,

although they concern mo so very nearly."

I will listen now, dearest father — now, or at any time, to

aught that affects you. Busca— poor BBuschcrc,a — here, rest your

head upon my lap — hit hand will never caress you more ! "

"Where is the spaniel — the pretty Blenheim — Sir Charles

Barnett sent you, Marian , it is a fitter pet, I think, than that

great hound."

Marian looked in her father's face, as if doubtful that she

heard aright, and while her pale check crimsoned, made no reply,

but by pressing her lips on the dog's head.

My dear child, I have this day fathomed what I could not

H

before understand ; the cause of your coolness to Sir Charles

Burnett — a gentleman — an English gentleman, to be sure, but

still a gentleman, aud, I must say, a man of liberal feelings — a

man of sound political views, too — never contradicted me in

his life : poor dear Harry would always have an opinion of his

own ! But Sir Charles is a steady man, of good family, too, in

its way, and old enough to take care of the main chance; rich osa

Jew, and not purse-proud, wishing, as you know, our families

to be united, which proves his respect for ancestry, and, I must

confess, make me respect horn in return." He paused for a reply,

hut Marian offered no observation, her lips still rested upon the

brow of the noble hound, and Mr. Raymond continued — " I

suppose some girlish and boyish engagement passed between you

and Harry ? "

Another pause, and no reply.

"Then, I must say, I think it was very dishonourable of horn

to"—

"Father!" interrupted Marian, springing on her feet in an

instant, and clasping her hands with startling energy — " Father,

name not horn and dishonour in the same breath — purify your

heart aud lips from such a conception and such an utterance.

Dishonour and Henry O'Donuell were never before blended.

And you, too, who so well knew horn, within these walls, in this

very room, where so often he has corrected my faults, aud

directed my wandering thoughts to the right path — these

walls to hear the blasphemy of that dear name — ! " Then, as

if thinking that to her father she had said too much, the

poor girl threw herself at his feet, and bending her head to

the earth, robbed out a petition that ho would retract his

words, and forgive tho agony which drove her to such extremes.



Mr. Raymond folded her to his bosom, greatly shocked at

a violence he had so little anticipated ; and said everything that

occurred to horn to convince her he meant nothing that could

sully O'DonneH's reputation in the least.

Wc will talk of this another time, my child," he said, tends'"

; " but it must be soon, very soon, Marian — very soon, or

you will see your father within the county gaol, a prisoner —

a prisoner, Marian, for paltry debts."

She pressed her hands to her forehead, and at last murmured,

Father! I understand you now— and now I cannot bear more

not to-night, but tomorrow, father — tomorrow, or the next

day. God help me, and direct me for the best. Good night,

dear father ! You believe that he was incapable of a dishonourable

thought, and you forgive my petulance. Now bless me,

father — bless me, for I have need of blessing." She sank on her

knees, and her unhappy and ruined parent pronounced as fervent

a blessing as ever passed from human lips

"Do not think of a gaol, father. What have I to live for

now . "

As she passed from, the apartment, the little spaniel, Sir

Charles's present, mot her at the door, aud fawned upon her, as

was his custom, for all things loved her well : sne spurned horn

from her, and the creature ran yelling through the hall ; the

found smote upon her ear. " God forgive me ! " she ejaculated ;

Satan is busy at my heart." She crossed the vestibule ; the

rusty armour, aud the disarranged fishing and other sporting

implements, appeared dropping from the neglected walls ; the

splendid lamp, which had once shed its many-coloured light over

the marble pavement, hung broken and dangling from the

painted and cobwebbed ceiling ; the spacious fireplace, round

which a hundred followers had often crouched, exhibited rusty

liars, and broken fragments of stone ; aud as she passed it, the

bright and glittering eyes of a starved rat, that bad been prowling

for prey, glared upon her with their poisoning light : she

shuddered with superstitious dread from the influence of the

unclean animal ; nor did she breathe freely until, standing on

the green slope leading to the castle gardens, sho fixed a long

and piercing gaze upon the blue sky, studded with its stan-y

worlds : there was his planet, glorious among the man', shining

iv its white raiment of brilliant light — fully and splendidly

shining, not beneath a cloud, but standing out in the heavens, as

if in triumph ! Will poor Marian be accused of weak-mindedness

if it be confessed that the brightness of the star communicated

h 2

hope to her heart . She wandered among the tangled plantations,

with her eyes still fixed upon the shining orb, until she

found herself on the moor beyond the gardens. Her foot struck

against a mound of earth ; and whi-u she looked down, she sound

herself on the very spot where she had placed the dead lark

beneath the turf. After that little incident, with girlish romance,

she had planted two white rose-trees on the tiny grave, to prove,

as she laughingly assured her cousin, her theory to be correct ;

for the spirit of the lark would mingle with the perfume of the

roses, and teach them to mount the skies. Harry too smiled at,

if not with, her. The rose-trees grew aud flourished ; aud now,

in tbc decline of summer, the grass was strewed with their white

leaves : she stooped to see if one remained that she could gather ;

and when she raised her head, she saw that the white clouds,

which had been careering, like the Bea-foam, through the heavens,

had obscured the brightness of his natal star ! — it was too much

for her excited imagination, and she Bunk upon the spot where,

two years before, her hopeful emblem had met with an untimely

end. Let no one make sport of youthful sorrow — it is the

bitterest wc are doomed to endure in our course through life ;

the trials of after-age are, doubtless, more real, but they are not

so intense — they are of the world, worldly; it is seldom they are

unselfish — rarely untutored. Let any of us recall the devotedness

of our first real grief, the anguish of our first real disappointment,

and remember how literally it was deep and heartfelt

how entirely mid and body were stricken during its continuance

; and then, in justice to fast coming memories, wc can

never make sport of early sorrowing.

And here you are, a-lannan, and your beautiful hair wet

wit the night dew — after myself and the whole house seeking

for ye, in every hole and corner, up and down, iv and out. What

brought you here entirely Och, my grief! Come in, J store

ma three, and go into your comfortable bed ; aud don't take on

go, though grate is your trouble : sure, darling, wc are born, all

of us, without asking our laves, and wc die — rich and poor, grate

and small — in the same way. Och, a-cousltla ! it's a grief to

my heart that you war not brought up in the tlirue religion —

for, sure, a trifle of patters and aves would make ye so comfortable

! The master thinks you asleep, and never a wink en

yer eye, no more than on the lady moon, who's blessing us with

her light. Maybe, after all, he's not dead — who knows ? — buta

little time will tell ! "

A little time and a long time passed, aud told nothing —

nothing was heard of Harry O'Donnell. His companions iv

arms had ceased to think of him — his uncle wished to forget he

had ever existed — the old nurse even had taken the hue and

character of the time, and spoke of horn no more. Autumn with

its golden sceptre tinged the woods with divers and magnificent

colours — the swallows had deserted their haunts by the tranquil

lake and the wooded hills —-the song of the reaper, and the glad

whistle of the blithesome blackbird, no longer danced amid the

valleys. Winter came, stealthily at first, sprinkling the earth

with frosty diamonds, and nipping the young buds that ventured

forth from their mystic inclosures — then, iv his ice-car, ho

mounted the hurricane, aud capped the mountains with ibis

snows. Spring — lovely, all-healing Spring — with its young sunshine,

and gentle showers, succeeded ; the hills were green, the

violets blue, the cowslips mingled their blossoms with the furze,

the golden catkins hung from the birch woods, over the blossoms

of the timid and trembling anemone ; the fly-away birds

came back to their old habitations with unsoiled wings and

unruffled plumage, as if they had never wandered, —

"The elm tree blossomed o'er the brooding bird.

And wild and wide tho plover's wail was heard."

The seasons had changed ; but in Marian Raymond there was no

change, " neither shadow of turning." — Did I say, no change ?

I did her injustice ; her beautiful bead, which at first had been

bowed to the earth, had risen into an erect and statue-like

dignity, as she had said—" Here I and borrow sit." She had

learned, from commune with her noble self, to meet, not sink

beneath, her destiny ; her check had settled into extreme paleness,

and her eye gained in strength what it lost in brightness.

The summer had seen her a wild, ardent, confiding girl ; the

succeeding spring found her a cold mannered dignified woman,

whose lips were rarely known to smile, and in whose eyes no tears

were ever seen; yet she loved Henry as deeply and as tenderly

as ever — in that one sentiment she was unchanged.

And they all seemed to love horn too," she exclaimed, iv the

Solitude of her dreary chamber ; '• I thought it was real, and that

they would have laid down life for Harry ; yet but oue remembers

horn besides myself — his poor, poor dog ! "

Och, Mistress Grady ! an' Im heart glad to see ye," said

Nelly Riley of Cloyne. '•' Sit down, ma'am — and is it throe that

your Miss is to be married, after all, to that English barrow-night,

who's "ould enough to be her father, and has nothing in horn

but the spirit of a tare nigger, — he'd take a penny out of

a blind man's hat ! "

Indeed, then, Nelly Riley, I take it to be an ill pattern of

your manners to say the likes o' that to no who's coming into

our family, and has good blood in bis veins ; sure, then, ye little

know what he'd do for the sake of the young Mistress."

Maybe I do know, Mrs. Grady ; don't I know how (God

look down upon her !) she's been drooping all the winter ; don't

I know how the heart-saver came upon her, a laughing girl, and

left her a sober heart-struck woman ; don't all the countrey

know how the poor Master (snore's the pity !) has been distressed

; don't wc know how the jaws of the law (bad luck to it /)

has been stretched open for horn; and don't wc see that he's

stuffing his daughter betwixt to stop its mouth . Sure, everybody

iv bis whole town-laud knows that Sir Charles wanted to

buy the estate long ago. and has money enough in the Limerick

bank, and the Waterford bank, and the big bank in Dublin, to

say nothing of his outlandish banks, to buy fifty estates like it

but he wanted the lady too, for he could get nothing iv England

like her — the ould, dressed up, buckram-stiffened, face-painted

dandy. You needn't grizzle, like a pea on a griddle, Mrs. Grady,

it's the truth Im tellin', and I don't care who hears it ! but

this I know, if the poor young gentleman hadn't been killed, she'd

ha' seen Castle Raymond down the Shannon (and my blessing to

her for that same !) before she'd ha' sould herself to that English

thingumby, you call barrow-night."

You're a blaspheming ould woman, to talk that way of

Castle Raymond, and you're a poor desired craythur, too ; for

I can tell ye, that though Sir Charles is an Englishman, (which

countrey, you'll agree, is preferable before the world, after

Ireland,) he has a generous spirit of bis own, when there is occasion

for it."

I see how it is, nurse, and why yer two good-looking shoulders

stick out so grand, under yer beautiful lujee shawl ; but I'd

scorn to bo bribed, poor as I am; and, remember I tell ye, that

though grand she may be, rich she may be, yet ye'll never see the

smile on her lip so bright, or her step so dancing, as when she

went wandering, like a blessed bird over these hills, with horn

whose grave was made, without cross or prayer to mark it, in a

far countrey."

Nelly," replied Nurse Grady, " you're not a learned woman,

so I can't blame ye ; but you may take the word of one who

knows better than yourself what belongs to the quality, and she

tells ye, that Miss Marian will be as happy as the day is long —

and why not 1 Won't she ha' got a rich husband ; won't she ha'

saved Castle Raymond from being sould ; and sure you know

that if ever that came to pass, it would be the ould gentlemans

death ; won't she "

Don't bother us, axing yer pardon, nurse ; haven't I got the

sight o' my eyes, aud the feelings o' my heart — aud don't I see

how it is?"

Nelly Riley was right; the pulse of Marian Raymond's heart

was chilled Sir Charles Barnett had been a leader of fashion,

when fashion and vice were even more synonymous than in our

ram days. He bad drank and gamed in royal company. He was

snH brilliant and most elegant in his manners, but he was no

longer supreme in matters of taste aud ton ; younger men were

preferred, by the new beauties, and Sir Charles sought retirement

on his Irish estates, to recruit both health aud purse. An old

uncle died suddenly, and left horn the reversion of immense

wealth. He longed again to dazzle and to lead ; but ho felt and

knew that, except as a dinner-giver, his reign was over : — a man

may give dinners at any ago; but at any age he cannot waltz,

sing, and flirt with ladies who have succeeded their mammas in

the empire of fashion. He had ever eschewed matrimony, for reasons

which it is needless to explain ; but the radiant and dazzling

beauty of Marian Raymond attracted his notice. He perceived

immediately, with the quickness of a man of the world, that she

would create a sensation ; her naivete, her wit, could have no

rivals — her beauty, few. When first he saw her she had scarcely

numbered fifteen summers, and then he introduced himself to

Mr. Raymond by offering to purchase the castle and grounds.

This was received as an insult by the proud, though needy proprietor,

and it subsequently required all Sir Charles Burnett's

tact to gain the good graces of the master of Raymond. He

succeeded, aa wc have see, effectually ; for Mr. Raymond had

only told his daughter the truth when be affirmed, that her accepting

Sir Charles's hand was the only way to save horn from a

gaol. Poor girl ! she saw that indeed her father's hour was

come, as well as her own, aud she agreed — only stipulating that

she was not to be called upon to fulfil her contract until the following

summer. Sir Charles certainly acted with great liberality,

paid off all incumbrances, and was recognized as the heir to Castle

Raymond after the present possessor's death. A maddening

fever was the result of this self-sacrifice, and Sir Charles might

have repented (for with her characteristic nobility of soul she told

horn all the truth), had he not consoled himself with the idea,

that as her lover was dead it was of no consequence ; every one,

he believed, must have a first love before a second, and its

memory would pass from her mid as clouds from the

summer sky.



■ I am come, father — Marian Raymond is come to demand,

for the last time, her father's blessing."

Her father was alone in his chamber, but a joyous bridal-party

crowded the saloon.

For the last time, my girl ! What do you mean ? "

After this morning there will be no Marian Raymond."

Ah ! my dear, I wish you had been a boy — and yet I do

not — but, though not Marian Raymond, you are my daughter

still. Ah! well may he be proud of you •" —

I am adorned, you see, father, for the sacrifice."

Sacrifice, do you call it?" he replied — "say, rather, for the

festival."

Be it so — there is sono country, I think — though I cannot

tell where, which he used to speak of, where they made the sacrifice

a festival. But you will be happy, father — you will enjoy,

long, long enjoy, dear Castle Raymond."

So I will — that rascally wine-merchant, Marian, has been

writing to me to get back my custom ; but not a drop of ibis

claret shall ever enter my cellars — no, no ; when you return

you will hardly know the old place."

Father, grant me one request — the fishing tackle, and Harry's

old fowling-piece — he hung them on the walls himself, where

they now are — do not let them be removed."

Mr. Raymond pressed his daughter's hand in silence.

When I return, father, I hope I shall find you happy : —

what I do to-day, is for you only."

Happy ! how can I be otherwise, my Marian ? I never felt

better in my life — never in better health or spirits."

He led her into the saloon ; and soon after a gay cavalcade

passed through the motley crowd to the village church — they

entered its ivy-garnished portal — the ceremony commenced —

proceeded — concluded. It was observed afterwards by many, that

when the clergyman demanded — " Who gives this woman to bo

the wife of this man ?" Mr. Raymond's voice faltered, and his

countenance, latterly much bloated, assumed a purple and inflamed

appearance. When all was over, he moved as if to

salute his daughter ; but instead of the warm kiss of parental

affection on her check, she received the dying body of her

father in her arms. A strong apoplectic fit had rendered the

master of Raymond a corpse within twenty minutes after he

entered the Church of Cloyne. How truly were the words of

Scripture fulfilled : " In the midst of life wc are in death ! *

And poor Marian ! — what would she not have given that the

blow, if it was to be, had fallen a few minutes sooner ! " Then,

then I might have been preserved from this hateful union — what

cared I for those estates ? — I might have lived and toiled at

liberty, not driven, alas! to live with horn I loathe !"

It is but justice to Sir Charles Barnett to confess, that after

this unfortunate occurrence, he did everything he could to gratify

the feelings of his bride. Though strongly disliking the Irish

wakes and funerals, yet he permitted both to proceed according

to ancient custom, and took the lead ir. the procession as chief-mourner.

His conduct towards Marian on this occasion commanded

her esteem, if not her love ; and deeply grateful was

she for it. Youth is apt to attribute all vices where it discovers

o-ne, aud to believe that those they dislike must inherit all the

faults and imperfections they can possibly imagine. So it was

with Marian ; yet she endeavoured, with a resolution, not one of

her least trials, to make herself believe she had done her

husband injustice.

I will now," she said, " labour to discharge my duty."

When all was over, and they prepared to leave the country for

the London season, Lady Barnett, on descending one morning

from her dressing-room, found Sir Charles occupied iv giving

directions to various workmen as to the necessary repairs of the

castle during their absence ; the old armour and fishing-tackle

had been tom rudely from the walls, and lay in heaps upon the

marble pavement.

Let these publishing thugs be given away, and the pictures

aud statues I shall send from London occupy their places." One

old gun, surmounted by a cap and fishing-rod, still remained

untouched near the back entrance to the hall. " Shall I take

these down too, your honour ? " inquired one of the men.

No, no," replied Marian, who was leaning against the oaken

balustrades of the staircase ; " no, no, Sir Charles does not wish

these removed."

Not removed, my dear ! — you cannot, surely, mean these

things to remain stuck up over the door ! they would destroy

the harmony of my entire arrangement. The hall is really fine ;

those columns and carvings are in admirable keeping; and, when

my plans are completed, it will be as imposing as anything in

England. You are not serious, Marian ? — Peters, Lady Barnett

has changed her opinion — remove those things."

At this instant the remembrance of her noble cousin, as he

had placed his implements of sport in their rest, while she, with

tearful eyes, stood at one side, and poor Busca, little dreaming

that his dear master was about to depart, at the other, came full

upon her — she could not bear them to be removed— she could

not support the idea of their being profaned by any touch.

Before Peters could execute his masters orders, she called,

Forbear ! " in a tone, it might be of emotion, it might be of

authority — it was, most likely, a mingling of both. "Sir

Charles," she added, going into the breakfast-room, " Sir Charles,

I would speak with you." He followed her into the apartment,

and closed the door.

It is a weakness, and one for which, perhaps, I should beg

you to forgive me; but I have never, since the commencement

of our acquaintance, used the slightest concealment towards

you." Sir Charles bowed. " That cap, gun, and fishing-rod were

hung there by my cousin the night before he left us — for ever ;

will you oblige me by not having them removed ? "

There was a pause. Often, how much of our destiny hangs

upon a few words ! Brief they may be— unstudied, and seemingly

unimportant, yet how powerful their influence 1 The

instruments of will, the arbiters of fate, and its controllers i —

brief words, that stamp an impress on memory which time can

never efface ! Ob, if words were but more accurately weighed,

how much misery might be spared, how much evil prevented 1

Marian waited for his reply — on it depended more than the

narrow-minded baronet imagined ; she waited long, so long that

it became necessary again to speak.

On the morning of my marriage, the last request I made my

poor father was, that they should remain untouched."

You must," replied Sir Charles, but too evidently mortified,

attach much value to the person who placed them there, to

object so strongly to their removal."

I did attach much value to horn, and I regard bis memory —

he was my cousin."

Sir Charles forgot his good-breeding, and, with a perfectly

well-bred sneer, interrupted her at the word — cousin. " You

need not attempt to conceal the fact from me, Lady Barnett; he

was more dear to you than any cousin."

Sir Charles," she replied, " I never did, and never will, conceal

aught from you. You are my husband ; and, whether hebe

deserving or not, a husband has a right to a wife's unqualified

confidence : concealment I believe to be the root of all domestic

misery. What my sentiments towards Henry O'Donnell were,

you heard long ago, and from me ; you cannot entertain any

unpleasant feeling towards the clay — the mouldering clay — of my

childhood's friend. I promised horn that those implements of

the chase should never be removed except by his own hand ; do

then, I retreat you, let them remain as long as I live —

they are in the shadow — do not, pray do not, remove them,

for "

For my sake," she wished to have added, but she could not ;

she was unable to frame an appeal, bordering on affection, to

one for whom she felt it not.

"I am sorry, Marian," he replied coldly, " but I regret to

Bay, that trifling as it may seem, having given the order, I cannot

see how I can retract ; the things will be better out of

sight. I had no idea that you entertained such a strong

penchant for the gentleman ; indeed, cherishing such a feeling,

you ought to have paused before you honoured me with your

hand.* 1

Marian's only reply was a bitter groan ; and, without another

word, she lest the apartment, crossed the hall, and proceeded

with unmingled bitterness of spirit to the dressing-room Bhe had

recently quitted. She threw herself on her knees, and burying

her face iv her hands, gave way to a burst of regret, such as she

seldom indulged in — for tears are an indulgence, and a blessed

one, to the stricken at heart. Mingled with her tears were

prayers — prayers to the Almighty, who is known to us in the

hour of trouble, whether of mid or of body, as the One holy

and true Spirit, who will either remove from us our afflictions, or

teach us how to bear them as Christians only can. Marian had

known little, during her early years, of religion, except its name ;

but sorrow and solitude had taught her where she might find

consolation ; and enthusiasm, so strong a feature in her character,

having latterly no worldly object to chain it to earth, worked its

way towards heaven. " Teach me, 0 Lord ! " sho ejaculated,

to bear the reproach I have in a measure merited ; teach me

to perform the hard and heavy duty of a wife to horn whom I

love not, though Thou knowest full well there is no other on

earth whom I do love."

t She was interrupted by a whining noise, which she well recognized

— it was poor Busca ! Her four-footed friend was readily

admitted ; and she pondered in her mid whether she ought to

caress even his dog, when he whom at the altar she had engaged

to love, honour, and obey, would, she doubted not, disapprove of

her so doing. The poor animal stretched upon the rüg as usual,

and contented himself by elevating an ear occasionally, as his

beautiful mistress paced up and down the chamber. It was

evident that Sir Charles Barnett's mid, however dressed and

fashioned by circumstances, was intrinsically poor aud mean.

Had he thought kindly, or even wisely, he would have seen at

once, that though Marian was perhaps wrong, as a married

woman, in cherishing the remembrance of one, all too dear informer

times, yet the noble frankness she had shown, the freedom

from all art upon the subject, the confidence she reposed in horn

so bravely, deserved a similar return ; and had he been capable

of valuing her as she merited, he would have been proud to

preserve what she had frankly confessed she valued. Were even

the wisdom of generosity sufficiently estimated, the world would

go on in better tune : people, for the most part, endeavour to

bring events within the compass of their own narrow conceptions,

instead of striving to expand with them.

♦

PART THE SECOND.

%

WSSRErjc^ AK yer pardon, Miss — my Lady, I mane — dear,

ttf^fii&r, dear, it's hard to turn one's tongue to a word one's

jMRty'J? not used to ; but you have the heart's respect, any

Ws»^BlSh way," said the old gardener at Castle Raymond, the

morning before Marian was to leave her childhood's home —

aud may I make would to ax, if you intend taking Busca with

you over the seas?"

Yes, Frank."

Lave horn with me, Miss, my Lady, aud I'll take care of the

baste ; he has no taste for travelling now ; aud sure Nelly

Riley'sson, Bat, writes a fine hand, and ill indite a letter with

the priest (no disrespect to his reverence) ; aud, if you didn't

think I'd be making' too free, sure I'd direct a line to tell you

how Busca was, and how the roses got on, and all about the

melon-bed, aud the new graft ou the apple-trees."

I shall be happy to hear from you, thank you, Frank ; but I

cannot part with Busca, he was my father's favourite, and, — in

short, I must take Busca"

Busca," persisted the gardener, " ia fond o' me, and he and

the grey cat are the best friends in the world now ; they lie

together on my ould jock, that serves 'em for a mat ; indeed,

lady dear, I wish you would lave me Busca"

I am grieved I cannot oblige you in this, Frank ; is there

any thing else I can do? can 1 send you any thing from

England ? "

God bless you, my lady, I should like a quarter of English

tobacco ; I've a grate curiosity to see what sort of stuff it really

is ; and I hear their kail, particularly their brocoli, bates

Manager. But ma'am, my Lady darling, for the love o' the

poor ould master, and for the love — no, not that, because, iv

course it's past, but, for the regard of Master Harry — lave

Busca to me ; see how the craythur rams his could nose into my

hand, as if he said, I'll stay wit you."

It's very strange you should have set your mid on this ! "

May be so, my Lady ; strange things happen every dt.

Sure, it's mighty strange what makes such a beautiful, great, big

sunflower, as that yonder, come out of a little lay, humpy seed,

not as big, no, nor half, nor quarter as big, as a prayer's eye !

Well, place yer Ladyship, all I can say is, that if you don't lave

Busca behind, hell never see the ould grey cat again, that's all !"

Frank ! I insist upon knowing what you mean."

Ah, Busca, a cushla ! " continued the gardener, with true

Irish tact — " ah, thin, Busca, would yer mistress not let on, I'd

incense her into it, you poor brute, how yer no favourite with

Mister Bijaw, my Lord's valley de sham, and how he said tome

— ' Ould Blossom,' says he, 'if my lady intends bringing that

ould stinking baste (axing yer pardon, Busca ; but 'twas he said

it, not me) with us (by vt, manning Sir Charles and himself, the

rude, ill-raised pup.) — with us, says he, ' well give horn a dose,'

says he, ' crossing tho Channel, and then make our (the impudent

blackguard !) our lady believe he died of the say sickness.'

So with that, says I, what would his honour say to that ? says L

'0, nothing at all,' says he ; ' for Sir Charles hates the sight

o' horn, and whenever my lady back is turned gives horn a poke

or a puck with his foot — I have good raison to know that he'd

never say a word, except " 0 be joyful," if he was fairly gone.'

So I says nothing; for the might's the right evermore with thin

English again us. Now, ma'am, my Lady, a' fourteen, you'll let

Busca stay with his ould friend Frank !"

Marian made no reply ; her heart was too full to speak. She

turned from the gardener to conceal her emotion, and at a break

in the plantations encountered her husband.

I have been giving some final directions as to the trees wc

wished put down this autumn," he observed, as they met.

Have you been directing your old gardener as to your flowers 1

By the way, he gets old, that Master Frank — I must send off

some of my Scotch people from Barnett Park, to get everything

in right order."

Not to turn away Frank, Sir Charles ? "

Certainly not, my dear, if you wish to the contrary— always

most happy to meet your views, where they are consistent with

propriety."

Poor Marian made no observation on this sarcastic reply, but

fancied that Sir Charles cast an unkind look on the hound, who,

certainly, often provoked the baronet ; for, in former times,

Busca always received his advances with a certain exposure of

the teeth and gums, not very flattering to one desirous of cultivating

his acquaintance. Few words passed between them, until,

on reaching the vestibule, Sir Charles closed the door, so as to

prevent the hound from entering.

In England, Marian, dogs are not advanced to the rank of

companions, particularly when they grow offensive by age."

It was on Marian's lip to inquire if all things grew disagreeable

as they grew old ; but she remembered that " grievous words

stir up anger," aud held her peace. Sir Charles continued —

I do not think that Busca will ever bear a sea voyage."

I think not," was her forced reply to horn, whom, under the

influence of her strongly-excited feelings, she regarded as little

better than a premeditated murderer. That he fihou'd meditate

i

the destruction of an animal he knew she so fondly loved, was

cruel; but to take his valet— a low-bred, insulting foreigner — into

his confidence, and plan with horn the death of that poor blind

favourite, was mean, low, pitiful. How, in defiance of all her

resolutions to tho contrary, did she despise this mau of worldly

wealth and narrow soul 1 With this feeling came another — he

was her husband I

Despite all that has been said to the contrary, there is something

singularly brilliant and invigorating in a London season.

The weather, from April to June, is, generally speaking, on its

best behaviour ; the animation spreading itself, either as a bane

or a blessing, over all classes of society during the sitting of Parliament,

is in full force : it gives gentlemen something to talk

about in the park, in the streets, at the clubs ; and excites something

bordering on interesting conversation during the ten or

twenty minutes pause before dinner, at which time the said

gentlemen " bunch " together in whatever portion of the room

fronts the largest looking-glass, or lounge on the softest sofas, to

the exclusion of the ladies, aud are thus enabled to criticise,

quite at their ease, the merits of the last new speaker. — Despite,

then, the mauvais hon of almost every man of " ton " you meet,

still there is much to charm aud bewilder the senses in tho

London Season. The parks teem with beauty and elegance.

The opera, the finest and most glorious of sensual enjoyments, is

in full force. The exhibitions, such as they are, are open ; and

there are always more than two or three subjects at each to

repay you for the loss of time consequent on looking at all.

There is bustle in the streets, — not the ill-bred city bustle, that

forces you off the pavement, and covers you with mud ! — but

the bustle consequent on the crowding of the better classes of

society in search of amusement. Noble horses parade the squares ;

carriages, unrivalled in beauty of design and execution, meet

each other at every corner. There is a rich aud gorgeous blaze

of all that is bright and curious in the magazines and shops ;

the best books are reserved by the wary publishers for "the

season;" the most exquisite exotic flourish in the conservatories

of the great and gay ; and the air of the favoured " West End "

is redolent of the purest perfumes. Any foreigner, passing

casually through London during " the season," would pronounce

us the wealthiest and happiest of nations, and imagine that

distress had never set its seal of want, and sin, and death, upon

any of the children of Britain. Those who seek truth must

dive amid the turbulent and disordered waters of sorrow, as well

as ramble through the smiling groves aud laughing pastures

of joy !

It was Marius third season in brilliant London, and many

thought it was never truly brilliant until she appeared. Both in

Ireland, and on her husband's estates in England, she had been,

as far as she was permitted, an angel of charity : she had founded

schools, clothed the naked, fed the hungry ; and the deep-felt

and grateful blessing followed the " pale lady " wherever she

went. The first season passed off as her husband expected ;to

use the cant phrase, she was splendidly successful. Though

Barnett is an ugly and common-sounding name, there were

'barnet hats," and the hair was "Crepe b, la Barnet ;" and

I.ady Barnett's wit was often quoted, as the wit par excellence.

Those who called her witty, knew not what wit was. Wit maybe

likened to a silver arrow, pure, glittering, and pointed : hers

was of a more severe quality — it was satire ; not the flippant

and ill-tempered smartness that descends to marc personality,

but that finer and more ennobling quality, which feared not to

tell Philip feasting that it would only commune with Philip

fasting. Witty minds are seldom great, but a just quantity of

satire sharpens the intellect unto perfection ; it is the whetstone

of many virtues, aud is respected when its playful counterfeit is

run down by temper and good sense. Sir Charles Barnett had

taken a wife to help horn to support his waning state ; but he

had not calculated on eclipse, and by no means relished the

I 2

universal homage rendered to her marvellous wisdom and sound

judgment.

The President of the Royal Academy painted her portrait

during her second season, and, with his usual skill, completed a

picture that might have made Titian jealous. Lady Barnett

looked at it for some time iv silence ; and then, turning to the

polished artist, she observed, " It is beautiful ; but you know

what it needs to make it like mc."

Lady," he replied, with admirable tact, " it wants a sigh

upon the lip."

And he was right.

My dear Lady Barnett, I have a little request to make of

you this evening," said Sir Charles ; "it is that you will not

enter into any conversation with the Russian envoy about the

plans wc" (the mean creature bad nothing to do with them)

adopted for the education of the poor in Leicestershire. If he

speaks again upon the subject, refer horn to mc. And I really

wish you would not agree with Lord Smeaton's notions about

literature — he invariably contradict me ; and therefore, oblige

me by not conversing with him."

I will do as you desire."

I think wc shall confine our parties, this season, to dinners,

concerts, and card-assemblies. Balls" (Sir Charles had lately

been afflicted with gout) "are really incorrect, since the introduction

of waltzes."

I am glad to find that your ideas of correctness are improving,"

replied his lad'. Sir Charles winced.

Will it be believed that the very man who was lecturing and

directing this high-souled woman on such trifling points, was

continuing (almost openly) in the practice of what the uninitiated

would call "gross immorality," but what the well bred delicately

classify as a liaison ? Oh, this twisting and mooting of terms ! —

this cloaking of all that is abominable under the banner of

human frailty ! " — this glossing aud polishing of vice ! — this

burning of incense in high places, and bending the knee to Baal !

How does the free-born soul sicken at, and loathe, suchihomage !

God forbid that wc should for a moment wish to see the levelling

of rank, or the decent barrier of society overthrown. Wc

honour the one, and respect the other ; but vice is vice, though

a coronet bind the brow ; and virtue is as holy in a peasant's

cottage as in a ducal palace. How many are worshipped, literally,

during the season in London, because of their faites and

splendour, who would not be tolerated in what is termed decent

society, were it not for " station ? " Lady Barnett felt this

deeply ; and while Bhe was idolized, loathed the idolatry. Not

that she was insensible to praise or applause : what woman is —

what woman ought to be ? but she longed for a devotion, which

she knew, as a wife, there was but one who could render. She

wished to be the object of a warm aud fervid affection, as she

bad once been. She was constantly the victim of her penetration,

and sometimes wished that God had, in his mercy, bestowed

upon her less feeling and more folly. There was one thing, and

one only, that yielded her pleasure ; she had an extended sphere

of doing good ; and the manner in which she threw her entire

soul into relieving the necessities of others, often excited in her

worldly-minded husband an astonishment he did not deem it

necessary to conceal.

I cannot think, Marian, why you are so anxious about the

dead curate of Lyme's daughters : one is deaf, and the other

blind ; moreover, nobody knows them."

Simply, Sir Charles, because their father is dead, one deaf,

the other blind, and nobody knows them."

Sir Charles muttered something about " bad habits, contracted

through a defective education, and wild Irish views of manners

and society ; " and the once free-hearted Marian listened, as she

bad often listened, patiently ; for " patience is the badge of all

her tribe."

Would those who crowded her splendid saloons, and were

astonished at her taste and calm majestic beauty, — would they

have believed that the canker was busy at a heart, where sorrow

had made its sepulchre ?

Lady Barnett," inquired one of her visitors, casually taking

up a morning paper from amid the heap of periodical literature

with which it is customary to heap a library table, " do you ever

read our political journals 1 "

'• Hardly ever."

Wc continue gaining victory on victory ; indeed, Napoleon

must soon evacuate Spain and Portugal."

Marian could never hear any allusion to the Peninsular campaign

without emotion ; her heart beat violently as the gentleman

continued.

So, I see an exchange of prisoners has lately been effected ;

some Irish names, too, among the number. You must surely be

interested in them, Lady Barnett ? Culvert O'Connell, lieutenant

in the 3rd dragoons ; Barry St. Leger— ay, all the St. Legers

were brave fellows ; Henry O'Dounell, captain in the Royal

Irish "

Marian seized the journal from the grasp of the astonished

lounger, and in another moment. — the paper clasped within

her hands, her eyes starting from their sockets — she had fallen

back on the sofa, not in a fainting fit, but iv strong and terrific

convulsions.

And so, Marian, — you are a wedded wife ! and though now,

three seasons the star of the ascendant, I hear you are still

triumphant. Long may you continue so —if it make you happy I

I have been more than three years a miserable prisoner, without

one friend, who remembered Harry O'Donnell sufficiently to be

interested iv his exchange, which only chance has effected. Ido

not, lady, blame you ; — you doubtless fancied I was dead ; for

you could not have been so altered, as not to have felt some

anxiety for your cousins liberty.

I intend paying my respects, in the course of the morning,

to you and Sir Charles j — to whom I beg my respects. You

will not be surprised at my strange handwriting, when you hear

that I lost au arm at Albert ! — Henry O'Donnell."

It was more than a month since Lady Barnett had learned

that Harry — her first — her only love — was in existence. When

questioned by her husband as to the cause of her sudden illness,

she told horn all the truth. " If," she said, within her own

bosom — " If Sir Charles suspects me — at all events I shall have

the satisfaction of not deserving his suspicion "

Was it joy or sorrow ? " inquired her tormentor, " that occasioned

your Ladyship's agitation ? "

"Sir Charles," she replied, "do not trifle with feelings that

have ever been laid bare before you. Ido not deny your rill

to ask that question ; and I reply frankly — that it was a

mingling of both."

Her husband gazed steadily upon her ; and her dark deep

eye, — her broad high forehead, — and her fine pale features, —

neither quailed vor shrank from the scrutiny ; — even Sir Charles

was moved.

Marian," he said, " you are a noble woman, but not suited

either for me or for the present times ; — you should have remained

among the stars, until a holier sun shone upon England.

I never met woman with truth like yours."

The involuntary tribute of such applause, paid by Vice to

Virtue, is great indeed ! Marian wept long aud bitterly , iv the

silence of her chamber, she prayed ; — and they who know how

hard it is to wish that those wc love may not love in return, will

appreciate her petition. She prayed that Harry would only

remember her as his cousin. When she thought of the many

changes she had seen men make, without an effort, she indulged

in what may be termed the ]sinful hope, that he might find it,

perhaps had already found it, easy to look upon and love another.

There was something in tho tone of Captain O'Donnell's

letter that repressed this conviction. I have heard many

women assert, after receiving a declaration of love, that — " indeed

they had no idea of such a thing ; they never thought the

gentleman entertained the slightest affection for there : " — it

might be true : but I never believed a word they said. Men

are, doubtless, clever enough ; but clever as they are, women, on

this subject, are seldom — never at fault ; — they have an intuitive

knowledge of man's affection ; — they generally know it

before be is aware of it tinsel ffand; — and though man can easily

assure an affection he does not feel, he must be a better adept

in concealment than I can imagine possible to hide a preference.

The one phrase, — " if it makes you happy," — showed

at once his anxiety, and his belief that she was miserable. The

precious letter was more than half-way to her lips, yet she

stayed its course, with a firmness those who have loved her will

estimate, and laid it on her desk. In a few moments she

arose, and, with the letter in her baud, proceeded to Sir Charles's

study.

Lost an arm !' Sad thing, sad thing!" repeated Sir Charles,

after he had finished its perusal. " Well, I shall be glad to see

him. He is your relative ; and wc owe it to ourselves to treat

our relatives with propriety."

I think I must spend the day at Richmond, with Mrs.

Brownlowe."

No, no, Lady Barnet, it would be exceedingly wrong ; you

can receive your cousin here. I dare say wc shall find horn

sadly changed."

Sir Charles, well skilled in human nature, was at fault : — the

truth was, that with the exception of his wife, his intimate

female acquaintances had been of a very indifferent stamp :

aud he fancied that a worn-out mutilated soldier could possess

no attractions for one posted and admired as his charming wife !

Lady Barnett, well as she knew his littleness of mid, almost

hoped that something like generosity had illumined his dark

soul. She, too, was mistaken.

"He loves me still," she Baid, while tears of bitter agony

coursed each other down her pallid cheeks, — " his love has been

unchanging as my own — Oh, what am I, to own it ! and he

talked of my father, and of Castle Raymond, and the dead lark,

aud poor Busca ! aud my husband has been either mud or cruel

enough to ask horn to stay within these walls. What then lAm

I fallen so low as to fear myself ? " And the young and proud

beauty paced her chamber with unequal steps.

Woman is never in so much danger as when she confides in

her own strength. The meek-hearted and trembling find

security in weakness, for they look for protection where it is

always found, — they seek advice from the Most High, and implicitly

employ his precepts ns their laws : there is always safety

for the humble Christian. According to the correct and established

laws of English society, if a married female find not a

friend in her husband, she is perfectly and completely cut off

from everything approaching to friendship with the more wise

and superior sex. If trusting to the pure and uncontaminated

counsels of her own heart and motives, she seek advice or protection,

in any way, directly or indirectly, from any man, no

matter how exalted his character, or pure his motives, her reputation

is tainted, irrevocably tainted, and therefore nothing

worth — she sinks in the moral scale, and can never retrieve what

she has lost. lam willing to allow the hardship of this state ;

and yet, valuing as I do the reputation of my high-souled and

beautiful countrywomen, more than their individual happiness,

I can hardly wish it altered. To this very strictness, to this

hardship in peculiar cases, wc owe much of our domestic happiness,

and all our good fare, — a fare that was never tainted,

until an assumption of foreign manners (that sit as ill upon us

as foreign fashions) rendered many, too many, of those in high

places, open to the scorn of the right-minded. " What," it maybe

asked, " is a woman to do who is married to a brute or a fool ?

is she to have no friend, no companion ? " I answer, None ;

she either made her election, or it was forced upon her ; but in

either case, she owes it to her God, to her sex, and to her

country, to bear her cross, and prove that she rises superior to

the ills that are heaped on her devoted bead. No matter how

pure may be her motives, the world reads actions, and not

hearts.

Lady Barnett believed that her cousin was as high-souled as

herself; she remembered how strict his notions had been, and

how often he had chid and reproved the volatility of disposition

that had, at one period of her existence, rendered her so gay and

thoughtless. She had read, deeply too, the records of human

life, yet it never occurred to her to bring her observations to

bear upon her cousin : — " He taught me ever what was best and

wisest, and to whom can I look with greater safety for advice if

I should need it?" With this seeling she scrupled not to consult

her cousin upon many points unconnected with her husband,

or the domestic differences, that, despite her care and real attention

to prevent, sprang up between them. Her innate propriety,

more than her judgment, counselled her not to suffer any interference

upon such points ; and, on all other matters, her vanity

was gratified to find that her monitor agreed with her in all thugs.

It must also be confessed, that though at first she had shrunk

from meeting her cousin, yet, after that meeting was over, she

experienced a tranquillity, a security in his presence, to which

she had long been a stranger. She had never enjoyed the sweet

privilege of appealing, with all her feelings, to her husband.

Though she had never used concealment, she could not be said

to have reposed confidence, — that full, perfect, aud happy confidence,

which is the out-pouring of an affectionate heart, and

forms a true earthly paradise. Her vivid imagination, that had

bo long communed with heaven, had again found an earthly

object upon whom to lean, — and " Cousin Harry." os before, was

even more the mid's idol than he had been at Castle Raymond.

There ho had been her guiding star: — the idea, the possibility

of his being changed, had never once occurred to Marian; she

looked to horn to strengthen her good resolves, not to overturn

them.

Of all things likely to suffer change, nothing changes like

man! With women the case is different; events with them are

things of rare occurrence, and there is little chance of one rubbing

out the record of another. The impression has time, not

only to be made, but, consequently, is not easily effaced. Men

fall rapidly into various societies, and hear various opinions ;

this occasions them to be less firm, or, to use a harsher term,

less obstinate. It may be for good ; — it may be for evil. Wc

shall see

Captain O'Donnell was almost domesticated in Sir Charles

Barnett's house, and people did begin to say, that " they wondered,"

— " were surprised," — " astonished," — •' suspected," —

hoped not." — " Lady Barnett, so beautiful." — " What could she

see in horn ?" — " Husband careless," — " used her harshly ;" — and,

at last, some of these whispers absolutely reached the ear of Sir

Charles. With a violence totally uncalled for, be assailed and

reproached his wife. She replied with her usual truth and

dignity, — for one criminal idea, — one feeling that angels could

pronounce impure, — had never stained her soul. Yet she had

stood on the brink of a precipice, and blessed, a thousand times

blessed, was the power that told her of her danger !

I will tell Harry that he must depart," she said ; " and his

sense of propriety will point out to horn the necessity for

doing so."

It was more easily said than done. The time came, and

brought its trial. With the instinctive propriety and delicacy of

a virtuous woman, she avoided the reason why, and told horn

only of the fact. Little was she prepared for his comment; —

little did she dream of his moving from the high and honourable

pedestal, on which her imagination, more than his own merits,

had placed him. The idea of Henry O'Donnell having become

"a mau of the world," as the phrase goes; — of these bland and

fascinating manners being only the polished surface; — and the

certainty that Continental example aud habit had sullied that

true and noble spirit which she imagined was more than proof

against contamination, fell slowly, but heavily, upon her feeling

heart.

I see how it is," he said ; " Sir Charles is jealous. I thought

the world would whisper."

"You thought the world would whisper!" repeated Lady

Barnett. "You thought it, and yet you remained near me !"

Marian," he replied mournfully ; " you have not now to

learn how dearer far than life you are to me; the only living

creature of my km; the only being who binds me to existence.

You are not happy, and yet you would separate those whose

lives depend upon being near each other. All I have asked

is your society, and that you would not surely refuse your

eousiu I "

Marian could not repeat all that Sir Charles had said ; she

could only entreat, command, O'Dounell's departure ; aud to her

honour be it recorded, she did so firmly— she neither quailed

nor wavered iv her mandate, — yet could she not utter the

reproaches that grew upon her lip at his acknowledging he had

expected the world would notice aud misconstrue his attentions;

while anticipating this result, he had yet remained.

It was now in vain for horn to seck her pity, by a representation

of his utter loneliness, and bj drawing a true but melancholy

portrait of what her situation woidd be when deprived of her

only friend. Her resolution was taken ; she saw and parted

from her cousin. Letter after letter were delivered to her, but

she returned them unopened. " I might read all he could sap - ,"

she would repeat to herself, " but I will not. I might read

without danger, for he is not now what he once was." This was

true ; but when she imagined, in her hours of indignation, that

he had become a being of no importance in her eyes, she erred iv

judgment.

The season drew towards its termination, Sir Charles became

worse, and was more morose than ever. He had been a good

deal disappointed lately ; — had not produced as good an effect in

"the House" as he had anticipated; and, somehow or other,

Lady Barnett was not as attractive as usual. Hints were followed

oy direct charges, and the usual recriminations succeeded. It was

in vain that Marian recalled to his remembrance her ingenuous

disclosures, her aversion to meet her cousin, and the promptness

with which, on Sir Charles's first intimation, she sacrificed all

her feelings to his wishes. He saw that she was heartbroken,

end, with the characteristic of a perfect tyrant, he persisted in

eis torture; coolly communicating, as the termination of his

discourse, that she should immediately accompany horn to Castle

Raymond ; " the most out-of-the-way place," as he observed,

and of course the best to hide his disgrace." How her proud

heart beat within her bosom ! And when, long after midnight,

she reasoned herself into the submission which, as a wife, she

felt was her first duty, she knelt, and pressed her throbbing

brow within her small white palms, and prayed fervently to the

Almighty to strengthen her in all good things. She thanked

Horn too, in that He had mercifully taught her, crc it was too

late, the painful, the agonizing truth, that he on whom she had

bestowed a love, far nearer to devotion than to any earthly passion,

was all too tainted to dwell in her remembrance, save as a

vision of the post ; which, like the lark of her young days, had

soared towards heaven, yet found its death on earth.

"Troth, Nurse Grady, aud it must be herself that's glad to

get the young mistress back," said our former acquaintance,

Nelly Riley, to the nurse of Castle Raymond ; " aud she's looking

very poorly ; and not, by no manner of means, as handsome, to

my thinking, as before she went away."

She can't be blind to poor Sir Charles's fate," replied the

sapient nurse : " he's had the gout in his stomach twenty times,

and it'll choak horn some of these days ; and thin well have

a new master, Im thinking."

List the captain ye mean ? Array !be ashy, now ! — I wish

her better luck. The captain, my landau 's more changed nor

any of 'era. Sir Charles is the ould thing that, as I've often said,

would make broth of his father's bones. My Lady's heart, Goblets

it ! Is the same as ever — a beautiful heart she has. It's

useless trying to turn May butter into a flint-stone ; but the

captain has got foreign hurling in his head — and, don't toll me —

if be had true regard for bis cousin, he wouldn't visit the gamekeeper's

daughter so often."

M^ 1 Lady," replied the nurse, bridling, " knows nothing o.

his even being in the countrey — how should she t And as to

the gamekeeper's daughter — did Master Harry tell you it battle

daughter he visited ? Oughtn't he have a regard for the

father, Mrs. Riley?"

Mrs. Grady, ma'am," replied the shrewd Irishwoman, " you

have a mighty grate regard for fine French handkerchiefs, and

a fine docket o' cornwall hades. I would you my mid a-fore, and

I'll tell it you again, if you like, and make a lane breast at on't;

but, may be, better not — time tells all things."

In a few weeks, the death of Sir Charles Garnett was duly

announced in all the fashionable journals ; and though, from'

what wc know, Lady Barnett could not be called inconsolable,

yet she behaved as was right and fitting her to do — nay, she did

more ; she watched her husband to the last ; she tried to turn

his thoughts towards that source from whence she had derived

consolation ; and she both prayed and wept when all was indeed

over. Among all her trials, she had one consolation — he blessed

her with his dying breath, and requested her forgiveness.

Her year of mourning was expired — perhaps the most tranquil

year of her existence. Still young, with renovated beauty, aud

a large fortune, Lady Barnett was talked of, and toasted, forbore

than when her young heart beat, and her gleesome laugh

sounded, amid the groves and hills of Castle Raymond.

Much was she tempted to revisit London : she bad become

a mark for all speculating fortune hunters, whether male or

female ; aud if her intimacy with her cousin had ever cast

u cloud over her fare, it had passed as shadows from a brilliant

landscape.

But though others ceased to remember, she had not forgotten.

I have said that Henry O'Donnell was a man of the world ; and,

as such, it will lie readily believed he did not relinquish the idea

that he might still be master of Castle Raymond, admits fair

mistress. He hud wisely withdrawn from the country on Sir

Charles's death, well knowing that Marian's delicacy would shrink

from his intruding at such a time ; and when he did return, he

managed to be introduced so as to avoid alarming her prejudices

or creating any unpleasant sensations.

It must not bo imagined that O'Dounell was what would be

considered either a bad or a heartless man : when he reasoned,

he was invariably right ; when under the influence of his passions,

fearfully wrong : his mid had become imbued with a false

philosophy, and it was convenient to be the disciple of a school

that granted much licence. He loved Marian ; but he loved her

as a woman, without caring for or comprehending her true nobleness

of soul. He had seen much of life, and the life of a soldier-prisoner

had little in it to strengthen what might have been

good. After he left London, he visited the scenes of his childhood

; and the turf-raised mound to the dead lark, and the

attention paid by the old gardener to Busca, by his lady express

command, confirmed Henry iv tho belief that she was unchanged.

She was a living instance of the romance of life lingering and

dwelling with advancing years. O'Donnell admired virtue aud

glory in the abstract, without possessing either the firmness,

which is the groundwork of the one, or the enterprise necessary

for the other. There is an undying essence in woman's love,

which, like the costly perfume, endures after the vase that contained

it is broken, and clings even to the hand of its destroyer.

How Marian had loved is already shown : it now remains only

to prove — what life proves daily, though books, often at variance

with human nature, are too prone to set forth love in the conclusion

as requited, and an end of triumph crowning a life of

Vain — that perfect happiness is as much a fable as unbroken

sunshine, aud would be as wearisome, and as destructive. He

•vho knows and orders best has willed it otherwise, and has

offered that the wickedness of some should draw forth the

virtues of others ; but those who trust in Horn in heart and spirit

will feel that all is good.

It was a clear, calm evening, aud the mistress of Castle raymond

was alone in her own halls. She had discarded the robes

>f mourning, and reclined, in jewelled state, in a room redolent

tf perfume.

Her thoughts were of a second marriage, and one upon which

she had not determined without some fears and misgivings ; but

woman's unassisted wisdom is little worth, when set against the

strength of an affection which had grown with her growth, and

outlived both time and sorrow. Her eye rested upon the wed-lingering,

which still encircled her taper finger — it appeared to

her an unhallowed badge ; she slowly removed it, and, with a

trembling band aud a blushing check, tried on another, which

she took from a small red case. The sound of a distant footstep

smote upon her ear, and, blushing still more deeply, she replaced

tho mystic bauble iv its rest, and the other emblem of her

wedded state upon her finger. As the evening deepened, and

she continued still alone, she thought upon her cousins faults ;

and what had appeared so criminal when it would have been

sinful to have loved, had dwindled into a marvellously short

catalogue of errors — failings rather — which she could hardly tell

over. Her imagination wandered to the scenes of her early and

of her present happiness ; and she scouted from her memory the

remembrance of her married life, as one would cast forth a

loathsome object from what was otherwise cheerful and smiling.

Harry's natural generosity of disposition had prompted horn to

enter into all her plans for the good of her tenantry. The village

of Castle Cloyue was now clean and cheerful ; its inhabitants

felt themselves raised iv the seale of society — and that is the

true way of ensuring an Irishman's gratitude ; the hills within

sight of Castle Raymond were covered with cattle, the property

of zealous and industrious farmers, who, if they did not manage

quite as well as their English neighbours, yet promised to be all,

within a little time, that their best friends could desire.

Marian revolved and re-revolved all her plans aud projects for

future happiness ; and if a doubt did arise as to what her former

fashionable friends might say, rather than analyze herTeeliugs,

she contented herself with the consideration, that she should not

mix with them again — that she should be far away from their

sneers and their comments— that she should be happy in her

own dear country — happy amid the unsophisticated peasantry,

who looked to her for all their comforts — happy with the chosen

of her heart, in her youth's fii-st and only affection ! Generous,

and free-hearted in action as well as thought, Marian settled

upon O'Donnell all the Raymond property. "He must be perfectly

independent of me," argued the noble creature, " to render

his happiness equal to my own." Her lover was all gratitude

and thankfulness, and remonstrated much against that of which

he secretly approved : but I must not do horn injustice ; his

cousins generosity touched bis heart more than her other

virtues — he could comprehend the one, but not the other.

They were married.

Those who truly and devotedly love, will understand me when

I say, that Marian was as happy as woman could be for some

months aster her marriage — I had almost written that she was

tumultuously happy ; but it pleased God that her health grew

feeble iv a little time, aud, though she did not suffer pain, she

could not wander about with her beloved, as in former days.

She hardly felt the privation while be was with her; but, though

invariably kind, and even affectionate, Marian had discovered —

what, had she not loved too well, she might have known before,

that upon the most important of all subjects they greatly disagreed.

She had learned to trace the wisdom and the bounty of

the Almighty in his works ; she could read " good in everything

;" she saw His glory in the firmament, His wonders in the

flood ; she had grown practically pious, from a deep sense and

knowledge that in the belief and hope, springing only from true

religion, was there refuge for the broken-hearted, or an unerring

guide through the mazes of the world. Her religion had been

the result of experience — she had see its good, and felt its

advantage ; aud while she longed for the time when her husband

would join with her in prayer and praise, she yet dreaded lest

her very efforts to make horn what she wished, might fail, and

drive horn further from the belief in which she trusted.

Another year had passed ;maud again the mistress of Castle

Raymond was seated alone in the same apartment in which wc

once saw her try on the token of a new contract. Colonel

g

O'Donnell (for money achieves rank) had been absent on business,

and his wife, more impatiently than usual, awaited his return.

As she threw open the casement windows, shaded by a rich

drapery of pink and silver, aud stepped forth upon the marble

terrace that overlooked the lawn — the beams of the harvest

moon shed a flood of light and glory upon her head ; yet her

step was somewhat feeble, and she threw her arm round one of

the pillars of the colonnade to support her in a spot where she

could hear the approaching tread of his horse's hoofs, long before

they entered the avenue of fragrant lime leading to the castle.

Suddenly, a female Sprang upon the terrace, and stood beside

the lady so silently, that Marian, unaccustomed as she was to

fear, would have called to her servants, had not the stranger, by

an energetic movement, entreated her to forbear. She looked

upon the pale, attenuated figure, enveloped iv a deep scarlet

cloak ; and as the hood, which had been drawn over the

woman's face, fell back, Marian thought she recognised the

features.

"You've forgotten me, lady, and no wonder," said the

stranger ; " I deserve that you should — and I only pray the

blessed Virgin that I wasn't myself — God break hard fortune

before every honest man's child!"

I remember you now, Mary Deane." said Marian ; " but it is

impossible for me to remember one I have been so long without

seeing — can I do anything for you, poor girl ? "

The woman fell at her feet, and, while she kept her cloak

closely clasped around her, Bobbed forth a petition " that she

wouldst turn again her entirely, and üse her worse than a dog."

She had, in truth, little reason to expect such treatment from

the mistress of Castle Raymond, who raising her from the earth,

would have led her into the room she had so recently quitted,

had not the girl refused to enter.

Sure I've made an oath never to cross hit door, and don't

ask me, lady, darling, for Im a poor unworthy sinner — God-stricken

and dying, and willing' and happy to die, if I was fit, —

though I am young, and the only child of my father — aud yet,

tc my sorrow, I've heard the whitehead ould man pray that

I'd never been born — and worse, lad r — worse nor that — I saw

horn " sand here her words came short aud broken) — " I saw horn

kneel down on his own hearth-stone, and curse me and mine,

lady ; me and mine ! — Oh ! why indeed was I born, — why indeed

was I born ! — Yet I call the God who sees into my very heart

this minute to witness for me, that, lady, darling I meant you

no wrong ; but he had the winning way with horn, and if he

could wm you, no wonder he bewildered mc."

"Of whom speak you, Mary Deane ? " inquired Marian, in a

voice of agonising emotion, dreading she knew not what or whom

" Of whom speak you ? "

Of your husband, lady — of the father of — my child."

As she answered, her head sank upon her bosom, and throwing

open the cloak that had hitherto shrouded her, discovered a

sleeping boy upon her bosom.

"'Tisalla falsehood — a fraud got up to — to — drive me mad !"

exclaimed Marian, " a base lie — Woman, how dare you slander

horn ? "

Look at horn," replied Mary Deane— holding the child forward

to where the light from a glowing lamp was streaming on

the glittering pavement. Marian did took — long and anxiously

looked — she pushed the small round yellow curls from the boys

forehead ; and as the movement fully roused horn from the deep

sweet sleep of infancy, he smiled in her face, and clasped his

little hands in admiration of some of tho rich jewels that glittered

on her dress. The smile confirmed the tale ; and taught the lady

of that noble house, that her most bitter trial was indeed arrived.

Sir Charles's gallantries she had borne with fortitude ; they had

grievously wounded her deep sense of religion and morality —

they had, moreover, hurt her woman's pride, but they had

never seared her heart — they had never entered, and lacerated,

and destroyed !

Tell — tell me one thing," she demanded of the betrayed girl,

who still cowered at her feet ; " this child was born before our

marriage ; have you been sinless since ? "

A deep and bitter groan was the only answer she received.

It was enough.

k 2

Marian would have paced the terrace, but she felt as if rooted

to the spot whereon she stood. She was iron-bound — spellbound

to the very earth. The child, still in admiration of the

brilliant jewels, crept towards her. Her first feeling was to

spurn — to thrust it from her ; in the madness of the moment

her foot was lifted to the act, but she could mt, it was his

child !

The eye of the wretched mother bad been fixed upon her

infants movements, and her sad heart beat more quickly when

she saw he was not repulsed.

What would you with me ? " inquired Marian, when she

could find utterance. " Speak and quickly."

Lady, I am dying — dying of the same decline that took my

mother away, so soon after I was born. See here." She held

forth her arms, white and fleshless ; they quivered in the moonbeams.

" I am gone, entirely," continued the unfortunate,

and so I ought to be ; for the beauty he talked about, went,

and his love went with it, and I've been almost starving' in a

strange parish ; and my father's curse, and your goodness, and

all together hanging over me like a ban ; and I couldn't die easy

till I asked yer pardon, and asked" The mother's eye,

which, still bright, gleamed like a lamp within a sepulchre,

rested on her child. The glorious creature to whom she spoke,

understood the appeal, and, immolating all common feeling,

she stooped, aud kissed the forehead of the unoffending infant ;

her silent offering ascended to the throne of the Almighty, a

record of a virtuous woman's triumph. Mary Deane knelt, as if

to pray, but she could not speak ; she could only weep, — weep

bitterly. At last she murmured —

The stamp of the Lord was always on you ; aud you'll be

good to the poor innocent baby, and forget its miserable

mother? And now, lady, darling, if I had only my father's forgiveness

; — if I could only hear horn take back the curse, I should

fie thankful ; and, may be, the Lord would forgive mc."

James Deane was the gamekeeper to whom Nelly Riley had

alluded ; and little had poor Marian thought, when interrogating

horn as to where his daughter had gone, that he had so much

cause for sorrow, aud yet kept it within his bosom, lest it might

poison his lady happiness.

I will see your father myself tomorrow, and entreat horn

for you."

God in heaven bless you for that thought ; but tomorrow,

lady ! tomorrow will be too late I I am dying now ! "

"Follow me, then," replied Marian ; "he must not refuse pardon

when I ask it."

And my child ? " Mary Deane trembled violently, as she

looked upon horn for the last time.

Leave horn here. Have I not promised ? " said Marian.

"You have, you have, lady. Och, lady dear ! forgive me; I

am a poor, miserable, wicked wretch, but och hone ! och hone I

am I not a mother 1 Sure an' I brought ye into the world, a-

hannah," she continued, apostrophising! he child, whom she held

closely to her bosom, " I brought ye into the world, a perfect and

beautiful boy ; and I exulted overdo ; and when your little lip

smiled on me, and your causey fingers twisted in my hair, —

God and the virgin forgive me I but I felt as if I could bear all

the sufferings that war ever suffered, and all the sin that ever

was sinned, for yer sake , and I thought, that though he might

change to me, be never could change to you, for want you his

own, own child ? "

"Come, come," said Marian, hoarsely — for every word the

woman Spoke was as a dagger to her heart, — " the child is safe ;

are you not satisfied with my word ? "

Ay, ay, lady ; God bless — bless you, lady, but you are not hit

mother. My heart's darling ! it isn't my eyes will watch you

again in the night ; it isn't my ear will listen for yer breathing' ;

and, may be — may be, my own a-coushla ! you'll never know

that poor Mary Deane was yen other ; and so best — so best ;

for when he turned, who knows but you might turn as well ! "

She imprinted a long, long kiss upon the child's lips, who, accustomed

to her caresses, had fallen asleep.

You will see horn again," murmured Marian.

Never ! never ! never ! " she replied, wildly ; " and now I

have looked my last ! " She suffered the long red cloak to drop

from her shoulders, and rolling the child in it, laid horn on the

marble step that skirted the entrance ; kneeling over horn, she

muttered a few short words, and then, slowly rising, she crossed

her colourless arms upon her bosom, aud said, " Now, God

willing', I am ready."

Marian removed with her own hands the sleeping infant to a

place of greater security, and, followed by Mary Dean (whose

fleshless form seemed moved and urged forward by supernatural

strength), she took her way to the gamekeeper's cottage. As they

crossed the park, the tread of Colonel O'Donnell's horses came

Suddenly upon them : both stood behind a group of sapling

oaks, as he and his servant passed ; they clung to the boughs of

the young trees for support ; but as O'Donnell rode onwards,

Mary Deane stretched forward so as to catch a glance at his

departing shadow, while his wife, who not an hour before had so

anxiously waited his return, remained erect on the spot, more

like a statue of carved marble than a thing of life, for many

minutes after the sound had ceased.

The old gamekeeper opened the door of his cottage himself to

Marian's knock, and appeared almost terrified at seeing his mistress.

His daughter had crouched behind her as she entered,

and could neither stand nor speak.

I am come, Deane," said his mistress, " to ask you to forgive

your penitent girl. James Deane, / have forgiven her. I have

taken her child into my house, and you must not refuse her, at

Birch a time as this, her father's blessing."

The old white headed man clasped his hands, and remained for

some time silent ; bis wretched child crawled to his knees, and

her long yellow hair entwined around his feet ; she dared not

look into her father's face.

Deane, Deane, I entreat — I command you to forgive her I "

reiterated the lady.

The old man looked as if he could scarcely comprehend her

words.

Father, father 1 oh, quickly, for larn dying ! " Mary Deane

at length exclaimed. He raised her to his bosom, and as he

parted the long hair that shadowed her face, her head fell upon

his shoulder, — her eyes wandered, — her lips, white and livid,

separated from over her teeth, — her fingers moved convulsively,

and he had just time to say, " God bless you, darling Mary! "

when she again sank upon the earthen floor ; — her spirit

seemed indeed departed, and Marian, with a true feeling of

humanity, knelt to support her head. The dying creature

opened her eyes, and fixing their glare upon the lady face, three

or four times repeated, " Not cursed, not cursed— my boy — my

child " — and expired.

Such a sad event as this elevated Marian's nature to the

highest point ; always warm aud enthusiastic, she felt keenly, and

acted with promptness and decision — the father, who, while his

daughter lived, imagined he had altogether lost her from his

heart — now gave way to the agony of his feelings, and wept over

the silent lay — still beautiful in the form of his child. He sate

for a long time in the same spot — folding back her hair from

features that were rapidly becoming cold and hard to his touch

and weeping reproaches to himself for every harsh word

Spoken in reproof of her crime — " My child ! " he would exclaim

— "I forgot your youth — you were so young — not twenty

yet — and so innocent, aud I left you to yourself, as if you had

the wisdom of age — I was proud of you — and your praise,

though I did not seem to hear it — was pleasant in my ears. So

like her mother as sho is — if she had lived I would have cared

for her — I only kept her off to make her penitent — God knows

that was all — I thought it right and honest — she was the child

of honest parents — both — honest — My young aud pleasant child

the does would not hide their fawns from her — and the robins

would bring her their young — that she might feed them. I

was too proud of her" — old Deane seemed quite unconscious of

Marian's presence ; it was as though he had sight but for no

object — and that object his dead child — Marian saw — and felt —

and knew that this was all her husband's work— and yet neither

that, nor the knowledge of her own wrongs — roused her indignation

to unwomanly or matronly wrath.

That same night, Marian 0 Cornell conducted her husband to

a quiet chamber, not very distant from her own ; and drawing

the curtains of a small bed, showed horn his sleeping child. She

stood for a moment so as to cast the full light of tho candle

upon his beautiful face, and then stooping down, she calmly

kissed his forehead.

"The gamekeeper's daughter died, not three hours since,

Henry, and I promised her to watch over your child. You have

not known me, I think, as I deserved : may God forgive you for

the poor heart you have broken, and the heart " — she turned

proudly away, for tears were coming, and she would not let horn

see them fall.

What followed ? No reproaches — no scenes — no storms. She

knew aud felt that she was still his wife, and that no matter how

he performed his duty, she must not swerve from her's. Those

who knew her best saw, indeed, that her eye grew dim, her step

languid, aud noted that her voice, ever sweetly musical, had

grown like the sighing of a wounded bird ; but she never told

her feelings ; she buried them within her bosom : and, aster a

few years, they produced as their fruitage — death. The iron

had entered her soul, and not all the efforts made by a husband,

who at last became convinced of her inestimable worth, could

withdraw it Could she have loved horn less, her sufferings

might have been mitigated ; but, though conscious of his faults,

the affection of her childhood remained pure, spotless, and devoted

to the lr.Bt ; aud all that could be said was, what is said

every day of many a devoted woman, " How grievous was the

sacrifice!" Yet how great was her example ! how glorious her

triumph ! Long before her death, she was blessed by the conviction

that at last O'Donnell trusted as fully, as perfectly as

herself, to his Redeemer's merits. The delightful certainty of

meeting horn, a holy and purified spirit, " where sorrow and

sighing shall be no more," was a bliss she would not have exchanged

for worlds ; the pomps and pageantries of life were

poor and worthless compared to her spiritual glory ; and she

left this, only to be perfected in another, world. Her motto had

been " Deeds, not words." Her grateful feeling to the Most

High was proved by acts of love, of forbearance, and of charity

to her fellow-beings ; and while the hearts of many will wonder

at her forbearance, I feel inclined to assure those who are thus

tried — and, alas ! I grieve to know that many are bo situated —

that, hard as it may appear, they can only fulfil their duty to

heaven and earth by — " Doing likewise."

THE FORCED BLOOMS.

J'ART THE FIRST.

££j|Kft3 MORE delightful village than East-court it would be

?|JhHh| difficult to picture ; its fine old manor-house, combine

m S tMe architecture of half-a-dozen reigns, bound

* together by ivy, the growth of at least two centuries ;

its straggling grotesque houses, with high gables and tall

chimneys, fenced along the road by broad yellow hedges, cut

here and there into various patterns — where small birds had

nested time out of mid.

Yes; East-court was a pleasant village. There was in the

centre of a sort of common green, a pond, large enough to entitle

it to the dignity of being termed "a lake:" but the people of

East-court having been originally an unambitious race, were

satisfied that the pond should be simply called a pond — and a

beautiful pond it was. Two noble willows extended their

branches nearly to the waters midst, and a clump of mingled

holly, and tapering feathery birch, was so beautiful in its growth

and colour, that an artist once came ten miles to sketch it; a

fact which the aged landlord of the " Three Bee-Hives" repeated

several times each day of his life, forgetting altogether, good old

soul! that every one in East-court was aware of a circumstance

so flattering to the beauty of their long-loved home. The cottages

at East-court were so disposed as to add to the effect of

the larger dwellings — pretty white and brown erections they were

the walls as white as lime and labour could make them, aud

the dark-brown thatch nearly covered by those sweet and beautiful

climbers which belong of right to the cottage homes of

England.

On the very summit of an abrupt conical hill, that sprung

up suddenly at the back of the manor-house, was a windmill,

with wide extended arms and snow-white sails; and at the

foot of the hill on the other side, guarded by some venerable

trees, stood East-court church with the adjoining parsonage-house.

There were but few shops at East-court, for the village

was only three miles from the county town. But the very

shops partook of the picturesque character of this truly English

hamlet; and many declared there never was so quiet, so venerable,

and yet, withal, so cheerful a village as East-court, or, as

the very old people call it, " East-court o' the Hill."

It might well be a cheerful village ; the gentleman who resided

in the manor-house was a magistrate, and landlord of every

adjacent dwelling. He was, in all acts of love and charity, a

second Sir Roger de Coverley ; and had a brother, a physician,

who had one wing of the old building fitted up as a surgery and

dispensary ; but he never received fee for advice or payment for

medicine, from any human being; seeling-at least so it would

appear, from the alacrity with which he dispensed both — that

he was under particular obligation to all who took his prescriptions,

and was never happy after a baby was born iv the parish

until it was vaccinated. It was rare, indeed, to meet with such

men as the squire and his good brother. Well might East-court

be the very paradise of English villages. I have said nothing of

the rector ; but certainly, unless he had carefully laboured in,

aud pruned aud trimmed, his vineyard, the old would not have

descended to their graves with such hope and humility, nor

would the young have lived together in such peace and goodwill.

For the rest, a dancing, a music, and a species of drawing,

master, who combined drawing and writing, made each the

round of the neighbourhood once a-week ; thus the simpleminded

people imagined that the means of " a polite education"

were safely secured to their children ; while the village school

was under the immediate rule of the parish-clerk and his wife,

and endowed in every way by the lord of the manor, so that the

peasant class were considered well provided for as to sources of

information.

I could say a great deal more in favour of Eastcourt and

its inhabitants as they were about fifteen years ago, but

perhaps have stated enough to create an interest for there, and

may be permitted to pass on to the day on which a story

connected with the village may be considered to open.

A new family, a rich and respectable family, did you say,

Isaac, wanting the Deerstone house, where Mr. Rowley died ? "

inquired Squire Rüssel of East-court, of his land-steward, Isaac

Heywood.

Yes, your honour," replied Isaac, bowing ; " a lady and

gentleman, Mr. and Mrs. Diggons by name, three young masters,

two young misses (doll-looking young things), seven servants, a

tutor, and a governess."

Diggons," repeated the squire, who had a little leaning

towards aristocratic names ; " Diggons ; it is not au old name,

Isaac, though it may belong to respectable people."

"Certainly, sir; he's a fine gentleman, and wears chains and

rings; a Sue gentleman, and has (his man says) a great library,

for his lady is very clever; indeed, his man says, they are an

extraordinary clever family."

Wc never, I think, had a family of that description, Isaac,

iv the village," answered Mr. Rüssel, after a pause. " I cannot

say I like people who appear more clever than their neighbours.

However, this is perhaps a prejudice, and wc should guard

against prejudices. Wc will look into the references."

The references were looked into, and Mr. Diggons was found

an eligible tenant for Deerstone. The arrival of the "clever

family" occasioned more than the ordinary commotion, for they

brought with them various things that the good people of the

village had only heard of — chemical apparatus, electrifying

machines, various astronomical instruments; in short, some of

the older and simpler people regarded Mr. Diggons very much

iv the light of a necromancer, and the small, pale, acute-faced

tutor as his familiar — something or other which they did not

like to name.

When every thing was settled, aud every one got used to

every thing, Mr. Rüssel and his brother, Mr. Graham Rüssel,

agreed that the Diggonses were a good sort of people, although

eaten up by a desire to be celebrated ; leaving the town where

they were "nobodies" to reside iii the country, where they hoped

to bo " somebodies;" labouring to acquire conversable knowledge

of abstruse sciences; not being particular who approved, so long

as they received approbation, unable to persevere to the extent

of being informed, and yet having a smattering of every thing.

Bating this eager thirsting after admiration — not after science

for its own noble sake, but for the gaping admiration of the

many — the family were kindly, cheerful, and hospitable ; not

selfish, either, in their pursuits, but willing to inform others.

Three or four self-thinking inhabitants of East-court agreed with

Mr. Rüssel and his brother in their rational estimate of the new

family; but the many opened wide their mouths, and gave their

most sweet voices " in applause. The Diggonses were pronounced

to be the most "talented people in England!" Science

has many triflers in her train ; and certainly among them she

numbered every member of the Diggons family; from Mr

Diggons, who trifled with all the sciences, down to pretty little

pule Elizabeth, who sighed and smiled over a miniature galvanic

battery.

Ou the left-hand side of the village, commanding a view of

the green, the huge pond, and the picturesque cottages beyond,

was a pretty cheerful-looking house ; " happy," you would have

called it, for inanimate thing 3 can be so placed, so garnished, as

to look happy. The draperies within the windows were of white

muslin trimmed with blue silk lace and fringe ; and the trellis-work

outside was almost concealed by the wreaths of flowers

that owed their luxuriance and beauty to much care and a warm

southern aspect. There was an ample bow window, with several

long narrow ones, which seemed playing hide and seek among

the roses and myrtles that were always in blow ; and the

chimneys were tall and square, and the gables very high. There

was also a conservatory, and you could see that, besides plants,

it contained several birds of splendid plumage. Iv short, the

outward appearance of the dwelling combined so much that was

tasteful and expensive, the looker-on was assured there were

both wealth and taste within — the latter keeping the former in

subjection.

This house had the quaint name of East-interest — why I know

not ; yet no one at East-court seemed to think it strange. It was

almost as large, and of the same date as the manor-house, and

hid been, time out of mid, inhabited by the same family,

once as numerous as honourable, but now dwindled down to a

widow and two children — a boy and girl. The lady was still

lovely ; her children were beautiful ; the boy was tall, fair, and

handsome, but his movements partook of the irregularity and

languor of ill, or at least weakly health ; the girl was also fair and

delicate, but with an energy and decision of character marking

every movement, that deceived even her mother as to her

bodily strength. When the " clever family " came to reside at

Deerstone, Alfred Erris was nearly seven, and Lucy between

eight and nine ; and as the two children clung together, gazing

at the evolutions of a good-natured macaw, who invariably exercised

himself to amuse them, Mrs. Diggons might almost be

excused, when returning Mrs. Erris's visit, for the encomiums

she injudiciously passed on their beauty.

Well, Mrs. Erris, you may certainly be proud of their

beauty," she exclaimed ; " I never saw two such darlings — loves

quite. I should so like my son Robert to paint them ;he does

such charming things. There is no doubt but, if he chose, he

could be an R.A. in three months."

Alfred draws a little," said Mrs. Erris.

A little ! " repeated Mrs. Diggons. "My dear lady, at his

age, Robert copied the cartoons ; but I do not wonder at your

spoiling such angels. I assure you I had plenty of struggles

with myself crc I could make my boys and girls work. I lost

the flower of the flock about five years ago — died, sweet child, in

six days, of brain fever ! A wonderful memory he had, poor

darling ! could repeat poetry for two hours by my watch, when

only eight years old." It never occurred to Mi-s. Erris that this

had killed horn ; but she said that though Alfred could not do

that, he, too, had an excellent memory.

Which," said the lady, "you must work. Memory of all

things, must be cultivated ; but I do not wonder at your spoiling

such an angel."

Mrs. Erris assured her she did not "spoil" horn, and in proof

thereof, asserted that he could repeat a great number of Watts'

hymns.

"Watts' hymns ! " answered Mrs. Diggons, with an irreverent

sneer at the purest child poetry of any language, living or dead ;

such a creature as that should be able to repeat orations from

Shakspeare and Milton."

"In time," said Mrs. Erris, making a secret resolve that he

should do so immediately, and beginning to think she had really

neglected his education.

"Is he fond of the languages ? " continued the lady.

"He has commenced Latin, and learned French and English

together orally, I may say," replied the abashed mother.

Only commenced Latin ! " exclaimed Mrs. Diggons in a

compassionate tone. " Well, to be sure, be will never want it,

as they say ; but I should have an ambition to see such a noble

creature as that ' far on ' in everything ; but, perhaps, if he is

not much advanced in languages, he is 'well up' in the

sciences."

Mrs. Erris was a timid gentle woman, very anxious for her

children, and fearful lest they should grow to think she had not

done her duty.

Indeed," she replied blushing, " he hardly knows the meaning

of the word. His taste leads horn to study ; but my good

friend, Doctor Graham Rüssel, says his brain is already too large,

and insists so much on air and exercise, and out-door amusements,

that my dear boy is backward, rather in absolute study ;

not that he is ignorant ; he knows the names of all the trees

and flowers, the "

"Botanical names?" mildly suggested Mrs. Diggons.

No ; the homely English names and their uses," replied the

widow ; "remember, he is only seven years old."

Well, well, ejaculated the lady ; I can perfectly understand

Dr. Russell prejudice ; he has arrived at that time of life when

men look at improvements suspiciously, because they are not of

their time. He is an old man ; and if I had minded our family

physician even in poor Elizabeth's case, ma'am, she'd have been

a disgrace to me ; that unhappy curve in her spine, he declared

arose from sitting so closely to the harp, and she was obliged to

recline ; but during the three years she laid upon a slightly inclined

plane, she never missed a single lesson, nor did I yield her

any indulgence — never suffered her to have an amusing book.

'No,' I said to the physician; 'since Bhe cannot go on with the

harp, she shall be remarkable at something else ;' that was my

ambition — to have remarkable children. Her nature was soft

and gentle, but wc hardened it with mathematics aud algebra."

This, at the moment, startled Mrs. Erris. She thought of the

deformed girl, and her pale, anxious, thoughtful face, from which

every ray of joy seemed banished. She had struck her, at first,

as being the only one of this "clever family" who was not

superficial. Such had been her first impression. But Mrs.

Diggons'.} manner was imposing in more senses than one; and*

the timid, retiring mother, who had really done her duty by not

overtasking, and yet sufficiently exercising, the infant intellect

of her children, felt bitter self-reproach while her new neighbour

enumerated the acquirements of her offspring, without calling to

mid that one of there had fallen a victim to brain fever, while

another was deformed for life.

.Alfred and Lucy Erris were invited to spend a day with the

family at Deerstone; and— instead of the canter on the pony,

the race on the upland lawn, the hoop and merry play, which are

the healthy relaxations of healthful children, and which they had

expected with an interest that was a pleasure in itself — there

was a grand show-off of science, a parade of hard names, a display

of precocious understanding, or rather its distorted shadow,

which made Alfred and Lucy uncomfortable, and Alfred for the

first time in bis life thoughtful of display, and straining after

effect which rendered horn unnatural. Mrs. Erris, who died

there, felt thoroughly ashamed of her children. One young

Diggons painted, another excelled in languages, another made

crude poetry, which, though correct in numbers, was without

idea ; aud as to the " ologies," bard words, and parroted sentences,

there was no end of ther n! Poor Mrs Erris wondered

why she had suffered her beautiful boy — who looked like a

Grecian statue amid plaster and rough stone images — to display

his ignorance, aud internally resolved to adopt Mr. Diggons's plan,

and abridge his hours of play and exercise, that he might

make the most of time " — a duty doubtless ; but let the how

to make the most of this gold from God be well considered,

before the earnest and most injurious tf all vain-glories, that of

making "show-children," is attempted.

In accordance with her determination, Mrs. Erris dismissed

her son's tutor (whom Mr. Diggers bad pronounced " merely a

classic") for one who was "classical and scientific" — a hard stern

man, with an iron constitution ; and directed Lucy's governess

to " keep her at work " under the tutor's direction. There

was no difficulty in making these children Study — no difficulty

in getting them to rise in the morning; their docile and

intelligent minds were open to receive, and fertile to produce.

In natural capabilities, they were far superior to their

L

showy neighbours ; and their moral and thinking qualities

were far beyond those of Mr. Diggons's offspring. Alfred was

indeed a boy of the noblest qualities, entering into the spirit of

history, comprehending and analysing, idealising, too, until his

dry, hot hand, flushed check, and throbbing brow, would have

warned any teacher of feeling and observation that it was time

to lay by the book and the pen, aud away into the bright fields,

and among the joy-creating and health-giving beauties of nature.

Aud yet this tutor loved the boy ; be delighted in horn, because

he delighted in learning, and because he felt no express fatigue

in poring over the world of knowledge, which delighted horn more

and moro every day. He knew that he was the only son of

an ancient house, and that much depended on horn ; and he

thought how fine it would be to see horn carry the highest honours

at Oxford — to feel that he would be more distinguished by his

talents aud his learning than by the ordinary position he would

hold in society by virtue of family and wealth.

Lucy was with her brother in all his tasks, timing down her

wildness of spirit to assist his labours,' and stimulating his exertions,

which were anything but childish. The " clever family "

were a fair example of the fashion and display of information —

they imitated rather than laboured. This was particularly the

case with the healthier portion, who, like their parents, were

superficial ; but Alfred and Lucy had hearts, feelings, and intellect

of the finest texture, an intense love of study, an appreciation

of the beautiful, a desire to excel, which, being once

awakened, never again slept. They were precisely the children

whose minds should have been strengthened rather than taxed,

aud whoso bodies should have been invigorated by air, exercise,

and much rest.

Mrs. Erris, astonished at their progress, which she was vain

enough to exhibit to the Diggonses, partly from gratitude

that they had roused her to urge forward her children, was bo

delighted at the rapidity with which Alfred mastered every

difficulty, that she desired to make Dr. Rüssel confess she

was right and he was wrong as to the management of her son

especially. Since the commencement of her new system, she bad

had with horn but one conversation on the subject, and that had

certainly left a painful impression on both their minds. She

framed, however, some trifling excuse for calling at the manor-house;

and after a brief interview with the squire, who had been

so much annoyed at her obliging her son to forego his pony

exercise to devote more time to study, that ho was cold and even

stately to the widow of one he had loved like his own child, she

sought the doctor in his favourite conservatory.

The doctor was cold enough also, but no of his peculiarities

was his being unable to persevere in anything like coldness

towards a lady.

I wanted you to dine with me tomorrow, my good friend,"

she said ; " indeed, I wished our lord of the manor to come also,

but he has received me so strangely, that I had not courage to

ask him."

"Wc are two old-fashioned old men, my dear Mrs. Erris,"

replied the doctor ; ■' but somehow you have got uew-fangled of

late, and wc should not be able to avoid finding fault — one of the

bad habits common to old friends; so that, perhaps, under these

circumstances, it is better for us to stay away."

I know what you mean," answered Mrs. Erris, gently ; " you

allude to Alfred and Lucy. I want you to come and judge for

yourself ; I want you to see how they are improved : that, in

fact, is all I desire. I want you to examine the children of your

old friend, and I think you will be satisfied that I have done

my duty."

I am quite satisfied you have intended to do your duty, my

dear lady — quite satisfied of that; aud if it had not been for the

stimulus given to your material vanity by the arrival of this

clever family,' I am certain you would have continued blessing

and being blessed — not overtasking, but permitting your children's

minds, as well as their bodies, to strengthen while they

grow. But wc shall not agree upon the matter, my dear Mrs.

Erris ; bo, perhaps, wc had better not talk of it — wc shall certainly

not agree upon the subject."

You were the friend my poor husband valued most on

earth," said Mrs. Erris, after a pause ; " and I cannot bear that

l 2

you should labour under any false impression. I assure you

neither Lucy nor Alfred are ever driven to their tasks."

So much tho worse for children of their rapid yet delicate

natures. If they had a disinclination to study, it would prove

that their minds were not of a quality to injure their bodies;

but the zeal for study requires to be regulated."

And Mr. Salon does regulate it," said the mother.

"By increasing it," replied the doctor. " The structure of

these precocious minds is easily disorganised. It has always

seemed to me as extraordinary as unjust, that parents and

teachers bestow double the pains upon what are termed clever

children than they do upon those who are dull of comprehension

; whereas the heavier minds could be wrought upon with

far greater safety, and in nine cases out of ten would produce, if

not a richer, a more abundant fruitage. "

But," urged Mrs. Erris, '' you are arguing as if my children

were suffering from too much mental exertion. I assure you

the contrary is the case. Mrs. Diggons said she never saw

anything in her children like the energy with which my children

apply."

1 daresay she did not," replied the doctor. "Iv the first

place, your tutor imparts knowledge, not its semblance ; and in

the next, your children have really a panting aster information,

a gasping for the beautiful and the ideal — a naturally poetic

temperament, which destroys ten for the one it crowns. I remember

Alfred restless in his cradle, and weeping at melancholy

music ; and as to Lucy, the difficulty with her was always to

keep her tranquil. You have applied excitement where you

should, in my humble opinion, have removed it"

But would you have had them grow up in ignorance ? "

That is so like a woman," said the old bachelor, smiling

sadly. " The children were doing well — learning as much as at

their age they ought to learn without forcing ; that is all that

children should do."

But some learn more quickly than others, my dear sir."

"So they do ; some require keeping back, others bringing

forward ; but, with both, time is the only safe developer and

strengthened. I never knew an instance where a precocious child

was not the better for being kept back. It is positively offensive

to come in contact with those forced children. Well, my dear

lady," he added, ashamed of his pettishness, " I have, at least, to

thank you for your patience ; you have listened to me, and

I thank you. I will go, if you please, to morrow, if it were only

to prove how I value your forbearance; but just look at our

flowers, and this new forcing-house, which, I think, you have not

seen, and which our gardener would have, because tho clever

family have one "

Mrs. Erris looked at the flowers. On leaving the conservatory

for the forcing-house, they found the gardener busied with some

plants that hud been placed upon a stand ; among them was

a white moss-rose, its green leaves fading : the buds, through

whose soft moss the faint streak of light was more or less

visible, hung their heads, from their feeble and seemingly

twisted stems.

It won't do, Tom — all your care won't do now," said Dr.

Rüssel to the gardener : " if you had been content to urge, not

force the plant, it might have lived and flourished. Now it is

gone — gone for ever."

It was so beautiful, sir," said the man ; " I never saw anything

more beautiful. I didn't like to be outdone iv early

flowering by Mr. Diggons'B gardener, and got more heat on ; and

Im sorry to say this is not the first plant that has served me so —

the blossoms have dropped off many ; so that, after all my care,

and though willing to sacrifice the plant for one good flowering, it

wont always give that, but die away — right away."

The rose would have been healthy enough in the conservatory,

I suppose," said the doctor.

Bless you, sir ! it would have lived long enough to make

a timber tree, if I wanted it ; but such fierce forcing cuts them

off even before they blossom. It's a principle iv nature, sir; my

old governor never would have anything forced beyond nature.

Thomas,' he used to say to mc, ' let us help nature ; let us assist

the old gentlewoman as well as wc can — she deserves it of us ;

and it is our duty, as well as our interest, to keep friends with

her; for there's one thing certain, she won't stand no nonsense.

He was a plain-spoken Scotchman, sir ; but, like all of his

country, he had a great acquaintance with Nature."

The doctor made no further observation ; but a glance at Mrs.

Erris showed horn that her face was bathed in tears.

PART THE SECOND,

J^aJs^SHREE years had elapsed since the master of 

ifJ'W court manor let Deerstone house to the " clever

*|i$3H» family ; " and he had more than once hinted to his

*s*m.7£!-4Ya con g(j en tial servant. Isaac Heywood, his belief that

he did not think a pair of lawyers could have proved more

injurious than its inhabitants to the repose of the neighbourhood

; for, without improving, they had thoroughly unsettled,

the course of instruction. As Dr. Rüssel observed, "they

had inoculated the whole country with a mental nettle-rash."



Mr. Diggons's daughter Elizabeth, who had so long struggled

with, or rather submitted to, the spinal affection, which her

mother declared should never interfere with her education,

died eighteen months after their residence at Deerstone. Yet

did not this young woman's fate act as a warning to Mrs.

Erris.

Alfred had become one of those extraordinary boys who dazzle

yet satisfy — a creature so bright, so glorious, in noting whom,

you instinctively pray that a life may be spared to those who live

upon its continuance. All observed, except his mother and her

new friends, that be outgrew his strength ; his eyes beamed with

a deep yet brilliant intelligence ; they were eyes that flashed and

burned ; and the delicate tint upon his check occasionally flushed

into a concentrated crimson spot. It is true be took exercise. Ho

would spring upon a beautiful little Arabian horse that had

succeeded his pony, aud away ; using more violent exertion in

one hour than he ought to have done in four ; and then return

over-fatigued, to persuade himself and his mother that "exercise

was not good for him."

Fortune smiled on this favourite of nature. A baronetcy,

held by a distant branch of the family, became his by inheritance

: aud a large amount in money and estate came with it.

Most exceeding joy followed. Alfred was now the lust of his

race — the very last male of the family who bore the name of

Erris — and those who looked upon horn, aud those who more

particularly knew horn, thought all that was high and glorious

centred in him. Some time after the new had spread, and when

the fever of congratulations and arrangements had somewhat

subsided, Lucy and her brother were together iv a little temple,

called especially " their own." Alfred was fourteen, unusually

tall, and formed for his age ; and Lucy might have passed for

younger than she was, except that she had quite tamed down

her wild spirit, aud sometimes looked more thoughtful than

girls who have numbered many more than her years. They

were seated side by side, reading from the same book silently.

There was this difference in their way of reading : when Alfred

mot with anything that particularly struck horn, his check reddened,

his eye dilated, triumphed, I might say, in the glory of

the writer, aud he would silently point it out to Lucy. She, on

the contrary, read aloud to horn whatever pleased her, and did

not seem to enjoy anything unless he enjoyed it with her.

He had the same feeling towards her, though, as I have said,

it was differently expressed, and would lay his finger on the

page, and their eyes would mcct — his full of light, hers hardly

venturing au expression of their own, until she had scanned his.

Sometimes he could not bear even the whisper of her silver

voice ; he seemed to think that sound disturbs feeling, and that

it is only tho eye which should drink iv the written words of

mighty men ; and then, without another word, she would

remain hushed, rewarded by a smile or a pressure of her brothers

baud for her desire to give horn pleasure, by sympathising in his

delights — the greatest pleasure youth knows. The attachment

of these two young creatures was perfect. He was full of

dreams of ambition - ambition of the most lofty yet generous

character. The youth toyed exceedingly in his new position,

but he toyed still more in what was far beyond his years— in

philosophy, in poetry, which he delighted iv translating from

one language to another, and in all things abstruse as well as

beautiful. His disposition was sweet and generous ; and when

an irritability, which had increased of late so as to give even his

mother much concern, caused horn to say or do anything that

was painful or unjust to the humblest servant, he apologised at

once with so much warmth and regret, as to wm affection even

by his very fault. Like those beautiful flowers which, born of

the sun, die by the sun, bis very soul opened to the heat and

fever of the light of knowledge, aud tho more expanded the

flower became, the nearer it approached its end. Every oue saw

this now, except those whom it most concerned. The occasional

fits of lassitude which succeeded much mental or bodily exertion,

his mother attributed to his overgrowth, not to any other cause

to be cured by soups and jellies, and the old-fashioned tonic of

bark and port-wine," which Mrs. Diggons prevailed upon her

to exchange for claret. His tutor felt towards this wondrous

boy as a skilful mechanist would towards an automaton, upon

the construction of which he had expended an existence. Lucy

was certainly the only one who felt that the youth was not well ;

but she never thought of horn and death together. There had

been much talk of sending horn to Oxford with his tutor, and

even that separation his devoted sister could not bear to think

of. Before those children had been given up to such intense

study, Lucy had laid in a greater store of strength than her

brother, consequently she had not suffered so severely. Her

anxiety for horn wore her more than her studies, though much

that he learned she learned with horn ; still, particularly during

the last fifteen months, she had ceased to be the object of even

divided attention. Mrs. Erris's whole soul seemed wound up iv

the young baronet. If he had been wild, and wilful, and careless

of his studies, he might most likely not have continued so ;

for he was certain of being distinguished ; and that was too

surely her ambition. But though she ceased to urge forward,

she had not endeavoured to hold back, and the influence of the

"clever family" was undiminished.

Close the book, dearest brother," said Lucy, as she wiped

bis damp brow with her handkerchief. "Do close it ; the sun

has set, aud you came from the library for relaxation." A

gesture of impatience was his answer, and she continued by his

side, now smiling to his smile, and sometimes watching the glorious

hues of the clouds — the good night of the sun to his

attendant vapours.

Alfred closed his book with a heavy sigh ; and leaning back

on his sister's shoulder, so that he looked up into her shee, he

exclaimed, " There, Lucy ! I have done, at least until the lamps

are lit in the study. Shall wc walk now? I ought to have

thought of your walk before, you who have been working with

me all day ; and girls cannot work like men ! "

Lucy smiled. " Well, boys, then," added her brother, understanding

the smile. " Boys, if you call me so. Boy as I am,

Mr. Salon says I shall do myself credit at Oxford ; I will not lie

a mere bookworm there either, dear Lucy. I hope to be a

statesman, one who will govern the future. I must, as my dear

mother says, for the honour of But, oh dear, there is that

pain iv my side again, as if tho very idea of anything but books

brought it there." They Stood up.

'ris it better now, Alfred?" inquired Lucy, gazing earnestly

into her brothers face ; " is it, dearest ? "

Ives — no," answered tho boy. " Let us walk." In another

moment they were on the terrace.

What a beautiful evening is Hub, dear Lucy ; and what a

glorious world to live in ; with power, and wealth, and rank, all

handmaids to do my bidding ! You know wc are to build the

alms-bouses down there ; they are to lie yours, Lucy ; and I

think I shall found a college, only I wish the great estate was not

bo far from East-interest, I love this place so dearly. Ay ! there

are the stars coming out one by one. When I arn of age I will

build an observatory on the top of the hill."

What ! the squire's hill ? " said bis sister.

Ah, ah, I forgot that ! Do you know, Lucy, that all this new

wealth so bewilders me, that I feel ns if everything I looked on

must be mine ; and, oh ! if it were, would I not make a happy,

happy world ? Now, dear Lucy, while I think of it, do go and

ask old Charles to carry the telescope to the hill-top ; there is

hardly a cloud to hide a single star, and wc will spend a couple

of delightful hours in computing transits and distances." Away

flew Lucy ; but crc sho had gone a dozen yards, she paused and

turned back.

You are unkind, Lucy," answered the impatient boy. " You

know that those stars are to mo worlds of delight. Well, I will

call Charles myself" This his sister would not permit, and ina

few minutes sho returned with his cloak on her arm. As if

to atone for his little pettishness, he put on the cloak immediately

; and, leaving tho garden by a wicket-gate, they crossed

the road, and ascended the hill by one of those winding paths

which they had often traversed when very young. The servants

preceded them ; and, accustomed as they were to the grace aud

beaut' of these two children, who had grown up under their

eyes, Charles, the old white-headed butler, could uot avoid turn

mg back frequently to look at them, as they wound up the hill,

arm twined in arm ; Lucy, like the spirit of a zephyr, so slight

and wand-like, round which the soft muslin drapery floated like

a cloud, yet still able to support her brother, upon whose fair

brow the cool moonbeams glistened as upon an alabaster orb.

He's like his father," said the old man ; " like what he was,

James, — not in life, but ou his death-bed : just so his forehead

shone in the lamp-light, when he'd try to read."

It's seven years before hell be of age," answered the groom,

who was almost as old as the butler ; " but hell gain strength :

horse exercise is the thing for him."

And claret," added the butler, laying down the heavy stand

of the telescope to rest a little.

Well, both : but he has a fine spirit, our young master ; see

now, when he looks down upon the valley, how nobly he turns

his head 1 Sir Alfred Erris, baronet, that will sound well when

he stands for the county."

Ay, very grand," replied Charles ; " there is a deal in a grand

sound." .end without further converse, the pair gained the plain

on the top of the hill where the telescope was to be placed.

The telescope was fixed where Alfred desired; the old servants

had mastered the rising ground, and made all ready for those

they so dearly loved ; and yet the youth and maiden, in the very

Bpriug and bound of life, had not reached the mossy platform.

Dear me, Sir Alfred," said the old coachman, " you are quite

out of breath ; lean on me, sir."

It is all the fault of this cloak that Lucy would make me

wear," exclaimed the boy, fastening it from his gasping throat,

and dashing it down ; then he rushed upwards, and sprang upon

the mount His triumph was short-lived : before they could say

be stood there a moment, he fell flat upon the sward. It was

almost as light as day, so clear was the sky, so bright the stars,

and the moon shedding its clear white light over all the country.

Lucy knelt, supporting his head on her bosom, and calling on

horn who heard her not : blood gushed freely from a wound in

his temple, which a sharp pebble had inflicted. In their desire

for assistance, both the old servants rushed down the hill, leaving

the sister alone with her brother ; he soon became conscious of

her presence, complaining that he could hardly see, and that his

head " turned round."

About seven hours aster this accident, which agitated the

whole of East-court, Dr. Rüssel retired from the bedside of tho

boy upon whom so many hopes rested, and for whom so many

prayers were offered ; for, independent of the rich inheritance of

blessings which descends from noble and righteous ancestry,

Alfred was loved and honoured by all who came within the

influence of his smile and the bounty of his generous hand. The

good old doctor did not leave his favourite until the arrival of

two eminent physicians told horn it was time to do so. It was

determined that they should all meet in the morning ; and twilight

grey twilight was already spreading over the horizon, yet

still the kind old man lingered in his study. He was writing,

when a tap at the window, which opened on the lawn, arrested

his attention ; he unfastened it, and there was Lucy.

Mamma would have me go to bed," she said, " but I could

not ; she will not rest herself, yet she has sent me from him. I

thought you could not sleep when Alfred was so ill, and I flew

across the lawn, and came to you, dear friend, for truth, if not

for consolation. Is he very ill? Will be be better soon ? Will he,

my brother, will he soon recover? You turn away your head;

there are tears upon your check ; I see, I understand all that."

And she stood before the old man, whose very heart shook within

horn, like a statue struck dumb by his agonizing silence.

At last he succeeded in placing her in a chair ; and having

conquered his own emotion, by speaking to her of her brother,

indeed a violent burst of tears. He mentioned Alfred youth,

change of sceuo, mild air, and talked of care and a total freedom

from study, of rest, of there being decidedly no immediate

danger. The former words fell from his lips unnoticed ; but the

saving from apprehension of immediate danger was what effectually

recalled Lucy to herself. She fell upon her knees, and

blessed her venerable friend with a burst of grateful feeling.

She then became more calm, clinging to the assurance that there

was "no present danger," as if there were a world of hope

beyond it : and so there was to her. The dread of losing her

brother at the time was so appalling, that its terror being

removed, the hope of her young heart resumed its pulsations;

and the calmness having passed away, she alarmed Dr. Rüssel by

the energy aud wi'.dncss of her manner. " How foolish wc have

been to fever ourselves so," she exclaimed, talking rapidly. "No

immediate danger ! Oh, how I rejoice I came ! It was only that

which I feared ; it is such a fearful thing to see life stopped at

once. But I knew that could not be. Doctor, when he was

bounding by my side, and then fell flat upon the gross, and

I could not feel his heart beat, I thought, when I kissed his lips,

there was no breath. Oh, how the heavens whirled round while

I was alone with horn on the hill ! But there is no immediate

danger; and wc shall only want time, with God's blessing, doctor,

to strengthen him. How wc will watch horn, and pray for horn,

and cradle horn in luxuries — create an atmosphere for horn to

live in. Now do I rejoice more than ever at his new station

and wealth ; for, you know, no matter what it is, he can command

all."

All but the will of Heaven," observed the old doctor ; for

he feared, from Lucy's flashing eyes and burning cheeks, which

seemed to scorch up the tears she had shed, that her reason

reeled. " All but the will of Heaven ! " This short sentence

supplied Lucy with a new and painful thought. " Tell me," she

said eagerly, "did you ever know such as he is— mind, such at

he is — struck down before the fulfilment of any of the glorious

promises of bis youth ?"

The doctor paused : he knew that in his life he had never seen

a south who would bear comparison with Alfred Erris, and so he

told her "be had not." This seemed to afford her great consolation

; and, arguing as do untutored spirits that have not been

tempered by sorrow, she felt assured, at least for a time, that

God would spare him.

One of the physicians, a man of such standing in his profession

that he was able to tell the truth without incurring the danger

of losing his practice, said, in reply to Mrs. Erris's inquiries,

The illness under which } - our son is now suffering may be called

what wc please, but it has originated in over-mental excitement —

the brain has been over-worked, over-stimulated."

The poor lady shuddered. " But it is not too late ! " she exclaimed,

eagerly ; " oh, in mercy, do not say it is too late ! "

I hope it is not," he answered, with more feeling than was

usual with him. " I trust it is not. I wish I had seen horn

before."

Mrs. Erris assured horn that iv every respect she would attend

to his instructions, that she would not suffer horn to study, that

she would send Mr. Salon away for a time, that his books should

be put far from horn, that he should not think !

The physician arrested her. " You promise what you have

not the power to perform," he said; "and parents — all who

have influence over the education of youth — would do well to

understand and to study the characters and dispositions of their

children, before they submit all to the same discipline, the same

excitement. The slothful — the slow, who are not slothful; the

heavy-headed ; the light and trifling, who have no intellectual

subsoil — may be safely urged forward ; and if their cheeks are

pale, and grow anxious, withdraw or lighten the stimulus, and

the creature becomes fat and ruddy iv a week ; not, perhaps,

much the better for the forced exertion, though none the

worse. But with the ardcut, the spiritualised — those who draw

inspiration from everything around them; who see and achieve;

who are all eye, all ear, whoso nerves and hearts do double

duty, whose sharpened senses urge them forward — to stimulate

them as you do the slow or the merry-minded, is sheer

madness."

The physician had forgotten to whom he was speaking; but a

pressure of his arm from Dr. Russel's hand recalled him. He

saw that Mrs Erris was trembling, her hands clasped, her lips

compressed, the damp dews standing on her brow ; and, stern ashe

was, he had pity on her.

In pursuance of his advice, it was at length arranged that the

young baronet should go to Italy. The whole of the neighbourhood

was moved to one general prayer for his recovery ; for if he

died, all would pass to oue of another name, and of a depraved

and dishonoured character. The venerable master of East-court

begged to accompany his sorrowing friends.

My children always clung to you," said the broken-hearted

but grateful mother ; " but folly grew with me, and I must bear

the punishment, though, God knows, I acted for the best." The

wanderers had but one object, the restoration of this precious

youth. At first he was much better. His travelling physician

and Dr. Rüssel both agreed there were strong reasons for

hope ; and Lucy's face would brighten, and her eyes fill with

tears of joy, when her brothers voice was stronger, or his step

lighter, or bis appetite improved. Although keenly appreciating

the great and beautiful, this devoted sister saw nothing, beard

nothing, but her brother. If it were possible for two creatures

to have but one soul, it might have been their case. By day

and night Bhe was by his side, warding off the breeze, shading

the sun, reading, or singing, or reciting ; doing everything he

desired ; and thinking before one enjoyment was at an end what

the next should be ; — utterly careless of the sensation created

by her own unearthly beauty.

Alfred was better for a few weeks of travel, but no change

had the power of restoring the tone and strength destroyed by

over-mental exertion. If his mid could have slumbered, so

that his body might have continued undisturbed, the youth

would have achieved manhood ; but his body wasted beneath

the scourge of his untiring soul. His nerves were overstrained

; he could not sleep ; he was consumed by a low

wasting fever. His restlessness would have worn out any one

but Lucy.

If," said the travelling physician to his friend — " if he endure

much longer, she will go first." And yet, whether it was that the

certainty Alfred always expressed as to his own recovery, or the

belief Lucy hourly expressed to herself, that " God would not

take horn from the world," occasioned her blindness, she did not

see what her mother dared not speak of. The youth had grown

much worse, and yet was telling his mother of his suture plans,

all tending to the advancement of others, and mingling the

beautiful, the prosperous, and the good together. in a most unworldly

way, when their good friend of East-court entered with

an open letter in his hand, his face brightened by one of his old

looks of happiness : "Good news," he said, "a letter from Master

Isaac, stating that Mr. Diggons wishes to have Deerstone taken

off his hands."

"They were very kind to me," said Alfred ; "and yet I am

glad. Oh, send them away at once ! and then, mamma, let us

go home. Do, mother, take me home !" This appeal was answered

by a burst of tears from his mother, for, while speaking,

he stretched forth his hands towards her. and the light being

rather strong upon them, shone almost through them. Oh.

how attenuated ! They were transparent ! yet firmly clasped

together, while the boy again entreated, " Oh, mother, take me

home ! "

"How you all look!" exclaimed Lucy, twining her ready arm

around his neck, aud gazing in his flushed face. "Yes, dearest.

Alfred, there is no need for this excitement ; wc will go home

immediately, if you like, if the doctors say you are strong enough

for the journey."

I am strong enough," he said, half rising from the sofa.

I want to be at home ; that is all I want now. I have had

rest and change ; and now I wish to get to work again. Time is

passing. I want my books. If you let me have my books, I

can sleep. Look how strong I am. Stand with me, Lucy, that

they may see me walk. There!"

He stood for a moment by his sister's side, she still gazing

in his face ; and the brightness of the sunbeams, that came

through the half-open window, played like a glory round their

heads.

Now, dearest mother, will you not take me home ; home to

England?"

Lucy felt the arm of her brother relax its hold ; she

clasped horn more closely — closer still. " Alfred 1 " she whispered

: " Alfred ! " Ho was on the sofa, but she still clasped

him. Her lips moved, but no sound escaped them. She heard

not her mother's screams nor the more collected words of her

friends. Still Lucy gazed into those " windows of the

M

Soul;" they were open still, but their light, their might, was

gone.

Some time passed, and though every day it was said at Nice

that the English lady and suite, whose beautiful son died,

as she thought, suddenly, would leave the following day, they

were still there. Since her brothers death, Lucy shed no tear,

spoke no word. The last sound she uttered was " Alfred." She

knew no one. Move her, she did not resist. Gentle and passive,

she made neither sign nor complaint ; did not return her

mother's tearful caresses, nor observe when, at last, she was

placed in the carriage to return home. This " living death "

roused her mother ; but nothing seemed to awaken her, until,

when the day after they returned to East-interest, Doctor Rüssel

took her to the pavilion in the garden, where her childhood

passed so happily with her brother. She shed a few tears from

this time. Her consciousness returned in some degree, though

she never mentioned her brothers name. She would occasionally

mvrmvr over snatches of the poems they read together, and

listen when the Bible was read to her. She sank, however,

daily — imperceptibly; smiling, as her end drew nigh, in a

sweet, unearthly way, on those around her, "all gentleness

and love. Once, drawing Doctor Russel's head close to her,

so close that his long white hair mingled with the rich

brown tresses that wreathed her throat and shoulders, she

whispered, " I cau say now, thy will be done ! " and thus she

departed.

Those who visit the sweet village of East-court now, will find

it changed. The old manor house, though still inhabited by a

family of the name of Rüssel, who are greatly respected, talk of

their good uncle, whose monument has been lately placed in the

church. But what chiefly attracts the eye, is the gloomy aspect

of the house called East-interest Every window is closed ; and

the escutcheon above the entrance has remained there so long,

that it is garlanded, as if in mockery, by roses and other climbing

plants, wild, and untrimmed for years. The lady of the

house, the people say, a childless widow, resides there, aud is

sometimes seen wandering amid the tangled walks, for nothing

has been trimmed since her children died ; passing silently

along, or, if she speaks to any, it is to some mother with children

around her, whom she entreats earnestly, as if pleading for

her own life, " not to force the flower — not to force the flower

prematurely."

THE MOBSPITS

VJŒSmT&fi N one of the most highly cultivated counties of

'lA*Æm. \V

yMwWi England, near a town, the name of which I shall

l^R| conceal under that of Mondrieh, the following circumstances

occurred. My tale is but a simple narration,

and has little to recommend it but its reality. To those

who yearn after exaggerated pictures of life, in any situation, it

may bo dull and tedious ; but those who can appreciate the

sufferings and struggles of virtue, under trials of a more f han

ordinary nature, will, I doubt not, feel interested in the story I

am about to relate.

Well, good night, Mr. Hivton, good night ; wc are neighbours

now, and shall often meet," said Edward Hoskins, as he

closed the cottage-door after bis retreating guest. " A very

pleasant fellow, Agnes," he continued, addressing his wife :

though you were not particularly civil to horn, I know who

was ; " and his bright blue eye rested for a moment on his

sister-in-law — a merry-looking maiden, busied in assisting Agnes

Hoskins in placing aside the remains of their frugal supper.

"For shame, Ned !" retorted the blushing Jessy ; •' but you

are ever teasing me in some way or other ; and here's my sister

says it is very wrong to be putting such things into my head."

Agnes turned her handsome, cheerful countenance towards

her sister, and observed, in a low aud more serious tone of voice

than was her wont, " Jessy. I should be indeed sorry if anything

got into either your head or your heart which it would be necessary

to root out again."

Well," laughed Edward, " I don't see what harm Harry

Hints getting into her head, or heart either, could do ; he is

a good-tempered, free, frank, industrious "

Stop there, Edward," interrupted his wife, laying her hand

on his arm, " not industrious — surely, not industrious !"

"No ; perhaps not that exactly," replied Ned, " not what you

would call industrious. But, really, Agnes, I think wc both

work too hard ; — wc ought, as Harry says, to take a little

pleasure now and then, and wc should return to our daily labour

with more earnestness, and do all the better for it"

I don't think wc need do better : your situation at the

manor, the produce of your own little farm — all contribute to

render us independent. Aud as to pleasure — as to happiness,

Ned, look here ! "

She drew aside a large linen cloth that fell from the upper

part of her babes cradle, so as to shade it from the light.

Although the little thing had not cried, it was awake ; and, as

the father stooped to kiss it, the hands were stretched forward

to meet horn, and the rosy lips parted by the light noiseless

laughter of earliest infancy I Tt was a blessed moment : both

parents gazed upon their child, and as the mother placed it to

her bosom, the father said, in a subdued tone, " You are right

Agnes ; thank God, wc are happy ; and though, love, as you

were better brought up than 1 was, I should like to be richer for

your sake, yet somehow I think it shows you to more advantage,

and draws you more into my heart, to be as you are. What the

minister said of you was true, though I did not mean to tell it

you, lest it might make you conceited : — 'Your wife, Hoskins,'

said he, ' is never without a jar of honey, aud a flask of oil, to

sweeten aud soften your path through life. '"

"Reach down the Bible, Jess'; although it is past ten, wc

must not go to bed without our chapter," observed Agnes, after

a long pause. " But what books are placed upon it, Jessy ? "

A volume of songs and a novel, sister."

Agnes coutiuuod, iv a reproving tone, " I thought I had no

need to tell you that that shelf was appropriated to the Bible,

Prayer, aud Hymn-book only; profane and sacred things should

never mingle."

It was not Jessy, but Hinton, who put them there," said

Edward. Agnes sighed. •' Why do you sigh so heavily?" inquired

the husband, as he turned over the leaves to find one of

his wife's favourite chapters.

"Because it confirms my opinion of our new neighbour; the

word of God will ever be treated by a true Christian with outward

respect — the proof of inward reverence. One who venerates

Scripture could not rest a song-book even upon its binding."

Edward made no reply, aud soon afterward, the party retired

to rest.

This little passage in the lives of these humble individuals

occurred about the latter end of the month of April, a few years

ago, in a retired spot, near the town of Goodrich, to which I

shall give the name of Mosspits. It was a sweet and quiet

nesting of five cottages, inhabited, with one exception, by happy

industrious people. Four of these dwellings were joined together ;

the fifth, the abode of Hoskins, stood apart, surrounded by a

blossoming garden, and was of a larger size than any of the

others. The scene might be aptly described as —

A gentle, lonely place ; the path o'ergrown

With primroses, and broad-leaved violets, *

Arched by laburnums and the sweet woodbine.

Across the green a silver streamlet ran,

Hidden and silent, as it feared to wake

The deep tranquillity that dwelt and slept

Even on tho full-leaved trees."

It was far away from the public road, and one large oak spread

its huge branches over tho green in front of the Mosspit

cottages ; the trunk was surrounded by a rustic seat, where the

inhabitants met every fine evening, and discussed affairs of state

or business with the affected sagacity of wiser heads. Hoskins

possessed, as his wife had said, a lucrative situation — one that

gave them abundant comforts, and would, if carefully husbanded,

enable them to lay by a provision for after years.

Agues and Jessy were the orphan daughters of a Presbyterian

clergyman. Mrs. Hoskins was some years older than her giddy

sister, and had enjoyed, during her father's lifetime, many advantages

which he did not remain long enough in the world to

bestow upon his youngest-born. Agnes had been chosen by the

lady of the manor, Mrs. Cecil Walliugford, as a humble, very

humble, companion for her daughter — an only child, aud an

heiress: sho was therefore, to use the accepted phrase, "comfortably

situated;" which, being interpreted, means, that she

had her board, washing, and lodging, and the young lady

society when sho was ill or without company — dined with the

housekeeper — rode either inside the carriage when her frii-nd

pleased, or outside on the dicky when ditto - curled the lap-dog's

hair — and sometimes suffered, under the practical jokes of her

young tormentor, such mortifications as nought but her enduring

spirit could have supported — was stared at whenever seon, by

the young men, who already scented the heiress's gold afar off —

aud received divers lessons from Mrs. Cecil Wallingford, not on

errors she had committed, but on those which the lady supposed

she might commit. The dependent on this purse-proud family

could not have been strictly called beautiful; but there was that

about her which surpassed beauty — a kind, yet animated countenance,

illumined by mild and frequently upturned eyes, which

lent a sort of holy expression to her delicate features. Under

her after-trials it seemed almost as if a heavenly communion

supported her ; for while the tear trembled in her eye, the smile

sprang to her lip, and she regained her serenity apparently without

an effort.

Agues was fortunate enough to make one real friend in this

mighty family. The housekeeper, Mrs. Middleton, was a curate's

widow, and felt much and kindly for the situation of one so

young and unprotected ; she did all she could to soften the

innumerable mortifications that awaited the pure and delicately-minded

girl ; aud often, when the household had retired to rest,

they would seek each other's chamber, aud hold sweet counsel

together — thus imparting cheerfulness to the aged, and instruction

to the young When Agnes had been about twelve months

at the manor, Edward Hoskins was strongly recommended, on

account of his great skill in horticulture and floriculture, to the

situation of gardener in Mrs. Cecil Wallingfords establishment,

vacant by the death of the old man who had exercised unbounded

dominion over drapery, pinery, and green-house, for

nearly balsa century. Hoskins wisely brought, with horn a new

carnation of his own growing, which had gained the first prize of

the Horticultural Society. The splendid flower decided the

matter, and he was immediately engaged, at a salary of a

hundred and ten guineas per annum, (as the lady found he

could not only act as gardener, but as steward,) and tho very

prettiest cottage at Mosspit was appointed for his residence.

All was bustle in the servants' ball as the handsome young

gardener talked for a moment with the head butler. The ladysm-

aid and chief house-duster positively quarrelled as to the right

of first setting caps at horn ; though they both agreed that ho

behaved very rudely in passing into the housekeeper's room

without bestowing the slightest notice upon their pretty persona

.Mrs. Middleton and her young friend were quietly seated at tea,

when the butler respectfully asked permission to introduce the

new resident Long after Agnes had departed, he lingered, aud

lingered, and at last asked who the young lady was. Her history

was soon told ; and, to dismiss all matters of courtship briefly,

they were soon married. To do Mrs. Cecil Walliugsord justice,

she behaved very generously to her protege on the occasion, presented

to the young couple some neat and appropriate furniture,

stood godmother to their first infant, and Miss Cecil Walling

ford (when sentimentally inclined) always talked of love iv

the Mosspit cottage, and her sweet humble friend Agnes

Hoskins.

Much had been, of course, said, at the commencement of their

union, as to the probability of Agnes being too dainty a damsel

to make a useful wife ; but a little time proved the incorrectness

of such surmises. Hoskins insisted on Agnes domesticating her

only sister with them, and went for her to Scotland, where she

bad previously resided with a distant relative. No further

help than Jessy's was necessary to keep all things in order, and

no dwelling, even at the Mosspits, wos half so neat or half so

cheerful as their cottage. Indeed, cheerfulness was Agnes'

peculiar attribute — that sweet, gentle, aud unobtrusive cheerfulness,

which is felt rather than seen. Her very voice told of

happiness ; her eyes beamed with faith and love ; and the

ministers description of one of the favourites of his flock was no

less beautiful than true. The disposition of Jessy was not so

valuable as that of her sister : she was more mirthful, more gay,

nd, alas ! both giddy and inconsiderate ; but then, as Edward

kindly observed, " she was only seventeen, and every body could

not be perfect like Agnes, who certainly was different from everyone

else."

It is a happy thing when married folk believe perfection

enthroned in each other ; but it is a wise thing when they see

each other's faults, and yet endeavour to conceal them. It

is a stern test of a woman's judgment, if she discover her mental

superiority to the lord of her affections, and yet, while she

secretly manages all things for the best makes the world believe

she is only the instrument of his will. A wise woman will do

this, but it is only a wise woman who can.

Edward was certainly inferior to Agnes in intellect ; and yet,

woman though she was, she never allowed her mid to rest upon

the circumstance she could not avoid perceiving. Sic wasasuperior

woman - he was only an ordinary man, but one iv whom all

kind elements were so happily blended, that his faults were forgotten

in the contemplation of his better qualities. The great

difference in their characters was, that Edward acted invariably

from impulse — .agnes from principle.

My friends will remember that ray little tale commenced iv

the gentle month of April, the kindly season sung of by tho

elegant Surrey, as —

Tho sooth season, that bud and bloina forth brings,

With grono hath clad tho hill, and eko tho vale ;

The nightingale with feathers new she sings,

The turtle to her mato hath told lor tale."

And, passing over the first two months of summer, wc reach tho

latter cud of July. Although nothing had occured of a nature

to destroy the actual quiet of tho Mosspit family, rnauy trifling

incidents had filled the mid of Agnes with an apprehension for

which she could not account, aud dreaded to encourage. Harry

Ilinton was always so coolly received by her that he spent very

little time at their cottage ; aud Agnes was continually on tho

watch to prevent any intimacy between Jessy and their idle

neighbour. Still it was almost certain that tho thoughtless girl

regarded Harry with anything but indifference ; and tho proximity

of their dwellings rendered it impossible to prevent their

meeting. If Jessy took lor little nephew into the garden,

Hivton wus most likely in his ; if she stood at the door, Ilinton

passed it ; if she went for water to tho well, Ilinton would carry

the pitcher, at all events, as far as the great tree that shaded

them from observation ; aud, above all, Agues could not mako

either her husband or her sister think otherwise than well of

Harry Hivton. Edward did not spend his evenings as constantly

at home as before his acquaintance with his neighbour ; Mrs.

Cecil Wallingford complained that her grapes were not so fine as

they had been ; and the clergyman called one morning to

reprimand her husband for being absent from Sabbath worship

Agnes witnessed the reproof, and heard also — what shocked her

still more — her Edward utter a decided falsehood as to the cause.

She knew that ho had gone with Hinton, under some pretext or

other, two successive Sundays to the next market-town ; aud

when he stated he had been compelled, through tho negligence

of the under-gardener, to remain at the Manor while he should

have been at church, his wife's face was suffused with the blush

of shame, and she left their little sitting-room with a sense of

degradation both new and unsupportable to a mid like hers.

The bed-room to which she retired was at the back of the house,

aud her child, who hourly improved iv strength and beauty, was

sleeping calmly on the snow' coverlet. The open window was

literally curtained with roses and woodbine, through which the

sunbeams could not penetrate ; her fingers wandered amid their

foliage, while her tearful gaze was fixed upon her boy ; aud she

started as from a dream when the clear merry laugh of Jessy

rang upon her ear : it did not harmonize with her feelings, and

it was followed by words still more painful.

"you need not be afraid to speak to me, Jessy ; your sister

is too much occupied with the parson to heed you just now ; and

I long for the time that will make you mine, aud remove you

from her tyranny."

Agnes is no tyrant, Harry," replied the maiden, " only a

little strict ; and I wish you would let me tell her "

"What?" inquired Hinton, after waiting for some time the

conclusion of Jessy's speech — "What do you want to tell her?

that Im your lover? — why, silly lass, she knows that

already I "

Not that exactly, but—"

But, what ? "

I should like to tell her what you think of our laws, and of

the rights of men aud women ; and about that good gentleman

iv London, who proves wc are all equal, and — "

That you have as good a right to wear satin and gold, and

ride in a coach, as Mis. Cecil Wallingford herself; but Agnes

would not believe you, Jessy ; her mid is not comprehensive

like yours."

"0, Harry — Harry ! " exclaimed the thoughtless girl, at the

conclusion of her lover's speech ; " how nice I should lookin

white satin and French curls ! It is very hard that Agnes

will persist in making me band my hair like a Methodist ; but

I cannot think I have as good a right to ride in a coach as

Mrs. Wallingford ; because, you know, all her relations keep

carriages — and — mine — "

The sentence was left unfinished ; but Hinton soon satisfied

her scruples, as to Mrs. Cecil Wallingford and the carriage, by

an encomium on her beauty, a reiterated assurance of what he

termed love, and a present, which, first having received — secondly,

having admired — thirdly, hind lastly, she did not know what todo

with.

I don't think Agnes would let me wear such a beautiful

brooch ; and I am sure she would not permit me to take a

present from you, Harry."

"You need not say anything about, it.

But .Agnes might see it"'

Then tell her you found it."

Breathlessly did Agnes Hoskins wait for the reply, bat she

heard it uot — the lovers had passed the window, and walked on.

Almost on the instant her husband entered the room, with an

air of boisterous gaiety, aud, as if he had quite forgotten the

clergyman's visit, rallied his wife upon the seriousness of her

looks. She felt too much, aud too deeply, to reply even with

her usual smile. He took no notice of her change of manner —

probably from a wish to avoid a recurrence to what he knew

must have given her much pain — but fondled and kissed his

child, and, taking it in his arms, was leaving the apartment,

when Jessy quickly passed the door. " Stay, Edward ; — sister,

come here ! " exclaimed Agues. Jessy did come, with a flushed

check and a downcast eye.

What have you this moment put into your bosom ?" inquired

Agnes ; adding, without waiting for a reply, " I will not induce

you to utter the falsehood you have been directed to — when is

the brooch that young Hinton gave you but now under this

window ? You tremble — you turn pale. Jessy, my sister Jessy !

when you crouched beside the heather and the harebell at our

father's feet, while the sun was sinking amid the hills of our

own Scotland — there, at the cottage door, when our aged parent

taught you to lift up your then innocent hands to the Almighty

in prayer and praise — I little thought you would have so soon

forgotten his precepts 1 "

The thoughtless girl burst into tears, and Edward, whose good-nature

was an active, not a passive quality, kindly took her hand,

and, looking at his wife, said, " Do not be so angry, Agnes, at her

receiving a love token; Harry meant no hharthatm — that I'll answer

for Surely, if he is to be her husband "

"Her husband !" repeated Agnes, with an energy that startled

both Edward and Jessy - " the husband of Jessy Grey ! I would

rather shroud her for her coffin, than see her married to a man

devoid of religious and moral principle."

"You are strangely prejudiced against poor Harry, and a

thousand times more Egotistical than ever, Agnes," observed

her husband.

"I am not Egotistical, Edward— l am not changed — it is

yon who think differently ; and as the change has marred our

happiness, you cannot wonder at my disliking horn who has

wrought it. You were independent, industrious, and happy :

you now talk of the wealth of your superiors ; you say it is

wrong for there to possess so much, and yet you covet more.

Edward, now you seldom smile — or smile so that I would almost

rather see you weep : if you attend the village church, your eyes

and mid wander from your devotions, aud you rejoice at the

conclusion of the service. The flowers in our garden are

neglected "

Stop, Agnes ! " interrupted Hoskins, " you have lectured me

pretty sharply, I think, for nothing. Have I ever suffered you

to want ? — have I ever treated you unkindly ?"

Oh, no ! — no, Edward, not unkindly — not that yet /"

And never will, my own Agnes ! I will be more with you,

aud show you how much you have wronged me, and Jessy too,

by these misunderstandings."

I will speak to my sister apart, Edward ; give her the

infant. There, Jessy, do not weep ! "

Jessy left the room iv tears. " Now, in truth, Agnes," said

Hoskins, when the door was closed, "your prejudices are amazing

to me: there is not a better hearted fellow in the world than

Harry, or a more clever. I own that he thinks a little too

freely ; and you women don't understand that : the people are

improving."

Would," ejaculated Agnes, " that they felt Christianity to be

their best legacy, and inherited the virtue of their ancestors."

The very thing Harry says : he vows the landlords grow

worse and worse ; and unless the people take them in hand,

there'll be no end to their tyranny."

Did you ever experience any tyranny, Edward?"

Never, Agues."

Did Hinton ? "

No — but yes, he did, poor fellow, and that no later than last

week. 'Squire Nicol's fox-hounds and' the whole hunt went right

through his barley. But that is not the worst of it ; when he

lived near Chester, his sister ran off with, and was deserted by,

his landlords eldest sou."

I am not surprised at that," replied .Agnes, coolly, " if he

instructed his sister in the principles of equality and rights of

women. She only practised what he preached."

Agnes then proceeded to state to her husband the conversation

that had passed between Jessy and Harry Hinton : in natural

but forcible colours she portrayed the danger of his principles,

aided by his insinuating manners, and concluded with a request

that Edward would at once relinquish so dangerous au acquaintance.

Hoskins was much shocked vt the idea that Hinton

should have breathed such notions into the ear of the innocent

girl, whom he loved with all the warmth of brotherly affection ;

he promised his wife that he would speak seriously to horn on

the subject, and unite with her in endeavouring to break off his

oonuexiou with Jessy Grey, whom Agnes declared she would send

ou a visit to an aged relative of her friend Mrs. Middleton, who

dwelt near the Scottish bonner.

I think your plan is best ; absence and time will soon put

love out of her head," observed Edward.

It may do so, and I hope it most fervently," was the wife's

reply ; and again she entreated her husband, even with tears, to

avoid Hinton.

I promise you faithfully so much, Agnes ; but circumstances

which I cannot explain will oblige me to see horn occasionally —

in fact, I am in his secrets ; and it would be ungenerous to

desert horn when I know my friendship is of value to him. He

may judge wrongly at times, but I know horn to be both as Cleveland

as good-hearted a fellow as ever lived."

jeunes shook her head unbelieving ; but, pleased at having,

as she hoped, lessened his influence over her husband, and

resolved upon a plan of action with her sister, she for a time

forbore auy allusion to what at first so bitterly grieved her —

Edwards deviation from truth.

Heavy were the tears of Jessy, when told that she must leave

Mosspits for a season, and her sister refused to tell her destination.

Once, and once only, did Hurry Hinton speak on the

subject to Edward Hoskins But Edward firmly told horn in

that matter he would not interfere : Jessy was his wife's sister,

and consequently Agnes had the best right to determine how

she was to be situated. "My wife says," ho continued, " that

when Jessy comes of age she may do as she pleases, but till then

she will act towards her as her father would have done had he

lived till now."

Hivton made no reply, aud turned moodily away, muttering

curses, not loud, but deep. Agnes, almost immediately after,

journeyed to London, and placed Jessy under the care of a

respectable female of her acquaintance who was going to Berwick.

It was not without many tears that the sisters parted — tears of

reproachfulness and sorrow on the one side, and of affection aud

anxiety on the other.

When Agues returned, in the evening, to her cottage, sho

felt it very desolate ; a strange girl, whom she had hired

for the purpose, was nursing her little boy. No Jessy's light

step and gay smile welcomed her as in former times; and

Edward was not at home — not come in — had not been home to

dinner, nor to tea. She took the child in her arms, and seated

herself on a little mound in the meadow that overlooked the

high road : it was early in autumn, and troops of merry reapers

passed from time to time, beguiling the way with song and noisy

laughter ; her boy sat on her knee, twisting the tough sterns of

the corn-flowers into what he lisping called " posy." and ever

and anon pointing, with infant wonder, at the happy groups

hastening to their quiet homes. Gradually the passengers became

fewer iv number, the voices died away upon the hill, one by one

the stirs came forth in the blue heavens, and no note, save the

creaking of the rail, disturbed the tranquillity that was covering

tho earth as with a mantle. The Mosspit cottages, nesting in

their little dell, looked the very abode of cheerfulness ; the lights

twinkled from two or three of the small-pane windows, showing

that the dames within were busy with their small housewifery.

The eyes of Agnes had rested for some moments upon the scene,

when her boys gestures drew her attention towards the road.

She was somewhat surprised at observing a woman, whose tattered

dress and red cloak gave her the appearance of a gipsy, forcing

her way through the hedge, and approaching her at an uneven

but hurried pace. If she had been struck by her boldness, her

attention was riveted by the expression of her wild and restless

eye. which both watched and wandered. She appeared young,

and, perhaps, under other circumstances, might have been called

pretty; her figure was slight, and her hair, of a liarht auburn,

fell in profuse but arranged tresses over her face She was

without shoes, and the blood streamed from a wound in her foot,

so as to attract tho notice of the little boy, who pointed to it

with one hand, while he wound his arm tightly round his

mother's neck.

You did wrong to trespass, young woman," said Agnes,

mildly, while the stranger stood gazing upon her with a peculiar

.md bewildered took — " you did wrong to trespass — but you

have been sufficiently punished : wrap this handkerchief round

your foot, and, if you will follow mo to the cottage, I will give

you a pair of old shoes to protect you."

The woman did not accept the offered handkerchief; but still

staring at Mrs. Hoskins, who had risen from her grassy seat, at

last said, " Do you want your fortune told ?"

No ;" replied Agnes, " and, false as the art is, you have no

pretension to it— you are not even a gipsy "

You say truly," replied the girl ; " I am not a gipsy ; and

yet I could tell much that will happen tu you — you must be the

married one — where's the other?"

If you mean my sister," replied Agnes, '• she has left

England."

Lest England !- — left England !" repeated the young woman,

jumping and clapping her hands — " gone away from" — then

suddenly changing the joyful tone in which she had spoken, added

" But not of her own accord— not of her own accord — no

girl would leave horn of her own accord."

Agnes looked upon her with astonishment, and the suspicion

that the poor wanderer was a maniac occurred so forcibly to her

mid, that she held her child closely to her bosom, and commenced

returning to the Mosspits.

Stop, Agnes Hoskins, stop ! — you sent Aeraway, and I would

bless you if I knew how — but I cannot remember the words."

She paused, pressed her soiled but delicate fingers to her brow,

and sighed bo deeply that lira Hoskins could not have said an

unkind word to her for worlds.

He will be returning soon !" exclaimed the girl, at last, in a

hurried tone ; " but do you look to your husband — may-be you

love hir n; and it is very sad, as the song says —

To love — and love for ever,'

and then to find your lover go away just like the down off

the thistle — and may-be for as light a breath ! Well, keep horn

from Harry, or the curse will overshadow you ; for I was as blithe

and as happy as a nightingale till I kept his company — not but

what Im gay enough still — only I don't ever feel peaceful here,"

(laying her hand on her heart) — " yes, Jane is gay enough still,

N

aud does bis bidding, too, as well as if he loved her ; only 1 must

not tell, because it would get Harry into trouble, that I dance

round the burning ricks." She approached closely to Mrs.

Hoskins while uttering the last sentence, which she pronounced

slowly, aud in an under-tone.

An allusion to a circumstance that had excited so much

terror throughout the country, and made every one look with

alarm to his own homestead, caused an involuntary shudder to

pass over the frame of Agues. The wild girl shrieked, and

clapped her hands ou her mouth ; then, without uttering another

sentence, retreated rapidly across the meadow. Sho had not,

however, reached the spot where she entered, crc she retraced her

steps with visible agitation.

They are coming," said she, " and if he sees me here he will

murder me outright ; do — do, just let me hide in your house till

he goes to his own, and then I can go — for it will be dark, dark

night, then."

The poor creature trembled from bead to foot, and, before

Agnes had time to reply, had not only established herself in the

cottage, but coiled herself into an inconceivably small space in a

cupboard that opened into the little passage. Edward Hoskins

and Harry Hinton were soon upon the green that fronted the

cottage, aud the flushed check and loud laughter of her husband

told Agues, but too plainly, he was intoxicated. Her first feeling

was that of auger and disgust — her second brought tho

excuse, "it is not often thus with hir n;" though she coulcTnot

but acknowledge, what every woman so circumstanced must feel,

that each time she bo beholds her husband must lessen her

respect — and, without Suit, woman's love for man is of little

worth.

"Well, Agnes— pale, pensive, as usual!" he exclaimed, as,

notwithstanding his situation, she had advanced to the door to

meet horn: " Won't you wish Harry good-night?"

I am always to suffer iv Mrs. Hoskius's opinion, I fear,

although I hurried her husband home. Wc saw some gipsies

about, aud I said they might frighten you" — he added, drawing

nearly to the threshold of the door, and peering into her face

with his small grey eye, which she used to characterise as " cold,"

but which now appeared illumined by some secret fire — " did

not you see any ? "

"No;" replied Agnes, without shrinking from his gaze;

many persons passed on their way, but I did not recognise any

as gipsies." Her self-possession, doubtless, disarmed the querist

for, wishing her courteously good night, he entered his cottage,

aud seemed determined to shut out intruders, by carefully barring

doors and windows.

So you saw poor Jessy off, my love?" exclaimed Hoskins,

throwing himself on the chairs that stood near the table. " Don't,

for Heaven's sake, look so calm and quiet — I know what you

think — but I am sober — not quite cool, perhaps — but sober —

Sober as a judge. Why shouldn't Ibe a judge? Well, if Im

not wise enough for a judge, you are for a judges — though you

are not always right ; now you were wrong about Hinton, for

he'd have made a good husband for Jessy — only, as I said, she's

your sister, not mine ; so you've had your own way — banished

your sister, and smashed that poor fellow's heart all to pieces.

But the coach must have come very quickly ; I did not think

you could have been home these two hours. Give me the boy,

Agnes, I have not had a kiss from either of you since I

returned."

Agues held the child towards horn, but — whether it was that

the little fellow retained a remembrance of the bleeding foot

aud the red cloak, or that he felt the natural antipathy of childhood

to the smell of spirits, cannot be determined — he shrunk

from his father and hid his face on his mother's bosom. Edward

grew angry, aud forcibly disengaged the boy, who screamed more

loudly, " mamma — mamma!"

"Take the brat !" ejaculated the father, with au oath, at the

same moment, throwing horn with violence to Agnes — " take tho

brat; but I tell you that, whatever you may do, my owu child

shan't thwart me ; this is what comes of its having an aristocratic

godmother ; it already thinks my hands too rough to hold

it, I suppose I '

A Billy woman— nay, a woman with a moderate share of good

H 2

Bouse, as it is called — would have replied to this, and high words

would have ensued, and seeds of bitterness therewith been sown :

but Agnes was a superior woman ; so, without uttering a syllable,

without suffering an unkind word or gesture to escape, she took

the screaming infant out of the room, gave it into the arms of

the little serving-maiden, and, having wiped those eyes to which

unbidden tears had started, and offered up a silent but fervent

prayer to the throne of God for wisdom to form, and strength to

persist in her good resolves, she returned to prepare her husband's

supper with her own hands.

When Agnes had seen Edward to bed, she went to seck the poor

wanderer, who bad sheltered in the cupboard; but the girl was

gone — how, it was difficult to conjecture, unless she had let

herself down from the bed-room window, which appeared partially

open. It must not be supposed that Agnes was one of

those women who " humour" a husband in his faults, asserting,

with a mock amiability (the sincerity of which may be always

doubted) that they " have no right to oppose horn in his little

ways." A woman possessing a great and well cultivated mind

will be anxious that her husband shall both be, and appear, perfection,

and she will watch for a fitting opportunity to point

out, with gentleness and humility, whatever his better judgment,

if exercised, would also declare wrong. Agnes knew it was not

when he was intoxicated, that she ought to say a word calculated

to add fuel to the flame, but her resolution was not less decidedly

taken to combat, with all her gentle strength, the growing

evil.

The next morning Edward was very penitent ; and for an

entire week there was no recurrence of the same fault ; but the

evil did continue ; aud, with anguish which only a wife so circumstanced

can feel or understand, Agnes saw that her influence

and happiness were both decaying ; the serpent-coil was round

her husband, and each day added to its closeness and to its

strength. She prayed, she wept, she entreated ; and sometimes

Edward himself would seem bitterly to feel his weakness and

vow to amend it; but Hinton had attained that command over

horn which the powerful mid possesses over the weaker ; and

his duty, his business, were neglected, for the society of horn ho

termed his friend Mrs. Cecil Wallingford called herself upon

Agnes, and told her that unless Edward paid more attention

to her affairs, however unwillingly, she should be obliged to procure

some one else to act as steward and gardener. The suffering

wife assured the lady sho would do her utmost to correct his

habits, of which she refrained from complaining. Mrs. Walling-ford,

to say the truth, felt sincere sorrow for the looks of her

protegee, and said many kind and complimentary things to

Agnes on the extreme beauty of the bud, which seemed to

increase in size and loveliness in proportion to the fading of the

parent flower.

Mrs. Wallingford hud hardly departed when Agnes received

the following letter : — ■

Berwick, Nov. 23.

My dear Friend, — It is with very sincere sorrow I inform

you, that last night, without any reason that I can discover,

your sister lest my house ; and all attempts to trace her, during

the day, have been ineffectual. Lately, she manifested great

uneasiness and restlessness of disposition, which I tried in vain

to combat. Perhaps she has returned to you ; let me hear immediately

; aud, praying to the Almighty to preserve you and

yours in peace and happiness,

Believe me your truly affectionate,

"T. Middleton."

Agnes sat, with the open letter iv her hand, more like a thing of

marble than a breathing creature : and when her husband came

in she presented it to horn, and covering her face with her hands,

wept long and bitterly.

Hinton knows of this, Edward," she said at last, " and must

be spoken to on the subject."

Hinton knows no more of it than you do ; how could he ?

To my certain knowledge he has never been one day or night

from home since she lest, and how could he get to Berwick and

back in that time, think you? Poor Jessy ! it would have been

better she had married Hinton than ran off with no one knows

who. Indeed, Agnes, you were wrong in sending her from us ;

but troubles never come alone — the last frost has got into the

piuery, and Mrs. Cecil Wallingford says it's my fault ; that proud

lady must alter her tone, or shell get served out like her neighbours

— there are ways of bringing fine people down — Mr.

Flyhill's barns and kennel were burned last night."

"What awful times!" ejaculated Agnes; "but I know you

better, Edward, than to believe you would ever approve of such

dreadful doings ; you know your duty to your God, your country,

and your neighbour ; and nothing, I am sure, would ever induce

you to act contrary to it. But as to Hinton, I believe he is

engaged in these horrid acts — nay, Edward, you cannot deceive

mo ; I have combated your extraordinary infatuation in his

favour by every means in my power — you will not hear me,

Edward ; you are deaf and blind as regards that evil man ; and

nothing now is left for me, but to weep and pray in solitude and

silence — to pray for you, my own dear and beloved husband,

that God may lead you to see the error of your ways, and

conduct you again into the right path !"

Edward kissed her brow, as it rested on her hands, in silence,

and almost with the leve of by-gone days. That religion which

he had once considered her brightest ornament, he now called

the weak point of her character," and thought he was doing

what was very praiseworthy iv bearing with it so quietly. He

immediately wrote to some friends in Scotland, about Jessy, and

applied to the nearest magistrate to know what means it would

be necessary to adopt to trace out the lost and unfortunate girl.

Hinton protested he knew nothing of the matter — swore by all

that was sacred he had never heard from her since she left

the Mosspits — but failed in convincing Agnes of the truth of one

word he uttered.

"You have studied the character of St. Thomas, at all events,"

said her husband, in a Sneering tone, " and taken a lesson in

unbelief."

If I could find out what it is that Hinton believes iv, and

he would swear by it, then I might believe horn," replied Agnes,

mildly

after day, week after week, passed, and no tidings came

of the lost Jessy. Much did Agnes wish that the wandering

girl, whose mysterious prophecy seemed rapidly fulfilling, would

again flit across her path ; and often did she watch the highway,

hoping, yet. dreading that the tattered cloak and light form

of the strange being might issue from it towards the Mosspits.

Although Edward was more and more estranged from his home,

he thought it necessary to apologise occasionally to Agnes for his

absence : ill at ease with himself, he could not be expected to be

kindly towards others ; and she felt how very bitter it is to

bo obliged to take the cold leaden coin of civility, in lieu of the

pure and glowing gold of warm affection. It is utterly impossible

to describe how the alteration in a cherished and beloved object

affects her who loves more fondly and fervently, aster years

of union, than she did when, like the most admirable of Shakspeare's

heroines, she bestowed herself at the holy altar to the

one being almost of her idolatry, wishing —

That only to stand high on Am account

She might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,

Excocd account."

How quickly does the ear note if the voice tie not as tender

as in former days I To father — mother — friends — all may seem

unchanged ; but the wife, who has dwelt upon every took — who

knows, as it were, even the number of rays which the beloved

eye throws forth — painfully sees and feels the difference. The

words, perchance, may be as kind ; but their tone is altered.

What boots it to her if the universe views her with admiration

if the wealth of nations be piled at her feet ! He it changed !

That consciousness is the sword which, hanging by a single hair,

threatens, sooner or later, her destruction, and prevents her

enjoying any earthly happiness or repose. Not only Edward,

however, but circumstances, were also altering at the Mosspits.

The disturbed state of the country made each person suspicious

of the other ; and, as the winter advanced, so did distress progress.

In the neighbouring districts workmen of all trades

had refused to take employment without increased wages : not a

night passed but cattle were destroyed, or outhouses, and in

some instances dwellings, burned to the ground. Landlords

knew not which of their tenants to confide in ; aud the misery

was increased bj' soldiers being frequently distributed aud

stationed where the people absolutely lacked the means of supporting

themselves. It was pretty generally rumoured that

Hivton was concerned in these transactions, though no one

exactly knew how. He was the principal leader of a debating-society

in Mondrieh, which had the misfortune to attract the

attention of the magistrate, who sought to put it down perhaps

by measures that might have been called violent. He succeeded ;

and it formed a most desirable theme for the disaffected to dwelt'

upon. Hoskins grumbled incessantly at the " illegal" proceedings;

and Agnes combated his arguments, or rather his opinions,

in vain. Christmas, that trysting-time which generally brings an

interchange of kindness aud social feeling among all classes

of society, had come ; and a little episode that occurred at

Mosspits will at once show the state of feeling of both husband

and wife. They had been in the habit of exchanging presents,

during preceding years, on Christmas-day, each anxious to surprise

the other with some peculiar gist. Christmas eve, Edward

did not return until the village clock had chimed eleven, and

then he went sullenly to bed, without heeding the little preparations

that Agnes was making for the approaching festival. She

was alone ; for, finding that her husband's habits prevented horn

from bringing home the produce of his earnings, she hud wisely

purled with her little servant considering it was better to labour

with her own hands than to incur debt. " And," said she,

meekly, when communing with her own thoughts, "if he will

be extravagant, the more necessity is there for my being

economical."

Hoskins was awakened the next morning by the sweet kisses

of his boy, while his wife, leaning over his bedside, prayed that

he might enjoy many happy returns of that holy day.

Say wc, Agnes," interrupted Edward, " say we. God knows,

whatever happiness I enjoy, you ought to share ; for I make you

miserable enough at times. Will you forgive me ?"

Tho words were spoken in the tone that Agnes so loved, and,

unable to sustain her feelings, Bhe flung herself upon her

husband's bosom, and burst into tears.

When Edward, dressed in his best suit, was preparing to go to

the Manor, his wife laid her hunt on his arm, and, encouraged

by his kindness, in the gentlest manner requested horn to read

one, only one, chapter to her, before he went out — it would not

take horn five minutes. He complied with a tolerable grace ;

and, when he finished, she took a small heart-shaped brooch

from her bosom, and, telling horn that it contained their child's

hair, fastened it iv his shirt

You did not forget, Agnes, though I did," said he ; " but

I will bring you something from Mondrieh, where I must go

after I leave the Manor ; and I will lie back to dinner at two,

aud remain with you all tho evening."

Edward returned at the appointed time, but a cloud was on

his brow ; he hardly partook of the dinner she had prepared, and

had forgotten the customary token. As the evening was closing

over a cold and snowy landscape, " Agnes," ho said, " I must

go : I thought I could have spent all this day with you, but

something has occurred which must prevent it I will, however,

return early, and do more justice to your excellent cheer at

supper, than I have been able to do at dinner."

Never had his wife felt it so difficult to part from him. She

requested, entreated ; and for a long time his child clasped

its lauds round his neck, and hung by his knees even as he

approached the door. His departing footsteps smote heavily

on the heart of the affectionate Agnes, and, as the last echo

died upon her car, she wept

When eight o'clock came she looked from the window ; but

the fog was so intense that she could see nothing save the fantastic

boughs of the old oak, looking more like deepened shadows

of darkness than separate or distinct objects. The song and

cheerful laugh rang from two of the neighbouring cottages ;

and at a third there was an assembly of dancing rustics. Agnes

thought it was the first time the happiness of others had increased

her misery, and she blamed herself for the selfish feeling.

Nine, ten, eleven, twelve! — Christmas-day had ended, the

revellers had sought their homes, and no sound was heard save

the rushing of the storrn amid the branches, whose outlines were

now lost iv midnight obscurity. It would seem that the ancient

of days sturdily withstood the tempest, and groaned heavily from

the exertion ; tho old rooks, who had made it their habitation forages,

cawed their complaining whenever the sweeping of the

mighty blast passed on, as if to remonstrate with the mysterious

power that disturbed their repose. Sho stood at the little window,

und pressed her forehead against the glass, that its coolness

might be imparted to her burning how. Suddenly she thought

she perceived streaks of light, or rather (so deeply coloured were

they) of flume, intersecting the darkness, und gradually illuminating

the distant sky. Before she had time to draw any conclusion

from so singular an appearance, she started back with

horror on observing, so close that she almost, fancied it touched

her check, a thin, shadowy hand, with the forefinger curved, as

if beckoning her forward. Despite her self-possession, sho

trembled violently, aud could hardly prevent herself from shrieking

aloud, when she saw distinctly a white, ghastly face pressed

to the glass that separated her from this untimely visitor. A sort

of hissing and exulting whisper now came upon her ear. " Don't

you know me, Agnes Hoskins 1 — don't you remember Lady

Jane ? Come, come with me, and see how bright the Manor is

this gay Christmas night !" A horrid suspicion — too horrid to

be entertained — flashed across her mid, as Agnes undid the

door ; aud, before the half-crazed girl entered, sho had sunk upon

a chair, and with difficulty retained her seat For a few moments

she could not think ; and the half maniac, with that feeling of

sympathy which rarely deserts a woman, looked mournfully into

her face. At length her eye rested on a flagon of elderberry •

wine that stood upon a table with the untested supper ; she

poured out u large glass of it, and, curtseying with mock solemnity

to the trembling Agnes, said, before sho drunk it off,

Health to you, my lady, and a merry Christmas ! — a cellar

full, a byre full, and plenty of faggots ! See, see ! they blaze —

they blaze !" she continued, pointing to the sky, that was reddening

higher and higher. " Come with me, and I'll tell you as

wc go how that will be the last fire Harry will light for many a

day ! He must have other darlings indeed ! — but now he can

have only me, for none of his dainty dames will follow horn into

strange lands — one but poor June ! The police have horn by

this time, and Hoskins too ; so you'd better go and bring them

all home to supper ! "

Woman!" exclaimed Agnes, springing as in mortal agony

from her chair, " what do you say? — Hoskins — my Edward —

my husband there — at the burning of Wallingford Manor!"

She seized the girl fiercely by the arm, but suddenly lor grasp

relaxed, and she fell stiff and cold to the earth. How long she

remained there she knew not ; but, when she recovered, her

frame felt paralysed, the air was bitter and piercing, the light was

extinguished, and all around was utterly, utterly desolate. It was

some time crc she was restored to the recollection of what she

had heard, and it was still longer before she recovered sufficiently

to be able to move, or settle upon any plan of action. The very

ticking of the clock — that gentle, domestic sound — struck

heavily and painfully upon her brain ; and, when it gave warning

that another hour had passed into eternity, she could hardly

believe the sense was correct which counted four. She endeavoured

to compose her mid by supplication, and the Lord's

Prayer occurred to her at once. She repeated the words, until

she arrived at the sentence — '' Deliver us from evil," when the

full consciousness of the evil that was suspended over them prevented

her finishing the holy aud beautiful intercession. She

arose from her knees, aud groped about until she procured a

light. She then endeavoured to arrange her plans. Her very

soul recoiled from the dreadful idea that Hoskins had anything

to do at the burning which hud but a little while past streaked

the sky with tokens of the wickedness of man. The heavens

were still as intensely black as when first she had pressed her

burning brow against the small panes of the cottage-window, aud

looked earnestly and hopefully for horn with whom her heart

perpetually dwelt.

While she paused, and paused, she heard the sound of distant

voices ; footsteps approached — not her husband's. Her breath

came short and thick, aud, instead of passing from between her

unclosed lips, seemed to encrust itself upon her tongue, and

forbid the power of utterance. Men — strangers, entered ; one

she had seen — known — the sergeant of police. He respectfully

removed bis hat, " hoped that Mrs. Hoskins would forgive horn

for doing his duty." If her life had depended on it she could

not speak ; but she looked into his face with so despairing, so

imploring a gaze, that the man turned from her, with more

emotion than could be expected from one who had often witnessed

distress in many forms. When at. last she was enabled to ask a

few questions, the answers she received confirmed her worst

fears. " The out-offices of Wallingford Manor had been set on

fire ; Hoskius, Hintou, aud a pedlar of the name of Paul Dodder,

had been found on the spot ; and," added the man, " the Manor

itself must been consumed bad wc not received intimation immediately

after the fire was kindled — long before there was any

appearance to indicate such rapid destruction."

The party then proceeded to search the cottage, but found

nothing which they considered necessary to remove. " Matters

may turn out better than you think for," said the man kindly.

Can I take any message to your husband ? — it may comfort

horn, for he seemed sadly put out — stupefied like."

I will go ! — no — my child — I will— I must wait till morning

! Tell him — my blessing — aud I will be with horn tomorrow.

I shall find horn, I suppose, in the — " Gaol, she would have said,

but could not utter tho hateful word.

The man understood her, and replied " Yes," — the mony-syllable

of hope, but, in this instance, the herald of despair.

They then departed, and went to Hints dwelling, where they

remained much longer. The sergeant, with real good feeling,

knocked at tho door of a respectable resident at Mosspits, whom

ho knew was esteemed by Agnes— told her the circumstances —

and the woman needed no further intimation to hasten to one

whom Bhe both loved and respected

When she entered the cottage, Agues was weeping bitterly

over her unconscious boy, who, despite her loud sobbing, slept

as calmly as if the very breath of happiness had hushed his

slumbers. She extended her baud to Mrs. Lee, and said, in

broken and hardly audible tones, " They will point at that innocent

child, when wc are both dead, and call horn, in bitter

mockery, the orphan of the house-burner 1 Aud who has

brought this bitterness upon us ? Pray for me, Mrs. Lee, pray

for me ! — I cannot pray for myself now ! Oh, that God in his

mercy had lest us childless, and then I might have borne it !

Wicked that lam ! Will he not be, perhaps, the only thing on

earth lest me to love, when — when — " She pressed her hands

firmly on her temples, and her friend almost scared that the

violence of her grief would destroy her reason. The feelings

that had long been pent up within her bosom had at last found

vent both in words and tears, and before nine o'clock she had

apparently regained much of her usual serenity. Sho dressed

her child, who added unconsciously to her misery by perpetually

inquiring for " papa," and placing a cup and chair for horn

before the .untested breakfast, she then summoned resolution to

change her dress ; aud tying a cottage-bonnet closely over her

face, proceeded with a sorrowing heart towards Mondrieh.

Mrs. Lee kindly took charge of the little boy; and, to do

justice to the inhabitants of the cottages, not one but saluted her

kindly and respectfully us she passed.

Poor thing ! " said Mrs Lee, " she has borne a great deal

lately ; she looks ten years older than she did this time twelve-mouths."



I am truly sorry for her," responded Miss Nancy Carter,

famous for clear-starching and scandal, who had come on purpose

to Mosspits to find out, as she expressed it, " the truth of everything."

" Im truly sorry for her ; but she always carried her

head very high, as if she were better than a servant forsooth !

Im very sorry for her, for all that ! "

So you ought to be, Miss Nancy, for she sent you plenty of

black-currant jelly when you had a sore throat, last winter,"

observed Mrs. Lee.

Do you think poor Hoskins will get off with transportation ? "

persisted Nancy.

I could never think horn guilty of setting fire to Wallingford

Manor, for oue," replied the kind-hearted Mrs. Lee. "He was

on the spot, I suppose, or they could not have taken horn there ;

but I am certain it was to save, not to destroy."

Well, time will tell," said the gossip, who, finding that

Mrs. Lee was charitably given, thought she would seek some

kindred soul " with which to communicate : — " Time will tell ;

only what did he want with seven fire-brands, tied in red

tape, a cask of powder, and three mould candles ? You may

smile if you please, Mrs. Lee, but it's true, every word of it I

Three mould candles, with the ends scorched, and a quarter of

a pound of wax-ends ! I had it from the very best authority,

for I'd scorn to say anything without a good foundation ! " and

off walked Miss Nancy Carter.

It would be impossible to describe the feelings with which

Agnes entered that abode of misery — a county gaol. Snow and

ice had accumulated in a little court she had to cross, to such a

degree, that she could hardly extricate her feet from, the humid

mass. As the rusty key turned in its lock, she clung to tho

Bliniy walls for support ; and, when the door was thrown open,

she had scarcely power to crawl into the dismal cell where her

husband was confined. Hoskins sat upon a low bed, which

evidently had not been discomposed, his elbows resting upon his

knees, and his face buried in bis bauds. Agues could not speak,

but she sat down by his side, and, passing her arm round his

neck, endeavoured to draw his head so as to rest it on her

bosom. He shrank from the touch, and a low aud bitter groan

was the only reply to her caresses.

Keep a good heart, master," said the gaoler, " keep a good

heart, and it may all go well. Bless ye ! Master Hinton

doesn't get on so, but has taken something to keep life in him."

No answer was returned to this consolatory speech, and tho

man left them, observing that they must uot remain more than

two hours together.

Not many, but kind and tranquillizing, were the words which

this admirable woman breathed into her husband's ear. She

kissed his cold and clammy hands, and tried, though in vain, to

prevail upon horn to taste of the refreshments she had not forgotten

to bring with her. For a length of time sho obtained

no word from his lips ; and at lost she sat silently gazing on

him — as a mariner who looks upon a rock close to his native

home, where he sported in infancy, and formed his plans of

future greatness, but which, on his return from a long and prosperous

voyage, with the harbour in view, had wrecked bis vessel,

and consigned his all to destruction ! Silence is the nurse of

sorrow : Agnes would have given worlds to have heard the sound

of his voice ; and, when at last he did speak, its tone was so

fearfully changed — so hollow, so agonized — that she could hardly

believe it to be that of her own Edward.

I deserve this, and worse, Agnes," he said, "for I have cast

the blessing of the Almighty far from me. And you, who ought

to curse me, to find you thus ! Do not touch me, Agnes ! 1

could bear your reproaches ; but your kindness scorches my very

heart. Yet, Agnes, I solemnly call God to witness, that lam

innocent of any participation in the burning at Wallingford

Manor. I cannot now dwell upon it ; but, as you have borne

much, bear yet a little more — bear with my silence ; but believe

me innocent of any participation in that crime. However I maybe

otherwise guilty — however despicable — 1 repeat that I had

nothing to do with the burning at Wallingford."

How sweet and how natural it is to believe iv the innocence

of those wc love ! Although Agnes well remembered the fearful

habit of falsehood which her husband had contracted — although

he had so often deceived her — yet she clung to the belief that he

was guiltless, aud blessed God for it, as though it were an established

fact in the eyes of those judges before whom he was

shortly to appear as a fettered culprit, whose life only might

appease the offended laws of his country.

Would to God it were come— that dreaded, dreadful day I "

she murdered, iv her cottage-solitude.

It was now nearly three weeks since her first interview with

her husband ; a slow, consuming fever had been preying upon

her strength, and utterly prevented her using the smallest

exertion, or crawling to his prison. The kind neighbour, Mis.

Lee, undertook to visit horn daily, and to see that his wants were

cared for ; the little boy was often her companion.

Thank God ! " said his poor mother, kissing his rosy check,

"thank God he is too young to remember bis father in a prison !

Were he even a year older, its memory might dwell upon ibis

mid and wither his young spirit within him."

It was early in the mouth of February, and still she had been

unable to reach Mondrieh, although nearly every day the

physician described her as growing better. The clergyman's

visits afforded much consolation, particularly as he told her how

completely aud truly penitent her husband was : this, with the

assurance, repeated in every communication she received from

horn, of his perfect innocence, made her hope for the best, though

how that innocence was to be proved remained a mystery !

Mrs. Lee had taken her boy out one day. earlier than usual,

to see lira Middleton ; and, as Agnes looked forth on the clear

cold morning, she fancied she felt stronger than she had been

for a long time. The crisp hoar-frost hung iv fantastic forms

on tho young shoots of the early budding trees. The robin

hopped among the lower branches of the oak, and seeing the

hand resting on the window where it had been so often fed, flew

to the sill, and fearlessly pecked the crumbs she threw to her

little dependent. The air, she thought, was almost fragrant ; aud

crc the casement was closed, she had resolved to exert her strength,

and walk as far as the stile that divided the Mondrieh meadows.

She sat for a few moments on the step; and, urged by the

eager desire again to see her husband, after a little consideration,

determined to reach the town. She walked better than

she anticipated ; and felt much pleasure at perceiving that now

but one field separated her from the turn that led directly to the

prison Suddenly she became rooted to the earth ; her features

assumed the rigidity and colour of death ; and she cast off

the borne, which had been tied on so firmly, to catch every

note of the awakening sound that passed over the town. Again !

was it a dream?— or could it be really the trumpet — tho

awful trumpet that heralds the approach of horn who is to sit

in judgment on the crimes of his fellow-beings !

"It is come ! — it is come ! " she exclaimed, " the day — the

very hour of his trial, aud they told me not of it ! Father of

mercy ! " — and as she spoke she sank on the icebound and

crackling grass, and stretched forth her attenuated arms towards

heaven — " Father of mercy, remember mercy for the sake of thy

blessed Son! Mercy! — mercy! — mercy! Lord, this cup may

not pass away ; but crush me not utterly at this dreadful moment

! Mercy ! — mercy ! — 0 my God I "

The trumpet-sound had ceased, and the bustle of the county-court

subsided, when Agnes Hoskins— her mantle shrouding her

entire figure, and its hood held closely round her face, glided,

almost like a spectre, into a corner nearest the dock, where the

three prisoners stood arraigned for trial. With tender care for

the feelings of horn she loved, she concealed herself effectually

from his sight ; knowing that it would increase his misery to

see her there. To the indictment they all pleaded " Not guilty ;"

but Edward Hoskins laid his hand on his heart, and, looking

firmly in the judge's face, added, in a low, impressive tone, "so

help me, God I " The bearing of the unfortunate culprits was

strongly contrasted : Paul Dodder's chin had sunk on his

breast, and he looked down with the sullen expression of one

who knew the worst was come, and cared not for it Harry

Hinton had thrown back the light and glowing curls that crowded

over his brow, and his eye seemed enlarged by the bold front

he carried ; his features were high and regular ; and the observing

would have imagined that the firmness with which

he regarded, and even analyzed, the countenances of his judges,

little betokened the hardihood of guilt. Edward Hoskins stood

as a sorrowful and heart-stricken man — ashamed of his offences,

yet confident that he was not guilty of this particular crime.

His suit of solemn black seemed still more dismal beside the

smart blue coat and light waistcoat in which his unabashed

companion was arrayed. The first pierson examined was the

police-sergeant by whom the prisoners had been taken into

o

custody. The counsel for the crown, who, us usual, scented the

blood afar off, lost no opportunity, in his opening speech, of

stating the worst, and dwelt particularly on Hoskius's ingratitude

to Mrs. Cecil Wallingford ; while the counsel for the prisoners

seemed equally anxious to foil his brother, and, if possible, make

a way for his clients to escape.

The sergeant deposed to his finding Dodder and Hinton close

to the burning barn : the latter, when first he saw horn, was on

his knees, in the very act of blowing the flame ; the other held

a quantity of combustibles (which he described), and wus laying

a train to communicate with the stables. Hoskins, he said, was

near the spot, but made uo attempt to escape. This statement

went so clearly against the prisoners that the jury looked at

each other, as much as to say, " What need wc of further

witness?" No of the police confirmed all the other had

stated ; and at every word they uttered Agnes felt her heart beat

slowly, aud still more slowly, until, at last, she scarcely breathed

or lived.

"The case, my lord, against these unhappy men, seems so

fully made out," said the counsel for the crown, addressing the

bench, " that I need hardly trouble the court with the examination

of other witnesses; unless, indeed, the jury require it"

My lord," observed the prisoners' counsel, " I particularly

wish that a girl of the name of Jane Hoole be called up : much

dep ends upon her evidence."

My learned brother has chosen a strange witness," replied

the senior barrister ; " I was anxious to spare the feelings of

his clients ; but, by all means, let Jane Hoole be brought

forward."

All eyes were turned upon the wild fantastic girl who now

ascended the witness-box. Her rich golden hair had been curled

and arranged with much attention ; her pallid cheeks were tinted

by that fearful, but beautiful, hue which too truly indicates

consumption, aud her deep blue eyes were of a dazzling and

wandering brightness ; her dress was of faded silk, and a wide

red sash girdled a figure of light and elegant proportions. She

seemed much terrified, and trembled violently.

Tho prisoner Hinton intimidates our witness, my lord," observed

the counsel ; and a shudder passed over those who saw

the expression with which he regarded the unfortunate victim of

his wickedness.

Let Henry Hinton stand down," Baid the judge. After a

little time the poor creature seemed at ease, ont collected ;

Agnes, who had been roused by her appearance, thought she was

a much more rational being than she had imagined during their

former brief meetings.

"You know the prisoners at the bar?" commenced the

counsel.

I do, sir."

After a little more questioning, the rod was presented to her,

and she was directed to place it ou the heads of those who were

present at the burning of Wallingford Manor. With a trembling

hand she let it descend on the heads of Hinton and

Dodder, then held it for a moment or two suspended over

Hoskins, and, after some consideration, was about to return it to

tho officer.

Were only these two men present ? " inquired the counsel,

while a thrill and mvrmvr of mingled quality passed through the

court-house.

"Though I am only a poor, half-witted creature," Baid the

girl, looking round with au imploring air, " I want to tell the

truth, which I will if you let me do it in my own way. He

was there in body, but not in spirit; don't you see the difference

? He didn't mean to be there for harm — he was there for

good. But let me go on in my own way, aud you'll understand

mc."

She then, iv wandering but simple language, stated that

Harry Ilinton had often employed her to procure materials for

various burnings, and that she did as he desired, " for the love

that warmed her heart towards him." That he often promised

to marry her, but that the fancy he took to Jessy had, she knew,

prevented it ; and so she thought, if he was once to be sent

beyond the seas, she would follow horn, and have horn all her

own. He always promised to give Jessy up ; but she found that

o 2

he had got her back from Scotland, after her sister had sent her

there, and resolved to punish horn for his infidelity by telling the

police, which she had done ; and she hoped, now she had told

their lordships the truth, they would send Jessy far, far away,

and make Harry marry her at once ; she would go with horn

any where — that she would — for she loved horn with all her

heart.

A great portion of this was unintelligible to both judge and

jury ; but the witness evidently interested them ; and though

the counsel frequently interrupted her, saying that what she

stated had nothing to do with the transaction, yet they were

obliged to let her go on her own way, as the only chance of

getting at the truth. As to Hoskins, "he certainly was," she

said, "at Wallingford, but not to burn it." It was in vain

that the counsel for the crown declared that hearsay evidence

should not be received ; — the judge was of opinion that she

ought to be permitted to go ou ; and the counsel for the crown

resigned her to the cross-examination of the counsel for the

prisoner.

You have stated, young woman, that Edward Hoskins did

not aid and abet in the burning which took place on the night

of the twenty-fifth of December."

I have, sir. 1 was up iv the lost where they met, aud when

be found out what they were after, he prayed and begged them

not to go on ; and then my Harry made like to give it up — and

Hoskins went home as wc thought, for my Harry sent me down

to the Manor with the chips for burning, aud promised to come

after; but, at the Manor, dark as it was, I saw Hoskins, who let

himself iv with a private key to the out-places, examining and

looking about as if to see all safe. And I wondered what kept

Harry away, and went back ; and on the road I met Dodder,

and a little behind I saw Harry — my Hurry, talking to the girl

I hated ; and I made up my mid to tell that minute aud bring

the police to there ; and, meeting one, I gave horn a hint, aud

returned to the out-house, at Wallingford ; aud there was

Hoskins and Harry quarrelling, and one reproached the other — ■

md Edward Hoskins thought to put out the fire — and I was

sorry when Harry struck horn ; and then Paul Dodder went on

lighting the fire that Edward tried to put out — and was like

one frantic, aud Harry and he struggled hard, and came so

near the spot where I was crouching, that I ran off to tell Agnes

Hoskins of it, and saw the police coming, and she can tell you,"

continued the girl, turning round to the spot where Agues bad

fancied herself perfectly concealed — " there is Mrs. Hoskins.

I dare say she remembers what I said."

Edward Hoskins sprang to the side of the dock, and, for a

moment forgetting the propriety he had hitherto maintained,

shook the bars violently, and, finding that he could not escape to

her side, exclaimed, " Support, support her ! — will no one look

to her ! — she is fainting ! " But she did not faint — she approached

the bar with a blanched check, but a step of almost

supernatural firmness, and, passing her thin, cold hand through

the aperture, rested her clear blue eyes upon the jury ; and in a

low voice, which, notwithstanding its weakness, was so earnest

as to be heard in every corner of the court —

Forgive, gentlemen," she said, "a wife's presuming to remind

you that more than one life hangs upon your verdict ; and" —

Bhe was interrupted by a scream, so wild and piercing that every

eye was again turned to the witness-box. from whence it came.

There — there — there she is!" exclaimed Jane Hoole. "She

has followed horn even here to take horn from me But you will

not let her!" She leaped down the steps, and, in an instant,

before the officers had time to interpose, she had tom off a cloak

and hat, in which the unfortunate Jessy Grey had endeavoured

to enshroud herself ; but which could not deceive her lynx-eyed

rival. " Here she is, my lord !— here she is ! Agnes Hoskins,

I will trust her to you," she continued, dragging her forward.

Agnes did not see the deceiving and degraded sister ; she only

beheld the child of her father's old age — the girl she had loved

with a mother 8 tenderness, and cherished with a mother's care.

Turning from the dock, she opened her arms, but Jessy fell at her

feet and hid her face. It was in vain that order was sought to be

restored. Agnes Hoskins and her virtues were known to every

individual in the court. Husbands had often pointed her out to

their wives as a model of virtue and propriety — fathers had wished

for such a daughter, and young men for such a partner. .end as

she stood struggling with emotion, and caressing the poor lost

creature, who twined around her with all the contrite feeling of

a humbled sinner, the judge waited patiently till the feelings that

had thus agitated every member of the assembly should subside.

I have made one effort, Agnes, to repair my many crimes,"

whispered Jessy to her sister : " I have no evidence to offer in

savour of hir n; but I believe I can confirm the statement just

made by that unhappy girl, as to your Edwards innocence."

This information was conveyed to the counsel for the prisoners ;

aud, as the poor changed creature was about to ascend tho box,

Agnes threw her own cloak over her shoulders, to conceal a form

that called a crimson blush to her faded check. Her quiet aud

distinct account of the transaction fully corroborated what the

wild girl had sworn to. Unknown to her deceiver, Bhe had witnessed

the quarrel which took place between them on that awful night ;

and had wandered over the country ever since, " seeking rest,

but finding none" — not daring to pollute her sister's cottage with

her presence, aud resolved not to visit the author of her misery,

lest he might alter the fixed purpose of her soul - that of appearing

at her brother-in law's trial to testify his innocence. She was

supported down the Steps, and clung to her sister's shoulder

during the jurys deliberation. Without leaving the box, they

returned a verdict of guilty against Hinton and Dodder, and acquitted

Edward Hoskins. Agnes might well be excused for

forgetting Jessy's feelings in the overwhelming gratitude she

experienced for the preservation of her husband's life. So completely

were her ears closed by a new sensation of joyfulness and

hope, which overflowed as it were all her senses, that she hardly

understood, when tho judge had absolutely pronounced sentence

of death on his wretched companions, the meaning of his words.

One of Jane Hoole's frightful shrieks aroused her from those

visions of returning happiness which flitted around her.

Death ! — not death — not death for Harry !" vociferated the

maddened creature : " it is transportation — not death ! — you

won't kill horn !" At the same instant Agnes felt the grasp, that

her sister had so firmly fixed on her arm, relax ; she looked upon

her — her hands were stretched towards the dock ; and, as her

g.ize rested upon Hintou's face, which was turned towards her,

those beautiful eyes grew yet more dim ; her livid lips parted

over her white and glistening teeth ; and, with a frightful convulsion,

the ardcut, misguided spirit of Jessy Grey passed from

its earthly dwelling !

Months and years have gone by— the Mosspits are quiet and

beautiful as ever — but the curate of the parish, a mild and benevolent

young man, dwells in the cottage that had once been

gladdened by tho presence of the excellent Agnes. She had

passed with her small household to another land, where wc will

for a moment follow ; it is even iv the new world ; and there, ina

well-built dwelling, on the borders of a green Savannah, is the

final resting-place of Edward Hoskins and his now numerous

family.

The sun is setting behind the dense and magnificent woods

that seem to mount even to the heavens ; aud its parting rays

linger, as if loath to part from the richly-cultivated corn and

meadow-land that surrounds his house. There, literally, under

the shadow of their own vine and fig-tree, — " none making them

afraid," — are this once more happy family assembled.

"And will you never return to England father ?" demanded the

first-born, as he carefully examined the contents of a huge chest

which hud just arrived from Europe ; and which contained

a variety of tools and articles for use

His mother replied, " Could wc be happier there than wc

are here ?"

Her husband thanked her with a look that told of gratitude

unspeakable ; aud when the group had separated, and only

Edward and his cherished wife remained to enjoy the deep tranquillity

of the balmy twilight, he disturbed the meditation,

which the question hud occasioned, by the utterance of a natural,

but painful idea. "If our children should ever go to England,

Agnes, they would hear a sad story of their father ; but they

would hear also of their mother's virtue : had you been unkind

had you even been what the world calls just to yourself; and

what you might have been without offence, — I should have been

a banned and a blighted man, but you did — "

Only what every woman who truly loves her husband

would do," interrupted the unchanging Agnes. " And, behold,

the Lord has been not only merciful, but bountiful ; — the treasures

bestowed upon us on earth" (she pointed to their children,

who were assembling for evening worship within the porch) "can

only be exceeded by those appointed for humble believers in

heaven."

THE OLD MAID.

J-j$*J^HE lady who accompanied the children I had so often

Zjyljgi£ admired, was a slight, thin, narrow-looking person,

$L\a¥ fees"" °^ w hat is termed " a certain age ;" such certain

— *** — ' age being of all ages the most decidedly uncertain.

When an unmarried female passes thirty, until she is incontrovertibly

old, she remains, in the estimation of all well-bred

persons, "of a certain age;" and has to undergo the varied

taunts, sneers, and suspicions, which are unhesitatingly lavished

upon the sisterhood : — " As particular us an old maid," — " as

fidgety as an old maid," — " as cranky as an old maid," — " disagreeable

old maid," — and " ugly old maid," — are only a few of

church, or even the vulgar music of marrow-bones and cleavers.

[By the way, I cannot avoid saying, that I agree with Grant

Thorburn in considering an old bachelor really an obnoxious

animal. Where he has the means of supporting a wife, he ought

to have one ; besides, the awful power of " popping the question"

is in his own bands. And he may rely upon one thing, that be

he ever so old, and ever so ugly, ever so openly devoted to celibacy,

man-traps and spring-guns are in his path ; and if he does not

beware, like all who are very, very hard to please, he may take

the crooked stick at last. So much by way of advice en

parentheses

At last " Milly" came, aud I confess I did not at first find her

very prepossessing. Her figure was small aud narrow, her

shoulders were round, or, perhaps from constitutional delicacy,

she stooped rather forward ; her mouth had a firm-set expression,

by no means pleasing ; her nose was small and well formed ; and

her eyes were deep grey, and lustrous — yet was their brightness

tempered, as it were, by a certain indefinable discretion ; they

seldom looked abroad, but seemed retired within themselves,

quietly musing upon the affairs of life, rather than wandering

amid, or partaking of, its excitement ; her brow, though somewhat

low, was full, and shadowed by a profusion of light hair,

which in her youth must have been rich and luxuriant ; but

Time had there commenced a war with beauty ; or, perchance, it

might have been sorrow or Sickness. that scattered snows with

what had been a superabundance of curling auburn tresses ; her

throat was beautifully white, though its roundness was gone,

but a black velvet band, clasped by a rich ruby brooch (the only

ornament she wore), set it off to the best advantage ; her entire

dress, bearing, and manners, savoured much of what is called

puritanism. She would accompany the children to the beach,

and, while they wandered about, draw forth her knitting,

and, with her eyes fixed on the wide ocean or the passing

clouds, continue her mechanical employment without heeding

the passers by, or, so unobtrusive was her appearance, being

heeded by them. Or she would read, either in a small thick

volume, having the appearance of a Bible, or in divers other

books, iii both ancient and modern bindings. She was evidently

particular in her dress ; her shoes and gloves (her feet and

hands, I observed, were delicately formed) were always of superior

make and quality, and there was a precision about her dress

which led to the belief that she was exact in all things. She did

not seem anxious to make my acquaintance, and a nervous tremor

in her manner, when. conversing with strangers, showed she

was either naturedly timid, or unused to general society. She

blushed, moreover, in addressing you, though, after the awkwardness

attending a first salvation had ceased, there was a strange

mingling of gentleness and firmness in her conversation. That

she was au educated, rather than accomplished, woman, was

evident ; but, though devoted to my three young friends, sho

did not wish to explain the cause of her affection towards them :

not that she affected mystery, but any allusion to their being

related to her, or of her km iv any degree, created that species

of annoyance which the curious care too little to inflict. Once

only, iv one of the casual, and somewhat cold, conversations wc

held together, she observed, that there were ties stronger than

those cemented by relationship ; with this I perfectly agreed,

but added, that it was rather an odd observation for a Scottish

woman, whose clan-like sympathies generally give a tinge to all

things. She smiled, — one of those dim, faint smiles which separated

her firm-set lips, with an expression of pensive sweetness

that accorded well with the gentle meaning of her soft intelligent

eyes, — and observed, to the very elan-like feeling, which my

observation appeared to condemn, they owed both their prosperity

and success : " In strange countries, when far away from

home," she continued, " the feelings confined to the Mac Gregory,

Mac Persons, and Mac Donald, extend to each child of the hill

and heather ; tho Scotsman is everywhere the Scotsman's friend ;

and, in my humble opinion, this very circumstance, so often

urged against us, is much in our favour: if such were the course

adopted towards the children of every country, when away from

their natural dwellings, there would be a less number dependent

on the charity of strangers."

I agreed most readily with this assertion, and embraced the

opportunity of paying a just tribute to the moral and intellectual

worth of those who dwell over the border. She appeared

gratified.

I have generally noted that the Scotch are never warm, at

first, either in their expressions of pleasure or anger : they are

early acquainted with the benefits arising from restraint ; they

learn it in their mother's arms, herself ever patient and exemplary

; they are taught it by their deacons and their pastors;

and a knowledge of the world establishes them in the judicious

practice of self-control. I never — however meritorious the

restraint undoubtedly is — knew a person to be very popular, who

was very particular on this point. Perhaps wc like to be acquainted

with those who now and then make little slips iv

conduct, and occasionally burst forth into certain extravagances,

both of management and temper, because they seem so many

palpable excuses for our own misdeeds.

Horace tells me you are going to leave Bognor, and intend

passing a month at Hastings," said Miss Millicent to me one

morning ; " you will take a letter for me to a friend of ours

there, a Presbyterian clergyman, who has lately fixed his residence

in that neighbourhood?"

Of course I promised to do so.

Perhaps," she continued, " you would like his acquaintance :

he is a kind, amiable man, not much in sour way ; but I am

sure you would esteem horn highly, if you knew him."

1 did not exactly know what Miss Millicent meant by his "not

being exactly in my way," nor did I ask : I suppose sho considered

me too scatter-brained for a grave acquaintance. I should

not have liked to have been told that, and I did not wish to put

the maiden lady into a situation where it might have been

necessary to have said a civil bit of fib. — My readers must forgive

mo ; — but my busy mid, ever employed on those delectable

buildings denominated Chatmux en Espagne, had settled it, that

this Mr. Campbell was some antiquated beau of hers, and that

one of these days Millicent Morrison might become Millicent

Campbell. Still that would not do ; my imagination, stretched

to its greatest length, could not fancy her a married woman.

What would she be without her little peculiarities? and a

marrying woman ought to have none ; the very pins confining

the folds of her shawl on either shoulder, said, as plainly as pins

could say, "Wc were placed here by maiden fingers." Then the

white satin bow, at the back of the neat Dunstable straw borne,

its ends cut exactly into three sharp points, aud the two loops of

such equal length, that you might fancy the threads were counted ;

that white satin bow would have stood on end sit the idea of the

fair hand which arranged its proportions being devoted to any

male creature's control ; no, that could not be a correct conclusion.

Why, then, did she blush, when delivering me the

letter for " Mr. Campbell ?" and why did Horace look cunning,

and whisper his sister ; aud why did the little lady blush, and

simper, and look grave at her brother, when he repeated the

whisper, as well as to say — " For shame, Horace ? "

I wish big and little people would never either whisper or

discourse silent eloquence with their eyes, in company ; it is

really very rude, very — and very perplexing ; for it is so natural

to put that and that together, — and draw conclusions, — and

worry one's brain, about what, after all, is no concern of one's

own Now, as if I hud not enough of my own affairs to mid, I

continued perplexing myself about the three children and

Millicent Morrison — whom I had seen,— and about this Mister

Jamie Campbell — whom I bad not seen ; and was never fairly

content or comfortable, until I had the pleasure of receiving Mr.

Campbell, diet nous, at St. Leonardss I love tho national accents

of all countries, — some more, some less, — they always tell me of

something that is not present, and set the mid wandering to

other lands ; bring to you the sweet south, the sturdy north, the

brave and the beautiful of distant countries : the bold or the

tranquil landscape is outstretched before you, and often to me

comes the memory of much that I shall never see again, when a

poor basket-woman in Covent Garden market accosts me in what

many a one would call a detestable brogue, with — " God save

you this fine morning, my lady ; does your honour want a

basket ? and any how, whether you do or not, God's fresh

blessing be about you ! "

Mr. Campbell had not lost the accent of his country, nor had

he tried to lose it ; he appeared a quiet, gentlemanly man, though

not altogether what the elite would have termed a gentleman ;

there was a fire in bis deep blue eye, quelled, but not extinguished,

which I fancied proved horn a man of genius. Like

most of his countrymen, he possessed considerable literary information,

aud a great love for music ; but one thing I set my

head at rest about at one — he would never do for Millicent

Morrison : — he was slovenly iv his dress, and his shoes, I observed,

were tied with black leather twist instead of riband ; this

would, as I suit, never do for her. But why, then, did she

blush ? Wc shall see.

The following Sunday confirmed my opinion, that Mr.

Campbell was a man of genius, aud that his talents, far from

being hid under a bushel, were brightly burning, kindled by a

holy and well-directed zeal for the benefit of his congregation.

There was something wild and picturesque in the situation

of his little chapel, which called to mid the persecuting days,

when the disciples of the true Faith had not where to lay their

heads : it was rested almost in a cleft of the hill-side ; and from

the little, clean, and well-preserved platform, which fronted the

entrance, you over-looked the wooded valley — the distant town

and the boundless ocean, stretching wide aud away ; the sunbeams

dancing with its waves, and the blue arch of heaven,

untainted, on that bright morning, by a single cloud, reflected

in its bosom. I remember the text he worked upon so beautifully

— it was a simple but a joyous one to the believing

Christian ; it involved no abstruse doctrinal points ; it was loue

of those excellent and heuveu-constructed sentences which lead

the mid from earth to heaven by a single image —

Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy-laden, and

I will give you rest"

He described fully and forcibly the bitter burthen of sin,

giving due weight to its temptations and its fascinations iv the

first instance, but proving how, in the end, it became wearisome

to the lightest spirit — how it fretted, and festered, and galled,

and oppressed, all who imagined that the pleasures of this life

could satisfy that craving after happiness and immortality bo

inseparable from our nature. After descanting upon the first

portion of the sentence, with rare and fervid eloquence he turned

to the promise so touchingly given by our Saviour — " I will give

j T ou rest : " — he painted " the rest" signified by the Son of Godin

colours so holy, that, as for a moment my eyes wandered

through the open window upon the outstretched landscape, I

felt as if his moral pencil had been dipped in the tranquillity of

nature, and drunk with thankfulness of the river of living waters

which his eloquence poured upon a soul thirsting for a knowledge

of the love of God. Then came the hymn, and it was

impossible to look up to the gorgeous sky, or. out upon the

bounteous earth, without feeling conviction of the truth that

His ways aro just, His counsels wise."

I forgot the slovenly habits, and ceased to think that the

shoes were fastened with leather twist; I even, on my return to

St. Leonardss, indulged in the hope that Millicent Morrison

might yet become Millicent Campbell. There is no saying how

long this reverie might have continued, had not Mr. Campbell

himself, accompanied by a — wife — and three children, overtaken

my lagging footsteps. " Mrs Campbell wished to be introduced

to you; Bhe only returned yesterday from a visit to her father's,

iv Argyleshire, or she would have called before." Alas! alas!

was poor castle-builder ever so confounded ! I made the best of

it, however, and agreed to take a friendly cup of tea with "tho

Campbell" the next evening. 1 will at once pass over the

frugal but kind hospitality of my hosts, and only mention, that

very soon I heard a story I have never forgotten — a story I

have prized and cherished — a tale of forbearance and good faith

converting an old maid into a heroine, exalting my sex as I

lies love to see them exalted, more by their virtues than their

knowledge. The story was of Milly of the Manse.

She was a winsome bound lass, when I first knew her," said

Mr. Campbell, "blithe — and before all women I ever met for

Ai.Ai-jr.ig AU am Ban.say'u ballads, or the songs of llobbio Bums;

she was her father's darling, her mother's pride, and indoor, 1

may say, the pride of all th? congregation ; for her father wasp



the pastor of Kirk-averting, aud lived at Haverling Manse

Sho certainly," continued Mr. Campbell, after pausing for a

moment, " was the bonniest and blithest lass I had ever met."

That may be," observed the ministers wife, " but, Jamie, I

never could think Miss Milly as handsome as you say."

"Oh!" replied Mr. Campbell, — I thought, quite assail as was

consistent in a minister, — " she was the bonniest and blithest

lass I had ever met thai; it was before I saw you, Nannie."

The respectable " Nannie" smiled a smile that well became her

round and ample countenance ; and her husband proceeded.

"Ronald M'Lean was the only son of the M'Leau, a laird of

family and power, but of little wealth; for what remained from

ancient times had been spent in keeping up a style and appearance

to please the whim of Ronaldss mother, an English lady,

certainly of great beauty. The laird loved her with Scottish

truth, and more than Scottish fervour, and cared not what he did

so she was pleased. Young Ronald had too much of the spirit

of his clan to be a great favourite with his English parent, who

wished horn to be sent to au English school. But this his father

stoutly refused ; und the boy wus accordingly placed under the

euro of Duncan Morrison of Haverling, who had a rich reputation

as a classic, and a still richer os a moral man I was at

that time a pupil in tho same house, though under very different

circumstances from Ronald M Lean. He was a laird's son, und

I was the only child of the Widow Campbell of Mavisglen — he

came to school with a fine footman bchiud horn, I came by

myself — he had a horse to carry his luggage, and my store was

contained iv a handkerchief."

"In a trunk — a small trunk," interrupted Mrs. Campbell.

"N o, Nannie, it was my poor mother's best silk handkerchief."



"If it wasn't a hair trunk, it wus a box, with may lie a handkerchief

lapped round it," persisted the worthy woman, anxious

for her husband's dignity on all points.

No, it was only a handkerchief; do I not iciM^ilor vim.

.her— ?"

'ic on," interrupted Mrs. Campbell,

"I will," said the minister; "but the handkerchief" — (sit

was a trunk, I know," murmured Mrs. Campbell, but in so low

a tone as to be heard only by me, who sat next her) — "did not

prevent my being treated by all the house, Milly included, as

well as if I hod been a laird in prospective; they were happy

days, both for me aud Ronald, but especially for Ronald, who

secured tho love of a heart that was above all price. Millicent

and the young laird grew together, and studied together, and in

all studies where patience and application wus necessary, Milly

outdid us all : she was the personification of contented industry

and innocent enjoyment; the admired of tho rich, the beloved

of the poor. It was seen by all at the Manse, except Milly 's

father and mother, that Ronald M'Lean loved her with a strong

and fervid affection, such as men, however they may change in

other matters, can feel but once— and Milly was not slow in

loving iv return. I very much doubt if Millicent would have

given up her heart so entirely to this affection, had not the lady

of M'Leun, much struck with her beauty and acquirements,

invited her to spend a few months at M'Lean Castle, an invitation

she was proud to accept; and while there the lady treated

her with so much kindness, and, as Milly afterwards said, 'so

like a mother,' that she felt assured, poor thing! that the proud

lady knew and encouraged her attachment towards her son : it

was natural enough for her to think bo — and indeed Ronald

believed tho same — natural enough, too, in him-though bitter

was the struggle, and hard the trial, which taught them the

contrary.

"One morning, during her stay with the Melons, Milly was

sent for to Mrs. Mean's dressing-room earlier than usual : and

there were the laird aud his proud lady, stiff aud cold enough ;

aud, instead of kissing her 'sweet Scotch girl,' us she used on

other occasions, she permitted her to stand, while she haughtily

inquired, how she had dared to suffer her son to breathe his

affection towards her, while under her roof? she, moreover,

upbraided her as an artful, designing creature ; and concluded

by an injunction that she should quit her house for ever, and see

her son no more. You may suppose that Milly waited not top

2

be twice bidden : her knowledge of propriety prevented that,

nor, indeed, so bitterly hurt was she, had she the thought or

wish to bid good-bye to horn she loved so dearly. 'The blessing

of the Lord would not be with mc,' she murmured iv the silence

of her own heart, 'if I encouraged horn iv disobedience; and I

will show the great lady of M'Lean that I can lie as proud as

Bhe is.' "

"It was a sinful thought," quoth Mrs. Campbell.

"So it was. Nannie, I'll allow," replied her gentle husband ;

but there are time 3 when the wounded spirit stirs within the

best of us, and wc cannot, without much prayer, command it. to

bo still."

That's true, Jamie," quoth she again ; " you are aye on the

side of mercy."

I was pleased to see, that though she might be a trifle jealous

of Millicent Morrison, she honoured her husband's opinion ; and

I also observed that her eyes glistened whenever he uttered a

sentiment of a good or pious tendency.

She went home without leaving word or token for poor

Ronald, who came to tho Manse the next day in a woful taking.

By this time her heart had become softened, and she argued

moreover with herself, that she might meet horn once more, just

to bid horn good-bye for ever; and seeing horn from her window

pacing np and down the little flower-garden he had so often

assisted her to cultivate, she just slipped on her hood, and stood

before him.

The young man, at first, neither sighed nor spoke, but he

looked into her suce as he would read her soul, which was then

an easy thing, for her mid was as an open book, full of good

thoughts and maidenly wisdom, devoid of guile, and simple

withal as a mountain dove. I am no way skilled in love

passages — they are foolish, and only snares for wisdom, beguiling

men and women of their good resolutions; and so it was in this

ease; for Milly, who, notwithstanding Mrs. M'Lean's harshness,

had formed the resolution of giving up all communion with

Ronald, was persuaded, aud without her parents' sanction, to

meet horn once more iv a deep glen, where they had often

wandered before it was considered a sin for either to love what

to each appeared most lovely upon earth. I cannot altogether

acquit Mrs. Morrison of blame iv this transaction: — true, the

young pet. pie had never spoken to her of the affection subsisting

between them, but I am sure she knew it, and she ought to have

foreseen that, being so mv.h together, with similar pursuits, and

a suitable difference of age, nothing was more natural than that

they should become attached, in defiance of prudential considerations.

The muster himself, poor man, knew nought of

such matters ; he possessed book-learning enough to stock a

university, but he wus aye careless of the things of this life, and

no ways economical in the management of his homestead."

"I never beamed the Dominie for that," said Mrs. Campbell,

"for it is the woman's business; but what I censured the

mother for, was the belief she got into her head, that Milly's

beauty aud Milly's cleverness made her a fit match for e'er a

laird in Scotland. Mothers work ill for their daughters instead

of good, by such whimsies."

"So they do, Nannie; and yet I mid your turning up

your nose at Mrs. Grace, the curate's wife, when she hinted tint

her William and our Muggy might be married yet."

Mrs. Campbell laughed, saying only in reply, " But Willy is

such a foxy, mischievous ape, and every one says Mangy is so

handsome."

"She is very like you, my love," replied the minister, and

continued : —

Milly was at her tryst by the time appointed. She sat on the

same bank where she had often sat before with her lover. She

looked at the sky; tho evening was closing in — the stars, one by

one, were stealing up the blue arch of heaven — the dewy Softness

of night was over the landscape ; still he came not — the

loved, the looked-for, was not there; her heart beat more quickly

she scanned the hill, the wooded glen — still be came not ;

there was a perfect stillness in tho air and on the earth, and no

sound disturbed the serenity of nature, save the occasional bark

ot the shepherd's dog coming over the mountain, or the plash of

the water-fowl in the deep blue lake at her feet It was a

delicious hour, yet she heeded it not ; her heart was sir — and al

last the unbidden tears rolled down her cheeks as if that heart

would break. Suddenly came the sound of a footstep ; she

dashed the memorials of sorrow away, and the feel of ' Why

does he not come ? peradventure some evil hath befallen him,'

was succeeded by the resolution of assuming an angry manner,

though displeasure was far from her heart. In another moment

not Ronald— but the M'Lean himself stood at her side. Now

was she indeed alarmed ; and grasping the arm of the tall chieftain,

demanded, with an earnestness which told her feelings,

where Ronald was.

"He seated the trembling girl on the bank, and took his

place beside her. M'Lean was a stern, but not a cold-hearted

man, and he felt, more than he cared to express at home, for the

innocent and artless creature who loved his son with such devotion

; be thought highly of her, for thinking highly of that

which belonged to horn; and it was some time before he was

able to make the communication he knew must be made. Ronald

M'Lean had fallen from his horse that morning, and been much

injured. He had confided to a favourite servant his desire that

Milly should be made acquainted with his misfortune, as au

excuse for breaking his appointment The servant, with the

dread of his mistress before his eyes, told her of it ; and thus it

was that the father, and not the son, kept the expected tryst.

ivied now, Millicent, I am come to speak to, to commune with

you, not to reproach or chide you for a circumstance which wc

ought all to have foreseen, and over which, poor girl, as yet, you

have hud no control. It will not be always thus ; for you have

reason, and I am about to call upon you to exercise it, not for

your own, but for Ronaldss benefit.

"anything for his benefit,' she replied, 'I will gladly

do.'

' Do you know. Milly, that you have it in your power

to establish the house of the M'Lean in all its former grandeur,

or to plunge it into deeper difficulties than it has yet

known 1 '

'" I am sure, laird,' — interrupted Milly, eagerly.

' Make no rash promises — nothing rash will I listen to,' said

the M'Lean, — ' hear me — hear me calmly : Ronald loves you —

loves you now fondly, truth — but young men change — marriage,

blessed and holy though it be, cannot always restrain the wandering

thoughts of man — and even if you were bound together

iv the holy bonds of matrimony, Ronald might — nay, I am sure

he would, change.' Millicent seemed as though she had not

heard aright, and their shook her bead. 'All men change,' repeated

the laird.

' You were aye accounted a good husband,' observed

Milly.

' I trust I have been so,' he replied.

' Then, laird, you have no changed,' added the ministers

daughter; 'and why suppose Ronald unlike his father?'

M'Lean looked at her for a moment, baffled by her simplicity

and good sense. ' But,' said he, 'it was not that I meant

to speak of ; — have you never heard of Lady Lucy Graham, the

heiress of thousands of acres, and thousands to stock them,

too?'

' The auld maid of Graham Hall ? ' inquired Milly, quite

unsuspiciously.

' She is not to say auld— not forty, I should think — nor

near. Well, she loves my son, and would give up her houses,

her kye, her lands, her money, for the love you hold.'

' I dare say she would,' replied Millicent proudly, 'and

well she might ; — houses, kye, and lands, — oh ! what are they to

the love of Ronald M'Lean?' and then, ashamed that she had

gone so far, she hid her blushing cheeks between her hands.

The laird took her hand kindly within his. Intent as ho

was on other matters, there was something iv Milly's love —

young, innocent, and beautiful as she was — something in her love

for his son so true and blameless, that he was proud of the very

beauty of tho flower whose bloorn he was about to destroy.

'You know, Milly, that Ronald is not rich.'

' I do know it, laird ; — but he is rich enough in the graces

and blessings of a great mind — God has been 'bountiful to tho

M' Leans.'

' Granted ; but you heard what his mother said

' I have no forgotten it, sir,' replied tho maiden, 'and think

not so meanly of me as to suppose that, because I kept, or

meant to keep tryst with horn to-night, it was to be more to

horn than I have ever been — far, far from it— l would but have

bid horn farewell, — and auld horn not to think of me— though

though — ' she burst into tears, and her betide sunk upon her

bosom .

"' I have told you wc are not rich, Millicent ; I must now

tell you more — wc are poor.'

"' A weel ! a weel ! — ' she said, the accent of her native land

becoming stronger as her feelings were more wrought upon ; 'it

is na disgrace.'

' The girl is no fool,' thought the laird ; ' und yet I would

rather have a fool, or, better still, a woman of the world, to

manage, than this right minded creature ; I should know how

to deal with tho one and the other, but she baffles mc.' ' But it

«'* a disgrace, young woman — a disgrace for a lord, or even a

private gentleman, to want the means of keeping up his rank.

How would you like to see me — or Ronald — in a gaol ?' Milli-cent

clasped her hands, aud twisted her fingers together, while he

continued — ' And yet this must happen — this must lie, unless

you give horn positively up, and refuse of yourself to see or

commune with him.'

She raised her eyes, trembling in the moonlight, to the

laird's countenance, — it was still and pale.

' I intended to tell horn that, to-night'

' And to abide by it ? '

' Yes ; I never say one thing and mean another. I meant

laird, to abide by it — unless' — she paused; and then added,

unless it made horn as miserable as I—feare1 — feared — I thought it

would.'

The laird saw it would never do to go on at this rate, that

nothing could be gained by it, and therefore resolved to try

his hand at his lady plan : he repeated his assurance that

such were his embarrassments that a very little time would

witness his ruin, unless some decided steps were taken to prevent

it ; he told her that Ronald could possess the hand of Lady

Lucy Graham, if he chose to take it ; and that nothing would

then be wanting to make them flourish. Again Millicent's eyes

scanned the laird's countenance, but the expression was changed.

'And so,' she said, 'you would sell your son to save yourself?'

M'Lean grew angry — he reproached her with presumption — he

repeated the insinuations his wife had more coarsely used ; but

Millicent's spirit would not brook such treatment. She rose os

he rose ; and the man of the world saw that more could be

accomplished by touching her feelings than by rousing her pride.

His manner again became gentle ; he descanted on the high

name brought low — on the great trampled in the dust — on the

misery that would rest upon her, if she saw a husband, such as

Ronald, steeped to the very lips iv poverty, with the consciousness

that it was she who had done this. He assured her that his

mother's curse would rest upon horn to the last hour, if their

destinies were ever united ; and he, therefore, implored her to

think of the desolation she would entail upon them all, by persisting

in her acquaintance with his son — by continuing a contract

out of which only misery could arise.

' Marry Lady Lucy Graham ! marry Lady Lucy Graham ! '

she repeated time after time — ' Aud you, laird, think he would

marry Lady Lucy Graham ? '

' I know he would ; he told me himself that if it were not

for his promise to you, he would marry her at once.'

'she said that?' she added ; aud again suspiciously perused

his countenance. ' Aud ye think that, before his life was ended,

he would be happier with her that with mc?'

'god witness for me, I do ! ' said the laird. ' How, think

ye, could a M'Lean abide poverty aud the disgrace of a prison to

any of his kith or kiu J '

With the rapidity of thought Milly's mid glanced back to

Ronaldssssss habits, Ronaldssssss tastes, Ronaldssssss opinions ; and the

review confirmed his father's statement : his habits were expensive,

his tastes refined, his opinions extravagant. She had

often thought so — but then he was a laird, and a M'Lean ; and

she looked upon their rude magnificence as au heritage. After

a pause, — aud during that pause much that was great, much

that was truly noble, rallied in her soul, — she drew forth from

her bosom a small pocket-book, and tearing out a leaf, wrote a

few sentences upon it ; then rising from the sward whereon sho

had knelt to write, she stood before the laird with that right

noble dignity of manner which those only possess whose bodies

are the temples of living and active virtue.

' Laird of M'Lean, you come of a noble race ; and though it

may be but a vain and silly thing, yet' I have been taught to

believe, that as the richest soil yields the best fruits, so the best

blood gives forth the most glorious actions. For myself I was

born in a cottage, I have lived in a cottage, aud, God willing,

may die in one Wc who are so born, and so to die, cuunot be

expected to understand much that you have said ; but you have

called God to witness to your belief, that before your son's life

was ended, he would be happier with Lady Lucy Graham than

with me ; that God heard — and now sees us both : if such be

really your belief, give horn this paper — and — then — I shall see

his face no more. — If — if — you know of anything to change

your opinion, oh ! do not, do not for the sake of the gold that

glitters, sell the happiness of such as Ronald M'Lean! And now,

laird, God be wi' you ! aud from my heart I pray that you may

no hae cause to mourn for keeping this tryst with Milly of the

Manse.'

About a week after this Milly went to visit an aunt who was

far away in Edinburgh ; and before she came back to her father's

manse, the country and the bells had rung with tales and joy —

for that the houses of M'Lean and Grahurn were now one.

Before her return home, her mother had died suddenly. Here

was a divided grief ; and though I thought I understood it all, I

could not for my life tell what change had come over Millicent

Morrison. She was more useful in the house ;as studious iv

the library ; she conversed as freely ; but there was certainly a

change — little odds and ends of buttresses — not ill-temper

either, but positive bitterness, would mingle with, or rather, like

a wasp's sting, end, her conversations. She was rather watchful

than abstracted, and more keen than I hud known her — not

worldly-minded, and yet looking aster trifles ; fonder, than I

thought quite beseemed a woman, of diving into people's

motives ; not so fond of birds or flowers as she used to be, for

those are the affections of a simple and unsealed heart. She was

not much thinner, nor much paler, but her features had acquired

the acuteness of her mid ; in short, I cannot tell how it

was — but Milly wot changed."

That was about the time Im thinking you fell in love with

her herself," said Mrs. Campbell, taking advantage of the

ministers pause, aud saying so between the sobered mirthfulness

of jest, and the seriousness of a remembered displeasure. The

good lady husband blushed, positively blushed, (how odd, and

queer, and awkward is a man's blush !) aud rubbed his forehead,

os if to obliterate the sense of his timidity ; and both his wife

and myself were malicious enough to enjoy his confusion I

u I will not deny that — I — I — in short, she refused — better,

and greater than I — for, notwithstanding the change, Milly of the

Manse was the desired of many hearts. And now to the dole of

the story : — God forgive old M'Lean and his bitter lady ! for

how they could ever think that such as Ronald could be happy

with Lady Lucy, is what I could never understand ; nor could I

quite make out how they got horn to give up Milly. Disappointed

and heart-broken, the poor fellow rushed into all sorts

of extravagance ; he seemed to care for nothing, to stick at

nothing. Aud at last all the country cried, Shame upon horn !

all, all but one — there was one who never joined the cry that

was raised against horn - one who never believed that he was so

very wicked, though he hud been tempted to commit grievous

sin ; she hoped and trusted still.

Ten years had not passed from the time of the auld laird's

keeping the tryßt of tho young, when Castle M'Lean was advertised

to be sold by public roup, aud Lady Lucy had burst a

blood-vessel in a fit of passion, on learning the utter destruction

of all her property. Where was Ronald M'Lean? Ronald

M'Lean had gone to India. And where was the auld laird, whose

family pride had wrought such desolation? — even in the caned

and noisome cell of the gaol he had dreaded. It was night, aud

the gaol gate was opened to a neat and well-dressed female, who

had passed the day within the prison walls — the minister of

peace and consolation to the old white-headed man, who had

wrecked the happiness of that fair aud excellent girl, and with it

foundered the hopes and aspirations of his first-born and only

son. Poor Millicent ! not a week passed without her spending

one, and often two days, with M'Lean. And it was a calm and

holy sight, to see that woman, still lovely and still young,

sitting at his feet reading horn passages from Holy Writ, and

paying horn that homage in which his heart delighted, till the

last — which soon arrived, for his spirit was bowed aud broken.

When it was known that M'Lean was dead, all the old chiefs

seemed to think it wus a point of duty, more, in my mid, connected

with their own station than the old gentlemans merits, to

give horn a grand funeral, though he might have nearly starved iv

prison but for the exertions of Milly of the Manse. However,

the pall and the pibroch were not wanting, and scores of barelegged

gillies came down from the highlands : and Milly stood

at one of the windows in the market-place to see it all pass ; and

though the tear of womanly feeling was iv her eye, there was an

expression of such scorn aud contempt upon her lip, that I cared

not to look on it a second time.

Aster a lapse of about six years, word came that Ronald

M'Lean had married — married again in India! and all I heard

Millicent say, was, 'So best' But when she made tea for us —

(I was staying for a few days, at the time, with her father) —

when she made tea for us in the evening, I perceived that her

eyes were red. aud that she put three times tho usual quantity

of tea into the teapot, which was uncommon for her, who was so

frugal.

Now comes the wonder of the story : — a brother of the

minister, one whom he had not seen since his boyhood, died in

Mexico, and all the accumulated hoards of years came to Millicent

Morrison, in right of her father ; he, poor body, was nearly

childish for nage. Here was a change — a wonderful change for

Milly, not only in that it made her independent, and even rich,

but that it showed forth her character in its true und perfect

light. Poverty hud been accounted to her a crime — it had stood

between her and her earthly happiness — it had formed a barrier,

as it always does, between what might be almost termed the

living aud the dead : the knowledge that she was poor had made

her proud, and cold, and stern ; aud fearful that her advances

would be repulsed because of her poverty, she made noue. Nor

would she receive the overtures of strangers kindly, for she

thought ' When they find me poor, I shall be insulted : ' this,

as she now confesses, was a sinful pride ; but the wealth which

puffs up so many, made her gentle aud humble as a shorn

lamb. It is only a noble mid that can support prosperity ;

every one tries to bear up against adversity, but prosperity is

the touchstone of true greatness.

The quiet calm smile came back to Millicent's rigid lip ;

gentleness again reigned over all her actions. She was not bitter

in word as she had been ; aud as her sphere of doing good increased,

she appeared cheerful — almost happy ; yet did 1 never

hear her sing. Aud, I have marked, a deepened blush would

suffuse her check, whenever the M'Lean was alluded to, which

certainly was not often the case, — for the unfortunate are soon

forgotten.

I had been married some time; the poor auld minister, full

of years, had been gathered to his fathers, and a neat white

marble slab, raised by the band of his affectionate daughter,

marked out the place of his final rest, iv the kirk of Haverling.

Milly had settled fairly down into an old maid, and indulged in

many of the whimsies which are overlooked in a married woman,

but are put down as tokens of the sisterhood when a lady arrives

at a certain age. (Oh ! oh ! thought I.) She had a grey cat,

lively, though not mischievous. She was fond of knitting and

patchwork, and woefully particular in the shape and fashioning of

the bit ribands to trim her caps and bouquets ; but she was

actively benevolent — beloved by the poor— respected by the rich.

It might have been, as nearly as I remember, about seven years

after the news that Ronald M'Lean was again married iv India,

that Millicent Morrison came to my house, — for I was the

oldest friend of the family tn existence, — and after some difficulty.

and many sorrowing looks, produced a letter, which she permitted

me to transcribe." The minister took it out of his desk.

When you receive this, Millicent, the hand that pens it will

be colder than the clay of this burning country, and the Ronald

whom you once, and I would fain hope, always loved, will then

lie no more. I have heard of you, Milly — heard of your good

fortune — and I believe in your faithfulness. My life has been a

turbulent dream, beginning in ambition, ending in disappointment

One thing hangs heavily at my heart — my old father —

he died in a gaol, which would have been utterly desolate but

for you. Milly, how great was your revenge ! — may God bless

you — may God reward you — I cannot My wife will be the

bearer of this to England ; she is of another country — she

knows nothing of European habits, and iv Scotland the M'Lean

has now no friends ; perhaps I deserve it — but she does not.

There are reasons why sho cannot remain here, which you will

hear her explain, that is — but — I do hope you may meet. She

is a guileless, simple lucia girl, only a girl — not yet twenty,

though the mother of three children ; feel for her — pity her —

for she loved me, ' not wisely, but too well.' You bore our

separation like a heroine — she will, I know, only bear it like a

woman — and hers will be the same as ours, for an earthly

eternity. God bless you, Milly ! Love Annabel for my sake —

no, not for mine, for you ought not to love me, but for her owu

sweet sake — aud farewell — farewell for ever — ever ! — R. ML"

"rand they are come to England,' I said. ' They are,' she

replied ; and it was the first time I ever saw her weep : now the

tears rolled rapidly and heavily down her cheeks. ' They are

come, but he is gone ; and though people say that insensibility

ones with age, — aud I am not young, — God knows bow gladly

I would have died to save the life of Ronald M'Lean — died to

save horn for his wife aud helpless children ; they are at Portsmouth.'



' And you— ? '

■'I am going there directly. I have hired a carriage for the

purpose; for it is no fit that Ronald M'Lean'B wife and bairns

should tramp the country in a public coach, as if they had nae

fluid in their veins. If they want worldly gear, they must

share all I have ; and whether they do or uo, they shall not need

a friend.' ' You shall not go alone, Miss Milly,' I replied ; ' I

too will welcome M'Lean's widow; and I know Mrs. Campbell

will be proud to go with us.' It was .Millicent's first visit to

England ; and wc did idl wo could to rouse her attention to the

scenery, and the difference so palpably existing between Scotland

aud this cultivated land: but her mid was für uwuy — and at

last wc agreed it was the wisest plan to leave her to herself.

My Nancy enjoyed the journey much ; for it was für pleasant

going that way, than being jolted inside a public coach."

That's like your bundle story," interrupted Mrs. Campbell,

turning up her really pretty little nose, "that's like your bundle

story — as if I was never in a private carriage till then ; — I've

been in the Duchess of Buccleugh's carriage, before now." And

she looked at horn as one should say, " I wish you would not be

so blunt before strangers."

I remember it," replied the minister quietly ; "it was when

Mistress Laurie Grant, her companion, your own first-cousin,

broke her leg, aud you went with her to the doctor's."

Never mind — how should you ken. Surely it was her

Grace's carriage, vt all events," replied the worthy woman.

"Wc found the widow of Ronald M'Lean a poor delicate

Indian creature, who could do little for herself, and less for

others — hardly able to rise off the sofa— with hands that could

not work, and feet that could not walk — with a pale brown

check, and black soft gazelle eyes that seemed fainting for

the sun, whose rays they had fed upon in her own bright

land : her manners were languid and lady-like, and there was

a tone of tender and deep feeling in her low musical voice

that rendered her desolate situation ten times more interesting

— desolate it indeed was. What her reasons for seeking

a refuge in Scotland were, were known only to Millicent

and herself; but she made no secret of her straitened circumstances;

and her helplessness was the most pitiable I ever

witnessed. Added to the languid bearing so characteristic of

every Indian, she was languid also from ill-health, aud her pallid

check, occasionally flushed by a deep crimson spot, betokened a

disease which I shuddered but to think upon. She would sit

for hours and days caressing her children, or gazing upon a

miniature — hit likeness — which she always wore round her neck.

As soon as she was able to travel, Millicent bore her and hers to

her own home; and the widow of the proud house of M'Lean

was indebted to the despised Milly of the Manse for food and

shelter. My fears as to the dangerous nature of the disease

which was preying upon her, from her first arrival in England,

were confirmed ; the hot-house plant could not bear removal to

a colder clime — and Bhe drooped, aud drooped — and for two

years Milly tended her sick bed, until it became the bed of

death. It was not one of her least trials that the temper of an

Indian, ever hard to bear, was unequal to support with firmness

the struggles of departing nature. Millicent was obliged to listen

to her complaining, and to endure, as well as she could, the

weak petulance of the mother, and the tiresome, tormenting

noise (was ever old maid bo situated !) of three romping, spoilt

children. Yet she not only bore them, but was cheerful under

all these trials; aud God greatly blessed her exertions: for,

though that Indian lady soul was iv a state of pitiable darkness

when she came to England, before she died she had sought

and found the Saviour — aud sought and found Horn through the

instrumentality of the humble Milly. I had remained with

M'Lean 's wife on one particular evening — aud wc had enjoyed

much profitable conversation during the time. It was a painful,

and yet a pleasing thing for me to witness the struggles the poor

lady underwent, trying to conquer her constitutional weakness

and irritability of temper — the spirit warring against the flesh,

and the flesh against the spirit. If betrayed into error, she bo

quickly perceived her fault, and strove so earnestly to remove

the predilection to evil, that it was impossible not to love the

frail aud fragile being who was so quickly hastening to join, as

she hoped, her Ronald in another world. As I wished her goodnight,

I thought she appeared more feeble than usual, and her

eyes gleamed from out her pale thin countenance with an unearthly

brightness. ' This trial will soon pass away now,' I said

to Milly, as she followed me to the door. ' The poor children ! '

sighed Millicent. ' Aj t , indeed, the poor children,' I repeated,

'what will become of them!' 'I have no km,' she replied;

'and even if I had, I think that love is stronger than blood: I

will be to there as much a mother as I can — and, by the protection

of the Lord, and your advice, I trust they will not

disgrace their name.' ' But, my dear Miss Milly, you are not

aware of the fresh trials you are bringing on yourself. Norman

Cunningham, the late laird's fourth cousin, has offered to take

the boy.'

' Aud breed horn up to fish and shoot — without heeding

God's counsel, or caring for man's — then turn horn off into a

regiment, to be shot at like a popinjay! No, no — I'll do my

best with the three. You know, I am only an old maid,' she

continued, faintly smiling, 'and used to trials; aud, like all

things else, they are nothing when you grow accustomed to

them. God's will be done ! this care will strive the fag end of

my life from being spent either selfishly or uselessly ; aud, maybe,

the young creatures, when they grow up, will have an

affection for her who cared for there all so well ; — it takes the

desolate feel from about one's heart, to have something to live

for and love.' This was a long speech for Milly ; a:.d I went

home through the starlight, pondering upon the dispensations of

the Almighty, and thinking to myself, bow hard it is for us to

pass right judgment upon each other. No one, to see that stiff,

formal, particular old maiden, would conjecture that so warm, so

generous, so tender a heart dwelt within her bosom — that the

love she imbibed iv early youth kindled, in its own fitting

shrine, a pure aud steady flame, which burned as brightly as if

it had been fed with smiles — not fanned by sighs. I thought —

what was there could extinguish woman's love! — a passion

scoffed at by those who cannot comprehend its height its depth,

its strength, its duration: sorrow quenches it not — steep it in

tears, they but renovate its lustre; press it with thorns, the blood

that trickles from the wounds is as incense on the altar; talk of

death, it laughs at the danger and disease, as if they were but

The minister again paused ; his wife rubbed her eyes nigro

than once, and then, with the dew still moist upon their lids,

seized her husband's hand, and kissing it with genuine emotion,

forgetful of a strangers presence, she exclaimed, " Ah, Jamie

Campbell, I wish / had been yer first love, and then may be

you'd have spoken of me as you have spoken of her ! " Ho

pressed his wife to his bosom ; and, looking in her face, tenderly

replied, —

I spoke of the love of all women, not of one only. I believe

you would do as much for me as Milly did for Ronald M'Lean.

Thank God, it is not needed ! "

I was right," thought I to myself. " After all, I was right —

there was an affaire de cur here ; and that made Milly blush."

"But the lady, sir? "said I.

Oh, yes ! — I had forgotten her : she fell into a soft sleep,

from which she awoke in about au hour, and in a low voice called

Milly, who came instantly to her side.

"' My children ! ' said the young Indian mother. In a few

moments they were in the room : she kissed them — blessed them

all ; then, taking a small jewel-casket that was under her pillow,

she fastened round the neck of her eldest girl poor Ronaldss

miniature. She then selected a rich clasp of rubies, and placing

it in Milly's hand, added, ' Hit hair and mine are within this. —

Tell me — tell mo,' she continued, rallying her strength for the

question, ' do you think he is in heaven ? '

' Through the Redeemer's mercy, I believe it,' replied Milly,

deeply affected.

' And — I — I — meet horn there ? ' She clasped her hands fora

brief space — tried again to speak, but the power was gone ;

she motioned the children to go near Millicent, who kissed them

all, and pressed them in her arms ; a light and heavenly smile

passed over the lady beautiful lips — they parted — she moved

her hands once, aud only once, convulsively — and all was over.

» « • • •

You know the rest, having, of course, discovered that the

children you so much admired are those of Millicent Morrison's

adoption. She has discarded the grey cat, and, I believe, only

suffers one pet, a water spaniel, to share her attentions with

her wards."

I am astonished," said I, " that Ronald M'Lean did not say

more about his son : one would have thought ho would have

been pleased and proud to transmit his name, a name bo old, to

posterity."

I rather think he had learned the emptiness of seeking to

keep up appearances without suitable means."

Poor Milly ! "

Great Milly ! " exclaimed the minister, " how delighted

I should be to see all maids, wives, and widows as useful as

Milly of the Manse."

THE USES OF ADVERSITY

PART THE FIRST.

Arch!" exclaimed old Jacob Bond, os he sat up

in his bed, while the wind clattered and whistled

through the shivering window-frames. " Hush ! Is

that Brindle's bark ? "

No, father ; it is one of the farm dogs near the village. Lie

down, dearest father ; it is a cold night, and you are trembling."

I don't know why I should feel cold, Sarah," he replied,

pointing his shadowy fingers towards the grate, where au abundant

fire blazed ; " I am sure you have put down as much wood

as would roast an ox."

"It is so very cold, father."

Still, wc must not be wasteful, Sarah," he answered ; " ' wilful

waste makes woful want' " Sarah Bond covered the old man

carefully over, while he laid himself stiffly down upon his pallet,

muttering his favourite proverb over and over again. She then

drew the curtains more closely, and seated herself in front of

the fire.

The room had been the drawing-room of the old house in

which Mr. Bond and his daughter resided ; but. for the sake of

sparing both labour and expense, he had had his bed removed

into it ; and though anything but comfortable, a solitary, impoverished,

and yet gorgeous appearance pervaded the whole, such

os those who delineate interiors, loving small lights and deep

shadows, would covet to convey to canvas. The bed upon

which the old man lay was canopied, aud of heavy crimson

damask. In the dim light of that spacious room, it looked to

the worn-out eyes of Sarah Bond more like a hearse than a bed.

Near it was au old epithet, upon which stood a labelled phial,

a teacup, and a spoon. When Sarah Seated herself vt the table,

she placed her elbows upon it. and pressed her folded hands

across her eyes ; her chest heaved convulsively ; nd when she

removed her hands, she drew a Bible towards her, trimmed the

lamp, and began to read.

The voice of an old French clock echoed painfully through

the chamber. Sarah longed to stop it, and yet it was a companion

in her watchings. Once, a shy, suspicious, bright-eyed

mouse rattled among the cinders, and ran into the wainscot, and

then came out again, and stared at Surah Bond, who, accustomed

to such visits, did not raise her eyes to inquire into the cause of

the rustling which, in a few more moments, took place upon

a tray containing the remnants of some bread nd cheese, her

frugal supper.

Sarah," croaked Mr. Bond, " what noise is that ? "

Only the mice, father, as usual. Do, father, try to sleep ; I

watch carefully— there is nothing to fear."

Ay, ay, men and mice are all the same — nothing but waste.

When I am gone, Sarah, keep what you will have ; it won't be

much, Sarah, my poor girl, — it won't be much — just enough to

need care ; but kee** it — don't lend it, or give it, or spend it ;

you are fond of spending, my poor girl : see that huge fire,

enough for three nights — early bad habits. When wc lived

in a small house, and were poor, it was then you learned to

be extravagant : I had no money then, so did not know its

value."

But wc were happier then, father," said Sarah Bond ; "wc

were 60 cheerful and happy then, and so many poor people

blessed my dear mother, and Mary " ■

Hiss — bs ! " uttered the dying miser; " don't dare mention

your sister, who disgraced me by marrying a pauper — a pauper

who threatened my life, because I would not give horn my money

to save horn from starving ; but he did not get the old father-in-law's

gold : no ; he starved, and "

The words thus uttered by her father, who she knew had not

many hours to live — uttered, too, with such demoniac bitterness

forced the gentle, patient woman to start from her seat, and

pass rapidly across the room to the side of his bed, where she

sunk upon her knees, and seized his shrunken hands in hers.

Father ! " she exclaimed, " I have been your child for forty

years, aud you have said, that during that period, by no act. of

my own have I ever angered you. Is it not so?"

The old man withdrew one hand gently, turned himself round,

and looked in her face : " Forty years ! — is it forty years ? " he

repeated ; " but the fair brow is wrinkled, and the abundant hair

grown thin and grey. You were a pretty baby, Sarah, and a

merry child ; a cheerful girl, too, until that foolish fancy. Well,

dear, I'll say no more about it : good, dutiful girl ; you gave it

up to please your father, full twenty years ago ; and when he

dies, you shall have all his gold — there's a good father ! You

must keep it, Sarah, and not give it, or lend it I know you

won't marry, as he is dead ; nor see your sister — mid that : if

you see far, or serve her, the bitterest curse that ever rose from

a father's grave will compass you iv on every side !"

My father ! * she said, " oh, in mercy to yourself revoke

these words ! She knew nothing of her husband's conduct ; he

used her even worse than he used you. Oh, for my sake, say you

will forgive Mary ! It is all I ask. Do what you please with

your wealth, but forgive my sister."

You were always a fool, Sarah," he replied, faintly and

peevishly. "If I could do as I please, I would take my property

with me ; for you will surely spend it But there is another

condition — another promise you must give mc. Now, don't

interrupt me again ; wc will talk of her by and by, perhaps. As

long as you live, Sarah, as you value my blessing, you must not

part with anything in this room. You will live on in the old

house, or perhaps Bell it, and have a smaller ; yet don't spend

money in new furnishing — don't ; but never part with anything

in this room — never so much as a stick."

This promise was willingly given ; for, independently of her

love for her father, Sarah Bond had become attached to the

inanimate objects which hud so long been before her. Again she

endeavoured to lead her father away from that avarice which had

corrupted his soul, and driven happiness and peace from their

dwelling. She urged the duty of forgiveness, and pleaded hard

for her sister ; but, though the hours wore away, she made no

impression upon him. Utterly unmindful of her words, he did

not either interrupt her or fall into his former violence. On the

contrary, he Seemed involved in some intricate calculation —

counting on his fingers, or casting up lines of imaginary figures

upon the coverlet.

Sarah, heart-broken, aud silently weeping, retreated to the

table, and again, after turning the fire, betook her to her solace

the precious volume that never fails to afford consolation to

the afflicted. She read a few passages, and then, though she

looked upon the book, her mid wandered. She recalled the

happy days of her childhood, before her father, by the extraordinary

and most unexpected bequest of a distant relative, became

possessed of property — to what extent she could form no idea.

She knew that this relative had quarrelled with the heir-at-law,

and left all to one he had never seen. This bequest had closed

up her father's heart ; instead of being a blessing, so perfectly

avaricious had he grown, that it was a curse. Previously, he

had been an industrious farmer, and, though a thrifty one, had

evinced none of the bitterness of avarice, none of its hardness or

tyranny. He could then sleep at nights, permit bis wife and

children to share their frugal stores with those who needed,

troll " Here, around the huge oak," while his wife accompanied

horn on the spinner, and encourage his daughters to wed men in

what was their then sphere of life, rather than those who might

consider the gentle blood they inherited, and their superior

education, a sufficient set off to their limited means aud humble

station. Suddenly, riches poured iv upon hir n: his eldest

daughter, true to the faith she plighted, would marry her

humble lover, and her father's subsequent harshness to her

favourite child broke the mother's heart Sarah not only had

less firmness of character than her sister, but loved her father

more devotedly, and gave up the affection of her young heart to

please him. His narrow nature could not understand the sacrifice

; and when her check faded, and her really beautiful face

contracted into the painful expression of that pining melancholy

which has neither words nor tears, to lull his sympathy,

he muttered to himself, " Good girl, lie shall have all I

have."

No human passion grows with so Steady, so imperceptible, yet

bo rampant a growth as avarice. It takes as many shapes as

Proteus, aud may be called, above all others, the vice of middle

life, that sodden into the gangrene of old age, gaining strength

by vanquishing all virtues and generous emotions ; it is a creeping,

sly, keen, persevering, insidious sin, assuming various forms

to cheat even itself — for it shames to name itself unto itself; a

cowardly, darkness-loving sin, never daring to look fair human

nature in the face; full of lean excuses for self-imposed privation

; only revelling in the impurity and duskiness of its own

shut-up heart At last the joy-bells ring its funeral knell, while

it crawls into eternity like a vile reptile, leaving a slimy track

upon the world.

The inmates of the mansion, enclosed in its old court-yard,

had long ceased to attract the observation of their neighbours.

Sometimes Surah called at the butcher's, but she exchanged

smiles or greetings with few ; and the baker rang the rusty bell

twice a-week, which was answered by their only servant. When

Mr. Bond first took possession of the manor-house, he hired five

domestics, and everybody said they could not do with so few ;

and there were two men to look after the gardens : but after his

daughter's elopement, aud his wife's death, three were discharged,

aud he let the lands and gardens ; and then another went, and

Sarah felt the loneliness so great, that she made the remaining

one sleep in her own room. The house had been frequently

attacked : once, in a fit of despair, her brother-inlaw had forced

his way in the night to the old man's side, and but for her

prompt interference, murder would have been done. No wonder,

then, that her shuttered nerves trembled, as she watched the

shortening candle and heard the raving of the wind, saw the

spectral shadows — the broken plumes that ornamented the

canopy of the bed — cast upon the fantastic walls, felt that hit

hour was at hand, and feared " that he would die, and make no

sign ;" still, while those waving phantasies, passing to and fro

through her active but weakened mid, made her tremble in

every limb, and ooze at every pore, aud though unable to read

on steadily, her eyes continued fixed upon the book which her

baud grasped, with the same feeling that made those of old cling

to the altar of their God for sanctuary. Suddenly her father

called — and she started as from a dream — " Sarah I"

She hastened to his side — " Dear father, what do you

want ? "

Child, the room is dark ; and you had so much light just

now. All is dark. Where are you ? But it was better, after all,

to put out the light ; ' wilful waste makes ' "

Before the miser had concluded his proverb, the light of hit

existence was extinguished for ever !

Several weeks elapsed before Sarah Bond recovered sufficiently

from the shock — ay, and genuine grief— occasioned by her

father's death, so as to investigate her affairs ; the hardness and

the tyranny Bhe had borne for so many years had become

habitual, and her own will was absolutely paralysed by inaction.

Jacob Bond had always . treated his daughter ns if she ewer:.

a baby, and it was some time before she could collect herself

sufficiently to arrange her future plans. She had no friends ;

and the sister to whom, despite her father's cruel words, her

heart clung so fondly, was far from her, she knew not where.

The mourning for herself and her servant was ordered from a

neighbouring shop, with a carelessness as to expense, which

made people say that Sarah was of habits different from her

father.

The rector and curate of the parish both called, but she

shrunk from strangers. The very first act, however, of her

liberty was to take a pew at church — a whole pew to herself —

which she ordered to be curtained all round. Some said this

indicated pride, some said ostentation ; but it was simply shyness.

And, soon afterwards, she placed in the aisle a white

marble tablet, " To the memory of Jacob Bond, who died in the

seventy-eighth year of his age, deeply lamented by his sorrowing

daughter."

Some ladies connected with a society for clothing the pooh

called upon her, and explained their object ; she poked five old

guineas into the hands of tho spokeswoman, but forbade the

insertion of her donation in the visitor's book. During the

following week sho had numerous applications from various

charitable bodies, to whom she gave generously, they said, while

sho reproached herself with narrowness; to all, however, she

positively refused to become a yearly subscriber; and when

closely urged by the rector to be one of the patrons of his

school, she .answered, '' Sir, my father received his property suddenly,

and I may bo as suddenly deprived of it. I will give,

but I will not promise."

She added one more servant to her establishment; aud as she

did not send out cards returning thanks for the " inquiries,"

which increased daily, Sarah Bond was a very lonely woman ;

for though some, from curiosity, others from want of occupation,

others, again, from the unfortunately universal desire to form

acquaintance with the rich, would have been glad, now the

solitary old miser was gone, to make fellowship with his gentle-looking

and wealthy daughter, yet her reserve and quietness

prevented the fulfilment of their wishes. Weeks and months

rolled on; the old house had been repaired and beautified. Mr.

Crump, Sarah's law agent and " man of business," advised her

to let the house, of which she occupied about as much os a wren

could fill of the nest of an eagle; aud, strangely enough, finding

that the humble house of her childhood was to let, she took it,

removing thither all the furniture which her father had made

her promise never to part with. The ceiling of the best bedroom

was obliged to be raised to admit the lofty bed with its

plumes, aud the spine was assigned a very comfortable corner

in a parlour, where the faded stately chairs and gorgeous furniture

formed a curious contrast to the bright neatly papered

walls and drugget-covered floor; for in all matters connected

with her own personal expenses, Sarah Bond was exceedingly

frugal.

After her removal, though shy and strange as ever, still she

looked kind things to her rich, and did kind things to her poor,

neighbours ; only in a strange unusual way ; and her charity

was given by fits and starts — not continuously. She moved

Silently about her garden, and evinced much care for her plants

and flowers. Closely economical from long habit, rather thun

inclination, her domestic arrangements were strangely at variance

with what could not be called public gifts, because she used

every effort in her power to conceal her munificence. She did

not, it is true, think aud calculate how the greatest good could

be accomplished. She knew but no path to charity, and that

was paved with gold. She did not know how to offer sympathy,

or to enhance a gift by the manner of giving. Her father had

sacrificed everything to multiply aud keep his wealth ; all

earthly happiness had been given up for it; aud unsatisfying as

it had been to her own heart, it had Satisfied bis. Inclination

prompted to give, habit to withhold ; and certainly Sarah Bond

felt far more enjoyment in obeying inclination than in following

habit; though sometimes what she believed a duty triumphed

over inclination.

If Sarah Bond ministered to her sister's necessities, she did it

secretly, hardly venturing to confess she did so, but shielding

herself from her father's curse, by sending to her Sisters child,

and not her sister. Receiving few letters, the village postman

grumbled far more at having to walk out to Greenfield, than if

he was accustomed to the journey every day; and one morning

in particular, when he was obliged to do so while the rain

poured, he exhibited a letter, sealed with a huge black Beat, to

the parish-clerk, saying, ho wished with all his heart Miss Bond

bad remained at the old manor-house up street, instead of

changing; and where wos the good of taking her a mourning

letter such a gloomy day? it would be very unkind, and he

would keep it " till the rain stopped;" and so he did, until the

next morning; the taking back word to the village postmaster

that Miss Bond wanted a post-chaise and four horses instantly,

which intelligence set not only the inn, but the village in commotion.

She who had never wanted a post-chaise before, to

want four horses to it now, was really wonderful.

"Which road shall I take, Miss?" inquired the post-boy,

turning round in his saddle, and touching his cap.

"On straight," was the answer. Such a thrill of disappointment

as ran through the little crowd, who stood at the door to

witness her departure. "On straight !" Why, they must wait

the post-boys return before they could possibly know which way

she had gone. Such provoking suspense wus enough to make

the entire village demented.

Miss Bond remained away a month, and then returned,

bringing with her her niece, a girl of about eight years old —

her deceased sister's only child, Mabel Graham.

The following Sunday, Sarah Bond went to church, leading

her young companion by the hand ; both were in deep mourning,

and yet the very least observant of the congregation

remarked, that they had never seen Miss Bond look so happy as

when, coming out, after service, and finding that the wind had

changed to the north-east, she took off her scarf in the church

porch, and put it round the neck of the lovely girl, who strongly

remonstrated against the act It was evident that Mabel had

been accustomed to have her own way ; for when she found her

aunt was resolved her throat should be protected, she turned

round, and in a moment tore the silk into halves. " Now, dear

aunt, neither of our throats will suffer," she exclaimed ; while

Sarah Bond did not know whether she ought to combat her

wilfulness or applaud such tender care of herself. It was soon

talked of throughout the village, how wonderfully Sarah Bond

was changed ; how cheerful and even gay she had become. instead

of avoiding society, how willingly, yet how awkwardly, she

entered into it ; how eagerly she sought to learn and to make

herself acquainted with every source and system of education.

No traveller in the arid desert ever thirsted more for water than

did she for knowledge, and her desire seemed to increase with

what it fed on. The more she had, the more she required ; and

all was for the sake of imparting what she learned to Mabel.

She fancied that teachers might not be kind to this new-found

idol ; that she could transfer information more gently and continuously;

that the relative was the best instructress; in short,

the pent-up tenderness of her nature, the restrained torrent of

affections that had 60 long lain dormant, were poured forth upon

the little heiress, as she was already called ; and captious and

determined she was, as ever heiress could be ; but withal of so

loving a nature, and so guileless a heart, so confiding, so generoiiß

and so playful, and so overflowing with mirth and mischief, that

it would have been impossible to fancy any living creature, who

had felt the sunshine of fourteen summers, more charming or

more tormenting.

I wish, dear aunt," exclaimed Mabel one morning, as she sat

at her embroidery, the sun shining through the open window

upon the abundant glories of her hair, while her aunt sat, as

she always did, opposite to her, that she might, when she raised

her eyes from off the Italian lesson she was conning for her

especial edification, have the happiness of seeing her without an

effort ; " I wish, dear aunt, you would send that old spinach out

of the room ; it looks so odd by the side of my beautiful

piano."

My dear Mabel," replied her aunt, " I have put as much

new furniture as you wished into this room, but 1 cannot part

with the old"

"Rubbish," added Mabel, snapping her wonted with the

impatience of the movement

It may be rubbish in your eyes, Mabel, but I have told you

before that my dear father desired I should never part with the

furniture of the room he died in."

Mabel looked the truth — " that she was not more inclined towards

the old furniture on that account ; " but she did not say

so. " Have you got the key of the old spine, aunt ? I should

like to hear its tone."

I have never found the key, my dear, though I have often

looked for it ; I suppose my father lost it. I have danced to its

music before now to my mother's playing ; but lam sure it has

not a tone left."

I wish you would dance now, dear aunt," exclaimed Mabel,

jumping up at the idea ; "you never told me you could dance ;

I never, somehow, fancied you could dance, and I have been

obliged to practise my quadrilles with two high-bucked chairs

and my embroidery frame. Do, dear aunt ; put by that book,

and dance." It would be impossible to fancy a greater contrast

than aunt and niece. Sarah Bond's erect and perfectly flat

figure was surmounted by a long head and face, round which an

abundance of grey hair was folded ; for by no other term can I

describe its peculiar dress ; her cap plain, but white as snow ;

aud a black silk gown, that had seen its best days, was pinned

and primmed on, so as to sit as close as possible to a figure which

would have been greatly improved by heavy and abundant

drapery. Mabel, lithe and restless, buoyant and energetic, unable

even to wish for more luxury or more happiness than she possessed,

so that her active mid was forced to employ its longings

on trifles, as it really had nothing else to desire ; her face was

round as those faces are which become oval in time ; aud her

bright laughing eyes sparkled like sunbeams at the bare notion

of making " aunt Sarah" take either the place of a high-backed

chair or the embroidery frame iv a quadrille. "Do dance,"

she repeated.

My dear child, I know as little of your quadrilles as you do

of my country dances aud reels. No, Mabel ; I can neither open

the spinner nor dance quadrilles : so you have been twice refused

this morning — a novelty, is it not, dear Mabel ?"

But why do you not break open the spinner ? Do break it

open, aunt ; I want to see the inside of it so much."

No, Mabel ; the lock is a peculiar one, and could not be

broken without defacing the marqueterie on the cover, which

I should not like to do. My poor mother was so proud of

that cover, and used to dust and polish it with her own

hands''

What ! Herself I " exclaimed the pretty Mabel ; " why did not

her servants do it ? "

Because, my dear, she had but one."

But one ! I remember when my poor mamma had none,"

sighed Mabel, " aud wo were so miserable."

But not from lack of attendants, I think," answered Sarah

Bond. "If they are comforts, they are careful ones, and sadly

wasteful. Wc were never so happy as wc were then. Your

mother and I used to set the milk, and mid the poultry, and

make the butter, and cultivate the flower-garden, and help todo

the house work ; and then in the evening wc would run in

the meadows, and come home laden with wild flowers ; and,

tired as wc were by alternate work and play, my de.ir mother

would play on that old instrument, and my poor father sing,

and wc sisters wound up the evening by a merry dance, your

mother and myself trying hard which could keep up the dance

longest."

Mabel resumed her embroidery without speaking : Sarah

Bond laid down the book she had been reading, and moved restlessly

about ; her manner, when either thoughtful or excited,

prevented her features from being disturbed ; so her feelings

were soothed by wandering from place to place, or table to table;

but after a considerable pause, she said — " I wish you were a

little older, Mabel ; I wish you to be older, that I might convince

you, dear, it is vain to expect happiness from the possession

of wealth, unless wc circulate it, share it with others, and yet do

so prudently and watchfully. Yet my poor dear father would be

very angry, if he hoard me say that, Mabel."

" Yes, I know," interrupted the thoughtless girl ; "for he was

a miser."

Hush. Mabel ! " exclaimed her aunt. " How can you say

anything so harsh of horn from whom wc inherit all wc have ?

He was careful, peculiar — very peculiar ; but he saved all forme

; and may God judge mercifully between horn and me, if

I cannot in all things do as he would have had mc." And then

she paused, as if reasoning aud arguing with herself, apologising

for the human throes in her own bosom that led her to act so

frequently in direct opposition to her father's desires ; so that to

those who could not understand her motives and feelings, disappeared

every day more inconsistent. "It is difficult to judge

of motives in any case. lam sure, if he had only gone abroad

into the world, and seen distress as I have seen it, he could not

have shut his heart against his fellow-creatures : but his feelings

were hardened against some, whom he considered types of all ;

and, seeing no misery, at last believed, as many do, whom the

world never dreams of calling as you called horn, Mabel — seeing

no misery, believed that it only existed in tho popular whine.

lam sure, if he had seen, he would have relieved it. I always

think thai when I am giving : it is a great blessing to be able to

give ; and I would give more, were I not fearful that it might

injure you."

Injure me, dear aunt ! — how ? "

"Why, Mabel, my heart is greatly fixed upon seeing you

a rich heiress, and, in time, suitably established."

You have just been saying how much happier you were

when you were all poor together, and yet you want to make

me rich."

People may be very happy in poverty before they have

known riches ; but having once been rich, it would, I think, be

absurd to suppose wc could ever be happy again in poverty."

I saw," replied the girl, " two children pass the gate this

morning, while I wus gathering flowers — bunches of the simple

white jessamine you love so much, dear aunt — and they asked

Bo hard for bread, that I sent them a shilling "

Too much," interrupted Sarah Bond, habitually rather than

from feeling — " too much, dear Mabel, to give to common

beggars."

There were two, you know, and they looked wan and hungry.

About three hours after, I was cantering my pony down Swan-brook

Lane — the grass there is so soft and green, that you

cannot bear his feet, while I can hear every grasshopper that

chirps — suddenly T heard a child's voice singing a time full of

mirth, and I went softly, softly on ; and there, under a tree, sat

one of my morning acquaintances, making believe to sing through

a stick, while the other danced with bare feet, and her very

rags fluttered in time to the tune. T never saw more joy in

well-fed, well-clothed children, for they paused and laughed,

and then began again. Poverty was no pain to there, at all

events."

True, dear ; but a shilling was a great deal to give at the

gate." observed her aunt, adding, aster a pause, " and yet it shows

bow little will make the poor happy. lam sure, if my father

bad looked abroad, instead of staying at home to watch his —

his — money, he would have thought it right to share what he

had. It. Is an unnatural thing to shut one's self up from the

duties of life ; one gets no interest for any other outlay to do the

heart service : but though these poor children danced their rags

in the sunshine, and felt not the stones they danced on, yet my

dear Mabel could not dance with poverty as her companion —

my blessed, blessed child ! "

I'd rather dance a jig with mirth than a minuet with melancholy,"

laughed the girl ; " and yet it would take a great deal to

make me miserable, if I were with you, and you loved me, dear

aunt. Still, I own I like to be rich, so as to have everything

I want, and give everybody what they wont ; and, aunt Sarah,

you know very well I cannot finish this rose without the pale

floss-silk, and my maid forgot both that and to order the

seed-pearl."

Mabel's complaint was interrupted by the servant, who told

Miss Bond that Mr. Cramp, her attorney, wished to see her.

Show horn in." said Miss Bond.

He wishes to see you alone, ma'am."

K

His wife is going to die, and he will want you to marry

horn ! " exclaimed Mabel, heedless of the servant's presence.

Do, dear aunt, and let me be bride's-maid."

Sarah Bond changed colour ; and then, while stooping to kiss

her wayward niece, she called her " a foolish child."

PART THE SECOND.

R. CRAMP, Miss Bond's man of business, was a plain

little man, skilled in the turnings and windings of

the law, and could not be said to recognise distinctly

any other code of morals.

On this particular morning, after a few common-place observations,

he made a somewhat strange inquiry. " Had Miss Bond

heard that Mr. Alfred Bond had come over to England ? " No :

she had not heard it. It was, Mr. Cramp insinuated (for he

never said anything directly) — it was rather an awkward circumstance,

Mr. Alfred Bond's coming to England.

Miss Bond opened her wide eyes still more widely. She knew

that Mr. Alfred Bond was the heir-at-law to the property bequeathed

her father ; but what of that ? he had never, that she

heard of, dreamed of disputing the will ; aud she never felt no

pang of insecurity as to the possessions which had of late grown

so deeply into her heart. At this unexpected intimation she felt

the blood rush through her veins. In all her trials — and they

had been many — in full her illnesses, not a few — she hud never

fainted, never fallen into that symptom of weak-mindedness,

a fit of hysterics ; but now she sat without power of speech,

looking into Mr. Cramp's round face.

"My dear Miss Bond, you are not ill, I ho pc ?" exclaimed

Mr. Cramp. " I pray you to bear up ; what has been said is

doubtless wrong — must bo wrong; a threat of the opposite

party — an undefined threat, which wc must prepare ourselves to

meet in a lawyer-like way. Hope for the best, aud prepare"

For what, sir?" inquired Miss Bond, gaspingly.

For any — anything — that is my plan. Unfortunately, tho

only way to deal with the world, bo as to meet it on equal terms,

is to think every man a rogue. It is a deeply painful view

to take of human nature, and it agonizes me to do so. Let me,

however, retreat you to bear up"

'• Against what, sir?" said Surah Bond abruptly, and almost

fiercely, for now Mr. Crump's face wus reduced to its original

size, and she had collected her ideas. " There are few things

I could not bear up ugliest, but I must know what I have

to sustain."

'• Your father's will, my dear lady, is safe ; the document,

leaving everything to you, that is safe, aud all other documents

are safe enough, except Cornelius Bond Hobart's will — the will

bequeathing the property to your uncle. Where is that will to

be found? for if Alfred Bond proceeds, the veritable document

must be produced."

Why, so it can be, I suppose," said Sarah Bond, relapsing in

some degree into agitation ; "it wus produced when my father

inherited the property, as you know."

I beg your pardon, Miss Bond," he answered; "certainly

not as I know, for I had not the honour of being your father's

legal adviser at that time. It was my master and subsequent

partner. I hud not the privilege of your father's confidence

until after my colleague's death."

No one," said Miss Bond, " ever had my father's confidence,

properly so called ; he was very close in all money transactions.

The will, however, must be, I think, in Doctors Commons. Go

there immediately, Mr. Cramp; and — stay — I will go with you;

there it is, and there are the names of the witnesses."

"My dear lady!" expostulated the attorney in the softest

tones of his soft voice, " I hare been there already. I wished

to spare a lady of your sensibility as much pain as possible ; and

so I went there myself, with Mr. Alfred Bond's man of business,

whom I happened to know ; and I was grieved — cut up, I may

say, to the very heart's core, to hear what he said ; and he

examined the document very closely too — very closely ; and,

I assure you, spoke in the handsomest, I may say, the very

handsomest manner of you, of your character, and usefulness,

aud generosity, and Christian qualities ; he did indeed ; but wc

have all our duties to perform iv this world ; paramount things

are duties, Miss Bond, and his is a very painful one."

"What need of all these words to state a simple matter I

Have you seen the will ? " said Sarah Bond.

I have."

Well, and what more is there to see, unless Mr. Alfred

Bond denies his relatives power to make a will ? "

Which, I believe, he does not. He says he never made a

will ; that is all."

But there is the will," maintained Sarah Bond.

"I am very sorry to would you ; but cannot you understand?"



Speak plainly, if you can, sir," said Sarah Bond, sternly ;

speak plainly, if you can ; I listen."

He maintains on the part of his client, that the will is

a forgery."

He maintains a falsehood, then," exclaimed Miss Bond, with

a firm determination aud dignity of manner that astonished

Mr. Cramp. "If the will be forged, who is the forger ? Certainly

not my father ; for he inherited the property from his elder

brother, who died insane. The will is in his favour, und not in my

father's. Besides, neither of there held any correspondence with

the testator for twenty years : he died abroad, aud the will was

sent to England after his death. Would any there render a

gratuitous service to persons they had never seen ? Where

could be the reason — the motive ? How is it, that, till now,

Alfred Bond urged no claim ? There are reasons," she continued,

reasons to give the world. But I have within me, what passes

all reason — a feeling, a conviction, a true positive knowledge, that

my father was incapable of being a party to such a crime. He

was a stern man, loving money — I grant that — but honest in

heart aud soul. The only creature he ever wronged was himself.

He did that, I know. He despoiled himself of peace and comfort,

of rest and repose. In that he sinned against Gods

dispensation, who gives that wc may give, not merely to others,

but lawfully to ourselves. After all, it would have been buta

small thing for horn to have been without this property, for it

gave horn uo one additional luxury. I wonder, Mr. Cramp, that

you, as a man, have courage to stand lieforo me, a poor unprotected

woman, and dare to say that will is forged."

While she spoke, Sarah Bond stood forth a new creature

in the astonished eyes of the sleek attorney. He absolutely

quailed before the vehemence and fervour of the usually mild

woman. He assured her she was mistaken ; th.it he had not

yielded the point that the will was a forgery ; that he never

would admit that such was the case ; that it should be his

business to disprove the charge ; that ho hoped she did not

suppose ho yielded to the plaintiff, who was resolved to bring the

matter into a court, of justice. He would only dusk her one little

question ; had she ever seen her father counterfeit different

bauds ? Yes, she said, she had ; he could counterfeit, copy, any

hand he ever saw, so that the real writer could hardly tell the

counterfeit from the original. Mr. Cramp made no direct observation

on this, except to beg that she would not mention that

melancholy circumstance " to any oue else.

Sarah Bond told horn she should not feel bound to make this

talent of her father's a crime, by twisting into a secret what

he used to do as an amusement. Mr. Cramp urged mildly the

folly of this, when she hud a defence to make ; but she stood all

the more firmly upon what she fearlessly considered the dignity

of right aud truth ; at the same time assuring horn, she would to

the last contest that right, not so much for her own sure, or the

sure of one who wus dear to her beyond all power of expression,

as for the sake of horn iv whose place she stood, and whose honour

she would preserve with her life. Mr. Cramp was a shrewd

man of business. He considered all Miss Bond's energy on

the subject of her father's honour, as romance, though he could

not help believing she was in earnest about it. He thought it

wus perfectly in accordance with the old miser's character, that

he should procure or make such a document; though he considered

it very extraordinary, for many reasons, that it should have

imposed upon men more penetrating and learned than himself.

Sarah Bond, aster his departure, endeavoured to conceal her

anxiety from her niece ; but in vain. Mabel was too clear-sighted

; and it was a relief, as much as an astonishment to her

aunt, to see how bravely she bore up against the evil news. Miss

Bond did not remember that the knowledge of the power of

wealth does not belong to sixteen summers. Mabel knew and

thought so little of its artificial influence, that she believed her

happiness to proceed from birds aud flowers, music and dancing,

and books — those silent but eloquent tongues that live through

cent cries, for our advantage ; besides, her young heart welled

forth so much hope, that she really did not understand, even if

they lost their fortune, their " troublesome fortune," as she

called it, how it would seriously affect their happiness. There

was no philosophy, no heroism iv this ; it wus supply the impulse

of a bright, sunny, beautiful young mid.

The course of events promised soon to strip Mabel of all

except her own hopeful imaginings. Mr. Alfred Bond urged his

plea with all the energy and bitterness of one who had been for

many years despoiled of his right. H.B solicitor, soon aster his

claim was first declared, made au offer to Sarah Bond to settle au

annuity on her and her niece during the terra of their natural

lives ; but this was indignantly spurned by Sarah ; from horn

she would accept no favour ; she either had or had not a right to

the whole of the property originally left to her uncle. Various

circumstances, too tedious to enumerate, combined to prove that

the will deposited iv Doctors Commons was not a true document

; the signature of Cornelius Bond Hobart was disproved by

many ; second only to one incident in strangeness was the fact,

that though sought in every direction, and widely advertised for

iv the newspapers of the day, the witnesses to the disputed document

could not be found — they had vanished.

The incident, so strange as to make more than one lawyer

believe for a time that really such a quality as honesty was to be

found iv the world, was as follows ; — Sarah Bond, be it remembered,

had never seen the disputed will ; she was very anxious todo

so ; and yet, afterwards, she did not like to visit Doctors

Commons with any one. She feared, she knew not what ; aud

yet, above all things, did she desire to see this will with her

own eyes.

Mr. Cramp was sitting iv his office when a woman, muffled ina

cloak, and veiled, entered and seated herself without speaking.

After a moment, she unclasped her cloak, loosened the wrapping

from her throat, threw back her veil, and asked for a glass

of water.

Bless me, Miss Bond, is it you ? I am sure I am much

honoured — very much !"

"No honour, sir," she replied, '' but necessity. I have been

to Doctors Commons; have seen the will — it is my father's

writing !"

You confess this to me?" said Mr. Cramp, drawing back ou

this chair, and almost gasping for breath.

I do," she answered ; " I proclaim it ; it is my father's copy

of the original will. But how the copy could have been substituted

for the real will, I can only conjecture."

Surmise is something," replied the lawyer, a little relieved ;

conjecture sometimes leads to proof."

My father and uncle lived together when the will came into

their possession. They were in partnership as fanners. My

father's habits were precise : he always copied every writing, and

indorsed his copies with a large C; the very C is marked upon

the will I have just seen at Doctors Commons."

That is singular," remarked Cramp ; " but it docs not show

us the way out of the difficulty ; on the contrary, that increases.

Somebody — I don't for an instant suppose Mr. Jacob Bout — in

proving the will must have sword that, to the best of his knowledge

and belief, those were the real, which are only copies of

the signatures."

True ; and such a mistake was extremely characteristic of

my uncle, who performed many strange acts before ho was known

to be insane. This was doubtless one of them''

But where is the original ? " inquired the man of business.

Heaven knows ! I cannot find it ; but lam not the less

assured of its existence."

Then wc must persist in our plea of the truth of the document

in Doctors Commons."

Certainly not," said Sarah ; " you must not persist in a

falsehood in my name. If you do, I shall rise up in court and

denounce you ! I feel it my duty, having Been the will, to state

my firm belief that it is a copy of the original will, and nothing

more."

Poor Mr. Cramp was dreadfully annoyed. He could, he

thought, manage all sorts of clients. He reasoned, he advised, he

entreated; he got her counsel to call upon her; but all in vain.

She would go into court, she said, herself, if her counsel deserted

her. She would not give up the cause ; she would plead for the

sake of her father's honour. She was well assured that the real will

was still in existence, aud would be discovered — found— sooner

or later — though not, perhaps, till she was iv her grave.

The senior counsel was so provoked at what he called his

client's obstinacy, that he threw up his brief, and the junior took

advantage of the circumstance to make a most eloquent speech,

enlarging upon the singularity of no appeal having been previously

made by the plaintiff — of the extraordinary disappearance

of the witnesses —of the straightforward, simple, and

beautiful truthfulness of the defendant ; in short, he moved the

court to tears, and laid the foundation of his future fortune.

But aster that day Sarah Bond and her niece, Mabel, were homeless

and houseless. Yet I should not say that ; for the gates of

a gaol gaped widely for the " miser's daughter," though only fora

few days ; aster which society rang with praises, loud and

repeated, of Mr. Alfred Bond's liberality, who had discharged the

defendant's costs as well as his own. In truth, people talked so

much and so loudly about this, that they had altogether forgotten

to inquire what hud become of Sarah and Mabel.

The clergyman of the parish was their first visiter. He

assisted them to look into the future. It was he who conveyed

to Sarah, Alfred Bond's determination that she should be held

scatheless. The good man delivered this information with the

manner of a person who feels he comes with good news, and

expects it will be so received ; but Sarah Bond could only regard

Alfred as the calumniator of her father's memory, the despoiler

of her rights. The wild expression of joy in Mabel's face, as she

threw herself on her aunt's bosom, gave her to understand that

she ought to be thankful for what saved her from a prison.

Words struggled for utterance. She who had borne so much

and so bravely, was overcome, Again aud again she tried to

speak, but for some hours she fell from one fainting fit into

another. She had borne up against all disasters, until the power

of endurance was overwhelmed ; and now, she was attacked by

an illness so violent, that it threatened dissolution. At this

very time, when Bhe needed so much sympathy, a stern and

severe man, in whom there was no pity, a man who had received

largo sums of money from Miss Bond as a tradesman, and whose

account had stood over from a particular request of his own,

believing that all was gone, and that he should lose, took advantage

of her illness to levy an execution upon the goods, and to

demand a sale.

At this time her reason had quite deserted her, and poor

Mabel was incapable of thought beyond her duty to her aunt,

which made her remove her to a cottage lodging from the turmoil

of the town. No one distinctly knew, except Mabel, why Sarah

Bond was so attached to the old furniture, and few cared. And

yet more than one kind heart remembered how she had liked

the " publishing things," and bought in several, resolved that, if

she recovered, and ever had " a place of her own again," they

would offer them for her acceptance. Her illness was so tedious,

that except the humble curate and the good rector, her inquirers

had fallen off — for long sickness wears out friends. Some would

pause as they passed the cottage window, where the closely

pinned-down curtain told of the caution and quiet of sickness ;

and then they would wonder how poor Miss Bond was ; and if

they entered the little passage to inquire, they could scarcely

recognise in the plainly-dressed, jaded, bent girl, whose eyes

knew no change but from weeping to watching, and watching to

weeping, the buoyant and beautiful heiress whose words had

been law, and who once revelled iv luxury. The produce of the

sale — though everything, of course, went below its value — left a

small surplus, after all debts and expenses were paid ; which the

clergyman husbanded judiciously, and gave in small portions to

Mabel. Alfred Bond himself called to offer her any assistance

that might be required, which Mabel declined, coldly and

at once.

Patiently and devotedly did she watch beside the couch of her

poor aunt ; one day suffering the most acute anxiety if the

Symptoms became worse than usual ; the next full of hope as

they abated. Did I say that one day after another this was the

case ? I should have written it, one hour aster another ; for

truly, at times she fluctuated so considerably, that no one less

hopeful than Mabel could have continued faithful to hope. As

Sarah Bond gained strength, she began to question her as to the

past. Mabel spoke cautiously ; but, unused to any species of

dissimulation, could not conceal the fact, that the old furniture,

so valued by her grandfather, and bequeathed with a conditional

blessing, was gone — sold ! This had a most unhappy effect

on the mid of Sarah Bond. She felt as if her father's curse

wus upon her. She cured not trust herself to speak upon the

subject When the good rector (Mr. Golding) alluded to the

sale, and attempted to enter into particulars, or give au account

of the affairs he had so kindly aud so ably managed, she adjured

horn in so solemn a manner never to speak of the past, if

he wished her to retain her reason, that, he, unconscious of the

motive, aud believing it arose entirely from regret at her changed

fortunes, avoided it as much as she could desire ; and thus she

had no opportunity of knowing how much had been saved by the

benevolence of a few kind persons. Sarah Bond fell into the

very common error of imagining that persons ought to know her

thoughts and feelings, without her explaining them. But lu-r

mid aud judgment had been so enfeebled by illness and mental

suffering, that, even while she opposed her opinions, she absolutely

leaned on Mabel — it was as if the oak had summoned the

woodbine to support its branches. That which gave Mabel the

most uneasiness, was her determination to leave the cottage as

soon as she was able to be removed ; and she was seriously displeased

because Mabel mentioned this intention to Mr. Golding.

Despite all poor Mabel could urge to the contrary, they quitted

the neighbourhood — the sphere of Sarah Bond's sudden elevation,

and as sudden depression — alone, at night and ou foot. It was

a clear moonlight evening in midsummer, when the twilight can

hardly be said to give place to darkness ; aud when the moon

shines out so very brightly, that the stars are reduced to pale

lonely sparks of white rather than light, in the blue sky. It was

a lovely evening ; the widow with whom they had lodged was not

aware of their intention until about an hour before their departure.

She was very poor and ignorant, but her nature was

kind ; and when Sarah Bond pressed upon her, out of her own

scanty store, a little present of money beyond her stipulated

rent, she would not take it, but accompanied them to the little

gate with many tears, receiving charge of a farewell letter to the

rector. " And haven't you one to leave me for the curate?"

she inquired. " Deary me ! but Im sure for every once the old

gentleman came when Miss Bond was so bad, the curate came

three times ; aud no letter for horn ! deary, oh, deary me !"

Why did you not put mo in mid to write to Mr. Lyset,

Mabel ?" inquired her aunt, after the gate, upon which the poor

woman leaned, had closed.

Mabel made no reply, but Sarah Bond felt tho baud she held

tightly within hers tremble and throb. How did she then

remember the days of her own youth as she thought, " Oh ! in

mercy lie might have escaped from that which only so causes the

pulses to beat or the hand to tremble!" Neither spoke, but

Sarah had turned over the great page of Mabel's heart, while

Maliel did not confess, even to herself, that Mr. Lyset's words,

however slight, were more deeply cherished than Mr. Golding's

precepts. They hud a long walk to take that night, aud both

wept at first ; but however sad aud oppressed the mid aud

spirits may be, there is a soothing and bubny influence in nature

that lulls, if it does not dispel, sorrow ; every breeze was perfumed

; as they passed the hedges, there was a rustling and

murmuring of birds amongst the leaves ; aud Mabel could quot

forbear an exclamation of delight when she saw a narrow river,

now half-shadowed, then bright iv the moonbeams, bounding iv

one place like a thing of life, then brawling around sundry large

stones that impeded its progress, again subsiding into silence,

and flowing onward to where a little foot bridge, over which they

bud to pass, arched its course ; beyond this was the church, and

there Mabel knew they were to wait the coach which was to convey

them to a village many miles from their old homes, aud

where Sarah Bond had accidentally heard there was a chance of

establishing a little school. Mabel paused for a moment to look

at the venerable church standing by the highway, the clergyman's

house crouching in the grove behind. The hooting aud

wheeling of the old owls iv the ivied tower was a link of life.

Surah Bond passed the turn-stile that led into the churchyard,

followed by Maliel, who shuddered when she found herself surrounded

by damp grass-green graves, and beneath the shadows

of old yew-trees.

She knew not where her aunt was going, but followed her

silently. Sarah Bond led the way to a lowly grave, marked

by a simple headstone. She knelt down by its side, and while

her bosom throbbed, she prayed earnestly, deeply, within her

very soul - sho prayed, now a faded aged woman — she prayed

above the ashes, the crumbling bones of horn she hud loved

with a love that never changes — a love that is green when

the head is ggrathaty — that Mabel might never suffer as she had

suffered. Relieved by these devotional exercises, Sarah rose, and

the humble and stricken pair bade adieu to the melancholy scene,

and betook themselves to their toilsome journey. Fortunately,

the stage overtook them, and having with Borne difficulty obtained

Beats, they were iv due time deposited in a village, where

Sarah felt there would be no eyes to pry into their poverty, no

ears to hear of it, no tongue to tell thereof, and point, them out

"as the poor ladies that once were rich." This was a great

relief, though it came of pride, and she knew it ; and she said

within herself, " When health strengthens my body, I will

wrestle with this feeling, for it is unchristian." She never even

to Mabel alluded to what was heaviest on her mind — the loss of

the old furniture ; though she cheered her niece by the assurance

that after a few months, if the Almighty blessed the exertions

they must make for their own support, she would write to their

friend Mr. Goulding, and say where they were ; by " that time,"

she said, she hoped to be humble, as a Christian should be.

After this assurance was given, it was astonishing to see how

Mabel revived. Her steps recovered their elasticity, her eyes

their brightness. Sarah Bond had always great superiority in

needlework, and this procured her employment; while Mabel

obtained at once, by her grace and correct speaking, two or

three day pupils. Her wild and wayward temper hud been subdued

by change of circumstances ; but if she had not found

occupation, it would have become morose. Here was not only

occupation, but success ; success achieved by the most legitimate

means — the exertion of her own faculties ; there were occasionally

bitter tears and many disappointments; and the young soft

fingers, so slender and beautiful, were obliged to work in earnest ;

and she was forced by necessity to rise early and watch late ;

aud then she had to think, not how pounds could be spent, but

how permits could be earned. Wc need not, however, particularise

their labours in this scene of tranquil usefulness. It

is sufficient to say that Mabel's little school increased ; and

that both she and her aunt came at length to feel and speak

thankfully of the uses of adversity, and bless God for taking as

well as for giving.

Though Sarah Bond bad used every means within her

power to conceal her place of retreat, yet she often felt

bitterly pained that no one had sought her out. She said

she wished to be forgotten, unless she had the power to clear

away the imputation on her father's name. And yet, unknown

to herself, she cherished the hope, that some one would have

traced them, though only to say one cheering word of approbation

regarding their attempt at self-independence. Sarah thanked the

Almighty greatly for one thing, that, Mabel's cheerfulness was

continued and fluctuating, aud that her mid seemed to have

gathered strength by wholesome exercise. She believed that her

affections, if not free, were not entangled, aud that her pride hod

risen against her fancy ; and it was beautiful to see bow, watching

avoid giving each other pain, striving continually to show

the bright side of every matter, the one to the other — and extract

sweets instead of bitters from every little incident, led to their

actually enjoying even the privations which exercised their tenderness

towards each other.

Time wore away many of their sorrows, as Time always docs ;

a kindness wc forget to acknowledge, though wc often arraign

horn for spoiling our pleasures. Sarah and Mabel had been

taking an evening walk, wondering how little they could exist

upon, aud feeling that it was a wide Step towards independence

to have few wants.

I can see good working in all things," said Mabel ; " for if T

had obtained the companionship of books, which I so eagerly

desired at first, I should not have had the same inducements to

pursue my active duties, to read my own heart, and the great

book of nature, which is opened alike to peer and peasant ;

I have found so much to learn, so much to think of by studying

objects and persons — reading persons instead of books."

"' Yes," added Surah Bond ; "and seeing how much there is to

admire in every development of nature, and how much of God

there is in every human being."

As they possed along the village street, Mabel observed that

the cottagers looked after them, and several of her little pupils

darted their heads in and out of their homes, and laughed ; she

thought some village fun was afloat, that some rural present of

flowers, or butter, or eggs, had been sent — a little mysterious

offering for her to guess at ; and when she turned to fasten the

wicket gate, there were several of the peasants knotted together

talking. A sudden exclamation from her aunt, who had entered

the cottage, confirmed her suspicion ; but it was soon dissipated.

Tn their absence, their old friends Mr. Goulding and the curate

had arrived by the coach, and entered their humble dwelling.

From a wagon ot the same time were listed several articles of old

furniture, which were taken into the cottage, and properly

arranged. There were two old chairs, an embroidered stool, a

china vase, a cabinet, a table, and the spinner. Strangely the

furniture looked on the sanded floor, but never was gift more,

grateful to receiver than were these to Sarah Bond. She felt as

if a ban was removed from her when she looked upon the old

things her father had so valued. Absorbed in the feelings of

the moment, Bhe did not even turn to inquire how they had so

unexpectedly come there. Nor did she note the cold and constrained

greeting which Mabel gave to Mr. Lyset She herself,

after the first self-engrossing thoughts were post, turned to give

both gentlemen the cordial reception which their many former

kindnesses, not to speak of their apparent connexion with the

present gratifying occurrence, deserved. From Mr. Goulding

she learnt that the furniture bad been bought up by a few old

friends, and committed to horn to be sent to her as a mark of

their good will : he had only delayed bringing it to her, till she

should have proved, as he knew she would, superior to her misfortunes

by entering on some industrious career.

As the evening closed iv, and the astonishment and feelings of

their first meeting subsided, Sarah Bond and Mr. Goulding conversed

apart, and then, indeed, she listened with a brimming

heart aud brimming eyes. He told of bis young friend's deep

attachment to Mabel ; how be had prevailed upon horn to pause

before he declared it, to observe bow she endured her changed

fortune, aud to avoid engaging her affections until he had a

prospect of placing her beyond the reach of the most harrowing

of all poverties, that which keeps up an appearance above its

means. " Her cheerfulness, her industry, her goodness, have all

been noted," he continued. " She has proved herself capable of

accommodating herself to her circumstances; the most difficult

of all things to a young girl enervated by luxury nd indulgence.

And if my friend can establish an interest in her affections, he

has no higher views of earthly happiness, aud I think he ought

to have no other. You will, I am sure, forgive me for having

counselled the trial. If adversity had followed your exertions,

if you had failed instead of succeeded, I should have been sooner

at baud to succour and to aid."

Sarah Bond had never forgotten the emotion of Mabel, caused

by the mention of the curate's name when they quitted their old

neighbourhood, and the very reserve Mabel showed proved to

Surah's searching and clear judgment that the feeling was unchanged.

Truly in that hour was her chastened heart joyful and

grateful. " Mabel must wait," she said, " until the prospect of

advancement becomes a reality; for it would be an ill return of

disinterested love for a penniless orphan to become a burden

instead of a blessing. Mallet would grow more worthy everyday

; they were doing well ; uy, he might look round the

white-washed walls and smile, but they were prosperous, healthful,

happy, and respected ; and if she could only live to see the

odium cast upon her father's memory removed, she would not

exchange her poverty for her past pride." She frequently afterwards

thought of the clergyman's rejoinder, " That riches, like

mercy, were as blessed to the giver as to the receiver, and that

they only created evil when hoarded or bestowed by a heedless

hand."

They certainly were a happy group in that lowly cottage room

that evening. Mabel's proud bearing hud given place, as if by

magie, to a blushing shyness, which she tried to shield from observation

by every possible attempt at ease. She talked to Mr.

Goulding, and found a thousand uses for the old furniture she

had once so heartily despised. " She would Bit iv the great

high chair at the end of that table, with her feet on the stools



and the china vase in the midst filled with humble cottage

flowers — meadow-sweet, and wild roses, and Sweet-williams, sea

pinks, woodbine, and wild convolvulus ! Did not Mr. Goulding

like cottage flowers best ? " No ; the clergyman said he did not,

but he thought Mr. Lyset did, and the young man assured her it

was so ; and then gazed on the only love his heart, his deep,

unworn, earnest heart, had throbbed to, with an admiration

which is always accompanied by fear, lest something should

prevent the realization of the one great earthly hope.

And Mabel was more fitful than her aunt hud ever seen her.

Fearful lest her secret, as she thought it, should be discovered,

she made as many turns and windings as a hare ; and yet, unskilled

in disguising her feelings, after spending many words iv

arranging and rearranging, she suddenly wished that the spinner

could be opened. "If," she exclaimed, "that could be opened,

I should be able to teach Mary Godwin music ; and her mother

seemed to wish it so much ; surely wc can open the instrument

? "

It has not been opened for years," replied Miss Bond ; "and

I remember, once before, Mabel wished it opened, and I refused,

lest forcing the lock might harm the marqueterie, of which my

poor mother was so fond. It has never been opened since her

death." But Mabel's desire wus of too much consequence, iv

lor lover's eyes, to be passed over, although all seemed agreed

that if it were opened it could not be played upon ; so in a few

minutes he procured a smith, who said he would remove tho

hinges, aud then unscrew the lock from the inside, which would

not injure the cover. This was done ; but greatly to poor

Mabel's dismay, the cavity where the strings once had been, was

filled with old papers

Now, is not this provoking?" said Mabel, flinging out first

one and then another bundle of letters. "Is not this provoking

? "

"No, no," exclaimed Sarah Bout, grasping a lean, long,

parchment, round which was bound an abundance of tape. " No.

Who knows what may be found here?" At once the idea was

caught ; Mabel thought no more of the strings. " I cannot,"

Bid Surah Bond to Mr. Goulding, " untie this ; can you ? "

Her fingers trembled, and she sank on her knees by the clergyman's

side. The eyes of the little group were fixed upon horn ;

not a word was spoken ; every breath was hushed ; slowly he

unfastened knot aster knot ; at last the parchment was unfolded ;

still, neither Sarah Bond nor Mabel spoke ; the latter gasped for

breath — her lips apart, her cheeks flushed ; while Sarah's bauds

were clasped together, locked upon her bosom, and every vestige

of colour had deserted her face.

Be calm, my dear friend," he said, after glancing his eyes over

the parchment ; "be calm. You have experienced enough of the

changes and chances of this world not to build too quickly upon

any foundation but the one — the goodness of God ! I do believe

this is an especial proof of His Providence, for I do think this is

Cornelius Bond Hobart's original will in your uncle's favour."

It would be useless to attempt a description of the scene that

followed ; but the joy at the reality of the discovery was a

fearful temperate joy — the joy of chastened hearts. Sarah

Bond, blessing God, above all things, that, go tho law as it

would, her father's memory would now be held as the memory

of au honest man ; that he had, sis she had said, copied, not forged

the will. The shadow oust upon her father's grave was removed ;

and she was indeed happy. She assured the rector how useful

adversity had been to them — how healthful it had rendered

Mabel's mind — and how much better, if they recovered what hud

been lost, they should know how to employ their means of usefulness.

Mr. Lyset's congratulations were not so hearty as Mr.

Goulding's ; he felt that now he wus the curate and Mabel the

heiress ; and he heard the kind good night which Mabel spoke,

with a tingling ear. He was proud in his own way ; and pride,

as well as affection, had been gratified by the idea of elevating

her he loved. Mabel noted this und wept during a sleepless

night, that he should believe her so unworthy und so ungrateful.



There was much to think of and to do ; the witnesses were

to be found, and lawyers consulted ; and Mr. Cramp was seized

with a sudden fit of virtuous indignation against Mr. Alfred

s 2

Bond, after Sarah Bond's new " man of business " had succeeded

in producing the only one of the witnesses in existence, who, he

also discovered, had been purposely kept out of the way, on

a former occasion, by some one or other. The delays were vexatious,

nd the quirks, and turns, and foldings, aud doubles innumerable

; but they came to an end at last and Mr. Alfred

Bond was obliged iv his turn to vacate the old mansion, iv which

lie had revelled — a miser in selfish pleasures.

I have dwelt longer than was perhaps necessary on the minutia

of this relation, the principal events of which are so strongly

impressed upon my memory. But the more I have thought over

the story, the more I have been struck with the phases und

impulses of Sarah Bond's unobtrusive, but deeply-feeling mid ;

her habits struggling with her feelings, leading me to the conclusion

that she would never have become, even with the expanding

love of her piece to enlarge her views, thoroughly manacled

from parsimonious habits but for her lesson iv adversity, which,

instead of teaching, as it does a worldly mid, the value of money,

taught her higher nature its proper uses.

It was beautiful to see how Mabel grew into her aunt's virtues;

aud even Mr. Goulding was startled by the energy and thoughtfulness

of her character. She soon convinced Mr. Lyset that her

prospects grew brighter iv his love ; and for a time he was

romantic enough to wish she hud continued penniless, and he

bad been born a peer, to prove his disinterested affection. This,

however, wore away, as man's romance always does, and he

absolutely became reconciled to his bride's riches. Sarah Bond

was living a very few years ago, beloved and honoured — a fountain

of prosperity and blessing to all who needed. There was uo

useless expenditure, uo show, no extravagance iv " the establishment,"

at the old manor-house ; but it was pleasant to perceive

the prosperity of the poor in the immediate neighbourhood ;

there was evidence of good heads and kind hearts superintending

all moral and intellectual improvements ; there were flourishing

Schools, and benevolent societies, and the constant exercise of

individual charities ; and many said that Sarah Bond, and her

niece and nephew, did more good with hundreds than others

did with thousands. From having had practical experience of

poverty, they understood how to remedy its wants, and minister

to its sorrows ; and to the last hour of her prolonged life, Sarah

Bond remembered the uses of adversity.

THE MERCHANT'S DAUGHTER.

J^a^irjOOß little thing, how it limps ! Hush ! I declare it

je!l^|§ has gone through the hedge into the churchyard.'

Wait one, only one moment, dear sister, and I shall

«J'=t&^» certainly catch it ;"— and over the churchyard stile

bounded Rose Sünderland, as lightly as a sunbeam, or, I should

rather say, to be in keeping with the time and place, as lightly

ns a moonbeam ; for that favourite orb of love and ladies hud

risen, even while the golden hue of an autumnal sun lingered in

the sky, aud its pule uncertain beams silvered the early dewdrops,

which tho guy und thoughtless girl shook from their

verdant beds in her rapid movements. But Rose cored little

about disturbing dewdrops, or, indeed, anything else that interfered

with the pursuit which occupied her for the moment

With the eagerness of sixteen, she had pursued a young leveret

among the silent tombs, as thoughtlessly as if she trod only on

the sweet wild-thyme, or humble daisy ; and when she had nearly

wearied out the object of her anxiety, she saw it take shelter

under the worn arch of an ancient monument with evident satisfaction,

convinced that now she could secure her prize, if Margaret

would come to her assistance.

Sister, sister," repeated she, eagerly, " come ! — if wc do not

take it it will surely become the prey of some weasel or cub-fox

before morning."

Margaret slowly passed tho stile.

One would think you were pacing to a funeral," said Rose,

pettishly. "If you will do nothing else, stand there at least,

and— now I have it!" exclaimed sho, joyously; it's little heart

pants — poor thing ! I wonder how it got injured."

"Stop!" replied her sister, in a low agitated voice; "yon

forget — yet how can you forget? — who it is that rests here;

who " She placed her hand upon a plain stone pedestal,

but strong and increasing emotion prevented her finishing the

sentence.

"My dear Margaret, forgive mo ! It is ever thus. lam fated

to be your misery. lam sure I never thought "

Think now, then. Rose, if it be but for a moment : think —

think that only one little year has passed since he was with us ;

since his voice, so wise, and yet so sweet, was the music of our

cottage — his kindness the oil and honey of our existence. Though

the arrow hud entered into his soul, it festered not ; for no corruption

was there ! When he was reviled, he reviled not again ;

and though his heart was broken, his last words were, ' Lord,

thy will, not mine, be done ! ' My dear, dear father ! " she continued,

sinking at the same moment upon her knees, and clasping

her hands in devout agony, " teach me to be like thee !"

Say me, rather," ejaculated the sobbing Rose, whoso grief

became as vivid as had been her exultation ; — " say, teach Rose

to be like thee. You are like our father ; but lam nothing! —

anything! Oh, Margaret. ! can you forgive me? There; I'll

let the hare go this moment I'll do anything you wish — indeed

I will."

Do let it go," replied Margaret Sünderland, who had quickly

recovered her self-possession; "it would be ill-done to permit

any suffering near his grave." -

After a brief pause, she rose from her knees, and passing her

arm through that of her sister, left the churchyard to its moonlight

solitude.

Tho Widow Sünderland dwelt on the banks of the River

Within, and the path the sisters had taken led for some time

along the picturesque meadows that, sloped to the very waters

edge. As they pursued their way, an opening amid the trees

discovered the beautiful window in Lincoln Cathedral — at once

the pride and boast of that venerable city ; the beams of the

moon were full upon it, and its varied panes glittered like many-tinted

silver in the placid yet wavering light. " How beautiful I"

exclaimed Rose. Margaret sighed. "Is it not beautiful ?" interrogated

the gay-hearted girl. "Yes, Rose ; but methinks 1 more

admire these lofty towers, standing out against the clear night-sky,

and looking, not like relies, but giants of the olden days.

Wc have no right to upbraid Time in this instance ; for he,

gentlest among the thralls

Of Destiny, upon whose wounds hath laid

His lenient touches, soft os light that falls,

From the wan moon, upon the towers and walls,

Light deepening tho profoundest sleep of shade,

Time and man have loved those glorious towers, and I love them

better than the moon-tinted window ; for see, Rose, a cloud has

veiled her brightness, and — and now my towers are as prominent

as ever, while your window is obscured."

You would draw a moral from that, my wise sister."

It would be quaint, and, T fear," replied Margaret, " an old

song to, perhaps, not a new tune ; signifying, that much that is

excellent and beautiful is lost, not having the advantage of

a good light."

Sister, I forgot to tell you that I met Lady Louisa Calcraft

this morning at the library, and she took no notice of mc. I am

sure she knew me, for she said something to a gentleman who

was with her, and I distinguished the words, ' dead father,' aud

ruined fortunes.' "

The ban is upon you, and upon us all, Rose," replied Margaret,

turning her pale but beautiful countenance towards her

sister — " the ban

Of buried hopes,

And prospects faded.'

Would to God that were all I — that any sacrifice on my part

could pay the debts my poor father, in his honest but wild speculations,

incurred ; and then I could return the haughty stare

of those who worshipped, it appears, not us, but our prosperity,

and now scorn the daughters of a ruined house. The Calcrafta

in Lincoln ! — but they are everywhere. I could ill have borne

a Scornful look from one of them."

They are friends of Ernest Heathwood, are they not ? "

A deep and glowing crimson, which luckily the obscurity of

the night preserved from observation, mantled tho cheeks of

Margaret Sünderland, while she replied —

Yes, I believe so ; but, dear Rose, you might have spared

me the mention of his name."

You will bo more angry with me when you know that this

morning I also saw Ernest, and he requested — prevailed on me

to "

To what ? "

To take a letter to you."

Again the tell-tale blood rushed to the maidens face, and a*.

quickly receded, leaving her fine features pale and rigid as

chiselled alabaster. It was long crc she recovered herself sufficiently

to form any determination, much less arrange her words

for utterance ; but the only manifestation of displeasure she

evinced towards her thoughtless sister, was by withdrawing her

arm, and walking resolutely forward, unaided and alone.

Enough has been, doubtless, gathered from this conversation

to show that Margaret and Rose were the daughters of a ruined

merchant — of one, indeed, who had been a prince yesterday, unda

beggar to-day— of one whose argosies hud gone forth, but

returned no more — whose name one year would have guaranteed

millions, yet who died the next, wanting a shilling. Maurice

Sünderland had cheerfully surrendered all to his creditors ; yet

that all was insufficient to satisfy tho claims made, and justly

made, upon him. House, plate, jewels, servants, had all been

sacrificed. Not a vestige of their former prosperity lingered ;

and they who had revelled in superfluities, now wanted the most

common necessaries of life. A small jointure alone remained ;

and in that his wife had only a life interest. Margaret was may

years older than her sister; and in his agony, their father wished

that the grave had closed over them, us it had over his other

children, before this great sorrow had come upon them.

His wife was vain, weak, selfish ; a woman who knew not

what it was to grow old gracefully, and who haunted youthful

pleasures with a wrinkled brow, a flaxen wig, and a painted

check. Her mid was inconceivably small ; she wept more for

the loss of her diamonds aud Dresden than for her husband's

misfortunes ; and mourned incessantly that her Mino, her

darling, her exquisite poodle, was of necessity deprived of his

chicken panada 1 Being a man of no ordinary intellectual powers,

Mr. Sünderland bad chosen her — no one knew why !— from the

love of contrast, perhaps ; or the then, as well as now, prevailing

opinion, that silly women make the most tender wives ; or,

perhaps, smitten with her pretty face — time out of mid tho

matrimonial bait for wise men as well as fools ! But certainly

no one could have imagined her to have been the mother of such

a being as Margaret Sünderland. One little anecdote will serve

to show the nature of Margaretss principles — and it is to bo

hoped, act as a lesson to many similarly circumstanced, who

seem not aware that honesty demands the sacrifice of all; so

that, in the emphatic words of Scripture, wc may '' owe uo man

anything, but to love one another." When her father was

making out au inventory of his personal property for the benefit

of his creditors, Margaret entered the room with a noiseless step,

and placed before horn a large casket, containing all the jewels

she possessed. The old man laid down the pen, aud looked into

her sweet face, without a word.

These were only valuable, dear father, because you gave

them, and loved to see me wear such finery ; — in our future

dwelling they would be worse than useless ; — take their, aud

let them, for my sake, be appropriated to the payment of

our debts."

Not so, my child ; you have nothing to do with "-—

She prevented the sentence being finished by an affectionate

kiss.

I will not suffer you to say so, because it makes me as

if not one with you. If you do not take them I will sell them

myself, and send the money where it may be required."

Mr. Sünderland unclosed a portion of the casket, and his eyes

rested on a tiara of the finest oriental pearl. " I remember when

you lost wore this, my child ; it was at the gallant fete given at

Hampstead, by the rich Jew of Cheapside. How beautiful

it looked in your dark hair."

And does not this look as beautiful, father?" exclaimed

Margaret, snatching a white rose from an overturned vase of

flowers, aud placing it on her head. " When wc live in a nice

country' cottage, you shall gather one for me every summer

morning."

•' But the winter — the winter will come there, girl, as well as

here, and where then shall 1 gather roses?"

"Wc w ; ll then, father, live upon memory — and upon hope !"

She hardly dared trust herself to pronounce that little word hope,

which, to a really broken heart, sounds more like mockery than

consolation. Her father looked mournfully into her face, and

shook his head in bitter silence ; he then closed the casket,

and would have placed it iv her hands.

They are the only portion left you, Margaret"

Not so, father ; they would take a portion from me."

How, child ? "

"An honest conscience ! I cannot keep them ; they were

bought with your money for the daughter of the rich - they

would not, dearest father, become the daughter of a poor man.

All I ask is, permission to imitate your example — You give up

all : 0 1 suffer me to do the same, and do not suppose so meanly

of your own girl, as that she valued these more than self-approbation,

whose silent voice is sweeter than the applause of courts

or kings."

Maurice Sünderland was neither a harsh man nor a stern

father ; he had loved and admired his daughter, but he had

never known her till that moment He made no reply to her

words, but folded her silently to his breast ; and she felt tears —

the first she had ever known horn shed — falling upon her brow.

These misfortunes may be considered the commencement of

Margaretss trials. The family removed to Lincoln, as one or two

relatives lived there, who could forward the plans Miss Sunderland

had formed for their support Her affection for her father

would not permit her to leave horn to the care of a giddy, childish

sister, and her almost idiotic mother ; particularly as his health

was visibly sinking, and nature appeared unable to repair the

inroads of disease. She, therefore, accepted most joyfully the

charge of the education of four little girls, her cousins, who were

to remain with her only during tho day, as their parents resided

in the good city of Lincoln. Her father raised no obstacle to

this plan ; though his withered check flushed, und his bund

trembled, the first day that he saw his beautiful Margaret quietly

arranging, and superintending her Hives in the back parlour of

their cottage, which she had converted into a school-room ; but

her mother's caprice and spirit of contradiction was a constant

source of mortification, although it tended still more to draw

forth her daughter's virtues : she was never satisfied ; always

regretting their past splendour — always reproaching poor Margaret

with having degraded her family, by condescending to

become a "school-mistress ;" and yet thoughtlessly squandering

her hurd earnings on selfish enjoyments. This was not full ; —

no oue who has only read of " The delightful task of teaching

the young idea how to shoot," can form an estimate of the self-denial

which must be the portion of an instructress, particularly

if she be conscientious in the discharge of her duty. All influences,

to be useful, must be exercised with discretion ; and it

is but one little step from dominion to tyranny. Margaret was,

therefore, obliged to practise as well as preach ; and, indeed, one

without the other is always unavailing ; she had to watch, not

only herself but others, so that her maxims might be really

useful to those she sought to improve. She wished to make

them not only accomplished, but informed ; and her " new

system," as it was called, was subject to many animadversions,

both from her relatives and their friends ; who, as usual on such

occasions, quite forgot what Miss Sünderland had been, in what

she was; treated her merely os " the governess," and admitted

her only as such to their houses.

•Of all persons doomed by the wavering scale of fortune to earn

their own bread, none are so much to be felt for as governesses.

The servant, when her work is done, has an hour or two that she

can cull her own, and she has no ambition beyond her sphere.

But the governess bus no sphere — she is considered — part of the

kitchen — part of the drawing-room ; — from the latter she is often

expelled, aud from tho former she turns with disgust She

struggles between a double existence ; she is a sort of amphibious

creation, belonging to two separate states. She must appear

like a gentlewoman, while she hardly receives the wages of a

lady maid ; she must be " accomplished and refined," yet keep

her accomplishments out of the way till called for ; and support

insult, as if she were devoid of feeling. Heaven help those who

are obliged to go " a governesses," for they can expect but

little help from earth !— Volumes might be filled by " The

Trials " of " a Governess."

At one of those visits, which she continually shrunk from, and

only endured as an occasional penance, she met the very Ernest

Heatbwood, to whom Rose so unwittingly alluded during their

evening walk. The eldest sou of a baronet, who, with his new

honours, had changed, it was understood, a mercantile for a

somewhat aristocratic name, was a likely person to attract the

attention, and wm the civilities, of all within his circle ; aud ho

was welcomed to the mansion of Miss Sunder lands relatives with

extraordinary courtesy. Margaret, always collected, always

dignified, sought neither to attract, nor avoid, bis attentions ;

but silently suffered all the little manoeuvres of second-rate

country town society, to take their course. The anxiety that

Borne mothers evinced to crowd a tribe of ill-dressed daughters

to a tuneless piuuo, aud there show oil' their skill in the various

departments of first, second, and third harmony ; while others

contented themselves with exhibiting the more quiet, and, consequently,

more endurable litter, of card drawings aud Poouah

painting, could only excite a feeling of pity in such a mid as

Margaretss. Pity, that woman should so thoroughly mistake the

end and aim of her creation, as to descend to be the mistress of

a puppet-show — and herself enact first puppet ; aud something

more severe than pity towards the other sex, who outwardly

encourage, while they inwardly despise, such petty traps of

slavery. "An age," reflected Margaret, " which values itself

on caricature, parody, or burlesque, can produce little that is

sublime, either in genius or virtue ; yet these qualities, aud the

display of imperfect and, in nine cases out of ten, more Senseless

accomplishments, amuse : and wc live in an ngc that must be

amused, though our best aud noblest feelings pay the penalty ;"

and she employed her slender fingers with ten-fold care, to build

up tho card-castle, which her little pupil, Cicely, had thrown

down.

It is abominable," whispered her sister, who that evening

had accompanied her, " to hear such bud music, while you could

give us so much that is good." A quiet motion of her sister's

finger to her lips prevented further observation ; and tho card-castle

bid fair to mount three stories high, when, suddenly,

Ernest Heathwood turned round, and, addressing himself to the

fair architect, asked if now she would savour them, for he was

sure she could. "0, yes," observed one of the dowagers ; "of

course. Miss Sünderland can and will ; she reaches so well, that

she must be a proficient." Some seeling of pi ide, perhaps (for it

will linger, despite our better judgment), called so exquisite a

blush to Margaretss check, and young Heathwood gazed on her

with such respectful, yet visible admiration, that, had she not

been " only a governess," the entire female sex, likely to be married,

or given in marriage, would have thrown up the garnet as

hopeless; but the eldest son of a rich baronet would never think

of the daughter of a broken merchant — and a governess I the

thing was impossible — quite.

What Ernest Heathwood did think while Margaret commenced

that sweet ballad of Moors, " All that's bright must

fade," it is impossible to say ; but a thrill, amounting to anguish,

was felt by every one in the room, by the peculiar manner iv

which she pronounced the following lines, as if they were the

pure echo, the true feeling of tho sweet Indian melody : —

Who would sock or prize

Delights that end in aching T

Who woidd trust to ties

That every hour ore breaking?

Then it was that Ernest Heathwood saw into her very soul, and

felt that she must indeed have known change and misfortune.

Music is dangerous from lips of beauty, but more dangerous

from those of feeling : the union of both was too much for

Ernest's philosophy ; and he was, it must be confessed, somewhat

bewildered during the remainder of the evening. She

inspired horn not only with interest but admiration ; and he

felt more anxiety than he cared to express, when her history wus

truly, though, it appeared to horn, coldly communicated by her

relative, the next day, with the additional intelligence, that her

father had been seized only that morning with paralysis, and

that little hopes were entertained of his recovery ! He called

constantly at the cottage ; but it was not until some time aster

the bereavement, which Margaret above all, lamented, that he

saw again the being for whom he felt more interest than ever.

There are peculiar circumstances which train our susceptibilities

to receive impressions, and misfortune either softens or

hardens the heart : the incapacity of her mother, the volatility

of her sister, rendered them both unfit companions for the high-minded

Margaret ; and she might well be pardoned for anticipating

the evening that now invariably brought Ernest to the

cottage, as a time when, free from toil and restraint, she would

meet the sympathy aud tenderness, without which a woman's

heart must be sad and unsatisfied. She was not, like many

other wise and prudent people, at all aware of the danger of her

position. She had no idea that, while seeking to alleviate or

dispel soitow by what she termed friendly converse, a deep aud

lasting feeling was silently, but surely, implanting itself in her

bosom, aud that time and opportunity were fostering it, either for

her happiness or misery. Her girlhood had passed without any

of what wc may call the frippery of love. How she had escaped

the contagion of flirtation, is wonderful. Perhaps it might be

attributed to a certain reserve of manner, which served as a beacon

to fools and puppies, to warn them off whenever it was their

fortune to encounter Margaret Sünderland.

Among the wealthy citizens many hud sought her hand ; but

she was not to be courted by a golden shower ; and after her

father's failure, none remembered the beautiful daughter of the

unfortunate merchant : it was, therefore, not to be wondered at

that she valued horn who valued her for herself, and herself only

and dreamed the dream that can be dreamed but once !

Many evenings were spent in that full aud perfect trustfulness,

which pure aud virtuous hearts alone experience. So certain

indeed appeared the prospect of her happiness, that she sometimes

doubted its reality ; and when a doubt as to the future did

arise, it pressed so heavily, so very heavily, upon her heart, that,

with a gasping eagerness which excited her own astonishment,

she cast it from her, as a burden too much for her to bear.

She had known and loved Ernest for some months, when one

morning their only servant interrupted her little school, by

saying, that a gentleman in the parlour wished to speak to her.

On entering the room, a short, dark, elderly man returned her

graceful salvation, with an uncouth effort at ease and self-possession.



Miss Sünderland, I presume ?"

She Kov:ed : a long pause succeeded, which neither seemed

willing to interrupt ; and when Margaret raised her eyes to his,

there was something — she could hardly tell what — that made

er think horn the bearer of evil tidings. Yet was the countenance

not unpleasing to look upon — the expanded and somewhat

elevated brow — the round full eye, that had rather a benign than

tern expression, would have betokened a kind, and even gentle

being, had not the lower portion of the face boded heaviness and

severity — the mouth was thin and compressed — the chin lean

and short — the nose looked as if nature had at first intended to

mould it according to the most approved of Grecian features, but

suddenly changing her plan, loft it a rude piece of unfinished

workmanship.

Madam," he nt last commenced ; " you are, I believe, acquainted

with my sou 1 "

Sir !"

My son, Mr. Ernest Heathwood ?"

Again Margaret replied by bowing.

I have resided many years abroad, but if your father was

living he would know me well."

The word " father" was ever a talisman to poor Margaret, and

she looked into his face, as if imploring horn to state how he had

known her parent. He evidently did not understand the appeal;

and continued, in a constrained manner, bis lips compressed, so

as scarcely to permit egress to his words, and his eyes bent on

the carpet, unwilling to meet her now fixed and anxious gaze.

I have every respect for you, Miss Sünderland ; and yet

I feel it but right to mention in time, that an union between you

and my son, is what I never could — never will — agree to. The

title (and the new baronet drew up his little person with much

dignity) I cannot prevent his having, but a shilling of my money

goes not with it unless he marries with my perfect consent.

Forgive me, young lady, I esteem your character ; I — I — j"

he raised his eyes, and the death-like hue of Margaretss features

seemed, for the first time, to give horn the idea that he spoke to

a being endowed with feeling.

Miss Sünderland, I was not prepared for this. I had

T

hoped matters had not gone so far. I — then you really hove

Ernest?"

Whatever my sentiments, sir, may be towards your son.

she replied — all the proud woman roused within her — " I would

never entail beggary on him."

Well spoken, faith ; and I am sure, Miss Sünderland, that

had you — in short, you must be aware this is a very delicate subject;

but had you fortune equal to my hopes for Ernest, I would

prefer you — upon my word I would — though I never saw you

till this moment — to any woman in England. You see," he persisted,

assuming the tone of low-bred confidence ; " I have, as a

mercantile man, had many losses ; perhaps you know that?" He

paused for a reply, which Margaret could not give. " These

losses must be repaired, and there is only one way to do so. If

I had not the station to support which I have, it would not

signify ; but as a man of title, the truth is, I require, and must

have, ten or twenty thousand pounds within a very little time— *

there is but one way to obtain it — you would not — (and here

the man of wealth, and the man of rank, forgot himself in the

husband and the father) you would not, 1 am sure, by persisting

iv this love affair, entail ruin upon me and mine. Ernest

has two sisters and a mother, Miss Sünderland."

Margaretss breath came short and quick, the room reeled

round, and, as she endeavoured to move to open the window,

she must have fallen, but for the support which Sir Thomas

Heathwood afforded her.

I will never bring ruin on any one," she said at last. " What

is it you require of me ? "

To write and reject, fully and entirely, my son's addresses,

and never, never see horn more."

This, sir, I cannot ; I will see horn once more, for the last

time, this evening. I will practise no deceit, but I will tell horn

what is necessary. There, sir, you have my word ; and may the

Almighty ever preserve you and yours from the bitterness of

poverty I "

Well might the old baronet dread the effects of another interview

between Margaret and his son, when he himself experienced

such a sensation of awe and love towards this self-denying girl ;

yet such was the holy truth of her resolve, that he had not the

power to dispute it. He lest the cottage, after various awkward

attempts to give utterance to his contending feelings.

Margaret 1" screamed her mother, as she was passing to hei

own room — "do, Margaret, just come here, and see bow well —

how young I look with my widow's cap — a conceit of my own,

this trimming — when you are married to Ernest, I shall dress iv

white. I should like to know what sort of a man his father is,

and if he is likely to live long or die soon. Dear Margaret,"

added the poor woman, in all the pure vulgarity of mid, " I

should so like to hear a child of mine called 'my lady !' " This

was too much for her poor daughter, who rushed into her little

chamber, and, burying her face in her hands, yielded to emotions

which, for a time, were too powerful to submit to the control of

reason.

The evening of that eventful day was clear and balmy ; the

flowers of early spring disseminated their fragrance over every

little weed and blade of gross, till they were all impregnated

with a most sweet odour : the few insects which the April sun

calls into existence, clung wearily to the young tendrils for support,

and the oak-leaves of the post autumn still rustled beneath

the tread of the creeping hedge-hog or swift-footed hare. It wus

a tranquil hour, and Margaret Sünderland repined at its tranquillity.

" I could have better parted from horn in storm aud

tempest, than amid such a scene as this," she said, as she leaned

against a gnarled trunk of a withered beech-tree for support.

The next moment Ernest was at her side.

And thus, to pleuso the avarice of my father, Margaret, you

cast me off for ever — you turn me adrift — you consent to

my union with another, though you have often said, that the

union, unhallowed by affection, was indeed unholy. Is this consistent

? "

I come not here to reason, but to part from you — to say,

Ernest Heathwood, what I never said before, that so true is my

affection for you, that I will kneel to my Maker, and fervently

and earnestly implore Horn to bless you, to bless your bride, tot

2

multiply happiness and prosperity to your house, and to increase

exceedingly your riches, and good name."

Riches ! " repeated her lover (like all lovers) contemptuously

; " with you I should not need them."

But your family, ycu can save them from the misery of

poverty — from the plague-spot that marks, and blights, and

curse, all whom it approaches. I should have remembered," che

added, with unwonted asperity, " that it rested upon us, and not

have suffered you to be contaminated by its influence."

Many were the words he used, and the reasons he urged, to

shake what he called her mad resolve. He appealed to her

affections, but they were too strongly enlisted on the side of duty

to heed his arguments ; and, after some reproaches on the score

of caprice and inconsistency, which she bore with more patience

than women so circumstanced generally possess, he left her under

feelings of strong excitement and displeasure. He had not given

himself time to consider the sacrifice she made ; be felt as if she

deserted horn from a feeling of over-strained pride, and bitterly

hinted (though he knew it to be untrue at the time), that it

might be she had suddenly formed some other attachment

When she found herself indeed alone, in the dim twilight, at

their old trysting-spot — though while he was present she had

repelled the last charge with true womanly contempt — she would

fain have recalled horn, to reiterate her blessing, and assure horn,

that though her resolve was unchangeable, she loved horn with a

pure and unsullied faith. Had he turned on his path, he would

have seen her waving horn back ; and the tears that deluged her

pale cheeks would have told horn but. too truly of the suppressed

agony Bhe had endured.

Many weeks elapsed, and she had outwardly recovered her

tranquillity, though she was but ill-fitted to go through her

daily labours as before, when Rose so unexpectedly announced

that she had seen Ernest, and taken a letter from him. When

tho sisters entered the little cottage, it was evident that something

was necessary to dispel Mrs. Sunderland's ill temper.

Yes, it's a pretty little thing ; what loves of eyes it has, and

such nice long ears ! But really, Margaret, you must not go out

and leave .ne at home without a sixpence : there was no silver in

your purse, and the postboy came here, and refused to leave a

London letter without the money, — it is astonishing bow impudent

those fellows are, — and so "

Margaret interrupted her mother, by saying that she lest tenor

twelve shillings in her purse.

Aye, very true — so you did ; but a woman called with such

an assortment of sweet collars, and it is so seldom I have an

opportunity now of treating myself to any little bit of dress,

that I used them : it was so cheap, only eleven and sixpence,

with so lovely a border of double-hern stitch, and the corners

worked in the most delicate bunches of fuchsia — here it is."

And did the letter really go back, mother ? "

I wish you would not call me mother — it is so vulgar I everyone

says mamma, even married women. No ; it did not go

back : I sent Mary into the little grocer's to borrow half-a-crown.

You need not get bo red, child : I said you were out — had my

purse — and would repay it tomorrow morning."

Degradation on degradation," thought poor Margaret, as ale

took the letter : " I cannot repay it tomorrow ; that was tho

last silver in the house : I know not where to get a shilling till

next week."

'■ I must say, Margaret, for a young woman, you are the least

communicative person I ever met : you have got that letter by

heart by this time, I should imagine. Pray, who is it from? "

Margaret Sünderland seemed perfectly unconscious of the

question, but continued the re-perusal of her epistle, as if her

mother had not spoken ; she then left the room without uttering

a single word.

I must say, Rose, that your sister gives me a great deal

of uneasiness," said Mi's. Sünderland; 'she is so uidike mein

all things— so self-willed — so like your poor father, who,

indeed, always made her his companion. She wants tenderness,

and "

Oh, my dear mamma I" exclaimed the generous, thoughtless

Rose, " you cannot think that, lam sure. If you only knew

what a sacrifice she made to-night to catch you that little hare !

and, as to her purse, I know that the reason she changed colour

was, that it contained all the money in the bouse."

Then she ought to manage better ; I never used to be without

money in London : it is very odd " and so ran on this

inconsiderate lady, until the heart of her youngest-born ached

within her, from perfect weariness and shame at her selfishness.

Rose," said Margaret, as the former entered their bedroom,

"come hither: you may, perhaps, see Ernest Heathwood again,

and you can then return horn this ;" — she placed the unopened

letter in her hind ; — " Ido not wish to read it, particularly now ;

it might have a baneful effect upon the honest purpose which, I

trust in God, I shall have Strength to accomplish. And now,

dearest, sit here, and look over this other letter I have received

from London."

Rose took the paper that Margaret offered, and moved from

opposite the cracked looking-glass which garnished the simple

dressing table.

I'll stand here, please, sister ; I cannot bear to sit opposite

that disagreeable, trumpery glass ; it makes my nose crooked.

Oh 1 Mangy, do you remember the beautiful mirrors wc had in

Bedford Square, and my pretty little bed, with its pale pink silk

curtains, looped with roses ? Height ! I did not know what a

patched quilt meant then ;" and she glanced contemptuously at

the clean, but humble, coverlet of their simple couch.

My dear Rose, do be serious, and read."

What an ungenteel-looking letter I — such coarse paper, and

such a scribbely-scrabbely hand ! " Whatever the hand or paper

might be, after she had fairly commenced, she did not again

speak until she had finished the perusal from beginning to end,

and then, with one loud cry of joy, she threw herself into her

sister's arms.

Margaret, dear Margaret — to think of your taking this so

quietly, when I— my dear sister — I shall certainly lose my

senses. Wc shall be rich, more rich than ever ; and you can

nnrry Ernest — dear, kind Ernest — and wc can live in London,

and keep our carriage, and — Nay, sister, do let me break that

odious glass. 0, Margaret, I am so happy ! let us go tell our

mother — mamma — I beg her pardon ; and you shall give np

your pupils; — dear, beautiful letter! let me read it again;"

and the second perusal threw her into greater raptures than

the first

It is better not to mention this to our mother, I think,"

said Margaret, when her sister's ecstacies had in some degree

subsided '' And yet she is our parent, and has therefore a right

to our confidence, though I know she will endeavour to thwart

my resolves."

"Thwart your resolves?" replied Rose, in astonishment;

"why, what resolves can you have, except to marry Ernest, and

be as happy as the day is long ? "

"I Shall never marry Ernest Heathwood," replied her sister,

in a trembling voice, " though I certainly shall be more happy

than I ever anticipated in this world."

I cannot pretend to understand you," said Rose ; " but do

let me go and make mamma acquainted with our unlooked-for

prosperity :" and she accordingly explained to her mother, that

a brother of her father's, one who had ever been on decidedly

bad terms with all his relatives, and their family more particularly,

had died lately in Calcutta, bequeathing by will his property,

amounting to many thousands, to his niece, Margaret

Sünderland, who, in the words of his singular testament, " had

never offended horn by word or deed, and must ever be considered

a credit to her sex." There is no necessity to recapitulate the

ecstacies, plans, and arrangements that succeeded, and in which

Margaret took no part.

The next morning she granted her pupils a holiday, and when

her mother went out, doubtless for the purpose of propagating

the account of their good fortune, Margaret told her sister that

she wished to be alone for some time to arrange her plans. She

had been so occupied for about two hours, when Rose Sunderland,

accompanied by a gentleman, passed the beechen-tree

where Margaret aud her lover had last met.

I am sure she will not be angry — it will be an agreeable

surprise— and mamma won't be home fora long time yet,"

said Rose ; " I will open the parlour door, and — "

There I shall find her forming plans for future happiness,

in which, perhaps, I am not included," interrupted Ernest Heath-wood.



You are unjust, sir," replied Rose, as they entered the

cottage ; and iv another instant Margaret, with a flushed check

and a burning brow, had returned the salvation of horn she

loved. There was more coldness iv her manner than ho deemed

necessary, and, with the impetuosity of a high aud ardent spirit

he asked her if she attributed his visit to interested motives.

No," she replied, " not so ; I hold myself incapable of such

feelings, and why should I attribute them to you ? I tell you

now, as I told you when last wc met, that my constant prayer is,

that God might exceedingly bless you and yours, and save you

from poverty, which, in the world's eye, is the extremity of

sin."

"But, Margaret," interrupted Rose, as was her wont, "there

is uo fear of poverty now ; and Sir Thomas himself said, that,

with even a moderate fortune, he should prefer you to other

women."

I have not even a moderate fortune," replied the noble-minded

girl, rising from her seat, and ot the same time laying

her hand on a pile of accompt-books that she had been examining.

" You, Mr. Heathwood, will understand me, if I say that,

when I first breathed the air of existence, I became a partaker of

my family's fortunes, as they might be, for good or evil."

"And you shared in both, Margaret, and supported both with

dignity," said Ernest, eagerly.

I believe you think so, and I thank you," she replied, while

the flush of gratified feeling passed over her fine features. " And

now, bear with me for a little, while I explain my future intentions.

My poor father's unfortunate failure worked misery for

many who trusted in horn with a confidence which he deserved,

and yet betrayed. I meant not that," she added, hastily, "he

did not betray ; — but the waves, the winds, and the misfortunes

or ill-principles of others, conspired against horn, ont he fell,

overwhelmed with his own and others' ruin. Lips that before

had blessed, now cursed horn they had so fatally trusted, and

every curse seemed to accumulate sufferings which only I was

witness to. To the very uttermost — even the ring from his

finger — he gave cheerfully to his creditors ; there was no reserve

on his part — all. all was sacrificed. Yet, like the daughters of

the horse-leech, the cry was still ' Give ! give ! ' and," she added,

with trembling voice, "at last he did give— even his existence !

and I who knew so well the honour of his noble nature, at the

very time when his cold corpse lingered in the house,— because

I lacked the means of decent burial, — was doomed to receive

letters, and bear complaints of his injustice. In the silent hour of

night I knelt by his coffin ; decay had been merciful ; it Spared his

features to the last ; and I could court and kiss the furrows which

disappointment, and the scorning of a selfish world, had graven on

h.B brow : — but, oh ! how perfectly did I feel, in that melancholy

hour, that his spirit was indeed departed, and that my lips rested

on nought but cold and senseless clay ; yet I clung, with almost

childish infatuation, to the dwelling it had so sweetly inhabited

for such a length of years. The hours rolled on, and the grey

mists of morning found me in the same spot ; it was then, as the

light mingled with, and overcame the departing darkness, that I

entered into a compact with the living spirit of my dead father,

that, as long as I possessed power to think or act, I would

entirely devote my energies to the fulfilment of those engagements,

which his necessities compelled horn to leave unsatisfied.

I am ashamed to say, I nearly forgot my promise ; and though

a portion of my hard earnings were regularly devoted to the

darling prospect of winning back for my father his unspotted

reputation, yet I did form plans of happiness iv which his

memory had no share. Ernest, for this I have suffered, aud

must suffer more. I have gone over these books, and find that,

aster devoting the entire of the many, many thousands now my

own to tho cherished object, only a few hundreds may remain at

my disposal. This is enough— again I say, may you be happy

with your dowered bride, and remember that the one consolation

tho only one that can support me under this separation, is —

that I have done my duty."

Strange as it may seem, young Heathwood did not appear aa

much distressed at this resolution as Rose — or, to say the I uti,

as Margaret — thought he would have been. No matter how

heroic, how disinterested the feeling which compels a woman to

resign her lover, she naturally expects that the lover will evince a

proper quantity of despair at the sad circumstance : and certainly,

Ernest, after a pause of a few minutes, during which ho

seemed more affected by Margaretss noble-mindedness than his

own bereavement, entered cordially into her views, and praised

the sacrifice (if, with her feelings, so it might be pulled) with an

energy that left no room to. doubt his sincerity.

After his departure she pondered these things in her heart, and

came to tho conclusion, that she had not resigned her affections

too soon, for that it was evident he had pretty well succeeded in

banishing her from his love ; and poor Rose, who had in so little

time been twice disappointed iv her hopes both of a fortune and

a wedding, was reproved with some asperity for conducting

Ernest Heathwood, under any circumstances, to their cottage.

It is needless to add, that her mother's tears and remonstrances

had uo effect upon Margaretss purpose ; and her lawyer received

instructions to remit forthwith to all creditors of the late

Maurice Sunderland the full amount of their demands, wish

interest thereon from tho day of his failure I

It required all her firmness to bear up against her mother's

complaining; and, above all, against tho painful truth established

ill her mind, that Ernest had ceased to regard her with

anything bordering on affection. Strange, that at the very

moment wc are endeavouring to repress the unavailing passion

of the one wc love, wc secretly — unknowingly, it may be — hope

for its continuance !

All " business affairs" were arranged according to her desire ;

but she was must sinking under the outward tranquillity which

is more fatal than exertion. Listlessly she wandered amid tho

flowers which Rose loved to cultivate, when the unusual sound

of carriage-wheels roused her attention, and, with no ordinary

emotion, sho saw Sir Thomas aud Ernest Heathwood enter the

wicket gate, and walk towards the cottage.

I told you, Miss Sünderland," commenced the old gentleman,

with more agitation, but less embarrassment, than he had shown

at their former interview, " that I had need of twenty thousand

pounds to support my credit, and save my family from distress.

I told you I wished my son to marry a lady possessed of that

Bum, and I now come to claim you us his bride."

Sir ! "

Yes, madam : I was your father's largest creditor ; aud

though I had no fraud, nothing dishonourable to allege against

horn, yet I did not, I confess it, like the idea of ray son's being

united to his daughter. He was always speculative and imaginative,

and I feared you might be the same. The sum you have

so nobly repaid me, I looked upon as lost, and you must therefore

suffer me to consider it a marriage-portion ; it has saved me

from ruin, without the sacrifice of my sou's happiness."

How is this?" exclaimed Margaret, fearful of trusting the

evidence of her own senses; " I cannot understand — the name—"

Our original name was Simmons," exclaimed Ernest, eagerly ;

but knowing all the circumstances — I never told you — I knew

bow my father would feel at your disinterested conduct ; and

now that your trials are past, you will, I trust, no longer

doubt mc."

Who said I doubted ? " inquired Margaret

Even Rose ; and here she comes to answer for her crime."

Nay, dearest sister," exclaimed the laughing girl, " it was

only last evening that I saw Ernest, and I have kept out of

your way ever since, lest I should discover my secret. Without

my frivolity, and the thoughtlessness of another, who, for all

that, is dear to us both, Margaretss virtues would never have

shone with so steady a light."

True, Rose, spoken like an angel ; I never thought you wise

before; it is to be hoped that when your sister changes her name,

her mantle may descend upon you," said Ernest

"She may want wisdom for herself," she continued, archly;

who knows but the most bitter trials of Margaret Sünderland

may come after marriage ? "

Ernest did not reply to the unjust suspicion, for he had not

heard it ; his sense, his thought, his heart, were fixed only upon

her who had thrown so bright and cheering a lustre over the

impressive truth : — " The good things that belong to prosperity

are to be wished, but the good things that belong to adversity

are to be admired."

THE PRIVATE PURSE.

PART THE FIRST.

ET my niece, Miss Geraldine — I mean, let Mrs. Lesson

know that as soon as she has put off her bridal,

and put on her travelling, dress, I wish to see her,"

said Mrs. Gascoigne to her maid, who had not answered

trf bell until she bad rung it twice.

Yes, ma'am," replied the flushed maiden, who was bowed

out with white satin ribbon, as if she too ho 1 just been made

bride.

And listen — When all this mummery is over, take off

these white fal-lals, aud lay them by; they will do for the next

fool of the family who chooses to enter the ' holy bonds ' —

ah ! ah ! "

The servant hardly murmured " Yes, ma'am," to this, nor bad

she quite closed the door on the crackling laugh of her mistress,

when she muttered, " Well, that beats all ! She to come ou a

visit to her own sister, on her niece's wedding-day, and grudge

me wearing of the ribbons that cost her nothing! But it's just

like her ! Stingy ! — aught ! It's no use talking — I can't a-year

stinginess. I wonder why she could not stay below at the breakfast,

like other Christians ; but it's none of my business. Put

by the millions, indeed, that never cost her a brass farthing ! "

A group of ladies passing from one room to another interrupted

this soliloquy, and turned the rippling current of the waitiutr-

maid's small mid from meditation to observation. In an instant

she became spell-bound by the white roses that garlanded the

bridesmaids' bonnets.

Mrs. Gascoigne, a lady of some five-aud-fifty years, who had

been a wife for one year and a widow for ten, was occupied after

her own fashion. She was seated at a table in her dressing-room,

and upon it was her open desk. Her long narrow features

were pinched into a mean expression ; her hair grew thinly above

her brow ; aud yet it was short and frizzed, as if it had not the

heart to grow long. Her lips were thin and compressed, betokening,

however, secrecy rather than firmness. I have noted

mouths which, though ugly, are of bland and generous forms ;

but I never saw a mouth like Mrs. Gascoigne's that was not

indicative of meanness and subterfuge. Her eyes were fine —

that is to say, well set, and of a good colour ; but their expression

was unpleasing — it was sharp and suspicions. Her dress

was neither good nor becoming, and she had flung aside the

silver favour which indicated the motive that bud drawn her

from her owu home. A faded purse of blue aud white was between

her fingers, and into it she had dropped some guineas —

uot sovereigns, but old-fashioned golden guineas — which she had,

as^it were, purloined from her own desk. She shook them once

or twice, and an unconscious smile disturbed the gravity of her

face — it was evident that she loved the golden chimes. Then

she picked out one aud put it into its secret hiding-place in her

desk. " Forty-nine," she said to herself — " forty-nine will go ass

ar with a foolish girl as fifty ; but it's an odd number — she may

wonder why it was not fifty." Another was taken from the

purse and returned to the drawer. A moments pause — she

looked out a third ; a fourth ; weighed it for a moment on her

well practised finger — it was a thought light, so she exchanged it

for one that pleased her better, and it was dropped into the

hoard. Another — she chinked the purse again. " Forty-five good

guineas — forty and five," she repeated — " hum ! quite enough to

commence a private purse for the wife of a young banker ; " and

she shut it to with a determined snap.

May I come in, dear aunt ?" said a sweet face at the door —

may I come in ?"

Until the desk was shut aud locked she made uo answer ; and

then, affecting uot to have recognised tones, the sweetness of

which told upon every ear, as the joy bells sound upon the

summer air, she inquired, " Who is there?"

Me, aunt - Geraldine," answered the same music.

Oh, yes, dear, come in," said Mrs. Gascoigue. For a moment

she looked with pride upon the young and lovely being who had

that day committed her entire destiny into the hands of one who

had promised, with his whole heart and soul, to '' love her, comfort

her, honour and keep her in sickness and iv health ; and,

forsaking all others, keep horn only unto her so long as they both

should live."

Why, dear," exclaimed Mrs. Gascoigne, as the mid returned

to its old habits, " what a deal of money that dress must

cost ! it is a real pity to hack it travelling — a real pity. Dear

Geraldine. nave you no turned silk you could wear on the

journey — en I"

You know, aunt, I brought Henry uo fortune ; so mamma

thought the least thug I might have was a handsome wardrobe

;" and she looked as much annoyed as she could have been

by anything on such a day.

Ah, dear — well, that's true ; I suppose your mother scraped

together all she could to make up the trousseau, and has no little

purse to give you, eh ?"

My dear mother," answered the bride — and the ready tears

rose to her eyes — " has indeed done everything to make me

happy — I was going to Bay independent — but every woman is

dependent upon her husband ; and Henry is so gentle and affectionate,

I have no fear that be will make me feel be was rich and

1 was poor. Mamma gave me ten guineas, and," added the fair

girl (she had not numbered nineteen summers), with a proud air,

it will be a long time before I spend all that."

That's my own Geraldine — keep it, dear — don't spend it —

keep it. Gold grows by keeping ; it does not rust or mildew —

keep it ; it is power — all that man and woman wants. I know

that — by wanting it, Geraldine. Ay, you may smile, and I daresay

your mother and all of there think it not true ; poor Mr.

Gascoigne left me enough, but no more. You, Geraldine, were

my god-child — called aster me — and I must say that you have

been as good and as affectionate as if I had made you a present

every birthday, which, perhaps, I might have done, had I not

been afraid you would have married your cousin, Arthur

Farewell."

"My dearest aunt ! " ejaculated Geraldine, in a tone of

surprise.

Oh, yes 1 I know he was very fond of you ; but I hate everyone

of the Farewells ; they are os poor as church mice, and yet

os proud of their intellect as if they had been every one city

members. Now, my dear, lam going to tell you a secret, which

I must not have you tell Henry ; your own secrets you may tell

horn, if you are foolishly fond of talking, but as this is my secret,

you have no right to tell it."

No," said Geraldine, somewhat hastily, " I will not toll horn

your secret, aunt. I have no right to do that, I think."

Certainly not, ray dear ; men have odd notions, aud it is a

foolish thing to tell them every nonsense ; it makes them

think little of us women, to keep up a tittle-tattle about every

trifle."

Geraldine gave no reply to this. She had made up her mid

to tell Henry everything ; this was her own right-minded impulse

; for her mother, a quiet, amiable, fashionably-thinking

woman, fancied she performed her duty when she sent Geraldine

to a boarding-school, heard her play and sing, and saw her dance

during the vacations — restricted her own expenditure in all

things that she might have the best musters, and be as well

dressed as girls who had ten times her fortune — ti sure way to

enfeeble the mind — took it for granted, that, as she knew her

catechism, had been confirmed, and went every Sunday to

church, lor religious education was such as to befit the high

calling of a Christian — and had never spoken to her of the duties

a woman is required to fulfil as wife and mother, until about a

week previous to the wedding-day, when she told her to be affectionate

and forbearing, and " not to forget her own dignity."

Something sho added about the duties of a mother, and the

advantage of cold bathing for infants ; but quickly concluded by

saying there would be " time enough to think of that." No

wonder that Geraldine was unable to reply to her aunt's

common-places, and at once unravel their fallacy and foresee

their danger. There are, to my knowledge, at this moment,

when volumes on female education pour from the press — when

national education is rendering the lower scarcely inferior

to the higher class in solid and useful knowledge — there

are scores of well-intentioned ladies, gentlewomen by birth,

and in manner, who love their daughters, who would (if

they knew how) forward their temporal and eternal welfare

in every possible way — and yet do no more than Geraldine

Leeson's mother did. Ah ! when shall wc have a school for

mothers ?

Mrs. Gascoigne resumed the broken thread of her discourse

more quickly than I have finished my digression.

'• Well, my dear Geraldine, I have here a little present for you

-just enough to prevent your running to your husband's pocket

i;

every moment ; but you must not tell horn a wmd about it — it is

my secret. If he or your mother were to know 1 had scraped

together fifty — no, five-and-forty — guineas, for you, they would

expect me to go on giving ; and the more you give, the more you

may give. So, take it with my blessing, child, and take care of

it ; spend it secretly for any little thing you may want, and Bay

nothing about it."

Geraldine was really surprised and pleased ; she had never

in all her life had so much money of her own, and least of

all had she expected it from her "stingy aunt" She reiterated

her thanks most sincerely ; little thinking she had taken the

first step towards deceiving her husband and working her own

misery.

Remember," repeated Mrs. Gascoigne, " remember, it is my

secret, and you have promised; you cannot conceive how I

should suffer if you broke your word." Again Geraldine kissed

her, and bade her affectionately farewell — not before she had

been twice summoned by her bride maids.

I mig/U as well," said this dangerous monitor, as sho took her

seat by the window to observe the departing carriages ; " I might

as well have taken back that odd five ; and then the ten her

mother gave her would have just made up the fifty. I hope

shell take care of it, poor dear child ! There she goes, aud her

cousin, Arthur Farewell, handing her in ! Well, I shall conceive

it my duty to give Henry Leeson a hint to look after his

pretty wife when Master Harewell is in the way. It is a very

queer world wc live in I"

The people who make the world "queer," as they call it, are

tho first to complain of this queerness ; and so it was with Mis.

Gascoigne. Her own marriage had been entirely dictated by interested

motives. She married a rich old miser for the sake of

his wealth, when she was past forty ; and upon her " queer"

ways his "queer" ways became engrafted. Geraldine's match

pleased her, because Mr. Leeson was rich ; and she fancied her

god-child had inherited her disposition, because she had discarded

a poor cousin, whom she believed, erroneously, she loved, and

married a wealthy man, whom she, as erroneously, believed the

did not love. If Geraldine lead chanced to like and wed her

poor cousin, Mi's. Gascoigne would never have given her 

pence.

Geraldine Leeson had escaped many of the contaminations of

a public school, from a sincere desire to learn thoroughly whatever

she undertook ; consequently she had little spare time. She

knew the sacrifices her mother made that she might become accomplished

; and besides, she loved her home dearly and

devotedly. She had not lest it a3 early as many children do, so

that the home affections, if not full-grown, had taken root before

her departure into a community as varied and as dangerous as

that of all large schools must be, until their entire system is

thoroughly regenerated. Still, as this was a " finishing school,"

she could not but hear various speculations, on the part of many

of the elder girls, M to " when they should come out." How

anxious the mamma of one was to get papa into good humour, to

spend a winter in Paris — whether he could afford it or uot —

because her cousin had mado an excellent match there ; to be

eure, the gentleman thought at first, from the style they lived in,

that they were very rich, but he knew the difference now ; and

the other girls laughed at this, and exclaimed, " What fun !"

Another mourned bitterly " papas stinginess," and how her poor

mamma wus obliged to alter the house bills to make them appear

more than they were, or else they never could have anything fit

to wear ; while a third rejoiced that such never could be the

case at home, as her mamma's pin-money was secured, and she

did us sho pleased, without consulting any one ! All this sort of

poisoning is carried on, like all poisonings, secretly : I do believe

that few women who undertake the charge of youth, would

suffer such observations to go unreproved ; but no governess

can have ear and eye for fifty, or even five-and-tweuty,

"grown-up" young ladies, who are permitted to sleep, sour or

two, in the same room, aud to walk attended by foreign teachers,

who frequently do not understand the language spoken by their

pupils.

Geraldine had escaped systematic corruption ; sho loved music

and dancing for their own sakes, and never cared a great deal

u 2

for creating a sensation. She, of course, desired to be loved;

but she never degraded affection by calculation. She would

have paused, certainly, before she wedded poverty ; but she

would not have married simply because her lover was rich. Sofar

she was tolerably right; but, unfortunately, many mothers,

and hers among the number, have confused notions as to the

boundaries of the delicate and indelicate. If love is mentioned,

instead of impressing the young mid with a just idea of its

sacred nature, its holy attributes, its natural impulses, it is

dismissed with an " Oh, fie!" or a reproving look, which at once

assures the daughter that her mother cannot be her confident ;

thus a mother loses a stronghold on her child's mind ; yet,

by making it the subject of conversation, speaking of it as

au event on which much of the happiness or misery of

after-life depends, she might strengthen the reasoning powers

against its undue influence, and, while subduing its violence,

lead to its being considered in its more holy and sacred

tearing.

Geraldiue's mother would have almost blushed herself at

mentioning a husband to her daughter ; yet that daughter could

not fail to perceive to what the hint of, " Geraldine, wear your

blue and white, aud let Esther dress your hair — I want you to

look particularly well to-night" tended — for this was done when

only one eldest son was expected to " come iv and try his new

flute." How much of the dignity of truth, with which every

British mother ought to be crowned, is sacrificed to those petty

arts ; how much misery ensured, by domestic duties feebly sustained

!

'• I hope," said her mother, " I hope and pray you may make

a good wife;" aud she meant what she said; but she had never

adopted the means to make her one.

Geraldine hud read over the marriage ceremony, thought fora

moment how harsh that word '• obey " sounded, then wondered

she hud thought so — '• it would be so easy to obey oue she loved

as she loved Henry — obedience would be pleasure;" and so she

closed the book. Her nature was very timid. She bad little

strength of either body or mid; but she bad much affection, a

gentle yielding temper, and wished to do right in all things.

Her husband had settled a handsome independence upon her incase

of his death ; but the idea of wanting anything while he

lived she had put far from her. Although induced by her selfish

aunt to promise not to mention her fatal gist, it had never

entered into her head that she was doing wrong in keeping a

secret from her husband.

Six months had elapsed since Geraldine became the wife of

Henry Leeson. She was established in a pretty house at the

"West End;" had a chariot of the newest build, a pair of unexceptionable

bays, a very tall footman, and a very little page;

went sometimes to the opera, presided at a small dinner-party,

and assisted at a soiree, with infinite propriety; and so liberally

had her husband ministered even to her fancies, that she had

only spent five guineas of her store. She had told horn of her

mother's gift but remained silent as to her aunt's. Her cousin

had come to town to "keep his terms," and her aunt had

succeeded her mother as an inmate for a month. " The season,"

as it is called, had commenced ; and if it had not been that her

aunt's presence damped her spirits, she would have been as

happy as any wife could be. Her husband never was late

at his club, and, like most junior partners in a bank, did

not remain at his counting-house longer than was absolutely

necessary.

One evening, soon after the aunt and her niece had taken

their places iv front of a private box at Covent Garden — for

they did not move in the very high sphere which eschews

English theatres altogether — Henry, leaning over his wife's

chair, exclaimed, " Why, Geraldiue, what a handsome chain ! I

have not seen it before. Where did you get it ? "

I bought it, love."

When ? "

Oh ! let me see — this week."

This week ! and never consulted me ! I hope," he added,

looking somewhat serious, " that it is paid for."

"Of course it is, Henry. Why do you ask ? "

Because that chain must have cost twenty-five guineas,

at least ; and you know, last week you shook your empty purse

at me, und I put only ten guineas into it. Where did you get

the money?"

Her aunt contrived to press her foot, as a warning. " I told

you mamma gave me ten guineas when I left home."

But you told me how you spent five of that at Cheltenham.

Wc young bankers understand subtraction."

Well, then," she replied, colouring with condition ; "if you

must know, mamma made me up the money, as I fancied tho

chain."

Mr. Leeson bit his lip. " Indeed!" ho replied; " she is richer

than I fancied."

"It does not need a mother to bo very rich to give a child ten

guineas, even for such a toy us this," she said, flinging the links

over her pretty shoulder.

"Certainly not, my dear; but riches are comparative. One

person is rich with a pound, another poor with a thousand."

He looked serious, even Stern for a moment, as if something

very unpleasant was presented to his mid; and then his fine

animated face brightened up. and he added, " I hope my little

Geraldine has uot made a private purse !"

She could not reply ; she felt agitated, degraded ; she had told

a falsehood, and one likely to be detected. Tho performance

passed unheeded ; she tried to smile, but, instead of smiling,

burst into tears. Mr. Leeson had not been long enough married

to slight a wife's tears ; he withdrew her from the front, and

thought he had spoken harshly, when he had only spoken

seriously ; he caressed and apologised, and every affectionate

word ho spoke added to her self-reproach. Soon after, her

cousin entered the box: his manner was only that of most

animated young men, light and careless, with an occasional

empressement, rendered more striking when contrasted with his

ordinary trifling. Still, that manner was the one, of all others,

her husband disliked most. Nor had Mrs. Gaseoigne's injudicious

hint been wanting, to increase the antipathy he hud felt

towards this well-intentioned but frivolous young mau, from the

first Arthur Harewell used a cousin's privilege to tho full ;

inquired — Henry thought more tenderly than was necessary —

after her health, then rallied her on her seriousness, talked the

usual quantity of nonsense, which women, who know anything

of the world, understand to be matter of course, aud then offered

some observations on her dress. She complained that the chain

had an unsafe clasp, and he offered to take it to the jeweller's to

get it repaired — conveying the idea to Henrys mid that he

knew where it had been purchased. Mrs. Guscoigne, who hated

every one of tho Farewells, did not fail to cast in as many

innuendoes as she could, to annoy the young barrister, who had

too much tact to retort on on elderly rich relative, yet became

gradually irritated by his own forbearance. Geraldine was so

unhappy as to seem constrained ; Henry grew snappish and

morose; aud the only one of the party who seemed contented

with the evening's proceedings was Mis. Gascoigne. Not that

she acknowledged a wish to make any one, particularly her godchild,

unhappy ; but, like oil other discontented people, she did

not quite understand why anything in this world should go

smoothly forward, and it was consolatory to imagine that others

were os uncomfortable os herself. There are persons who derive

consolation from the belief that many are more unhappy than

themselves. Geraldine was unaccustomed to deception ;as long

as the five-and-forty guineas had lain dormant in her desk, there

was no visible proof of their existence, aud she hud no temptation

to deceive ; but the chain coming so palpably before her

husband's eyes, bad changed altogether the nature of the case,

and called her deceptive powers into action. Sho was, however,

a bad actress, and felt so. Her impulses were, however,

good.

I will not," she said, " ran a second risk ; I will return

my aunt her twenty guineas, and not suffer myself to be again

tempted : I wus fortunate to get off so well lust night." Sho

took out the money, and entered her aunt's room.

You look pale enough," was the morning salvation she received

; " and truly, my dear, lam uot astonished at it Mr.

Lceson's conduct was very harsh to you last night; and, I confess,

I thought rude to me ; yes, dear, rude to me — to fly into a

passion about a trumpery chain, because, forsooth, he was not

consulted — to ask if ray niece and god-child had paid for what

she wore — to inquire low she got the money — taunting you with

your want of fortune."

Oh, dear aunt, he never thought of that ! "

Permit me to know best, if you please, Mrs. Leesou. If

your mother had done as she ought, she would have stood out

for pin-money, and uot have left you the degrading task of dunning

your husband for every little foolish thing — turning men

into molly-cots — Ah ! you may smile if you like, Geraldine ; the

phrase is not very elegant but it is very expressive — you will

allow t/uU, I suppose. However, you are no child of mine, or

I would have managed differently, and taught you differently.

Men change, my poor girl ; and it is quite right for a woman to

provide against that change."

"By a large. stock of affection?" inquired Geraldine, half

amused, and more than half awakened by her aunt's theory.

No, my dear ; but as large a stock of cash as she cau muster.

Henry makes you an allowance for house-keeping ; you do not

spend it all, I hope ? "

No, aunt ; he has given me credit for good management I

saved nearly five pounds out of my first month's allowance."

And you told horn so ? "

I certainly did. Now, my dear aunt, why do you look so ?

Where would have been the pleasure of saving without his

praise? I saved five pounds, and gave it him."

And he took it ? "

Yes ; of course he did."

And after that to sjieak so meanly about the chain ! (which,

to confess the truth, was a bit of extravagance ; but he did not

think that) — a pretty clear proof that he expects you to consult

horn on every inch of ribbon. Don't be a fool, Geraldine. I

know the world, and I know that the more you give in, the

more you may. Why, you do not expect a business-man, such as

Mr. Leeson surely is, to suffer you to lay out his money for

what you may fancy? — be knows how money grows out of

money too well for that No ; make up your mid to one of

two courses — either be content to sink into an upper servant,

spending your month's allowance upon the house, and giving in

your honest account, or do as I did, as other women do — aud

keep a little for yourself; you do not know how you may want

it ; and, from tho fuss he made Inst night about that stupid

chain — in public, too — I think you may very easily judge that he

intends to draw the purse-strings tight ; aud you looked all tho

night as penitent as if you had committed a crime. Well, well,

you will know better. I once knew a woman who managed to

scrape a purse together so cleverly, that, when her husband got

into difficulties, she was able to provide all sorts of little

comforts for the house, without the knowledge of the creditors."



But was that honest ? " inquired the young wife, "as it was

saved out of his means."

But surely he intended it to have been spent ? "

Yes, very likely," replied Mrs. Leeson, who was musing on

her husband's rudeness; "yet such a system destroys mutual

confidence."

My poor foolish child ! " retorted her aunt, with an ominous

shake of her bead, " ray poor foolish child ! you do not surely

believe that your husband tells you everything — makes you a.

confidant ! A handsome, would-be fashionable young man make

his wife his confidant ! — tell her everything ! Why, what a fool

you must be ! — ah, ah ! " and the old crackling laugh grated on

Geraldine's heart. "By the way," resumed the adviser, " who

was with you when you bought that chain ? "

My cousin."

Oh ! and you told Mr. Leeson that, too, I suppose."

No, I did not; but I would in a niomeut, for I saw no harm

in it" '

Well, my dear, he would; he's as jealous as a Turk. I would

not wonder if he thought that Arthur Harewdl had given you

that chain."

I told horn mamma gave me the money."

Oh ! ah ! so you did ; I daresay he thought her a great fool,

for he must know how little she has to Spare ; however, dear,

there's an end of it now. Take my advice — do not invite Arthur

to the house yourself, keep what money you have safely, and add

to it whenever you can. You'll find Henry, with all his love,

will draw the purse-strings tighter and tighter every year ; it's

always the way with those business-men : and men of independence

are just as bad in the other way, they draw in to meet

their own greedy extravagance."

Geraldine was so confounded by the variety of new ideas — the

suspicion that she did not possess her husband's confidence ; that

he insulted her by his jealousy; that, let her be as confiding as

she would, she could meet with no return ; that he was, or would

be, avaricious, not from want, but caprice — all caused her such

intense pain, that she retired to her room to find relief in tears,

without returning the remainder of her money. If she had preconceived

notions upon the subject — if her mid had been

decided that, let lier husband's conduct be what it would, her duties,

solemnly pledged at the altar, remained the same, all would have

been well. But, poor thing, she had no fixed principles to build

ou. Her cousin pulled a couple of hours after, and she did

not ask horn to dinner. When her husband returned, he found

her languid and cold, with an indescribable air of offended

dignity; whereas he, on the other hand, felt constrained and

afflicted at a duplicity be had discovered for the first time. If

either had then confided in the other, how much after-misery

would have been spared to both !

Mr. Leeson heard from the footman that Mr. Harewell had

called, aud thought it was odd his wife did not as usual mention

his name, with those of two or three other visitors ; then he

asked her abruptly, "Why she had not detained her cousin

Arthur to dinner ? "

Her aunt's insinuation as to her husband's jealousy immediately

occurred to her, and she stammered aud blushed so as to

recall vividly the young man's frivolous manner on the preceding

evening ; and the consequence was, that both felt exceedingly

unhappy.

It is not to be wondered at that Mr. Leeson suffered a good

deal of anxiety ; for it so happened he had discovered that his

wife's mother was exceedingly distressed for money before she

had quitted his house to return to her own ; and with a delicacy

which deserved increased confidence, he had placed a sum at her

disposal as she was leaving London, intreating her not mention

it to Geraldine, lest the shadow of obligation might give

her pain. The old lady thanked horn with tears of gratitude,

confessing that she had wished to borrow a few pounds from her

daughter, but thought it better not, lest it might lead to uncomfortable

feelings. This proved to horn that his beloved wife —

she whom he loved with all the passion of a strong, truthful, and

fervent affection — she in whose simple purity he trusted, and

would have trusted for ever — had deceived horn by a mean falsehood.

If she had not returned horn the five pounds already

mentioned, he would again have taxed her with forming a private

purse ; but that act argued so strongly against such a supposition,

that he rejected the idea for one far more painful — he

believed she had either accepted the chain from her cousin, or

borrowed the money from him.

Henry Leeson's nature was none of the softest. He entertained

the highest possible sense of female honour. Whatever the fact

might be, he boasted of always making his affections subject to

his reason. And on that same evening, when they were alone,

he said, aster about twenty minutes bad been spent iv a restless

aud painful dialogue, in which neither were explicit, yet both

saw that something remained untold — he said, sternly, for the

fair and gentle face he looked upon had lost the radiance of

truth, " Thus much, Geraldine — thus much ; beware at any

attempt to deceive me ; for, if you do so once, you will never do

so a second time."

The young wife wept, and wept bitterly; but though only four-and-twenty

hours had elapsed since he dried her tears so anxiously,

yet then he had not thought, aud calculated, aud placed one

circumstance with another, to see how they tallied ; and he had

clung to the hope that she would have frankly told the truth wbeu

they were alone — he had pictured her with her pale weeping face,

he had framed the gentle counsel, and heard the fond promise ;

he had hoped even that she had gone in debt rather than have

incurred an obligation which she feared to confess. Her aunt's

extreme niggardliness prevented the supposition that she bad

bestowed anything upon her save what even raisers give —

advice. Yet little did he imagine what the nature of that advice

would be. Young meu in general are careful enough as to what

male society their wives mingle with ; but they ought to be

even more careful as to their female friends. A woman is on her

guard amongst men, but amongst women her heart aud ears are

both open ; yet what pernicious notions may she not imbibe

from that dangerous class of persons called " women of the

world."

It would be difficult to explain how one small suspicion grew

out of another ; how Geraldine's heart heaved and ached under

the consciousness that her husband regarded everything she did

with a prejudiced eye, and listened to her words with a jealous

car ; how, having asked horn for some fancy of here, when ho

was in a mood not to grant a favour, he refused ; and her aunt.

who unfortunately happened to be present, took occasion to

exult in the truth of her evil prophecy : —

•'You see, Geraldine, I was right; every husband grows

selfish sooner or later ; and a poor woman who has no spirit is

sure to be trampled ou - never has a shillings spend on herself,

unless she manages."

Geraldine had no broad ideas as to the duties of wedded life.

She, happily for herself, had never thought of discussing the

rights of women part from the rights of men. Sho did not seek

to disturb the beautiful harmony of nature, by setting up the

weak against the strong— by endeavouring to persuade a woodbine

into the ambition of an oak ; but she did think sometimes

that, as the oak did not afford much generous support to the

woodbine, the woodbine might manage a little artificial prop for

itself. So sho fell, by degrees, into her aunt's plan. She stinted

the house to fill her private purse, and so rendered his home

anything but comfortable to her husband; but even this was not

the worst. She who hud felt and mourned over her first untruth

with so much real bitterness of spirit, had become accustomed to

falsehood ; it was necessary to tell oue little lie to hide another;

the holy beauty of truth had altogether departed from her.

Whenever her conscience reproached her, she whispered to it,

"that she could not help it — that if Henry had continued the

Henry he was at first, it would have been different — that it was

his fault — that he was severe — that he had grown suspicious —

that as he often blamed her without a cause, she might as well

have a little of her own way as not — that he was frightfully

stingy." It was impossible for any one to have proceeded in

such a course, without becoming morally degraded ; it is wonderful

how slowly, yet surely, this degradation progresses; until

when a review of the past takes place, wc are astonished that

what were principles should now be called prejudices, and marvel

at our past simplicity 1 Such were generally Geraldine's reflections.

She almost smiled to think how she had blushed aud

trembled at an equivocation; but such smiles are only as gleams

of sunshine on a sepulchre, and when they pass, woe, woe, for

the rottenness within !

Arthur Harewell always came to London in term time, and

sometimes remained until it had been long over. Henry Leeson

would hardly confess to himself that he regarded horn with suspicion

; and yet, though they frequented the same club, walked

together, went to the theatres together, and Arthur was a constant

guest at his table, Mr. Leeson wus anything but comfortable

in his society.

In indulging this feeling, he did his wife great injustice. She

loved her husband, and practised no deception towards horn,

except on the one point ; but it would have been next to

impossible to convince horn of this. She was universally

admired ; her loveliness was matured into beauty. She was never

absent from her husband's thoughts for ten minutes together ;

und yet he was the only person who appeared indifferent

to her.

Her memory was not always true to her falsehood ; she often

betrayed herself. She had lost her husband's respect. The vase

was broken, and though much of the perfume remained, he did

uot seek to treasure it, but rather desired to have the power of

turning from it altogether : each had a separate interest; and

when he looked upon the only child God had given them — a girl

his heart sunk within him. "For," he said, " she will grow up

a liar like her mother ! " To do Geraldine justice, she endeavoured,

strange as it may seem, to impress her daughter with a

love of truth ; but her ideas of right and wrong, in their bravest

and highest sense, were confused — and precept in education is

nothing worth without practice.

The young are apt to learn ; and their powers of observation

are generally far keener than wc give them credit for ; it is

therefore, above all things, necessary that, for their future, our

present should be only, and always, right ; wc can never be too

mindful of the fact, that in all wc do and say, and in almost all

wc think, wc are influencing the hereafter.

Geraldine had not seen her mother since the birth of her

child, as she had been abroad from ill health. Her aunt visited

her but too often, for she became, unfortunately, the depository

of her secrets, and still advised her to keep her purse closer than

ever, as, be sure, her child, as she grew up, would want so many

things its father would not give it

Alas I for the mischief that arises from evil counsel ; the good

are not always strong of mid ; and the best principles may be

weakened or destroyed by the suggestions of . Bad advisers ; wc

have the example to " warn and scare," in the earliest act of recorded

sin — the sin by which Paradise was lost Disobedience

is but one of a train of miseries that result from this — their

most fruitful source ; and in mid, heart, and character, as well

as in " good manners," it is certain that evil communications are

the great '• corrupters."

It would be impossible to particularise the various instances of

mistrust that occasioned so many bickering between Geraldine

and her husband; but they had led to this result — that, even

when she spoke the truth, her husband did not believe her. A

disbelief in her truth as regarded money matters, was not tho

only doubt that passed through, and occasionally took possession

of, his mid. He fastened upon her a careless impropriety of

conduct, which was altogether apart from her nature ; ans

never did she wear the chain which occasioned her first act of

dissimulation, without its rendering horn silent and morose. At

last her mother, whom much sickness had made a wiser

woman, came to visit them ; aud so great was the change

apparent in both, that she resolved to probe its cause as far

as she was able.

PART THE SECOND.

VSSe^ERALDINE, how is it," said her mother to Mrs.

mL(^%R Leeson — "how is it that you and Henry are so

JKvsC5% changed in your manner to each other? Four

"**'**** years ago, I left you all affection ; now, I find you

hardly civil — this is very bad."

"It is," replied her daughter ; " but it is not my fault. Henry

is perpetually insulting, by asking me the most frivolous questions,

and then sneering at my replies. He never believes a

word I say. It was only yesterday he took our child on his

knee, and read her such a homily on the beauty of truth that she

looked at horn, poor innocent, in fear and astonishment, without

understanding his meaning, and then he looked at me. Oh !

mother, I wish I had never married. It is very true what my

aunt Bays — you never can know how a man will turn out."

Your aunt, my dear, is a very bad counsellor. I fear she has

caused mischief between you."

Oh, no ! but she told me how it would be. Why, before wc

were six months married, he took me to task about a chain !

But that is nothing; I assure you he is niggardly in the

extreme."

You must be wrong, Geraldine," said her mother, earnestly;

indeed, you must be wrong. When I left you to go abroad —

though I did not tell you so, lest it would make you unhappy —

my finances were deplorably reduced. He questioned me upon

them with the greatest delicacy ; and when he found how I was

circumstanced, as he was handing me into the carriage, he slipped

a purse containing a hundred guineas into my hand."

Geraldine felt her colour change. " But how did he find that

out, in the first instance? " she inquired, after a pause.

"I really do not know," replied her mother; "but you

remember, dear, I was always a very bad dissembler. Your aunt

says I can be seen through in a moment, which I dare say is the

case, aud To not care about it. What does it matter when one

has nothing to conceal ? I never led horn to suppose that you

had a penny, or that I had a sixpence beyond my small annuity;

so I confessed that when I came to pay you the bridal visit,

I had not five pounds in the world."

Good heavens ! " exclaimed Geraldine, the falsehood she had

framed as to her mother giving her ten pounds towards the purchase

of the chain, and the effect it must have had upon her

husband's mid, now flashing upon her for the first time. "Ob !

mamma, why did you not tell me this before? What must my

husband have thought of me?"

Thought of you, my dear?" replied her mother, not understanding

her allusion. " Why, what had you to do with it? He

knew, as I have told you, perfectly well that you had nothing

whatever to do with the matter ; but I call it very handsome

of him — very handsome indeed." And the lady resumed the

perusal of her book, thinking it better to let this anecdote of her

son-in-law's generosity operate of itself upon her daughter.

Geraldine felt the blood rush to her head, and in another moment

x

she was chill and trembling. She went to her own room, and

traced back circumstance to circumstance. She saw clearly that

on that evening she must have appeared guilty of duplicity. She

remembered her husband's deep-seated and constant love and

affection previous to that event ; how her every wish had been

anticipated by him. She remembered how pleased, how happy

he looked, when she gave horn the five pounds she had saved

from her housekeeping ; and she could uot but acknowledge that

all the satisfaction she had received from her secret peculations hud

been gall and wormwood, iv comparison to the approving smiles

which Bhe now knew how she had at first forfeited. Truly, her

tears were may und sincere. She would willingly have retraced

her steps hud she known how ; but she fancied she had not strength

to do so. She considered confession more humiliating than deception

; and, moreover, Henrys late unkindness hud been so

numerous und so severe, that she forgot, when recalling them,

how much was owing to the suspicions she herself had excited.

She resolved to confide to her mother the particulars regarding

the chain, hoping she should be able to prevail on her to say,

if she was questioned on the subject, that she bad borrowed the

money to lend her ; for, as I have Baid before, lies yield ample

fruitage. She had of late mentioned some of her perplexities to

her cousin ; and here I pause, to observe that one of the most

foolish acts of a young woman's life is the confiding in any man,

either what she fours to entrust to her husband, or any complaint

against him. The act is almost always sure to betray

itself; aud if it do not, the step is so imprudent, so likely to lead

to results prejudicial to her character, aud, certainly, to affect

her conduct, that of all things it ought to be the most dreaded

the mos' avoided. It is seldom that a woman, resolved to

bear and forbear, cannot succeed in winning her husband's

friendship in the end. Where this is really impossible — which I

think can only be when a man is thoroughly unprincipled — may

God help her ! It is wiser for her not to complain of horn she

has sworn to " love, honour, and obey." Her own sex are often

too feeble for friendship ; aud where there is youth and beauty,

men are dangerous friends. It is wiser, then, I repeat, under

such circumstances, for a woman to conceal her sorrows, and to

alleviate them by active and duteous employment, rather than by

idle and perilous repining. The very reputation of having a male

friend is injurious to a young English wife. It is only a vigorous

mid that can boar being thus shut in within itself. A firm and

noble one will bear it, because it is right; and perhaps, after years

of firm endurance, be rewarded by the friendship it has so richly

deserved — the friendship of horn in whom a young heart trusted.

Geraldine loved her cousin really as a sister loves her brother ;

but no more. She had never bestowed upon horn an atom of an

affection that she needed have blushed to own even to her

husband; and though her cousin may be acquitted of all premeditated

wrong towards her, he was not averse to being rallied on the

preference evinced for horn by his lovely relative. He assured

every one that " it. was a brother and sister regard" — that " it was

impossible it could be anything else, as they had been children

together" — that " Geraldiue was too devoted to her husband

to indulge even a friendship for any one — except her cousin." But

ho did not say these things frankly, and seriously, and boldly, os

it becomes a man of high honour to do ; he said them with

a smile or a shrug, or a dolce sort of self-satisfied expression,

which made the careless young men of his acquaintance declare

horn a " lucky fellow," and married men soy "that Leeson should

look aster his wife ;" while matrons and old maids began to throw

something of significance into their countenances when they

observed that " they had met Mrs. Leeson and her handsome

cousin in the square ;" and Borne were malicious enough to forget to

add that she was accompanied also by her child or a female friend.

Most unhappily, her husband had become so irritable and

suspicious, that she excused herself for b"f constant deceptions.

He had long found it impossible to distinguish between her truth

and falsehood ; he had become unjust to her virtues ; for she was

a most devoted parent, while he believed that she was indifferent

towards her child. When she told tho story of the chain — that

origin of all the evil — to her mother, the old lady, instead

of going at once to her son-in-law, explaining it to horn, and

showing that the advice of her aunt had caused her to step aside

x 2

from the straight ppatthath — that it was she who had urged her to

form a private pursuance — and by this odious system undermined

their mutual confidence ; instead of doing this, she set herself to

frame a " reason for tho lie." And why ? Because the little girl

was the aunt's god-child, and she solaced herself, by determining

that " she would certainly leave her all she had, if she wore not

displeased; but if Geraldine broke her word — if she forgot that

she had promised not to tell — all the previous concealments

would have been made in vain, aud they would lose the property.

Henry would be sure to ' fly out' about it, and what would lie

tho end of it?" The good lady quite forgot that Geraldine had

promised to conceal the gift from her. As well as from her

husband ; but her ideas of right aud wrong could all be set aside

by interest ; wc have wonderful tenderness towards those who

break their words for our especial sakes. Geraldine was, in point

of fact, incapacitated, in the sight of God, from making the promise

her aunt required of her, on the morning of her marriage ;

because the oath, so important and so engrossing, which she had

taken at the altar, virtually appointed her husband the depositary

of her acts, thoughts, and secrets.

How despicable a picture of human nature does this perpetual

bowing down to Mammon pourtray ! aud how vain and

insignificant does it appear, when contrasted with so high, so

holy a thing us Truth ! Oh, if those who are heedless of words

and their import, did but know the inestimable value of this

bright ornament " — if they had but traced the cares, and toils,

and tangled weariness that must follow in the train of falsehood,

however small it may appear at first — if they could witness the

contempt that follows the liar to a despised grave — if they could

see the family disunion, the heart-burnings and heart-breaking,

originating in an untruth, no larger than tho gram of mustard-seed

that became an outspreading tree — if they could be brought

to feel the base, mean, paltry cowardice of a lie — how earnestly

they would pray to be delivered from its insidious temptation !

Geraldine's mother, I have already said, was exactly one of

those who had neither been educated to become a mother, nor

in the knowledge to teach the duties of domestic life to her

child. She was, like scores of others, weak, warm, and as brainless

as a woman could well be, who went through the etiquettes

of life with propriety and exactness. She thought herself acting

with extraordinary tact and discretion, when she entered the

small library where Mr. Leeson sat by himself, when at home in

the evening, and, shutting the door with a peculiarly silent and

mysterious air, asked if she might intrude upon horn for a few

moments. He placed a chair for her, and, laying down his book,

prepared to listen.

Henry Leeson was more changed than men usually are in

years so few, aud yet he dressed better, was quite as handsome,

when in society conversed more fluently, many thought more

agreeably, for a dash of vinegar curdled tho oil, aud rendered

horn pungent and racy. But his features had lost, their affectionate,

confiding, easy expression ; his face had grown sharp as a

lawyer's seeking flaws iv an indictment ; he could not sit for five

minutes looking straight forward, but twisted bis eyes to see sideways,

and his head to look behind — he had grown suspicious.

The old lady had a difficult card to play, and, of course, played

it badly, floundering through muddy sentences, until at last she

ventured to regret " that her dear Harry had not been in the

drawing-room — he used to be bo fond of music — and she had

prevailed on Geraldine to sing ; and Arthur Harewell said he

had never heard her iv better voice."

Mr. Leeson muttered something about a new book, and Arthur

understanding music better than he did, as he heard more of it.

Aud this was answered by an observation, " that more was the

pity-Vnd then tho gentleman sat, and the lady fidgeted,

through a long pause ; until, with tears of very sincere grief, she

declared, in her own simple way, her regrets that two so much

attached as her dear son aud daughter " were" (Mr. Leeson shook

his head) — " had been," then substituted the sorrowing mother —

were now so estranged, " without any cause."

Mr. Leeson stiffly said, " that if there had not been cause,

there would have been no estrangement — the fault wus none

as his."

The old lady hit upon one sensible observation by change —

that in quarrels matrimonial, both parties were generally to

blame."

He bowed ; and answered, "It might be so, in a degree."

For instance," she continued, "you were very angry with

her long ago, I find, about a foolish chain ; aud really, Harry,

dear, you had no reason."

The chain was in itself as unoffending," he replied, "as

trinkets generally are ; but I lead reason. She told me a falsehood

as to her means of purchase. The chain was a gift ; yet she

assured me she bought it. I have but too good reason to remember

it, as the commencement of all our misery. Why, she even

used your name as the giver of part of the purchase-money."

And so I was," murmured forth the feeble-minded woman,

unable to raise her eyes, but keeping down the truth by the

weight of her sister's riches.

Nay," he exclaimed, " how could that be, when you yourself

But you must remember certain passages which prevent

a possibility of that"

She wished so for the chain," said the old lady, " that I

borrowed ten pounds to make up the money."

Mr. Leeson rose from his seat in wrathful indignation, and but

that the being before horn was a frail aged woman, could not

have contained himself. " You really must excuse me for saying

I doubt you. I should, indeed, grieve to feel that those grey

hairs were dishonoured by a falsehood, to screen a child who has

no feeling for herself."

Self-degradation forced itself upon the feeble-minded mother,

aud she only said that she hoped he '' would permit her still

further to explain."

Pardon me," he replied, " if I decline any future conversation

upon this subject When I married Geraldine, I imagined

I read in the brightness of her sunny face the light of truth. I

loved her with the entire fulness of my heart. I would have

trusted her with my life ; I had trusted her with more — for

every man when he marries trusts his wife with his honour. I

pictured long years of enduring affection; and, above all, in

return for the most devoted love that man can feel towards

woman, I asked for her confidence, her unbroken confidence.

Nothing else could satisfy mc. It must be frank — spontaneous

untainted. My conviction is, that unmingled truth is the

sole bond of domestic happiness. She knew that such was my

opinion ; she had heard me say, a hundred times, that sooner or

later, sin follows concealment. I did not want my wife to appeal

to me on every occasion, or feel it necessary to render an account

of her personal expenses — such details are irksome to a man ;

but I expected that she should have no interest apart from mine

no expenditure that was to be considered private — no stealing

from a house purse, to put into one called, for distinction's sake,

her own.' Mine was at all times open to her hand. If I urged

upon her the investigation of accounts, it was only to lead her to

those habits of exactness which are inseparable from sound

domestic management I remember how my heart beat with

joy, when she brought me the savings of her early housekeeping:

if it had been thousands instead of pounds, I could not have

rejoiced more sincerely ; it was a proof of frankness on the very

point upon which I had depended so much. I felt I had a sweet

confiding friend, and that our interests were the same. How

soon this changed, I also well remember " He paused ; and

then abruptly added, " Why need she have denied that her

cousin Arthur gave her that chain ?"

Indeed," exclaimed her mother earnestly — " indeed, indeed,

you do her wrong; Arthur never gave it her. If you have for

so long a time indulged this injustice, no wonder you have made

her and yourself so wretched."

My dear lady," replied Mr. Leeson, calm even to bitterness,

I know he did ; and in the gift, or the taking, there was no sin ;

but there was sin in the lie. It destroyed my confidence in her;

it implanted the vile weed suspicion in my bosom ; and ever

since, as if a spell were round her, she has heaped duplicity upon

duplicity, until now I could not believe truth to be truth coming

from her lips." It was most painful to observe the agitation of

his feelings speaking in his eloquent slice. " I believe," he added

" I hope and trust, she is free of all other sin ; I hope it ; I —

— believe it ; but I cannot believe her. It was only this very

day that I came to the determination of removing our child

from an influence which must in the end destroy her, as it has

destroyed her mother."

You are not surely going to be guilty of the cruelty of taking

her child from her ! " ejaculated its grandmother ; " you cannot

be in earnest. What will even her friends think ? Oh, Henry,

you would not brand my child as unfit to be a mother 1 What

would the world say ? "

Madam," he replied, " there is a higher tribunal than that,

where parents will be called upon to give an account of the

children committed to their core. Mine is already practised in

deception. If I say one thing, and my wife teaches another, what

can be expected but that our child will in turn deceive us both ?"

You are severe — indeed you are," reiterated the poor lady,

who had altogether lost sight of her first object in this fresh

trouble, aDd did not seem to understand how much she had

added to the evil feeling she had thought to obliterate by her

poor subterfuge. Oh I Henry, dear Henry, remember how you

loved her 1 "

If," answered the afflicted husband — " if I could forget that,

I should not suffer as I do."

Had she been a faithless wife, you could not punish her

more severely thun you propose to do."

There are various kinds of infidelity not recognised by law''

he replied. "If I believed her guilty in the sense you mean, she

should not shelter for a moment here ; and yet there are men,

who, with less show of cause, have branded their wives. Now,

do not agitate yourself on that score ; I make no charge against

her. I believe her pure ; but where is the tender faith, the confiding

love, the truth, that should be the woman's throne?

However, my dream is past — my resolution taken. I will do my

best to prevent any man being deceived by my child, as I have

been deceived by her. You are, perhaps, the most fit person to

tell your daughter of my determination. In removing my child,

I remove the joy, the light, the solace, of my own existence; but

it is for her own good. She shall not return until her principles

are fixed, or her mother's course cf conduct is entirely changed."

Unfortunately, Mr. Leeson had selected a powerless messenger

who, of course, inclined to the other side, and who felt keenly,

what even the most silly women feel, the love of offspring.

Instead of keeping secret as the grave her son-in-law's intention,

with garrulous weakness she sought sympathy from those hundred

and one " dear friends," who immediately set their own versions

of the story afloat; and while but few saw and understood the

father's intention, tho mass "conjectured" and "hinted" the

real reason." " Poor Mr. Leeson I how generous of horn to

overlook what bad occurred, aud keep her (his wife) in his

house ; no wonder he should remove his child ; of course, her

mother would moke the best of it;— people might visit herby

and bye, but no one would do so until they saw who called

first ! — they used to give pleasant dinners and it was a cheerful

house to visit at ; but most likely it would change — time would

tell " — and so forth.

Geraldine looked upon her husband's resolve as au act of

wanton tyranny and cruelty. Having ceased to honour the

straightforward truth, she could not have faith in the actual

motive of bis resolve ; aud, blinded by sorrow and anger, she

induced her cousin Arthur to interfere Women talk aud talk,

outrage and anger each other, and their words are as nought

Who heeds or cares for there after they are spoken ? But men's

words are uttered to be remembered and acted upon. Mr.

Leeson was indignant at any mau presuming to interpose in his

domestic concerns. Words succeeded each other with angry

rapidity, until neither could call to mid how the unfortunate

chain was first alluded to. Arthur Harewell, then, boldly and

fearlessly declared that he never gave it to his cousin ; upon

which Mr. Leeson gave horn the lie direct. The usual consequences

followed. Arthur Harewell received a ball in his shoulder,

and Mr. Leeson, also wounded, was conveyed home, where

his agonised wife, throwing herself on her knees by his side,

bitterly lamented that her aunt's gift had been so fatal. Now,

indeed, she spoke the truth. The sight of her first and only love,

his lacerated arm bleeding, and his features white as a maidens

shroud, recalled her better nature. What, in that hour, did she

care for her aunt's displeasure ? — what for the wealth her sordid

fingers had grappled together ? She believed he was dying, and

dying with the conviction of her utter worthlessness. She did

not even seek to extenuate her own fault, while she traced it to

its origin ; and yet there, on her knees, even while pouring out

her soul in sincerity and truth, she taw she was not believed.

How could she convince horn ? In a state bordering on frenzy

she wrote to her aunt, imploring her to ratify her words,

acknowledging her kindness towards herself, but showing what

its effects had been. To this appeal she received no answer.

The proof, however, she was aide to lay before her husband, at

last convinced horn that her first fault— her first falsehood - did

not originate iv herself. Before he rose from his sick-bed — for

mental agitation, combined with his wound, terminated in fever

her aunt had died ; and the legacy she left her niece was

characteristic of her sarcastic nature. " And to my niece,

Geraldine Leeson, I give aud bequeath, instead of the whole of

my property, as I had intended, the sum of one shilling, to buy

a padlock for her foolish lips."

I wish I could here say, after the most approved novel fashion,

that, so reconciled, Mr. and Mrs. Leeson lived happily together

to the end of their days. Not so. A tarnished honour cannot

be restored to its original brightness ; it is quite impossible fora

woman to retake her place in society — even if, strictly speaking,

it has not been forfeited — if she is marked, she is doomed.

Henry Leeson, though a rigid, was a high-minded and generous

man, aud with such a character even his erring wife was safe

from reproach ; but the effect of years of misconduct, of any

kind, cannot be obliterated by sorrow. Repentance works well

for the penitent, but the world is little cognisant thereof. The

duel had stamped Geraldine in the eyes of that world as a

woman, if not of sin, of levity ; this in truth in a married

woman is so closely allied to sin, that there is but one Power

which can rightly discern the difference. When familiar faces

turned aside as she passed, when sho walked up the steps of the

parish church greeted, her husband was by her side, and she

felt her arm as closely pressed to his heart as when he supported

her, a lovely, loving bride, from the vicar ; but even then she

felt indebted to his generosity. She knew that his confidence,

though she hoped returning, had not returned. When to prove

to the world his perfect conviction as to the virtue of his wife,

he paraded town leaning upon Arthur Harewell's arm, the

knowledge of the necessity for such conduct made her ashamed

of her own shadow.

"Take my child from me now, Harry," she said, with bitter,

bitter tears, and her head bent almost to his feet, "and I will

not complain. Send her where some one of higher and holier

mid will strengthen and stablish her iv what is right. Send

her where the duties of her sex and station will be brought clearly

before her eyes, aud where there is no danger of her confounding

right and wrong. At any sacrifice of my own, I would save

her from the Sufferings I have inflicted and endured."

This, indeed, was the language of truth, and Henry felt it, and

rejoiced ; but his joy was sobered by the knowledge, the fearful

knowledge, of what the world said, and the dread that she did

not yet understand the perfect and entire union of interests

necessary to the happiness of domestic life. Union of sympathies

is the happy effect of chance, but a union of interests is a positive

duty ; and so at last Geraldine felt it

Time passed on. Mr. Leeson, although he despised the feeble

mid of his wife's mother, and kept her out of the way of her

grandchild, ministered liberally to her necessities. His daughter

grew up in mind all that the fondest parent could desire,

although her fragile form and sensitive face told of constitutional

delicacy. She had much deference for the world's opinion,

on all points, and a desire to remain unknown and unnoticed,

save by the few she deeply, but earnestly loved. She was singularly

feminine in her tastes, and entertained the profoundest

love and veneration for her parents. Towards her mother these

feelings were blended with a kind of enthusiasm that might be

supposed incompatible with her gentle nature ; sho regarded her

as the most perfect of human beings. No mother was ever so

devoted as hers — no mother was ever gifted with such accom-

plishments—no mother blessed with such understanding — if she

wished to express the excellence of any individual, she would say

she is like my mother." Her father had almost forgotten that

ho had ever doubted his wife's truth. They had removed into

a new neighbourhood, and formed new friends. The son of one

of these, a man of high rank, was paying his addresses to their

daughter ; and not only were the young girls affections engaged,

but both parents were delighted at the prospect of her happiness.

Father aud son were dining one day at Mr. Lceson's splendid

country seat, when the old gentleman, who was chiefly remarkable

for extreme propriety, aud was so entirely guided by what

Mr. This or Mr. That said or thought, as to have no fixed

opinion on any subject, although he believed that he not only

entertained fixed opinions of his own, but guided the opinions of

others, and was moreover exceedingly deaf, said, as they were

chatting over dessert, "By the way, Leeson, my cousin, Sir

George, wus telling me an odd story about a person of your

name, no relation, I suppose — eh ?" Mr. Leeson did not know.

No ; but it could not be — very improper indeed if it was.

Leeson is a general, I do not mean to say a common name,

but a general one. Something about an affair that ought to

have given employment to the gentlemen of the long robe ; but

the lady, who was a great story-teller, managed to convince her

husband of her innocence, though she convinced nobody else.

And only fancy, by Jove ! tho husband parading St. James's

Street arm inarm with the very cousin he had winged ? Now,

did you ever hear anything so absurd ? How the fellows at the

club windows must have laughed ! " Poor Mrs. Leeson ! After

the lapse of years, to hear this at such a moment ! She was

carried out of the room fainting. An explanation followed, and

the match was, at least for a time, broken off. The shook was

of too severe a nature to be endured by so gentle and tender

minded a girl us Miss Leeson. She hud known her mother only

as good and pure. Sho had been more proud of her character

and virtue than of anything else in the whole world ; but after

that fatal dinner she never spoke upon the subject, nor asked a

question, until at the very lust Within un hour of her death

(and she died within a mouth), raising herself on her pillow,

while her parents were at either side, she folded her arms round

her father's neck, and drawing his ear close to her lips, whispered,

Tell me, father — tell me truth — was she guilty ? " " No,

dearest — God knows, she was not."

The girls face became radiant with joy, and the last word she

spoke was a repetition of the sound she loved so well — " My

mother ! — my mother ! — my mother ! " 'And the she passed

away, as the leaves from the summer cistus, as fragile and as fair

the first rough blast of a rough world had borne her to the earth.

For years and years her parents lived, two mourning creatures,

he strengthening her, and she, patient and silent, save to the

young, whom she counselled, as I do you — dear young friends,

who may read this story — that when you wed, do it not lightly ;

but when done, endeavour, as much as lieth in you, to be of one

mid and one interest in all things.

THE CURSE OF PROPERTY.

•■S^Si^OOR Barry ! " exclaimed Mr. Newton. " Poor Barry !

.\;l|j.Csjfr( it was sad to see that once fine property melted

'•aÆJ^sM away, one could hardly tell how, until even the noble

**""'" dwelling of his ancestors was sold in lots to a fellow

who printed ' Architect ' on his card."

I was his uncle's friend," sighed old Sir Charles Stanley :

und the remembrance of that family — it is strange, but, neve -

tbeleßs, true — affords me at once exceeding pain aud sincere

pleasure. I mourn over the love of display, and the pauperism

system, pursued by poor but proud relations, by which that fine

estate was utterly ruined ; and I grieve for it the more, because

it is far from being a singular instance of ruin, effected by similar

means. You, my dear friend, will readily believe that the

pleasurable reminiscences I experience arise from the noble conduct

of that little black-eyed girl, Alice Lee, whom all the

family, excepting Claude, the heir-at-law, strove to injure ; and

to whom even now they grudge the fair nurse aud the fuir fare

acquired by her own industry and exertions."

I should like to hear you tell the tale, Sir Charles," replied

Mr. Newton. "I have heard portions of the history; but the

loss of property consequent upon mismanagement, is unfortunately

so common in our poor country, that many such events

may have been confused iv my memory with this particular

one."



"My old friend, Charles Barry," commenced the venerable

baronet, "hud the misfortune to inherit with his estate the

charge of some five or six half-brothers and sisters, who married,

and had a greater number of blessings, iv the form of children,

than usually fall to the lot even of Irish gentry. The person heat

that time loved most in the world, was his own sister, a young

woman nothing differing for other girls of her age and rank,

and who, in due time, married two thousand a year (it was so

called) and a fox-hunting 'Squire. Mr. Barry's health had for

some months been on the decline, aud he resolved to visit Bath,

then esteemed the most fashionable and health-giving place on

earth.

A little scene which occured at Barrybrooke the evening

before his departure, will best illustrate the menage of an Irish

bachelor's house in the year eighty-two. I was staying with horn

at the time, aud wc had agreed to travel together. I must,

however, tell you, that be had determined upon not letting any

of his numerous relatives — who came for ' sea air to Barry-brooke,

with the intention of remaining, some for three, others

for nine, and others again for twelve months — know aught of

his movements. In the evening he summoned into bis study

Jerry Keg — valet by inheritance — and whom I always remember

the same stiff, upright, honest-looking fellow, with a grave air, a

twinkling eye, and a twisted nose. Jerry entered, his high

shoulders propping his ears, his bead projecting like that of a

tortoise, his hands folded behind his back, his old-fashioned,

richly-laced livery sticking out on either side like the fins of a

flat-fish.

'Jerry,' said his master, ' I wish my valise filled with rather

n better supply of things than I require when I visit my sister ;

I wish Black Nell saddled, and as you accompany me, you must

take Padre, I suppose. Have all things ready by six o'clock

tomorrow morning, and tell Meg wc shall not return for a

month.*

'sit's a lane impossibility, yer Honour,' replied Jerry,

bowing ; ' Black Nell, I heard the groom say, wanted shoes, and

I made an oath never to cross Padre since he flung me into

the apple-tree, over the fence. As to the valise, sir, honey !

Mrs. Mooney's little Jack cried for it to make a cart for Beau ;

indeed, it 'ud surprise yer Honour to see the 'cuteness of that

child — how he settled it car-fashion behind the dog's tail, and

made the latest little harness ye ever see, out o' one of the new

traces o' yer Honour's gig.'

' And how dare you, sir,' said my friend, incensed at this

new proof of his not being master in his own bouse, ' how dare

you suffer Mrs. Mooney, or anybody else, to destroy my property

in that way?'

' Sure, she's yer Honour's half-sister, and I hope I know

manners too well to contradict a lady ; much less one of yer

Honour's blood relations.'

' Well, pack the things in a trunk, and wc can all go in the

carriage.'

"'O, boo-boo-boo ! — the carriage, is it? Sure, yer Honour's

own second cousin, Mr. Finery, sint that off yesterday, to bring

his nurse and the twins here, and his wife along wit 'era, to give

ye an agreeable surprise, as he said, seeing yer Honour's so fond

o' children ; and it's my opinion, that sorra a trunk iv the

house 'ud hound together ; they've been all let to drop, to pieces,

because it's so long since they've been wanting.'

' What am Ito do, Stanley ? ' said my friend, looking at me

despairingly.

' Simply thus,' I replied ; ' let us leave our servants to follow,

put a few things into my portmanteau — for I promise you,

the outward man will need refitting when wc arrive at our testis

I will ride Norton s horse.'

"This wus agreed upon, to Jerry's mortification, who muttered,

'He could ride the mule any way, tho' it was a stubborn

devil, and it was no thing for a gentleman of family and fortune,

like his master, to lave his own place without an attendant.'

' What do you mean to do with the horde at present in possession

of the house I ' I inquired, laughing. I always tried to

laugh horn out of his faults, for, like most of his countrymen, he

was more proof against reason than ridicule.

' What can Ido with them 1 ' he replied ; ' they are my own

kith and km ; and as I am the head of tho family, and a

bachelor — poor creatures ! — ay, it is easy for you to laugh — you

English folk know nothing, and care less, about long-tailed

families ; with you, the junior members of a family, both males

aud females, contribute to their own support ; with us — '

' The senior,' I said, sis expected to provide for all, and is

soon rendered, by that means, incapable of providing for himself.

Iv the name of goodness, my dear fellow, if you must play

almoner to such a tribe, do it in a rational way ; — pay them so

much a your — say teu, twenty, or thirty pounds each — but I

defy any income to stand the constant drains to which yours is

exposed ; — men, women, and children — dogs, horses, and

servants — make an eternal inn of your house. My life out!

you never know, from one year's end to another, how many eat

at your board.'

' Meg docs — and she is a faithful old creature.'

"' True ; but she has so long been accustomed to this Castles

system, that it is for you to commence the reform —

you cannot expect lure to do it'

' Faith, Charles, you are right,' be replied ; ' but you cannot

V

enter into my feelings. To tell you the simple truth, I could not

afford to pay hide the people I support ten pounds a year.'

' Permit me to ask how much their support costs you ? '

' Eh ? — Oh ! a mere trifle, I suppose : but seriously ' (and

he fixed his fine blue eyes upon me as he spoke), ' you do not

suppose me capable of the meanness of calculating what people

eat and drink ? '

' I would only wish you capable of the wisdom of considering

whether, in justice to others, you can literally give more that

you possess.'

' Justice ! — what do you mean ? '

' Forgive me, my dear Barry, but have you paid off any of

the embarrassments which hung over the estate when you came

of ago ? '

' I cannot say I have.'

' If you have not paid off the principal, I trust the interest

has been punctually discharged.'

"' I cannot say that it has. lam never pressed for it ; and,

somehow or other, the rents slip through my fingers before

I have time to think of my debts.'

' Of course, you investigate the accounts of your agent and

Steward regularly ? '

•• Strange beings you Englishmen are ! My agent's a glorious

fellow — exact as a dial, punctual as a dun. Oh, no I no necessity

.1 lier world to look after hir n; and as to my steward, faith !

ne 8 a clever fellow — so ingenious ! cannot write much, but hasa

way of his own of keeping accounts — particular sorts of crosses

he makes — amazingly curious, I assure you.' v

I smiled and sighed. Jerry knocked at the door.

'■ ' I want to spake to yer Honour.'

' Speak out, then, at once.'

' It's Mr. Eagerly, the grazier, called about the three fat

bullocks he sold yer Honour last Christmas, to kill for the poor ;

ana if it 'ud be convenient just to let horn have the money now.'

•' ' Tell horn it is not convenient, and send horn to Dennis ;

why should he pester me about his dead bullocks? I thought he

was paid hong ago. There, leave the room ! '

' The giddy Rooney is below, on account that her son is kilt

intirely. and as good as dead, by the Epilogue boys ; and she

thought, maybe, we'd help her in her trouble.'

' Poor thing ! — there, give her that,' tossing a guinea on the

table. ' Tell her, I'll commit her son, if he gets into any of these

broils again.'

' God bless you, sir ! I '11 tell horn not to bride agen — if be

cau help it'

' What, is he below ? '

"' As much as is left of horn, yer Honour ;' and away went

Jerry. The just creditor, therefore, was dismissed without even

an apology — the riotous youth, with a reward ! I noted this,

and more ! I urged his remaining even for a day or two longer,

for the purpose of arranging his accounts. It was useless ; he

laughed me off, and promised that, on his return, he would ' see

about it.' Alas ! how many of the bright and shining lights of

this poor country have been extinguished by Procrastination !

His easy manners, his good nature, and really handsome

person, made horn an universal favourite at Bath ; and many

a lady of large fortune would readily have bestowed upon horn

hand and heart : but Charles was no fortune-hunter — he considered

the lust of gold

The last corruption of degenerate man

aud fixed his affections upon a young and beautiful widow lady

with one daughter, whom he had accidentally met at the house

of a mutual friend. Although his passion was violent, I saw

good reason why it should be lasting. United to feminine loveliness,

she possessed the rare endowments of judgment and gentleness

: there was a steadiness, a sobriety about her, which made

Barry often say, iv the words of the poet,

I have a heart for her that's kind,

A lip for lor that smiles ;

But if her mid be like the wind,

I'd rather foot it twenty miles.'

' She is so uniform,' he would add, ' that I almost think lor

too good for me, who am so volatile ; yet I love her the more

r or the contrast'

V 2

It is exceedingly difficult to throw off the trammels that

have grown with our growth ; and when he was accepted by this

interesting woman, he positively wanted courage to write and

inform bis sister of his intended marriage.

' Poor thing,' said he to me, one morning, ' she will so grieve

at my being married ; for she has even now instilled into the

mid of her only son, Claude, who is about six years of age, that

he is to lie sole heir to my property.'

' If,' I replied, ' she has been absurd enough so to act, she

deserves punishment In addition to supporting the cousin-clan,

is it usual for the head of a family to remain iv a state of single-blessedness

to please his relations ? '

He smiled ; but not until aster they were united did he communicate

his attachment to his sister. He went further ; — he

wrote to old Meg, to say that, grieved as he might feel, it was

necessary that no visitors should remain at Barrybrooke, as Mrs.

Barry disliked company. So far, so good ; would that he had

persevered iv a course so decided I

I could not repeat, if I would, the innumerable mortifications

which Mrs. Barry experienced on her visiting Ireland for

tho first time. The manners and habits of the people ill accorded

with her English feelings. From being the admired and beloved

of a circle of intellectual and accomplished persons, she found

herself shut up in a castellated, dilapidated house, with barefooted

housemaids (I speak of what was forty years since) aud

other servants, to whom the English language was totally

unknown. Everything, from the kitchens to the attics of the

rambling building, wanted arrangement; aud she was bewildered

where first to commence a reformation. Out of two-and-twenty

servants, to discharge ten appeared tho most likely mode of

getting auy thing dono properly; aud this step immediately made

her unpopular with the peasantry. Then she blundered dreadfully

as to the management of her parties - asked Orangemen

and their wives to meet the priest of the parish ; and placed the

rector's wife, at table, above a lady who was second-cousin to the

(great Earl of Ormond I These offences were not to be forgiven

in a neighbourhood where every circumstance formed an event,

and where, if truth must be told, the women euvicd her beauty,

the men feared her intellect. Then tho family ! — how was it

to be expected they could pardon Mr. Barry for marrying at all,

in the first place, and for not consulting them, in the second ?

The thing was impossible, and they acted accordingly.

Harriet, the daughter of Mi's. Barry by her first marriage,

was a proud and silent girl, but possessed of exquisite feeling.

Her troubles were hard and many ; but they were not of long

duration : she pined, and wasted, and wept in secret ; and vt

lust, us the only wuy left of escaping from a place where she felt

every eye glared suspiciously on her, clandestinely married, and,

in less than twelve months afterwards, gave birth to a female

child, and died. Mr. Barry, with the pure kindliness of spirit

which always characterized his impulses, gave the little orphan

into his wife's arms, and, bursting into tears, exclaimed, ' It is

your grandchild, — it shall be also mine ; I will be unto it a true

parent'

You know that my friend had not been blessed with children

; the feeling, therefore, on his part towards the helpless

innocent was but just and natural. The person most displeased,

when my little friend Alice Lee took up her abode at Barry-brooke,

was Mr. Barry's sister : her son, Claude Barry, as he

was always called (his father, by the way, two years after his

birth, broke his neck at a steeple-chase), was naturally considered

heir to his uncle's property ; and it was a grievous thing,

in her opinion, for a stranger to take even a small part ot the

good things she expected her son to possess exclusively. Claude

himself was always a good-natured boy, though not much given

to reflection.

' I can't think why you all hate that little child,' he would

say ; ' she is a merry soul, and gets my uncle out of his nervous

fits sooner than any one else, with her innocent prattle : she is

quite a comfort in the long winter evenings, when the place is

too dull for us to remain there.'

' Innocent, indeed ! ' replied one of the family coterie, wreathe

observation was finished. ' I wonder how she could be

innocent, tutored as she is by her grandmother.'

"' I am astonished you have not more discernment,

Claude, than not to see,' said his mother, ' that the little imp

is brought up with mighty high notions : the very last time I

was there, she cried because there was no sugar iv her bread

and milk.'

' It's a comfort,' kindly added a third, ' that the child is

indisputably ugly ; — u little bit of a thing, notwithstanding

all the cramming she gets, with a monstrous sorehead towering

over her eyes, making her look as if she had water on

the brain.'

' She's as proud as Lucifer,' chimed in a fourth, 'and would

stamp like a fury, if she hadn't a clean frock on twice a day; fine

English air, indeed ! '

'Wc may all be obliged to her yet, for all that,' said

Claude, laughing, and making the remark more from a love

of tormenting, than aught else ; ' poor thing ! I shall be the

only one among you, who never thought or said an unkind

word of her I '

' And more fool you ! ' and ' you'll repent it ! ' and that

always safe and wise saying, ' Time will tell ! ' was echoed about,

through the scandalous council, until poor Claude wished the

holidays were over, and he wus fairly back vt school. The following

summer, many of the same party were staying at Barry-brooke;

for disagreeable as they certainly were to Mrs. Barry,

she bore their society with praiseworthy forbearance : unfortunately,

some words had arisen between her and Claude's mother,

on a very unimportant matter, and the lady was anxious for an

opportunity of mortifying her sister-in law. Mr. Barry wus

from home ; but after dinner, when the dessert was placed on

the table, Mrs. Barry desired the servant to send iv Miss Alice,

who was then about six years old. The little girl came, as

usual, to her grand mamma's knee, and at the moment Claude

xa& helping himself to some currants.

' Give a few of those to Alice, dear,' said Mrs. Barry.

' Help yourself first, my darling,' observed his mother ;

adding, in a bitter under tone, ' It is not meet to take the

children's bread and give it to the dogs.'

Mrs. Barry rose as she spoke ; and I shall never f. get the

dignity with which she crossed the dining hall, to leave the

apartment in which she had suffered so gross an insult : — those

who felt justly (I was one of the number) followed Alice

perfectly understood what had passed ; and the little thing stood

where her grand mamma had sat, swelling with rage. Claude

heaped the plate with currants, and called her affectionately to

his side. Alice looked at horn with an expression I shall never

forget. At last, swallowing her passion, she shook her head, aud

turning to his mother, said, very quietly, —

•' ' I am no dog ; I am, as you have often called me, a little

ugly girl ; but the time may come, when those who bate me

now, may be glad to pick crumbs from my table, and thank me

for there too."

This spirited reply, coming from one so young, drew forth

many and various observations from the party. Claude was

indignant at the cruelty of his parent, and followed his aunt

with apologies, and even tears. This was only one incident in a

thousand of the dislike evinced to this hapless child, of whose

father, I should have told you, nothing had been heard fora

considerable period, as he went abroad on the death of bis wife.

In the meantime, the circumstances of my old friend were for

from improving ; his habitual neglect of money matters, and his

eternal procrastination, were swiftly leading to a ruin, which, as

Mrs. Barry wus ignorant of its extent, she could not avert. Indeed,

the very exactness with which she conducted household

matters, was attributed to her as a crime.

' Where's the use of painting palms for the rain to batter

against ? ' said one ; — ' such expense, indeed ! '

"then,' said another, 'there was an enormous bill for

building two pig-sties: even if the hastes did get into the garden

now and then, what grate matter was it ? where's the good of

?'

wouldn't she let the tenants go on as they used,' exclaimed

'and take the spinning aud duty fowls from their

fas others did before her? What was the time of tho

to there ? Talk of extravagance ! wasn't it the height of

extravagance to pay women for spinning, when it could be done

for nothing ? '

Mrs. Barry's system, whatever might have been the prejudice

entertained against her by the peasantry, as ' u fine lady from

foreign parts, who was come to reign over them,' was productive

of so much good to the poor, that they soon regarded her as

their best friend, and their gratitude and affection were proportionate,

while increasing difficulties pressed hard upon Mr.

Barry, and he wanted resolution to tear himself away from

family and party feuds. These circumstances soured his

temper, and made horn at times capricious and severe. It is

well known, that at home or abroad, whatever goes wrong

with a married man is avenged upon his wife. Perhaps I

ought not to say avenged, but I can hardly find a term to

express the ill-temper which is too often shown at home, when

adverse circumstances are encountered out of the domestic

circle.

Your own poet has expressed in language so chaste and

beautiful the peculiar feelings which this sort of thing generates,

that I will repeat you the lines : —

A something light as air— a look,

A word unkind or wrongly taken, — >

Oh ! love, that tempests never shook,

A breath, a touch, like this, has shaken.

' Are they not beautiful ? ' exclaimed the old gentleman

again. " Not that matters were so bad with them either ; but

certainly, something was fast undermining Mrs. Barry's constitution.

I would not have said that her chief happiness arose

from the consolation afforded her in the affection of her tenants,

had I remembered the devoted tenderness of her grandchild, and

the delight she took in attending to her education. The development

of the girls mid was both rapid and powerful.

Distant as they were from towns, no aid of masters could be

obtained. Mrs. Barry knew enough of music to teach the child

its rudiments ; and Alice, gifted with a fine ear, and a genuine

love for tho charming science, made swift progress in the art she

loved. Many studies were resorted to, with a view to occupation,

that would not have been thought of under other circumstances,

or if the little maid had enjoyed the society of persons

of her own age. Her grandfather taught her Latin, and the

priest of the parish instructed her in Italian. Of what are

usually called children's books, she never possessed any ; but

could repeat, almost by heart, the Histories of Hume and Rolling,

with many of the ancient chronicles. Her light reading varied

from the Arabian Nights to the History of the Robber Frenzy,

with odd volumes of Irish History, and now and then a romance

of the Radcliffe school. Shakspeare she loved ; Milton she

revered ; but there was ONE book that was invariably perused

morning and evening, which laid the foundation of her good

conduct and future prosperity. Her grandmother saw that her

romantic and rambling mid needed a powerful corrective.

Situated as she was, and feeling that the child was debarred from

amusements suited to her age and sex, — observing also the

avidity with which she obtained information, and unable, from

the increasing delicacy of her health, to guide her as she wished,

sho wisely felt the necessity of strengthening her religious

impressions. The imagination of my young friend readily

caught at the beauties of Scripture, but her grandmother wished

her reason to be convinced of its truths: this she happily

effected, and the silence and solitude of her sick room often

echoed the pure doctrines of salvation, and the breathing prayers

dictated by faithful hearts, Barry procured for his wife, at au

immense expense, the best medical advice the country afforded.

His affection had cooled, but never changed; and the prospect of

losing one so dear redoubled bis attentions. It was, however, of

no avail : and, aster a tedious illness, I followed her to her grave.

Alice had never left her sick bed : it was a touching sight, to

see the expiring effort the pale but still beautiful woman mode

to place the hand of tho weeping child within that of her

husband : he fell on his knees, and solemnly swore to protect

Alice Lee to the latest hour of his life, and to bestow upon hera

handsome income at his death.

' I do not want that last promise,' she said in a trembling

voice, ' she can make riches for herself. Protect her, but let

her be independent'

Independent wus the lust word this excellent woman uttered;

no wonder then that it was a hallowed feeling and a hallowed

sound to the heart and the ear of her grandchild.

' I will be independent,' said the sweet girl, as she strewed

the flowers in which her grandmother hud delighted, over the

silent corpse, and placed to her check the blooming roses which

she had so loved to cultivate ; aud then she laid her own head

on the same pillow, and read in the Book of Life, of eternity,

and heaven, and worlds beyond the grave — aud was comforted in

her affliction !

Sho had watered from her chamber window the slowly

pacing funeral pass from the court-yard, the coffin supported by

eight of the oldest tenants, who claimed the privilege of carrying

it to its resting-place, and Claude Barry, in right of km aud as

the representative of his uncle (who was too ill to perform the

melancholy duty), following as chief mourner. She had seen

the procession, attended by a multitude of people, wind round

the hill side, till it was concealed from her view by a dense wood

that overshadowed tho rood, and drying her tears, she entered

the dark room where her grandfather was nurturing iv secret

the bitterness of grief. She seated herself quietly by his side,

nd made a sign of silence to old Jerry, who had followed her

into the apartment, and whose infirmities prevented his attending

the funeral : surprised that he motioned her towards tho

window which looked out upon the avenue, she opened the

shutter so as to peep forth and ascertain his meaning. Tho old

porter at the second gate was engaged iv evidently a fierce contention

with some four or five men, who demanded free passage

to the house. Poor Alice trembled all over, for she had heard

of writs und executions, as calamities threatened nguiust her

grandfather; but as he had ' ranged to keep them off' (alas!

for such management), she never thought they would really

arrive at Barryhrooke. The appearance of the men, the agitation

of the servant, and, above all, their suddenly pushing past

the porter, while Jerry exclaimed so loud as to startle Ida

master: 'I'll bar the doors,' confirmed her iv the feeling that

they were sheriff's officers. And she flung herself on her protector's

neck, exclaiming, ' What shall wc do?

Poor Barry looked for a moment on the men as they wheeled

round the house to approach the door. ' I see who they are,' he

said in a quiet voice ; ' alas ! and wus not my heart sufficiently

broken? and have I already lived to see the time when I return

thanks to the Almighty for having take from me the wife of

my bosom — so that she has been spared this misery?'

"Ho walked to the hall, where his faithful servant, in the

true spirit of Irish fidelity, had drawn the bolts, and established

himself with a rusty musket, that had done the rooks and magpies

much mischief, resolved to protect the dwelling from ' bailiff

or sheriff.'

' Open the door, Jerry,' said my friend.

'What, yer Honour?'

' Open the door.'

' For what, plato yer Honour, 'ud I do that same?'

' To admit these men.'

' Lord bless yer Honour, and keep ye iv yer right mid,

which ye are not in at this present time, or we'd never give way

to the like o' them.'

' Fool,' exclaimed Mr. Barry, as they thundered at the

portal, 'do as I command you.'

' Master, darling!' replied tho poor fellow, 'you may trample

on me if ye like, aud call me what ye place; but I'll never bethe

manes of letting shame into the house, iv the shape o' the

law, — only the boys are all at the funeral, it's long till they'd

suffer such serpents to walk the country. — Well, since yer

determined on it, do it herself, sir. I never opened a door to a

limb of the law, nor never will.'

Jeremiah flung down his musket, and hastily left the ball,

while Alice clung closely to her grandfather's arm.

' Come in, gentlemen, come in,' said he, with a frightful

calmness of manner; 'here I am, you see; — be seated, and tell

your business.'

The business was soon told ; a writ against his person at the

suit of Benjamin Eagerly, Esquire, for cattle furnished during a

period of sixteen or eighteen years— a sort of running account,

with now and then a nominal settlement ; bills bearing interest

and sundry other expenses ; — this claim alone amounted to the

enormous sum of two thousand pounds; for my poor friend had

often taken it into his head to stock farms, and speculate in

sheep, pigs, and oxen — speculations that always terminated

badly, from his unfortunate habit of never attending to his own

business, but leaving it to others to manage for him. Another

of these men of law had an execution against his goods ont

effects, for the sum of three thousand pounds, he having bestowed

upon a favourite cousin a bond for fifteen hundred pounds, upon

his commencing ' professional mau ; ' the interest of this, of

course, was never paid nor demanded, but on his refusing to

.end the young hopeful some two or three hundred pounds,

which he thought proper to require, he placed the affair in an

attorney's hands, who urged immediate proceedings on the bond,

tho interest of which had amounted to a sum equal to the

principal. Mr. Barry was very unfit to think or act ; but Alice

prevailed on the officer who made the arrest, to wait until the

arrival of his friends ; he proceeded calmly to take an inventory

of the furniture ; while the roaster of the mansion seemed perfectly

torpid. Claude returned with me and three or four others

from tho melancholy funeral to the house of mourning. As to

poor Claude, ho had all the family taste for expenditure, and the

property he inherited from his father was mortgaged to its full

value. This did not prevent his living in style ; he had a good

stud, fine dogs, and a machine to drive in that almost broke

one's neck to look at ; he had given a ball on his coming of ago

which cost almost as much as the fee-simple of his estate was

really worth ; and his mother, with her usual wisdom, observed

it was of little consequence, considering her son's expectations.

Claude, therefore, could do little — except join me in bail,

which was entered into immediately ; in less than an hour aster

our return, Jerry had the inexpressible satisfaction of banging

the hall-door after ' the sarjnnls,'' and of drinking (a ceremony

hy the way, the poor fellow never omitted) ' Destruction to the

law,' in a bumper of pure whisky. I remained at Barry brooke.

and endeavoured to unravel the difficulties with which ray friend

was encompassed. 1 confess they far exceeded my anticipations.

To enter into details would be useless. Suffice it to say, that

on his marriage, to pacify his relations, he had grunted annuities,

which had never been regularly paid, nut then had given

securities on his property for the various sums that accumulated

he knew not how; then, none of the old incumbrances had been

paid off; aud the fine domain, which could have supported the

establishment if properly farmed, was positively nothing more

than a common for the neighbours' horses, cows, sheep, pigs, aud

poultry to revel on. Mrs. Barry hud retrenched most considerably

the household expenses ; but as my friend, Alice Lee, said,

grand mamma was never suffered to know graudpapas affairs ;

and what she saved, even from her own personal comforts, wus

expended out of doors.' Claude's difficulties were quite as perplexing.

The advice I gave to both parties was as follows ; — Mr.

Barry to sell off us much property as would discharge all pressing

demands (for when no creditor comes down on an estate,

the rest are sure to follow), to let Barrybrooke, and go abroad

for five or six years, live on a small allowance, und thus clear

what wus spared. Claude wc recommended to marry a rich

widow, who was known to look favourably on horn, aud pay off

his debts with her fortune, providing uv annuity for her from

his estate.

' Cousin Claude,' said Alice, quietly, ' take my advice: they

say you have fine oratorical talents, go to the bar, and make a

fortune for yourself.' It may be easily imagined, that the advice

given was not relished by either. Barry's pride revolted at the

idea of selling a single acre and Claude did not like the widow,

because he had chosen to fall in love with a girl without either

character or fortune. Some accommodation was made with tho

creditors, and my friend resolved to go abroad. A uoblo lord

offered to take the house, and reside there ; but no ! — again

family pride was up in arms : — and although the certainty that

Barrybrooke could not be kept in even decent order, except at

great expense, was dwelt upon by his true friend Is, he disdained

to let it ; decided that three old servants should remain to take

care of it, aud as quickly as possible bade adieu to the halls of

his ancestors, leaving the property at nurse for his creditors, and

reserving only an income of three hundred a-year for himself.

All his relatives objected strongly to his being accompanied by

Alice Leo. — 'Shell be sure to come round him,' they exclaimed,

one and all, 'and if only sixpen'orth of property is left, it's only

just that right should have it.' It was all in vain : Barry took

a proud, cold leave of his ' dear relations' aud ' particular

friends;' his spirit had been bitterly wounded by his late misfortunes

; but it was by no means subdued.

"jerry,' said he, as the poor fellow held open the carriage

door, 'see that the widow Murphy has the milk as usual, and

the children at the school their clothing at Christmas; the agent

will attend to it' (I must tell you I had used every exertion

to prevail on horn to appoint a new agent, but in vain,) — and

Barry was trying to conquer his emotion, when Alice, her face

swollen with weeping, sprang into the carriage. The only living

thing she possessed — a pet lamb, attempted to follow her,

and looked up bleating in her face. ' Keep it, Jerry,' she

Baid, 'it is all I have to give you, and I give it you as a

remembrance.'

"The carriage drove on ; at the gate, a concourse of tenantry,

and the poor he had so often relieved, awaited him. They

stopped the carriage : some of the men, who had grown grey

on the estate, came forward. 'Wc have lived and flourished

under yer Honour, and them that's dead and gone, for many

years ; and ye're never distressed us, nor offered to do it. If yer

Honour 'ill stay among us, and keep from foreign parts, well

make an advance on our rents, aud pay up at once to next half-year

; don't leave us to the marcy o' strangers, aud well work

for ye, aud fight for ye, and never let a writ or a sheriff come

near the house.'

' Och ! don't go to lave us,' exclaimed a poor woman, laying

her thin hand on the coach-window. 'Oh ! don't, agra ! Miss,

don't let him — and the mistress, God mark her soul to glory !

not could in her grave yet ! ' All this was too much for my poor

friend ; he could only reply, covering his face with his hands,

God bless you all 1 I must go now ; but I will return to you in

happier times.'

Mr. Barry proceeded to France : the idea of cheap living is

connected, perhaps truly, with the Continent. An Irish gentleman

is sure of a kind reception abroad ; and the intelligent and

cheerful manners of my friend Alice, equally free from English

stiffness aud French levity, increased the feeling of kindness into

esteem. Barry, however, could not long remain contented

in the Provinces, and determined on a visit to Paris. This

certainly was not wise ; but Alice Lee hud the happy art of

extracting sweets from poison. She was introduced to some

persons of literary distinction there, who discovered that her

powerful and clear mid was capable of great efforts, and much

usefulness. They taught her to sour, and directed her flight

with judgment and kindness. Her attempts were made without

even the knowledge of her grandfather, who read aud approved

her first production without having au idea from whose pen it

proceeded ; — his feelings can be better imagined than described,

when he discovered that ' his little cherished child,' — the scorned,

the despised one — had not only received, but merited tho praise

of some of the most celebrated persons in France ; he was not

slow in sending this intelligence over. I, indeed, heard it with

far more pleasure than surprise ; but it threw every member of

the long-tailed family into utter consternation. ' The thing was

impossible — what ! the little pug-nosed girl, who hud never been

to school, to be praised in the newspapers, and thought much of

by learned people, — for her to write a book, a whole book, who

had learned to hold her pen from a village schoolmaster ! '

Fancy, my dear sir, all the exclamations of vulgar astonishment,

and even then you can hardly have an idea of the hubbub tho

news occasioned. — Happily for .alice, she was not one of those

morbid literary ladies, who mourn at their hard fate, and pretend

to sorrow because their minds are superior to their neighbours',

who sigh and sentimentalise over their being obliged to appear

before the public, aud yet use every justifiable and unjustifiable

mode of forcing celebrity. Alice was in the purest sense of the

word a Christian, and she felt tho necessity of doing her duty in

that state of life to which it had pleased God to call her. She

shrank not from tho useful exercise of her abilities, and she had

good sense enough to perceive that the odium, which at that

time, even more than now, attached to literary women, proceeded

from the attention they exacted, and the airs of superiority

they assumed, in society. She did not neglect the

cultivation of simple flowers, because she was skilled iv botany ;

she did not cease to charm by the exercise of her fine melodious

voice, because she comprehended tho nature of sound ; nor did

she delight less in the mazes of the dance, because she understood

the laws of motion. Though she became an author, she

hud not ceased to be a woman: her motives were noble — her

actions pure ; so that sho neither needed, nor wore, a musk :—

this was the grand secret of her popularity.

"The creditors of Mr. Barry's estate had lately become

clamorous, and declared that the sums stipulated for had not

been regularly discharged. My friend found it necessary to go

over to Ireland, and settle matters, the derangement of which he

could not account for ; even his stipend had not lately linen

remitted, and but for the exertions of Alice Lee, he would have

suffered much pecuniary difficulty. He felt that he ought to

clear himself from the imputation of connivance where evidently,

on the agent's part, mismanagement, if not dishonesty, must

have been practised : he came upon the man unexpectedly, and

the fellow paled and trembled before him. Conscious and confused,

he fixed the next morning for the explanation of his

accounts, but that very night set off for America, taking with

horn a very considerable sum, which ho had prevailed on the

tenants to advance, in addition to their rents, under the idea of

ministering to their landlords necessities. This was a dreadful

blow to my friend's feelings : Alice had suffered much from

delicate health, and he would not subject her to the fatigue of a

journey ; but earnestly did he long for her presence, to support

and cheer him. About three weeks after he had quitted Paris

on this unfortunate business, Alice Lee received the following

letter, sealed with dismal black ; the first page was in tho handwriting

of her beloved guardian and relative. She afterwards

permitted me to copy it

' Barrybrooke, December, 18 — ■

"' Mr beloved Child, — I ought not to have written you so

gloomy an account ; it was sadly selfish of me to disturb your

mid when I know how much depends on the work you are now

engaged upon. You would gladly support your poor grandfather

would you not ? even if he had not an acre left. No account

of that villain since he sailed from Cork. Alice, pray for me —

pray that my senses may be spared. The ingratitude I meet

with, is the scorpion's sting that festers in my heart. Pray for me,

Alice Lee I I suppose it must come to a sale. Sell Barrybrooke I

And the trees and flowers she planted ! But I shall have one

unfading flower lest ; —you, Alice ! Poor Claude is even worse

off than myself. Oh ! the curse of property, managed as it is in

this unhappy country. Would that I had been bred a common

tradesman ; I should then have been independent, and not afraid

to look every man I meet in the face, lest he should ask me for

money. Do you know that my sternest creditors are those of

my own km? lam sick at heart, my child, and you are not

here. Do you remember the evening you left that splendid conversazione

at the Count de Leonardss to come home, that you

might give me the medicine with your own hand ? Yet I would

not have you here now for the world. Jerry grows young again,

and Sir Charles is kind as ever : it is too late to wish now, —

but if I had taken his advice,— good night, my child. You

are the only being related to me who never gave me cause

for anger. Good night — God bless you ! tomorrow I will finish

my letter.'

Poor fellow I " exclaimed Sir Charles, as he listed his eyes

from the painful record. " When the next sun rose, his spirit had

met his God : — his heart was indeed broken. The remainder

was written by his old servant.

' May it place ye, Miss, to put up with me to tell ye the

sorrowful tidings, — that next morning when I went as usual

into his Honor's room, he was lane gone, and as could as a

z

stone ; they worried the soul out o' horn, that they did ; and my

curse, and the curse o' the poor, 'ill rest heavy on 'em on the day

o' judgment for that same. I wish ye could see how beautiful

he looks this minute ; just smiling' in his coffin. So best ; for

he's bryant trouble now. — God be praised ! they couldn't keep

his soul from glory ! Poor Master Claude is like one mad, and

Sir Charles is forced to order the funeral : it 'ill be the thing todo

honour to the name, and a grand berriu' as ever was seen iv

the country ; priests and ministers, and all the heart's-blood o'

the gentry — and it's my intention, now that the dear masters

gone, to travel into foreign parts myself, and wait upon you,

Miss, who must want some one to look after ye ; seeing (no

offence, I hope !) that ye are all as one as my own born child ;

aud so keep up yer heart, aud God's fresh blessing' be about ye,

prays yer humble aud faithful servant (till death) to command.

Jeremiah Keg.'

Very soon, the estates of the late Charles Barry, Esq. were

advertised to be sold by the sheriff, for the benefit of the creditors

of the said estates. The sorrow of sweet Alice Lee was agonizing

to witness or think upon ; and even now she has not ceased

regretting that she did not accompany her grandfather on his

last journey. Agitation brought on a nervous fever; aud her

friends in Paris, for more than a month, dreaded what its final

effects might be. She recovered slowly ; and one day I wus sitting

with her in the drawing-room (as I found I could be of no

service in Ireland, I went to see her), when the lady she was

staying with, endeavouring to divert her mid, observed, with

the good-humoured playfulness of her country, that Alice last

work had made a conquest of an old half-Indian gentleman, a

Mr. Clifton, an Englishman, she believed, who wished he were

young enough to make love to her.

' Clifton was my dear grandmother's name,' replied Alice ;

and she had a brother once, but be died, I believe.' A vague idea,

which I could neither account for nor express, took possession of

my mid. The next morning I waited on the old gentleman ;

and judge of my delight and astonishment when I found, after

much investigation, that Mr. Clifton was indeed the brother of

her grandmother, who had gone abroad when his sister was too

young to remember aught about horn, and who had returned a

wifeless and childless man : and the discovery of such a relative

was a source of extraordinary happiness to him. He was a proud,

Stern man, very unlike the parent Rhe had lost ; yet he soon

proved that he was anxious to bestow upon her what tho world

culls substantial proofs of bis affection. Being the avowed heiress

of a rich Indian merchant could add nothing to the lustre of

Alice Lee, but it increased her power of doing good. The idea

of Barrybrooke being sold rendered her very miserable. Her

uncle, who might well be proud of her, when I mentioned her

wish to horn, caught with avidity at the idea of gratifying her,

and agreed to give money for the purpose, just as if he were

bestowing upon her a splendid toy. He wished to visit Dublin,

and wc set out for that once splendid city with many and varied

feelings. But I tiro you, — a moment more and my tale is ended.

Wc were grieved, on our arrival there, to find that the sale had

been hurried forward : by the desire of Alice Lee, I wrote to the

sheriff, offering terms for the house, etc. of Barrybrooke. Through

some precious mistake, my letter miscarried. Wc drove down

to the estate ; and here you must let me mention an instance of

the delicacy of my favourite's mind — she would not travel in her

uncle's carriage, but only in a post-chaise.

' It would insult their distress,' she said, 'to go in splendour,

when the family of my benefactor is reduced almost to want'

The auction was going on when wc drove into the town; wc

were ten minutes too late, the very house of Barrybrooke had

been sold to tho architect I spoke of ! The kind aud generous

feelings of my young friend were thus thrown into another

channel ; she purchased an annuity for 'Cousin Claude,' and to

the hour of his death he never knew from whom the income

came, that enabled horn to live with so much comfort during the

five years he survived his uncle. She practised the revenge of

a Christian : she did good to those who had despitefully used her.

nor were they averse to partake of whatever a-umbs she chose to

bestow."

Mr. Newton looked at his watch : — the kind-hearted, garrulous

7.2

old gentleman took the hint, only adding, that the motto adopted

by Alice, was Independence, — the device, a little bark passing

through a stormy sea, with Hope at the helm, and the haven in

view ; and adding, " Thank God, all the trials of Alice Lee were

endured in youth : her after-age was free from them, save and

except those inherent in, and doubtless necessary to, human

nature."

LOST BEAUTY.

{o£Mfi§£ K the saloon of a large and antique house, of the

Crlfi'K'r Elizabethan era, two ladies were seated, enjoying the

XrJiY&L-''' ( '°"' even g breeze that entered through the open

window. The dwelling had been altered and re-altered,

to meet the tastes and improvements of the various

masters into whose hands it had passed from century to century.

Here and there fragments of turrets were propped up by modem

buttresses, the motor and the antique appearing in perfect contrast

; one beautiful arch still marked the old entrance-gate. The

former strength of the place was intimated by the remains of a

moat, now nearly filled with rubbish and portions of broken and

mouldering stone, from which the flaunting wall-flower, and

various creeping plants, sprung up, and mocked the decay, which

alas, poor blossoms ! wus soon to render them far more contemptible

than that over which they triumphed. The windows

of Leslie Abbey — for so was the dwelling called— were of every

order, and every size — from the small loopholes to the spacious

and modern French casements, that opened upon a lawn of

matchless colour and beauty.

Near one of these the ladies were seated : and if wc do nos

longer descant upon the richness and variety of the landscape,

the extent of the wood, whose dark girdle of mingled oak and

platanos clasped the green meadows, and shadowed the river that

wandered and murmured beneath its foliage, it is because wc

would make acquaintance with that noble-looking woman whose

countenance is turned towards the setting sun, aud whose every

attitude expresses dignity. How firmly, yet how gracefully, her

head is raised above her polished shoulders 1 What richness, yet

propriety, in her dress ! — the folds of her velvet robe descend to

her feet that — so delicate are their form — hardly indent the

crimson cushion with their slight pressure. Her companion is

of other, though, it may be, of more winning beauty. The

childish golden hair, that clusters over her expansive brow in

such redundancy of freedom, harmonizes well with the check of

palest rose, and a form that, wc could imagine, might rest upon

a bed of violets without crushing a petal. Her voice is like the

breathing of a soft lyre, when uwukencd by the spirit of joy ;

her blue eyes are full of hope — that perfectly saddened hope

which dwells with youth as a companion, and calls innocence its

sister.

They are both children of the same parents, though many

years had passed before Annette wus born, to be the playmate

and friend of the stately Lady Leslie.

As they sat together in that chamber, there was a feeling of

quiet and solitude around them which darkened the shadows of

Lady Lesliess mid, and sobered the smile on the lip of her gay

young sister. They had both recently suffered from that fell

disease which has been the bane of so much beauty. But, while

Annette had escaped unscathed, the blight had fallen upon her

sister, and the mistress of Leslie Abbey arose from her bed with

the marks of the pestilence written on her once beautiful countenance

too strongly to be ever effaced.

It is not to be denied that the noble lady had as large a portion

of personal vanity as usually falls to the lot of woman. Of

high birth, and large possessions, she had consequently a sufficient

number of flatterers to praise and fawn. Had she been

as turk us Erebus, nd as deformed os Sin, they would still have

sung of and praised her loveliness. But its character and brilliancy

had been such that she could not move without receiving

the homage of eyes — so rarely paid without being sensibly felt,

and duly appreciated. She had been feted and sung, painted

and sculptured, until her exquisite head whirled upon its pedestal,

aud, what was still worse, her heart, naturally-kind and

benevolent, became careless of the wants or wishes of her fellow-creatures.

Prosperity drives pity from the bosoms of the wealthy :

it is good to feel disappointment, and even adversity, at some

period of our lives ; for practical experience is a benefit to ourselves

and others. It was Lady Lesliess beauty that steeled her

heart ; she thought of it — acted upon it — dreamed of it It had

gained her the affections of the only man Bhe ever loved. One

whom wealth aud title could not purchase was nevertheless

caught by the matchless face — that now ! — but she could not

bear to think of it. To look upon it a second time, thus scarred

and disfigured, was impossible ! Her husband hod been abroad;

and the letter, which lay open on her lap, told of his hopes of an

immediate return, and spoke much of anticipated happiness in

meeting again (so ran tho words) " with his bright and beautiful

wife."

Annette hud watched, with all the earnestness and anxiety of

her affectionate nature, the effect produced by the perusal of

that letter upon her sister's mid. She had longed for the

return of her brother ; for she felt that now was the time, when

Lady Lesliess proud spirit was bowed by mortification, to lead

her from the vanity of her ways, and teach her to mount für, far

above the world's mean and sordid enjoyments. " Why should

such as she," thought Annette, " trifle away the essence and

energy of soul, that God has given her, upon those whose wonder

is cankered by envy, and to whose lips blessings are unknown !

Her heart is touched and softened by affliction ; she valued the

casket more than the jewel it contained — for she lived among

those who could appreciate the first, but not the last ; the roses

of her check were more lovely in her sight than the blossoms of

her mid, that would have supplied such glorious fruit, had the

one been cultivated with half the care bestowed upon the other.

But it is not too late — she is yet in the summer of her days ;

and who knows that, if Leslie comes not, it may be given to me

to me, her youngest and unworthy sister — to show her better

things? When the old Roman soldier was blind, be was led by

a stripling boy — as one child would lead another : not that the

old man was less wise than he had been ; but he wanted sight,

and the youth lent horn the only faculty he needed. On the

some principle, muy not I give to her, who is ten times greater

than I am, the one quality she needs,— the only one I possess, —

and so render her loss a gain ? " Having thought so much,

Annette looked into Lady Lesliess face ; it retained the traces of

recent tears, and was more than usually pale. '• I will not speak

yet," thought her sister ; and, without saying a word, she took

her lute, and, striking a few wild chords, liegon that beautiful

song of the witty aud accomplished Carew : —

He that loves a rosy cboek,

Or a coral lip admires,

Or from star-like clos doth seek

Fuel to maintain his fires —

As old Time makes these decay

So his flames must waste away.'

She paused for a moment, at the conclusion of the first verse,

and stole a quiet glance at her companion ; but there was no

expression that could induce her either to continue or forbear.

She again sung : —

But a smooth and sted&st mid,

Gentle thoughts and calm desires,

Hearts with equal lore combined,

Kindle never-dying fires :

Where these are not, I despise

Lovely cheeks, or lips, or eyes."

You are fond of the lays of the olden time," said Lady

Leslie, with a sigh ; " but I care not for either the modern or the

ancient gamesters : why should I care for anything, when nothing

cares for me ? "

If you care for nothing, dear sister, that same nothing shows

marvellous wisdom in caring for you. I wish I could imitate it !

But will you uot read me Leslie's letter ? " she continued, " or, at

least, tell me what he says ? Here have I sat, the perfect picture

of maidenly patience, singing and sighing, from fair curiosity to

know what writes my lordly brother."

Oh, you may see it all I — but stay, I will read you this passage

myself! —

' Since you have so long enriched the abbey with your presence,

I fear I can hardly hope you will continue there after my

return. Tell me, dearest, do you not pant for the court, of which

your beauty was so bright an ornament ? '

You hear, Annette," continued the proud lady, rising from

her seat, and pacing the apartment with the grace of a Mary and

the irritation of an Elizabeth — " you hear 1 Did he know of the

evil I have suffered, it would be ill talking of beauty : perhaps

he would not think of returning."

And have you not told horn, then ? "

Told horn, Annette ! Oh, no, silly girl I Do you think I did

not want to see horn once more — horn I have so loved 1 But

your childish nature cannot understand such love : you love

linnets, and doves, and wild roses, and "

You, sister ! "

Forgive me, Annette, forgive me !" said Lady Leslie, with

one of those sudden transitions of temper to which petted men,

women, and children, are so often subject ; " some allowance

would be made for a king who had lost his crown — for a "

You have not lost your crown. It is now my turn to be

forgiven, for again interrupting you. I have i read of a virtuous

woman being a crown of glory to her husband ; and do you

know what 1 fancy should be a married woman's crown ? — Her

husband's love."

Granted ; my husband's love was what I prized on earth —

more than earth's — all earth's other treasures : it is for horn

I would be beautiful I "

My dear sister ! "

What mean ye, girl ? " inquired Lady Leslie, with returning

haughtiness of manner.

That you deceive yourself : I grant ho was your principal,

but not your only, object. Admiration was your food — your

existence depended on it ! If he were not present to give the

necessary supply, you took it for other hands. Nay, do not

look so sternly on mc. 1 own from horn it was sweeter than from

any ; but, sister, it was sweet from all."

Lady Leslie gazed upon her young sister with astonishment.

She had only considered her on affectionate, kind girl ; she had

not sought to penetrate her character — vain people seldom care

for others sufficiently to scrutinize their minds. Aud now,

astonishment at her boldness was blended with veneration for

her truth. Annette continued — " If my beloved sister would

throw open the rich storehouse of her mid, and cultivate the

affections of her heart, she would lie more beloved than ever by

her husband, and command the respect — if, indeed, it would be

worth commanding — of those who flattered, and, better still, of

those who never soiled their lips by flattery or falsehood."

Annette Feversham, the philosopher ! " exclaimed the lady,

contemptuously.

Annette Feversham, the naturalist, if you will," replied her

sister, playfully. " May I tell you a little tale ? — it is very short,

and very true. You know that when you were engaged in the

business of fashionable life, your lx>y was turned over to his

childish aunt, as companions well suited to each other. Well,

sister, I have learned from children more wisdom, more of that

natural wisdom which comes direct from God, than I ever learned

from men. Their goodness is so active, and their thoughts given

with so much honesty ! I love to hear them prattle of their

miniature hopes and fears, before deceit has taught them mystery

or concealment. Do you remember, the first day you ventured

to your dressing-room, you ordered Edward to be brought in ?

I was well long before, and bad seen horn frequently ; but some

weeks bad elapsed since he had been permitted audience of his

mother. Sister, you took horn in your arms, kissed his fair brow

a thousand times, and wept salt yet sweet tears of joy : they

were brighter to my eyes that the gay jewels of your coronet ;

for they were nature's tears."

Perhaps they were tears of pride, shed at my own sad

change."

I'll not believe it ! — he, too, had suffered the disease, but

'escaped without a blemish. Ah, good my sister ! you wept for

joy — to see his brow unstained."

I did !— I did ! "

I knew you did. I took horn to his chamber ; and, aster a

grave pause, he looked into my face, and clasping his tiny hands,

exclaimed, ' I am so happy that mamma has grown ugly ; shall

I tell you why, dear aunt ? — lt has taught her to be kid —

she never kissed me so before. Shall I pray to-night that she

may continue always ugly ? ' — Trust me, dear sister, Ned was the

true philosopher : he knew that people, though they may be admired

for beauty, are never loved for it."

"My poor boy ! " said the lady, after a painful pause — " My

poor, dear boy — he is a noble child ! and I may thank you for

it, Annette : I trusted horn to menials ; you saved horn from

contamination."

I am not yet come out," retorted Miss Feversham, with her

own peculiar archness of manner ; " when I am I shall have

other employments, I dare say, like other young ladies."

Annette, do not trifle now. My child might think those

seams of little consequence ; but my husband ! — then those

women — those beauties whom I have so long eclipsed ! "

Ah, there it is I I will not believe it is on Lesliess account

you sorrow — he is but one of the many ! If I have wronged you

by my frankness," she continued, seeing the cloud again gathering

on her sister's brow, " study but the arts he loves, and on

my knees I'll crave a pardon — and never — never — never anymore

offend. He loves a country life — he loves simplicity "

He ought to have married you."

Perhaps be would hud I been old enough. My glorious

sister ! if you look so upon me, I'll never jest again. I know not

why I jest — a jest is a play on truth — and truth I have ever

worshipped. With reverence I speak ; it is the earthly type of

all thugs heavenly. God is truth — his word is truth — faith and

truth are one — truth should be treasured in our hearts, dwell

ever on our lips — brighten our eyes — shed a pure lustre over our

features, a lustre that can make beautiful the plainest face. A

noble thing is truth ! "

Annette, there's a new spirit created or roused within you."

"Lady, it is not new; love may burn faintly for a time, but

it can be quickly fanned by circumstances to a flame. I loved

my sister ; aud when I looked into her mid I saw but one blot

there — 'twos vanity. I feel that I am touching a dangerous

theme, with much too free a bund ; but you have called me

friend— that is a title dearer far than sister. I've heard you say

men are capricious, and would feed on loveliness, like bees, taking

honey, returning stings — that they would rove from flower to

flower, seeking the sweetest : but Leslie is uot one of these. Wc

look upon the plainness of the thing wc love till it grows into

beauty''

"He could not look on me, Annette," replied Lady Leslie,

without drawing comparisons — what I was, and what I am."

My dear sister, let me tell you one more short story, and I

have done. »'

In an eastern country, no matter whether in Persia or Turkey

but somewhere in the East, there wus a spring — a limpid spring,

whose waters were like crystal ; and upon the margin thereof the

nymphs and good spirits used to congregate, and return thanks to

Allah for having placed so delightful a fountain by the way-side.

The holy men who, journeying from country to country, drank

of its refreshing waters, declared that it came directly from the

centre of the world, and brought to its surface the virtues and

medicaments that before were concealed in the bowels of the

earth. The fare of the well spread far and near ; and one of

the rulers in that country said : —

"behold! we will build around our spring — the spring

wherewith Allah has blessed our land — a safeguard and a wall ;

and the wall shall bo of alabaster, within and without — so that

all who pass by shall marvel at the purity of the well. And wc

will set one to keep the well, and watch over it ; and the name

of her who watches and guards the well shall be called Truth.'

"And all the wise iv that country who heard the words of the

venerable ruler declared that they were good. And the ruler

stroked his beard, which descended below his girdle. And the

ruler said — ' Let the thing be done forthwith.'

But in that land there were more rulers than one ; and

another opened his mouth and spake. 'The brain in the grey

head is dry,' said the youthful ruler ; 'and his eye dim, so that he

cannot discern the fashions that spread over the earth ; his

ear is closed against the voice of improvement. Behold ! wc will

tell horn a thing ! Why should our well, the spring of delight in

our wilderness, be closed in alabaster, and one of such exceeding

plainness as Truth set to guard its waters? Behold! we will

plant a glorious tree beside the well ; and its roots shall descend

into the earth, and its branches ascend to the first heaven. And

the tree shall bear the fruit of gen sand jewels, that will sparkle

in the sun, and overshadow our spring with splendour.' And the

young and the foolish shouted the shout of joy. And the shouts

of the young, and the Shouts of the foolish, were louder than

the shouts of the wise. So the young ruler curled his moustache,

till its hairs saluted those of his soft hazel eyes, and said, ' The

thing shall be done forthwith.'

And the thing was done — the voice of the foolish prevailed

for a time over the voice of the wise.

' Where is the goodness of the well, and where the purity of

the water ? ' exclaimed those who once had praised its marvel

and its beauty ; ' behold ! the roots of the filthy tree have disturbed

its clearness.'

"'My spring— my spring — my limpid spring!' wailed the

voice of the last spirit that had lingered by its side, and could

now no longer remain near its margin. ' Birds of no wisdom

nest in the branches of the false tree, and the untrue gems have

become cankered — and thy waters are corrupt. Oh, that thou

hadst been walled with alabaster, and guarded by Truth!'

And, as the spirit passed sighing away from the well, the

spring itself replied : ' The sun shines, and the gems sparkle on

me — what do I desire more ? '

And a great spirit heard the words ; and the great spirit

said that the words were foolish. And the great spirit resolved

that he would uproot the unclean tree, and after a time restore

the well.

And the tree, which was named ' external beauty,' became

uprooted, at the command of the great spirit. And the waters

of the spring were troubled, aud mourned after the tree, and

after the gay birds that filled its ear with foolishness.

But the great spirit said, ' Let be — the well, in a little time,

will regain its purity, now that the glare of external beauty is

removed from its sight, and the roots of vanity from its heart ;

it can now drink into its depths the mysteries of heaven, aud the

light of Allah, and be satisfied with the wall of alabaster as a

guard. Oh that so fine a well should have ever become

corrupt! '

"My dear sister," persisted the fabulist, seeing that Lady

Leslie was not displeased at her invention, "you are the welland

Leslie the wall of alabaster, and I am Truth, aud your beauty

was the tree ; think less of the tree, and more of your husband

and child ; and, Annette Feversham's word upon it, he will love

you better than ever. I will not tell you," she continued, with

more tact than those unacquainted with the windings, the

knowledge, and the mysteries of woman's heart, would have given

her credit for — " I will not remind you that your figure is as

perfect as ever — your eyes as brilliant — your teeth as white —

your smile as gracious ; aud, as for those little pits, — they ore

graves for vanity! Write to your husband, sister — tell him — "

"Lady Leslie started from her seat — and, after a moments

listening, exclaimed — " It is his horse's tramp ; I know the sound

of its hoofs among a thousand. Oh, that I could hide this face

from horn and from the world! " She seized a veil which lay

upon the sofa, and would have flung it over her head. But

Annette drew up her slight figure with a gesture and a dignity

that bore a miniature resemblance to her sister— and, taking tho

rich lace from the trembling and agitated hands of the lady, said,

with both feeling and emphasis : — " There is but one thing that

should make a woman veil before her husband, and that is —

shame. The house of Feversham knows it not! "

Lady Leslie could hardly help smiling at the tone of authority

assumed by the little Annette; but she yielded, nevertheless,

and forgot, at the time, in her husband's warm and affectionate

greeting, the mortification which, for so many weeks, had steeped

her proud heart in bitterness.

•

» »

It is again evening — though five years have passed since the

commencement of our tale — and on the lawn of Leslie Abbey,

the lord and his noble lady are enjoying the prospect and the

breeze of their native hills. The moat has been partly filled,

and instead of weeds and wildness have sprung up goodly shrubs

and smiling flowers. Here a vista has been carefully opened in

the wood, aud wc may see the beautiful river wandering like

animated silver beneath the smiles of the rising moon, until it is

again swallowed in tho darkness of the deep, deep forest.

Hark! tho voice of joyous children from a neighbouring

village — the shout — the laugh — the gay halloo — dancing amid

the echoes of the hills ; and wc can perceive the spire of the

village church — the church which they, the lord and his once

proud wife, have built and beneficed ; the country upon which

they look is theirs — the silver river — the dark wood — the

waving corn; — what else? — the hearts and blessings of their

tenantry I

The Lady Leslie, after many struggles, followed the advice of

her young and simple sister: she became literally a crown of

glory to her husband, aud was crowned in return by his perfect

love.

"Where tarries our sister?" he inquired, after they had surveyed

their wide domain, and heard the blackbird's last whistle,

and watched the fog-wreath encircle the wood, and cast its

mantle over the valley.

She is with our children. 0, Leslie ! wc both owe much to

that girl, who blends so astonishingly the wisdom of the serpent

with the gentleness of the dove and the frolic of the wild kid.

I shall never forget the first lesson she read me on the advantage

of personal plainness."

Personal plainness ! what has it to do with you?"

Peace, peace, dear Leslie ! Do not again awaken the vanquished

spirit of pride within your wife's bosom ; I sometimes

fear it only sleeps; yet have I learned to bless 'lost beauty.'

My trial has been turned into a triumph''

Let it sleep on, then," replied the husband, of whose character

Annette had rightly judged. " A British woman has something

to be far more proud of than personal beauty."

THE WISDOM OF FORETHOUGHT

PART THE FIRST.

EAR to, or far from, London — I need not tell you

which — is the village of Repton, where the two

brothers, John and Charles Adams, originally resided :

it is a pretty village to this duy; and when John

Adams, some five-and-thirty years ago, stood on the top of

Repton Hill, and looked down upon the houses — the little

church, whose simple gate was flanked by two noble yew-trees.

A A

beneath whose branches he had often sat — the murmuring river

iv which be had often fished — the cherry orchards, where the

ripe fruit hung like balls of coral ; when he looked down upon

all these dear domestic sights — for so every native of Repton

considered them — John Adams might have been supposed to

question if he had acted wisely in selling to his brother Charles

the share of the well-cultivated farm, which had been equally

divided at their father's death. It extended to the left of the

spot on which he was standing, almost within a ring fence ; the

meadows, fresh shore of their produce, and fragrant with the

perfume of new hay — the crops full of promise, and the lazy

cattle laving themselves in the standing pond of the abundant

farm-yard ; in a paddock, set apart for his especial use, was the

old blind horse his father had bestrode during the last fifteen

years of his life ; it leaned its Sightless head upon the gate, half

upturned, he fancied, towards where he stood. It is wonderful

what small things will sometimes stir up the hearts of strong

men, ay, and what is still more difficult, even of ambitious men.

Yet he did not feel at that moment a regret for the fair acres he

had parted with; be wus full of the importance which the possession

of a considerable sum of money gives a young man, who

has been fagging almost unsuccessfully in an arduous profession,

and one which requires a certain appearance of prosperity to

command success — for John Adams even then placed M.D. Aster

his plain name ; yet still, despite the absence of sorrow, and the

consciousness of increased power, he continued to look at poor

old Ball until his eyes swam in tears.

With the presence of his father, which the sight of the old

horse had conjured up, came the remembrance of his peculiarities,

his habits, his expressions ; and he wondered, as they passed in

review before horn, how he could ever have thought the dear old

man testy or tedious; even his frequent quotations from "Poor

Richard " appeared to horn, for the first time, the results of

common prudence; and his rude but wise rhyme, when, in the

joy of his heart, he told his father he had absolutely received

five guineas as one fee from an ancient dame who had three

middle-aged daughters (he had not, however, acquainted his

father with that fact), came more forcibly to his memory than it

had ever done to his ear —

For want and age save while you may ;

No morning sun shines all the day."

He repeated the last line over and over again, as his father had

done; but as his "morning sun" was at that moment shining,

it is not matter of astonishment that the remembrance was

evanescent, aud that it did not make the impression upon horn

his father had desired long before.

A young, unmarried, handsome physician, with about three

thousand pounds in his pocket, and " good expectations," might,

be excused for building " des chateaux en Espagne." A very

wise old lady said once to me, " Those who have none on earth

may be forgiven for building them in the air ; but those who

have them on earth should be content therewith." Not so,

however, was John Adams; he built and built, and then by

degrees descended to the realities of his position. What power

would uot that three thousand pounds give hir n! He wondered

if Dr. Lee would turn his back upon horn now, when they met

iv consultation ; Mr. Chubb, the country apothecary, would not,

he was sure, laugh, and ask horn if he could read his own prescriptions

! Then he recurred to a dream — for it was so vague

at that time as to be little more — whether it would not be better

to abandon altogether country practice, and establish himself in

the metropolis — London. A thousand pounds, advantageously

spent, with a few introductions, would do a great deal in London,

and that was but a third of what he had. And this great idea

banished all remembrance of the past, all sense of the present —

the young aspirant thought only of the future.

•

Five years have passed. Dr. John Adams was " settled" in a

small "showy" house iv the vicinity of Mayfair ; he had, the

world said, made an excellent match. He married a very pretty

girl, " highly connected," and was considered to be possessed of

personal property, because, for so young a physician, Dr. Adams

lived in a " superior style." His brother Charles was still

residing in the old farm-house, to which, beyond the mere keep

a 2



mg it in repair, he had done but little, except, indeed, adding a

wife to his establishment — a very gentle, loving, yet industrious

girl, whose dower was too small to have been her only

attraction. Thus both brothers might be said to be fairly

launched in life.

It might be imagined that Charles Adams, having determined

to reside in his native village, aud remain, what his father and

grandfather had been, a simple gentleman farmer, and that

rather on a small than a large scale, was altogether without the

seeling of ambition which stimulates exertion aud elevates the

mid. Charles Adams had quite enough of this — which maybe

said, like fire, to be "a good servant, but a bad master" — but

he made it subservient to the dictates of prudence — and a forethought,

the gift, perhaps, that, above all others, wc should most

earnestly covet for those whose prosperity wc would secure. To

save his brothers portion of the freehold from going into the

hands of strangers, he incurred a debt ; aud wisely — while he

gave to his land all that was necessary to make it yield its

increase — he abridged all other expenses, aud was ably seconded

iv this by his wife, who resolved, until principal and interest

were discharged, to live quietly and carefully. Charles contended

that every appearance made beyond a mau's means was

an attempted fraud upon the public; while John shook his head,

aud answered that it might do very well for Charles to say so,

as no one expected the sack that brought the gram to market to

be of fine holland, but that no man in a profession could get

on in London without making "an appearance." At this

Charles shrugged his shoulders, aud thanked God he lived at

Repton.

The brothers, as years moved rapidly on — engaged as they

were by their mutual industry aud success in their several fields

of action — met but seldom. It was impossible to say which of

the two continued the most prosperous Dr. Adams made

several lucky hits ; and having so obtained a position, was fortunate

iv securing an abundance of patients in an intermediate

sort of sstatthate — that is, neither very well nor very ill. Of a really

bland and courteous nature, he was kind and attentive to all,

and it was certain that such of his patients as were only in

moderate circumstances, got well long before those who were

rich ; his friends attributed this to his humanity as much as to

his skill ; his enemies said he did not like " poor patients."

Perhaps there was a mingling of truth in both statements. The

money be had received for his portion of the land was spent,

certainly, before his receipts equalled his expenditure; and

strangely enough, by the time the farmer had paid off his debt,

the doctor was involved, not to a large amount but enough to

render his "appearance" to a certain degree fictitious. This

embarrassment, to do horn justice, was not of long continuance ;

he became the fashion ; and before prosperity had turned his

head by an influx of wealth, so as to render horn careless, he got

rid of his debt, aud then his wife agreed with horn "that they

might live as they pleased."

It so happened that Charles Adams was present when this

observation was made, and it spoke well for both the brothers

that their different positions iv society had not in the smallest

degree cooled their boyhood's affection ; not even the money

transactions of former times, which so frequently create disunion,

had changed them : they met less frequently, but they always

met with pleasure, and separated with regret.

Well ! " exclaimed the doctor, triumphantly, as he glanced

around his splendid rooms, and threw himself into a chaise longue

then a new luxury — " well, it is certainly a charming feeling

to be entirely out of debt ! "

And yet," said his wife, " it would not be wise to confess it

in our circle."

Why ? " inquired Charles.

Because it would prove that wc had been in it" said the

lady.

At all events," said John, " now I shall not have to reproach

myself with every extra expense, and think I ought to pay my

debts first : now I may live exactly as I please."

I do not think so," said Charles.

Not think so ! " repeated Mrs. Adams, in a tone of astonishment



Not think so ! " exclaimed John; "do I not make the money

myself?"

Granted, my dear fellow ! — to be sure you do," said Charles.

Then why should I not spend it as pleases me best ? Is

there any reason why I should not ? "

As if to give the strongest dramatic effect to Charles's opinion,

the nurse at that moment opened the drawing-room door, and

four little laughing children rushed into the room.

There — are four reasons against your spending your income

exactly as you please ; unless, indeed, part of your plan be to

provide for there," answered Charles, very seriously.

I am sure," observed Mrs. Adams, with the half-offended air

of a weak woman when she bears the truth, " John need not be

told his duty to his children ; he has always been a most affectionate

father."

A father may be fond aud foolish," said Charles, who was

peculiarly English in his mode of giving an opinion. " For my

part, I could not kiss my little Mary and Anne, when I go to

bed at night, if I did not feel I had already formed an accumulating

fund for their future support — a support they will need

all the more when their parents are taken from them, as they

must be, iv due course of time."

They must marry," said Mrs. Adams.

That is a chance," replied Charles ; " women bang on hands

now-a-days. At all events, by God's blessing, lam resolved that,

if they are beauties, they shall never be forced by poverty to

accept unworthy matches ; if they are plain, they shall have

enough to live upon without husbands."

That is easy enough for you, Charles," said the doctor, " who

have had your broad acres to support you, and no necessity for

expenditure or show of any kid — who might go from Monday

morning till Saturday night in home-spun, and never give anything

beyond home-brewed and gooseberry-wine, with a chuaoe

bottle of port to your visitors ; while I, Heaven help me ! was

obliged to dash in a well-appointed equipage, entertain, and

appear to be doing a great deal in my profession, when a guinea

would pine in solitude for a week together in my pocket"

I do not want to talk with you of the past, John," said

Charles ; " our ideas are more likely to agree now than they were

ten or twelve years ago : I will speak of the future and present

You are now out of debt, in the very prime of life, and in the

receipt of a splendid income ; but do not let me entreat you,

spend it as it comes : lay by something for those children ; provide

for there, either by insurance or some of the many means

that are open to us all. Do not, my dear brother, be betrayed

by health, or temptation for display, to live up to au income the

nature of which is so essentially precarious"

Really," murmured Mrs. Adams, " you put one into very

low spirits"

Charles remained silent, waiting his brothers reply.

My dear Charles," he said, at last, " there is a great deal of

truth in what you say — certainly, a great deal ; but I cannot

change ray style of living, strange as it may seem. If I did,

I should lose my practice. And then I must educate my children

— that is an imperative duty, is it not?"

Certainly it is ; it is a part of the provision I have spoken

of, but not the whole — a portion only. If you have the means

to do both, it is your duty to do both ; and you have the means.

Nay, my dear sister, do not seem angry or annoyed with me ; it

is for the sake of your children I speak ; it is to prevent their

ever knowing practically what wc do know theoretically — that

the world is a hard world — hard and unfeeling to those who

need its aid ; it is to prevent the possibility of their experiencing

a reverse."

Mrs. Adams burst into tears, and walked out of the room.

Charles was convinced that she would not uphold his opinion.

Certainly," said John, " I intend to provide for my children ;

but there is no hurry, and "

There should be no hesitation in the case," interrupted

Charles ; " every man intends to provide for his children. God

forbid that I should imagine any man to be sufficiently wicked

to say, — ' I have been the means of bringing this child into

existence — I have brought it up in the indulgence of all the

luxuries with which I indulged myself — and now I intend to

withdraw them all from it, and leave it to sight its own way

through the world.' No man could look on the face of the

innocent child nestling in your bosom and say that; but if you

do not appropriate a portion of the means you possess to save

that child from the ' hereafter,' you act os if you had resolved so

to cast it on the wild waters of a turbulent world."

But, Charles, I intend to do all that you counsel. No

wonder poor Lucy could not bear these words, when I, your own

and only brother, find them stern and reproachful ; no wonder

that such should be the case. Of course, I intend to provide stray

children."

Then do it," said Charles.

Why, so I will, but cannot in a moment. I have already

aid there is no hurry. You must give a little time."

The time may come, ray dear John, when time will give you

no time. You have been spending over and above your debt —

more than, as the father of four children, you have any right to

spend. The duty parents owe their children in this respect has

preyed more strongly on my mid than usual, as I have been

called on lately to witness its effects — to see its misery. One

family at Repton, a family of eight children, has been left entirely

without provision, by a man who enjoyed a situation of five

hundred a-year in quarterly payments."

That man is, however, guiltless. What could he save out of

five hundred a-year ? How could he live on less ? " repbed the

doctor.

Live upon four, and insure his life for the benefit of those

children. Nay," continued Charles, in the vehemence of his

feelings, " the man who does not provide means of existence for

his helpless children, until they are able to provide for themselves,

cannot be called a reasonable person ; and the legislature

ought to oblige such to contribute to a fund to prevent the

spread of the worst sort of pauperism — that which comes upon

well-born children from the carelessness or selfishness of their

parents. God, in his wisdom, and certainly in his mercy, removed

the poor broken-hearted widow of the person I allude to,

month after his death ; and the infant, whose nourishment

from its birth had been mingled with bitterness, followed ina

few days. I saw myself seven children crowd round the coffin

that was provided by charity ; I saw three taken to the workhouse,

and the elder four distributed amongst kind-hearted hardworking

people, who are trying to mure the young soft hands,

accustomed to silken idleness, to the toils of homely industry.

I ask you, John Adams, how the husband of that woman, the

father of those children, can meet his God, when it is required

of horn to give au account of his stewardship ?"

It is very true — very shocking, indeed," observed Dr. Adams.

I certainly will do something to secure my wife and children

from the possibility of anything like that, although, whatever

were to happen to me, I am sure Lucy's family would prevent

"

Charles broke in upon the sentence his brother found it difficult

to complete — " And can you expect distant or even near

relatives to perform what you, whose duty it is, neglect ? Or

would you leave those dear ones to the bitterness of dependence,

when, by the sacrifice or curtailment of those luxurious habits

which, if not closely watched, increase in number, and at last

become necessaries, you could leave them in comfort and independence?

Wc all hope for the leisure of a death-bed — awful

enough, come as it may — awful, even when beyond its gloom wc

see the risen Sun of Righteousness in all His glory — awful,

though our faith be strong in Horn who is our strength ; but if

the consciousness of having neglected those duties which wc were

sent on earth to perform be with us, then dark, indeed, will bethe

Valley of the Shadow of Death. I do not want, however,

tread a homily, my dear brother, but to impress a truth ; aud

I do hope that you will prevent the possibility of these dear

children feeling what they must feel, enduring what they must

endure, if you passed into another world without performing

your duty towards them, and through them to society, in this."

Mrs. Adams met her brother-in-law that day (people five-and-twenty

years ago did dine by day) at dinner, with an air of

offence. She was, of course, lady-like and quiet, but it was

evident she was displeased. Everything at table was perfect

according to its kind. There was no guest present who was not

superior in wealth and position to the doctor himself, and each

was quite aware of the fact. Those who climb boldly sometimes

take u false step, but at all times make dangerous ones. When

Charles looked round upon the splendid plate and stylish servants

— when the children were ushered in after dinner, and

every tongue was loud in praises of their beauty — au involuntary

shudder passed through his heart, aud he almost accused himself

of selfishness, when he was comforted by the remembrance of the

provision made tor his own little ones, who were as pretty, us

well educated, and os happy in their cheerful country home.

The next morning he was on his return to Repton, happy

in the assurance hi 3 brother had given horn before they parted,

that he would really lay by a large sum for the regular insurance

of bis life.

My dear John," said the doctor's wife, " when does the new

carriage come home ? I thought wc were to have had it this

week. The old chariot looked so dull to-day, just as you were

going out, when Dr. Fitzlane's new chocolate colour passed •

certainly that chocolate coloured carriage picked out with blue,

and those blue liveries are very, very pretty."

Well, Lucy, I think them too gay — the liveries I mean — for

an M.D. ; quieter colours do best; aud as to the new carriage, I

had not absolutely ordered it. I don't see why I cannot go on

with the jobs; aud I almost think I shall do so, and appropriate

the money I intended for my own carriage to another purpose."

What purpose 1"

Why, to effect an insurance on my life. There was a great

deal of truth in what Charles said the other day, although he

said it coarsely, which is not usual with horn ; but he felt the

subject, and I feel it also ; so 1 think of, as I said, going quietly

on with the jobs — at all events till next year — aud devoting this

money to the insurance."

It is difficult to believe how any woman, situated as Mrs.

.•Vdams was, could have objected to a plan so evidently for her

advantage and the advantage of her family ; but she wus one of

those who never like to think of the possibility of a reverse of

fortune who thrust care off as long as they can, and who feel

more pleasure in being lavish as to the present, than in saving

for the future.

I am sure," she answered, in the half-petted, half-peevish

tone that evinces a weak mid, " I am sure if anything was to

happen to you, I should break my heart at once, and my family,

of course, would provide for the children. I could not bear the

idea of reaping any advantage by your death ; aud really the

jobs are so very inferior to what they used to be— and Dr.

Lessor, next door but one, has purchased such a handsome

chariot — you have at least twice his practice ; und . Why,

dear John, you never were in such health j there will bo no

necessity for this painful insurance. And after you have set up

your own carriage, you can begin and lay by, and in a few years

there will be plenty for the children ; aud I shall not have the

galling feeling that any living thing would profit by your death.

Dear John, pray do not think of this painful insurance ; it may

do very well for a man like your brother — a man without refinement

; but just saucy the mental torture of such a provision."

Much more Mrs. .\dums talked ; und the doctor, who loved

display, and had no desire to see Dr. Lessor, his particular

rival, or even Dr. Fitzlane, better appointed than himself, felt

strongly inclined towards the new carriage, and thought it would

certainly be pleasant to save than to insure, and resolved to

begin immediately after the purchase of his new equipage.

When persons are very prosperous a few ten or twenty pounds

do not much signify; but the principle of careless expenditure is

bard to curb.

Various things occurred to put off the doctor's plan of laying

by. Its. Adams had an illness, that rendered a residence

abroad necessary for a winter or two. The eldest boy must goto

Eton. As their mamma was not at home, the little girls were

sent to school. Bad as her management was, it was better than

no management at all. If the doctor had given up his entertainments,

his " friends" would have said he was going down in

the world, and his patients would have imagined horn less skilful;

besides, notwithstanding his increased expenditure, he found he

had ample means, not to lay by, but to spend on without debtor

difficulty. Sometimes his promise to his brother would cross

his mid, but it was soon dispelled by what he had led himself

to believe was the impossibility of attending to it then. In

process of time two little ones were added to the four, and still

his means kept puce with his expenses ; in short, for ten years

he was a favourite with the class of persons who render favouritism

fortune. It is impossible, within the compass of a tale, to

trace the minutia; of the brothers" history ; the children of both

were handsome, intelligent, and, in the world's opinion, well

educated. John's eldest daughter was one amongst a thousand

for beauty of mid and person ; here was no glaring display of

figure or information. She was gentle, tender, and affectionate ;

of a disposition sensitive, and attuned to all those rare virtues

iv her sphere, which form at once the treasures of domestic life

aud the ornaments of society. She it was who soothed the

nervous irritability of her mother's sick chamber and perpetual

peevishness, and graced her father's drawing-room by a presence

that was attractive to both old and young, from its sweetness

and unpretending modesty ; her two younger sisters called forth

all her tenderness, from the extreme delicacy of their health ;

but her brothers were even greater objects of solicitude — handsome,

spirited lads — the eldest waiting for a situation, promised,

but not given ; the second also waiting for a cadetship ; while

the youngest was still at Eton. The moment his eldest sons got

the appointments they were promised, Dr. Adams would certainly

save, or insure, or do something !

People who only talk about doing " something," generally end

by doing " nothing." Another year passed ; Mrs. Adams was

Still an invalid, the younger girls more delicate than ever, the

boys waiting, as before, their promised appointments, and more

extravagant than ever ; and Miss Adams had made a conquest

which even lor father thought worthy of her.

The gentleman who had become really attached to this

beautiful girl was of a high family, who were sufficiently charmed

with the object of his affections to give their full sanction, as far

as person and position were concerned ; but the prudent father

of the would-be bridegroom thought it right to take au early

opportunity of waiting upon the doctor, stating his son's prospects,

and frankly asking what sum Dr. Adams proposed

settling on his daughter. Great indeed, was his astonishment

at the reply — " He should not be able to give his daughter anything

immediately, but at bis death." The doctor, for the first

time for many years, felt the bitterness of bis false position.

He hesitated, degraded by the knowledge that he must sink in

the opinion of the man of the world by whom be wus addressed;

be was irritated at his went of available funds being known; and

though well aware that the affections of bis darling child were

bound up in the son of the very gentlemanly but most prudent

person who sat before horn, he was so high and irritable in his

bearing, that the fathers parted, not in anger, but in anything

but good feeling.

Sir Augustus Barry was not slow to set before his son the

disadvantages of a union, where the extravagant habits of Miss

Adams bad no more stable support than her father's life. Aud

Dr. Adams insulted the son for the fault of the father, and forbade

his daughter to receive him.

Mary Adams endeavoured to bear this as meekly as she had

borne the flattery aud the tenderness which had been lavished on

her since her birth. The bitter, bitter knowledge that she was

considered by her lover's family as a girl who, with the chance

of being penniless, lived like a princess, was inconceivably gulling ;

und though she hud dismissed her lover, und knew that her father

had insulted horn, still she wondered how he could so soon forget

her, aud never write even a line of farewell. From her mother

she did not expect sympathy ; she wus too tender and too proud

to seck it ; and her father, more occupied than ever, was seldom

in his own house. Her uncle, who had not been iv town for

some years, at last arrived, aud was not less struck by the extreme

grace und beauty of his niece, than by the deep melancholy

which saddened her voice, and weighed down her spirits.

He was evidently anxious to mention something which made

horn joyous and happy ; and when tied doctor entered the library

with horn, he said, " Aud may not Mary come in also ? " Mary

did come in ; and her gentle presence subdued her uncle's

spirits. " I had meant to tell the intended change in my family

only to you, brother John ; but it bus occurred to me wc were

all wrong about my niece ; they said vt home, 'Do not invite

my cousin, she is too fine, too gay to come to a country wedding

; she would not like it ;' but I think, surrounded as she is

by luxuries, that the fresh air of Repton, the fresh flowers, fresh

fields, and fresh smiles of her cousins would do my niece good,

great good, and wc shall be quite gay iv our own homely way —

the gaiety that springs from hearts grateful to the Almighty

for his goodness. The fact is, that iv about three weeks my

Mary is to be married to our rector's eldest son 1 In three

weeks. As he is only his father's curate, they could uot have

afforded to marry for five or six years, if I had not been able to

tell down a handsome sum for Mary's fortune ; it was a proud

thing to be able to mako a good child happy by care iv time.

Care in time,' that's my stronghold ! How glut wc were to

look back and think, that while wc educated them properly, wc

denied ourselves, to perform our duty to the children God had

given to our care. Wc have not been us gay as our neighbours,

whose means were less than ours ; wc could not bo so, seeing wc

had to provide for five children ; but our pleasure has been to

elevate aud render those children happy and prosperous. Mary

will be so happy, dear child — so happy ! Only think, John, she

will be six years the sooner happy from our care in time!" This

was more than his niece could bear. The good father was so

full of his daughter's happiness, and the doctor so overwhelmed

with self-reproach — never felt so bitterly as at that moment —

that neither perceived the death-like paleness that overspread

the less fortunate Mary's face. She got up to leave the room,

staggered, and fell at her father's feet

"Wc have murdered her between us," muttered Dr. Adams,

while he raised her up ; " murdered her ; but / struck the first

blow. God forgive me ! God forgive me I "

That night tho brothers spent in deep and earnest converse.

The certainty of his own prosperity, the congratulation that

follows a just and careful discharge of duties imposed alike by

reason and religion, hud not raised Charles above his brother in

his own esteem. Pained beyond description at the suffering he

bad so unconsciously inflicted on his niece — horror-struck at the

fact, that thousands upon thousands had been lavished, yet

nothing done for hereafter, the hereafter that must come, he

urged upon John the danger of delay, the uncertainty of life.

Circumstances increased his influence. Dr. Adams had been

made painfully aware that gilding was not gold. The beauty,

position, and talents of his beloved child, although fully acknowledged,

had failed to establish her in life. " Look, Charles," lee

said, after imparting all to his brother, absolutely weeping over

the state of uncomplaining but deep sorrow to which his child

wus reduced; " if I could command the necessary sum, I would

tomorrow insure my life for a sum that would place them

beyond the possible reach of necessity of any kind."

"Do not wait for that," was the generous reply of Charles

Adams ; " I have some unemployed hundreds at this moment.

Come with me tomorrow ; do not delay a day, no, nor an hour;

aud take my word for it you will have reason to bless your

resolve. Only imagine what would be the case if God called

you to give an account of your stewardship." But he checked

himself; be saw that more was not necessary; aud the brothers

separated for a few hours, both anxious for the morning. It was

impossible to say which of the two hurried over breakfast with

the greatest rapidity. The carriage was at the door ; and Dr.

Adams left word with his butler that he was gone into the city

on urgent business, and would be back iv two hours.

I don't think," exclaimed Charles, rubbing his hands

gleefully, " I don't think, that if my dear niece were happy,

I should ever have been so happy in all my life as I am at this

nome vt"

"I feel already," replied John, "as if a great weight were

removed from ray heart ; aud were it not for the debt which I

have contracted to you Ah, Charles, I little dreamt when

I looked down from the hill over Repton, and thought my store

inexhaustible, that I should be obliged to you thus late in life.

knd yet 1 protest I hardly know where I could have drawn in ;

one expense grows so out of another. These boys have been so

very extravagant ; but I shall soon have the two eldest off; they

cannot keep them much longer waiting."

"Work is better than waiting; but let the lads fight their

way ; they have hud, I suppose, a good education ; they ought

to have had professions There is something to me awfully lazy

in your 'appointments;' a young man of spirit will appoint

himself; but it is the females of u family, brought up as yours

have been, who are to be considered. Women's position iv

society is changed from what it wus some years ago ; it was

expected that they must marry ; aud so they were left, before

their marriage, dependent upon fathers aud brothers, as creatures

that could do nothing for themselves. Now, poor things, I really

tout know why, but girls do not marry off as they used. They

become old. and frequently — owing to the expectation of their

settling — without the provision necessary for a comfortable old

age. This is the parent of those despicable traces aud arts which

women resort to to get married, as they have uo acknowledged

position independent of matrimony. Something ought to be

done to prevent this. Aud when the country steadies a little

from the groat revolution of past years 1 suppose something

may be thought of by improved teaching and systems — to enable

women to assist themselves, and be recompensed for the assistance

they yield others. Now, imagine your dear girls, those

younger ones particularly, deprived of you"

Here is the patient upon whom I must call, en route," interrupted

the doctor.

The carriage drew up.

'• I wish," said Charles, " you had called here on your return,

I wanted the insurance to have been your first business

to-day."

I shall not be five minutes," was the reply. The servant

let down the step, aud the doctor bounded up towards the open

door. In his progress ho trod upon a bit, a mere shred, of

orange peel ; it was the mischief of a moment ; he slipped,

and his temple struck against the sharp column of au iron-scraper.

Within one hour, Dr. John Adams bud ceased to exist

What the mental aud bodily agony of that one hour was.

you can better understand than I can describe. He was fully

conscious that he was dying — and he knew all the misery that

was to follow.

PART THE SECOND.

wV^Yv Only give me your attention, my dear niece," said

R Charles Adams, as he seated himself by Mary's side ;

Ci XIU/iS " for half-an-hour, now that all is over, and that the

demands of the world press upon us. I wish to

speak about the future. Your mother bursts into such fits of

despair that I can do nothing with her ; aud your brother is so

ungovernable — talks as if he could command the Bank of England,

and is so full of his mother's connexions and their influence,

that I have left horn to himself. Can you, my dear Mary,

restrain your feelings, and give me your attention ? "

Mary .Adams looked firmly in her uncle's face, and said, " I

will try. I have been thinking and planning all tho morning,

out Ido not know how to begin to be useful. If I once begun,

I could go on. The sooner wc are out of this huge expensive

house, the better ;if I could get my mother to go with the little

girls to the sea side. Take lor away altogether from this homo

take her "

Where ? " inquired Mr. .adams; " she will not accept shelter

in my house."

I do not know," answered his niece, relapsing into all the

helplessness of first grief ; " indeed Ido not know ; her brother-in-law,

Sir James Ashbrooke, invited her to the Pleasaunce, but

my brother objects to her going there, his uncle has behaved so

neglectfully about his appointment."

Foolish boy ! " muttered Charles ; " this is no time to

quarrel about trifles. The fact is, Mary, that the sooner you

are all out of this house the better ; there are one or two

creditors, not for large sums certainly, but still men who will

have their money ; and if wc do not quietly sell off, they will

force us. The house might have been disposed of last week

by private contract, but your mother would not hear of it.

because the person who offered was a medical rival of my poor

brother''

Mary did uot hear the concluding observation ; her eyes

wandered from object to object in the room — the harp — the

various things known from childhood. " Anything you and

your mother wish, my dear niece," said her kind uncle, " shall be

preserved— the surlily pictures — your harp, your piano — they

are till hallowed memorials, and shall be kept sacred."

Mary burst into tears. " I do not," she said, " shrink from

considering those instruments the means of my support ; but

although I know the necessity for so considering, I feel I cannot

tell what at quitting the home of my childhood ; people are all

kind ; you, my dear uncle, from whom wc expected so little, the

kindest of all ; but I see, even in these early days of a first

sorrow, indications of fulling off. My aunt's husband has

really behaved very badly about the appointment of my eldest

brother; aud as to the cadetship for the second— we had such

a grief dry le' ter from our Indian friend — so many firsts on

B R 2

the list, and the necessity for waiting, that I do not know how

it will end."

I wish, my dear, you could prevail on your mother, and

sister, and all, to come to Repton," said Mr. Adams. "If your

mother dislikes being in my house, I would find her a cottage

near us ; I will do all I can. My wife joins me in the determination

to think that wc have six additional children to look

to. Wc differ from you in our habits ; but our hearts and

affections are no less true to you all. My Mary aud you will be

us sisters."

His niece could bear uo more kindness. She had been far

more bitterly disappointed than she had confessed even to her

uncle ; and yet the very bitterness of the disappointment had

been the first thing that had driven her father's dying wail from

her ears — that cry repeated so often and so bitterly in the brief

moments left after his accident — " My children !My children I"

He had not sufficient faith to commit them to God's mercy ; he

knew he had not been a faithful steward, and he could not bring

himself from the depths of his spiritual blindness to call upon

the Fountain that is never dried up to those who would humbly

and earnestly partake of its living waters.

It was all a scene as of another world to the young, beautiful,

petted, and feted girl ; it had made her forget the disappointment

of her love, at least for a time. While her brothers dared

the thunder-cloud that burst above their heads, her mother and

sister wept beneath its influence. Mary had looked forth, and

if she did not hope, she thought, and tried to pray ; now, she

fell weeping upon her uncle's shoulder. When she could

speak, she said, " Forgive me : in a little time I shall be able

to conquer this ; at present, lam overwhelmed — 1 feel as if

knowledge and sorrow came together — I seem to have read more

of human nature within the last three days than in all my

past life."

It all depends, Mary, upon the person you meet," said Mr.

Adams, " as upon the book you read : if you choose a foolish

book or a bad book, you can expect nothing but vice or foolishness;

if you choose a foolish companion, Surely you cannot

expect kindness or strength." Tho kind hearted man repeated

to her all he had before said. " I cannot," he added, "be guilty

of injustice to my children, but I can merge all my own luxuries

into the one of being a father to the fatherless."

But to all the plans of Charles Adams, objections were raised

by his eldest nephew and his mother : the youth could not

brook the control of a simple straight-minded country man,

whose only claim to be considered a gentleman, in his opinion,

arose from his connexion with " his family." He was also indignant

with his material uncle for his broken promise ; and these

feelings were strengthened by his mother's folly. Two opportunities

for disposing of the house and its magnificent furniture

were missed ; and when Mrs. Adams complained to her nearest

and most influential connexions, that her brother-in-law refused

to make her any allowance unless she consented to live at

Repton — expecting that they would be loud in their indignation

at his hardness — they advised her by all means to do what he

wished, as he was really the only person she had to depend upon.

Others were lavish of their sympathy, but sympathy wears out

quickly ; others invited her to spend a month with them at

their country sent, for change of air ; one hinted how valuable

Miss Adams's exquisite musical talent would be now. Mary

coloured, and said, " Yes," with the dignity of proper feeling ;

but her mother asked the lady what she meant, and a little scene

followed, which caused the lady to visit all the families in town

of her acquaintance, for the purpose of expressing her sympathy

with " those poor dear Advises, who were so proud, poor things,

that really there was nothing but starvation and the workhouse

before them !" Another of those well-meaning persons —

strong-minded and kind-hearted, but without a particle of

delicacy — came to poor Mary, with all the prestige of conferring

a favour.

My dear young lady, it is the commonest thing in the

world — very painful, but very common : the families of professional

men are frequently left without provision. Such a

pity ! — because, if they cannot save, they can insure. Wc all

can do that, but they do not do it ; and. consequently, everywhere

the families of professional meu are found in distress : so,

as I said, it is common ; and I wanted you to suggest to your

mother, that, if she would not feel hurt at it, the thing being so

common— dear Dr. Adams having been so popular, so very

popular — that while every one is talking about horn, and you alla

very handsome subscription could be got up. I would begin

it with a sum large enough to invite still larger. I had a great

regard for him — I had indeed."

Mary felt her heart sink aud rise, aud her throat swell, so that

she could not speak. She had brought herself to the determination

of employing her talents for her own support, but she wus

not prepared to come with her family before the world as

paupers. "Wc have no claim upon the public," she said at lust

"I am sure you mean us kindly, but wc have uo claim. My

dear father forwarded no public work— no public object ; he

give his advice, and received his payment If wc are not provided

for, it is no public fault. Besides, my father's children are

able and willing to support themselves. lam sure you mean us

kindly, but wc have no claim upon public sympathy, and an

appeal to it would crush us to the earth. lam very glad you

did not speak first to my mother. My uncle Charles would not

suffer it, even if my mother wished it."

This friend also departed to excite new speculations as to the

pride and poverty of " poor dear Dr. Adams's family." In the

world, however, — the busy London world, — it is idle to expect

anything to create even a nine days' wonder. When the house

and furniture were at last offered for sale, the feeling was somewhat

revived ; and Mary, whose beauty, exquisite as it was, had

so unobtrusive a character as never to have created a foe, was

remembered with tears by many : even the father of her old

lover, when he was congratulated by one more worldly-minded

than himself on the escape of his sou in not marrying a portionless

girl, reproved the unfeeling speaker with a wish that he only

hoped his son might have as good a wife as Mary Adams would

have been.

The bills were taken down, the house purified from the

auction-mob — everything changed — a new name occupied the

doctor's place in the " Court Guide" — and in three months the

family seemed as completely forgotten amongst those of whom

they once formed a prominent part, as if they had never existed.

When one sphere of life closes against a family, they find room

in another. Many kind-hearted persons in Mrs Adams's first

circle would have been rejoiced to bo of service to her aud hers,

but they were exactly the people upon whom she had uo claim.

Of a high but poor family, her relatives had little power. What

family so situated ever had any influence beyond alia* they

absolutely needed for themselves ? With an ill grace, she at last

acceded to the kind offer made by Mr. Charles Adams, and took

possession of the cottage he fixed upon, until something could

be done for his brothers children. Iv a fit of proud despair, the

eldest son enlisted into a regiment of dragoons ; the second was

fortunate enough to obtain a cadetship through a strangers

interference ; aud his uncle thought it might be possible to get

the youngest forward iv his father's profession. The expense of

the necessary arrangements was severely felt by the prudent and

careful country gentleman. The younger girls were too delicate

for even the common occupations of daily life ; and Mary,

instead of receiving the welcome she had been led to expect from

her aunt and cousins, felt that every hour she spent at the

Grange was an intrusion.

The sudden death of Dr. Adams had postponed the intended

wedding of Charles Adams's eldest daughter; and although her

mother agreed that it was their duty to forward the orphan

children, she certainly felt, as most affectionate mothers whose

hearts are not very much enlarged would feel, that much of their

own savings — much of the produce of her husband's hard labour

labour during a series of years, when her sister-in-law aud her

children were enjoying all the luxuries of life — would now be

expended for their support : this to an all-sacrificing mother,

despite lier sense of the duty of kindness, was hard to bear. As

long as they were not on the spot, she theorised continually, and

derived much satisfaction from the sympathising observations of

her neighbours, and was proud, very proud, of the praise bestowed

upon her husband's benevolence ; but when her sister-in-law's

expensive habits were in daily array before her (the cottage

bo;ug close to tho Grange) — when she knew, to use her own

expression, " that she never put her hand to a single thing " —

that she could not live without port wine, when she herself

never drank even gooseberry, except ou Sundays — never ironed

a collar, never dusted the chimney-piece, or ate a shoulder of

mutton, roast one day, cold the next, aud hushed the third ; —

while each day brought some fresh illustration of her thoughtlessness

to the eyes of the wife of the wealthy tiller of the soil,

the widow of the physician thought herself in the daily practice

of the most rigid self-denial. "I am sure," was her constant

observation to her all-patient daughter, " I am sure I never

thought it would come to this. I had not an idea of going

through so much. I wonder your uncle aud his wife can permit

me to live iv the way I do — they ought to consider bow I was

brought up." It was in vain Mary represented that they were

existing upon charity — that they ought to be most grateful for

what they received, coming os it did from those who, in their

days of prosperity, professed nothing, while those who professed

all things, hud done nothing. Mary would so reason, aud then

retire to her own chamber to weep alone over things more hard

to bear.

It is painful to observe what bitterness will creep into the

heart und manner of really kind girls where a lover is in the

ctise, or even where a commonplace dangling sort of flirtation is

going forward ; this depreciating ill nature, one to the other, is

not by any means confined to the fair sex. Young men pick

each other to pieces with even more fierceness, but less ingenuity;

they deal in a cut-and-hack sort of sarcasm, and do not hesitate

to use tends and insinuations of the harshest kind when a lady

is in the case. Mary (to distinguish her from her high-bred

cousin, she was generally called Mary Charles) was certainly

disappointed when her wedding was postponed iv consequence of

her uncle's death ; but a much more painful feeling followed

when she saw the admiration her lover, Edwin Lechmere, bestowed

upon her beautiful cousin. Mary Charles was herself a

beauty — fair, open-eyed, warm-hearted — tete beauty of Repton ;

but though feature by feature, inch by such, she wus as handsome

as Mary, yet in her cousin was the grace and spirit given only

by good society ; the manners elevated by u higher mid, and

toned down by sorrow ; a gentle softness, which a keen observer

of human nature once told me no woman ever possessed unless

she had deeply loved, and suffered from disappointed affection ;

in short, she was far more refined, far more fascinating, than

her country cousin. Besides, she was unfortunate, and that

at once gave her a hold upon the sympathies of tho young

curate: it did no more; but Mary Charles did not understand

these nice distinctions, und nothing could exceed the change

of runner she evinced when her cousin and her betrothed were

together.

Mary thought her cousin rude and petulant ; but the true

cause of the change never occurred to her. Accustomed to the

high-toned courtesy of well-bred men. which is so little practised

in the middle class of English society, it never suggested itself,

that placing her chair, or opening the door for her to go out, or

rising courteously when she came into a room, was more than,

as a lady, she had a right to expect; in truth, she did not notice

it at all; but sho did notice and feel deeply her cousins alternate

coldness and suappishness of manner. " I would not," thought

Mary, " have behaved so to her if she hud been left desolate ;

but iv a little time, when my mother is more content, 1 will

leave Repton, und become independent by my talents." Never

did she think of the power delegated to her by the Almighty

without feeling herself raised — ay, higher than she had ever

been in the days of her splendour — in thessaly of moral usefulness

;as every one must feel whose mid is rightly framed. She

hud uot yet known what it was to have her abilities trampled on

or insulted; she had never experienced the bitterness consequent

upon having the acquirements — which iv the days of her prosperity

commanded silence and admiration — sneered at, or openly

ridiculed. She had yet to learn that the Solos, the lawgivers

of English society, lavish their attentions and praise upon those

who learn, not upon those who teach.

Mary had not been six mouths fatherless, when she was

astonished first by a letter, and then by a visit, from her former

lover ; he came to renew his engagement, aud to wed her even,

then if she would have horn ; but Mary's high principle was

stronger than he imagined. " No," she said ; " you are not

independent of your father, aud whatever I feel, I have no

right to draw you down into poverty. You may fancy now that

you could bear it, but a time would come — if not to you, tome

— when the utter selfishness of such conduct would goad

rae to a death of early misery." The young man appealed

to her uncle, who thought her feelings overstrained, but respected

her for it nevertheless; aud in the warmth of his admiration,

he communicated the circumstance to his wife and

daughter.

Refuse her old lover under present circumstances," repeated

her cousin to herself us she left the room ; " there must be some

other reason than that ; she could not be so foolish us to reject

such au offer at such a time." Unfortunately, she saw Edwin

Lechmere walking by Mary's side, under the shadow of some

trees. Sho watched them until the foliage screened them from

her sight, und then she shut herself into her own room, aud

yielded to a long and violent burst of tears. "It is not enough,"

sho exclaimed, in the bitterness of her feelings, "that the comforts

of my parents' declining years should be abridged by the

overwhelming burden to their exertions — another family added

to i he: r own ; it is not enough that au uncomfortable feeling bus

grown between my futhcr uud mother on this account, and that

cold looks and sharp words have come where they never came

before, but my |>euce of mid must be destroyed. Gladly would

1 have taken a shoulder portion, if I could have kept the affections

which I see but too plainly my cousin has stolen from me. And

my thoughtless aunt to say, only yesterday, that 'at all events

lor husband was no man's enemy but his own.' Has not his

went of prudent forethought been the ruin of his own children ?

aud will my parents ever recover the anxiety, the pain, the

sacrifices, brought on thorn by one man's culpable neglect? Oh,

uuolel if you could look from your grave upon the misery you

have caused I" — aud then, exhausted by her owu emotion, the

affectionate but jealous girl begun to question herself as to what

she should do. After what she considered mature deliberation,

Bhe made up her mid to upbraid her cousin with treachery, aud

she put her design into execution that same evening.

It was no easy matter to oblige her cousin to understand what

she meant ; but at last the declaration, that she had refused her

old lover because she had placed her affections upon Edwin

Lechmere, whom she was endeavouring to " entrap," was not to

be mistaken ; aud the country girl was altogether unprepared

for the burst of indignant feeling, mingled with much bitterness,

which repelled the untruth. A strong fit of hysterics, into

which Mary Charles worked herself, was terminated by a scene

of the most painful kind, her father being upbraided by her

mother with " loving other people's children better than his

own," while the curate himself knelt by the side of his betrothed,

assuring her of his unaltered affection. From such a scene Miss

Adams hastened with a throbbing brow and a bursting heart.

She had uo one to counsel or console her ; no one to whom she

could apply for aid. For the first time since she had experienced

her uncle's tenderness, she felt she had been the means of disturbing

his domestic peace; tho knowledge of the burden she

was, aud the burden she and hers were considered, weighed her

to the earth ; and iv a paroxysm of anguish, she fell on her

knees, exclaiming, " Oh, why are the dependant born into the

world ! Father, father, why did you leave us, whom you so

loved, to such u fate!" Aud then she reproached herself for

having uttered a word reflecting on his memory. One of the

every-day occurrences of life — so common as to be hardly

observed, is to find really kind good-natured people not " weary

of well-doing." " Oh, really I was worn out with so aud

so; they are so decidedly unfortunate that it is impossible to

help them," is a general excuse for deserting those whose continuing

misfortunes ought to render them greater objects of

sympathy.

Mr. Charles .adams was, as has been shown in our little narrative,

a kind-hearted man. Estranged as his brother and himself

had been for a number of years, he had done much to

forward, and still more to protect, his children. At first, this

wus a pleasure ; but somehow his " benevolence," and " kindness,"

and " generosity," had been so talked about, so eulogised, and he

bad been so seriously inconvenienced by the waywardness of whig

nephews, the thoughtless pride of his sister-in-law, the helplessness

of his younger nieces, as to feel seriously oppressed by his

responsibility. And now the one who had never given horn

aught but pleasure, seemed, according to his daughter's representations,

to be the cause of increased sorrow, the destroyer of

his dear child's happiness. What to do he could not tell. His

daughter, wrought upon by her own jealousy, had evinced,

under its influence, so much temper she had never displayed

before, that it seemed more than likely the cherished match

would bo broken off. His high-minded niece saved horn any

farther anxiety as für us she was concerned. She sent for and

convinced horn fully and entirely of her total freedom from the

base design imputed to her. " Was it likely," she said, " that I

should reject the man I love lest I should drag horn into poverty,

und plunge at once with one I do not care for into the abyss I

dread? This is the common sense view of the case; but there

is yet another. Is it to be borne that I should seek to rob your

child of her happiness? The supposition is au insult too gross

to be endured. I will leave my mother tomorrow. An old

schoolfellow, older and more fortunate than myself, wished me

to educate her little girl. I had oue or two strong objections to

living iv her house; but the desire to be independent and away

has overcome them." She then, with many tears, entreated her

uncle still to protect her mother ; urged how she had been sorely

tried ; and communicated fears, she had reason to believe were

too well founded, that her eldest brother, feeling the reverse

more than he could bear, had deserted from his regiment.

Charles Adams wus deeply moved by the nobleness of his

niece, und reproved his daughter more harshly than he had ever

done before, for the feebleness that created so strong and unjust

a passion. This had the contrary effect to that which he had

hoped : she did not hesitate to say that her cousin had endeavoured

to rob her both of the affection of her lover and her father.

The injured cousin left Repton bowed beneath an accumulation

of troubles, not one of which was of her own creating, — not one

of which she deserved ; and all springing from the providing

nature of horn who, had he been asked the question, would have

declared himself ready to sacrifice his own life for the advantage

of that daughter, now compelled to work for her own bread. To

trace the career of Mary Adams in her new calling, would be to

repeat what I have said before. The more refined, the more

iv formed the governess, the more she suffers. Being with one

whom she had known in better days, made it even more hard to

bend; yet she did her duty, and that is one of the highest

privileges a woman can enjoy.

Leaving Mary for a moment, let us return to Repton. Here

discord having once entered, was making sad ravages, and all

were suffering from it. It was but too true that the eldest of

the Advises had deserted; his mother, clinging with a parent's

fondness to her child, concealed horn, and thus offended Charles

Adams beyond all reconciliation. The third lad, who was walking

the London hospitals, and exerting himself beyond his

strength, was everything that a youth could lie ; but his declining

health was represented to his uncle, by oue of those

whom his mother's pride had insulted, as a cloak for indolence.

Iv short, before another year had quite passed, the family of tho

once rich aud fashionable Dr. Adams had shared the fate of all

dependants — worn out the benevolence, or patience, or whatever

it really is, of their " best friends." Nor was this the only consequence

of the physician's neglect of a duty due alike to God and

to society ; his brother had really done so much for the bereaved

family, as to give what the world called '• just grounds " for Mrs.

Charles Adams's repeated complaints, " that now her husband

was ruining his industrious family to keep the lazy widow of his

spendthrift brother and her favourite children in idleness. Why

could she not live upon the ' fine folk ' she was always throwing

in their faces?" Their daughter, too, of whose approaching

union the fond father had been so proud, was now, like her

cousin whom she had wronged by her mean suspicions, deserted ;

the match broken off after much bickering ; one quarrel having

brought on another, until they separated by mutual consent

Her temper and her health were both materially impaired, and

her beauty was converted into harshness and acidity.

Oh ! how utterly groundless is the idea, that iv our social state,

where one human being must so much depend upon another,

any man, neglecting his positive duties, can be called '• only his

own enemy ! " What misery had not Dr. Adams's neglect entailed,

not alone on his immediate family, but on that of his

brother! Besides, there were ramifications of distress; he had

died even more embarrassed that his brother had at first believed,

and some tradespeople were consequently embarrassed ;

but the deep misery fell upon his children. Meanwhile Mrs Dr.

■Viam-. hud left Repton with her younger children, to be the

dependants of Mary iv London.

It was not until a fatal disease had seized upon her mother,

that Mary ventured to appeal again to her uncle's generosity.

My second brother," she said, " has out of his small means

remitted her five pounds. My eldest brother seems altogether

to have disappeared from amongst us ; finding that his unhappy

presence had occasioned so fatal a separation between bis mother

and you — a disunion which I caw was the effect of many small

causes rather than one great one — be left us, aud wc cannot

trace him. This has broken my poor mother's heart ; he wus

the cherished one of all her children. My youngest brother has

been for the last month an inmate of oue of the hospitals which

my poor father attended for so many years, and where his word

was law. My sister Rosa, she upon whom my poor father poured,

if possible, more of his affection that he bestowed upon me — my

lovely sister, of whom, even in our poverty, I was so proud — so

young, only upon the verge of womanhood — has, you already

know, left us. Would to God that it had been for her grave,

rather than her destroyer ! — a fellow student of that poor youth,

who, if he dreamt of her dishonour, would stagger like a spectre

from what will be his death-bed to avenge her. Poverty is one

of the surest guides to dishonour; those who have not been

tempted know nothing of it It is one thing to see it, another

to feel it. Do uot think her altogether base, because she had

not the strength of a heroine. I have been obliged to resign

my situation to attend my mother, and the only income wc have

is what I earn by giving lessons on the harp and piano. I give,

for two shillings, the same instruction for which my father paid

half-a-guinea a lesson : if I did not I should have no pupils. It

is more than a month since my mother lest her bed ; and my

youngest sister, bending beneath increased delicacy of health, is

her only attendant I know her mid to be so tortured, and her

body so convulsed by pain, that I have prayed to God to render

her fit for heaven, and take her from her sufferings. Imagine

the weight of sorrow that crushed me to my knees with such

a petition as that. I know all you have done, and yet I ask you

now, in remembrance of the boyish love that bound you and my

father together, to lessen her bodily anguish by the sacrifice of

a little more ; that she, nursed in tho lap of luxury, may not

pass from life with starvation as her companion. My brothers

gist is expended ; and during the last three weeks I have earned

but twelve shillings ; my pupils are out of town. Do, for a moment,

remember what I was, and think how humbled I must be

to frame this supplication; but it is a child that petitions fora

parent, and I know I have never forfeited your esteem. In a

few weeks, perhaps in a few days, my brother and my mother

will meet my poor father suce to suce. Ob ! that I could be

assured that reproach and bitterness for the past do not pass the

portals of the grave. Forgive me this, as you have already

forgiven me much. Alas! I know too well that our misfortunes

drew misfortunes upon others. I was the unhappy but innocent

cause of much sorrow at the Grange; but, oh! Do uot refuse the

last request that I will ever make." The letter was blotted by

tears.

Charles Adams was from home when it arrived, and his wife,

knowing the handwriting, and having made a resolution never to

open a letter "from that branch of the family," did not send it

after her husband, "lest it might tease him." Ten days elapsed

before he received it; and when he did, he could not be content

with writing, but lost not a moment in hastening to the address.

Irritated and disappointed that what he really had done should

have been so little appreciated, when every hour of his lisp he

was smarting in one way or other from his exertions - brokenhearted

at his daughter's blighted health aud happiness — angered

by the reckless wildness of one nephew, and what he believed was

the idleness of another — and convinced that Rosa's fearful step

was owing to the pampering and mismanagement of her foolish

mother — Charles Adams satisfied himself that, as he did not hear

to the contrary from Mary, all things were going on well, or at

least not ill. He thought as little about them as he could ; but

the letter of his favourite niece spoke strongly to his heart, and

in two hours after his return home, he set forth for the London

suburb from whence the letter was dated.

Is Miss Adams at home?" inquired her uncle of a woman

leaning against the door of a miserable house.

I don't know ; she went to the hospital this morning ; but

Im not sure she's in; it's the second pair back; it's easy known,

for the sob has not ceased there these two nights ; some people

dp take on so " —

Charles Adams did not hear the concluding sentence, but

sought the room ; the door would not close, and he heard a low

sobbing sound from within ; he paused, but his step had aroused

the mourner — "Come in, Mary — come in; I know how it is,"

said a young voice : " he is dead ; one grave for mother and son

—one grave for mother and son ! I see your shadow, dark as

it is."

Charles Adams entered the room ; but his sudden appearance

in the twilight, and evidently not knowing horn, overcame the

girl, his youngest niece, so much, that she screamed, and fell on

her knees by her mother's corpse. He called for lights, and was

speedily obeyed, for he put a piece of gold in the woman's hand ;

she turned it over, and as she hastened from the room, muttered,

If this had come sooner, she'd not have died of starvation, or

burdened the parish for a shroud ; it's hard the rich can't look

to their own."

When Mary returned, she was fearfully calm. " No, her

brother was uot dead," she said ; " the young were longer dying

than those whom the world had worn out ; tbc young knew so

little of the world, they thought it hard to leave it ;" and she

took off her borne, and sat down ; and while her uncle explained

why he had not written, she looked at horn with eyes so fixed

and cold, that he paused, hoping she would speak, so painful was

their story expression ; but she let horn go ou, without offering a

word ; and when she stooped to adjust a portion of the coarse

plaiting of the shroud — that mockery of " the purple and fine

linen of living days" — her uncle saw that her hair, her luxuriant

hair, was striped with white.

There is no need for words now," she said at last ; "no need.

T thought you would have sent ; she required but little — but

very little ; the dust rubbed from the gold she once had would

have been riches ; but the little she did require she had not, and

so she died ; but that which weighs heaviest upon my mid washer

calling bo continually ou my father, to know why he had

deserted her ! she attached no blame latterly to any one, only

called day and night upon him. Oh ! it was hard to bear — it

was very hard to bear ! *

I will send a proper person in the morning to arrange that

she may he placed with my brother," said Charles.

No," resumed Mary, " let the parish bury lor ; even its

officers were kind ; and if you bury her, or they, it is still a

paupers funeral. I see all these thugs clearly now ; death,

while it closes the eyes of some, opens the eyes of others ; it has

opened mine."

But why should I prolong this sad story ? It is not the tale

of one, but of many. There are dozens, scores, hundreds of

instances of the same kind, arising from the same cause, in our

broad islands. In the lunatic asylum where that poor girl, even

Mary Adams, has found refuge during tbc past two years, there

are many cases of insanity arising from change of circumstances,

where a fifty pounds' annual insurance would have set such maddening

distress at defiance. I know that her brother died in the

hospital within a few days ; and the pale sunken-eyed girl whose

damp yellow hair and thin white hand are so eagerly kissed by

the gentle maniac when she visits her, month by month, is the

youngest, and, I believe, the last of her family, at least the last

c c

in England. Oh, that those who foolishly boast that their actions

only affect themselves, would look carefully abroad, and if they

doubt what I have faithfully told, examine intr tbc causes which

crowd the world with cases even worse than I have here

recorded !

THE DAILY GOVERNESS.

SEj£|&^S Very early, every morning, she passes our gate ;

£pHjfjKs seldom a minute later than a quarter before eight.'

FwUfficK '^' le co °^ at l ' le P rest J "hostelry" of " the Hoop i

~ p and Toy " knew this so well, that she set the kitchen

clock by " the young lady in the cottage bonnet." I must

pause to lament that the old-fashioned wayside inn, as you see

002

it here pictured, exists no longer ; it has been swept away by

the brick-and-mortar — that so rapidly destroys all relies of

the past.

Wc used to boast that wc resided in one of the most rural and

quaint districts in the neighbourhood of London ; wc were so

fond of our green lanes — our hedge-rows, so thick and trim,

through which the most beautiful wild flowers wreathed and

clustered, bordering the footways leading by such prolonged

short cuts " from Fulham and Chelsea to Brompton aud Kensington.

Wc were so proud of our old houses ! Among them

were " Cromwell House " — tall and ghastly as a ghost, cold and

self-contained as tho old Covenanter — alone in its tangled

grounds, to which the wayfarer could discern no entrance ;

Burleigh House " — desecrated to be sure, modernized, and,

as the decorators' phrase goes, " beautified," and called Crompton

Hall, but once the veritable dwelling of the great Lord Burleigh ;

the preserved relic of the " Queen's Elm," beneath which our

royal Tiger-Queen Elizabeth sheltered ; poor, erring, generous

Nell Gwynue's house at Sandy End ; a regular chapter of antiquities

in Church Street and Cheyne Walk ; and in the Fulham

Road, the mansion where Locke wrote and Shaftesbury resided ;

in the quiet Palate burying-ground, the precious relic of Sir

Thomas More's dwelling, close by the water-garden where he

took boat ou many a pleasant summer evening. I cannot help

thinking that wc had good cause for pride ; our neighbourhood

was crowded with old records — in walls and ruins, and long

chimneys and high gables ; and in the more recent times the

Prince of Wales (they say) often looked forth from a little

abutting window belonging to a narrow rambling tenement, where

our good neighbour the carpenter stores his chips. Moore, the

poet, wrote sono of his most loving and lovely songs in an erect,

unpoetical-looking house in tbc Fulham Road, overlooking the

nursery-grounds, nearly opposite the new hospital; aud within a

few doors of it, Curran breathed his last! To recur to more

courtly matters.— ln the small parlour of "The Grange," where

Brahum lived and entertained so sumptuously — tho Prince of

Wales and Mrs. Fitzherbert parted for the last time. Our

neighbourhood was rich in memorials — now it is only rich in

memories. The building mania has seized upon our lanes and

chases." Where the " bird-catcher" warned off the birds from

the young gram, and the fields echoed the labourer's song, wc

hear the "click" of the stonemason's trowel, and the monotonous

"knock" of the persevering carpenter. "Essex House" has

given place to small tenements in brick and mortar; " Burleigh

House " is stared out of countenance by stucco and plaster ;

"Shaftesbury House" is the refuge of age and infancy — the

nui-very and hospital of St. Georges parish ; " The Grange" is

multiplied into villas ; Canning's house, where of old the lovely

Duchess of Gloucester resided, when the Gloucester Road was

called Honore Lane, is yielding foot by soot to the ravages of

insect architecture," if wc may so cull the dry rot, by which it

is infected ; and, to speak last of our own small domestic

troubles, the back windows of an overgrown square, that has

sprung up like a mushroom in our bright " back field," are

playing at bo-peep through our taller trees, aud looking down

with contempt upon our ancient mulberry — one of the few

remaining, said to have been planted by command of the first

James, who desired to feed silkworms in his " mild and sheltering

park at Brompton."

But I must return to the " Daily Governess."

All the winter wc could tell her approach by the plashing of

her clogs, in the wet unrepaired piece of path at the corner, a

standing disgrace to our highway inspectors — I was going to

write them " highwaymen," for they take our rates and do not

mend our ways And here she passes noiselessly, as our summer

flowers grow ; but, like them, neither unobserved vor unremembered.

Her bonnes is a coarse Dunstable ; within the lust week,

the maroon-coloured ribbons have been replaced by those of

vapour; but they were both plainly put on. The ruche beneath

is ornamented with a very little wreath of pale primroses ; the

black veil is still worn ; but a parasol (not one of those fawn-coloured,

baby-like fairy mushrooms of the present season, buta

large, full-grown parasol, two years old at the very least), has

replaced tho heavy, brown cotton umbrella, whoso weight her

thin white wrist seemed hardly able to sustain. The broderie on

her collar is coarse, but the collar sits smoothly, and is very

white; her shawl — what a useful shawl it has been! With the

assistance of a boa she seemed to think it a sufficient protection

agaiiißt last winters cold, and yet now, thrown a little open at

the throat, and with the relief of a white collar, how well it

looks ! Her dress then was merino, now it is muslin-elaine ;

her boots are exchanged for strong prunella slippers, fitting

nicely; and she generally rests a roll of music or one or two

books iv the bend of her arm, the hand of which curries the

parasol. I must not forget her brown silk bag — what odds and

ends peep out of it at times, when 'tis over-full ; shreds of

German wool; paper patterns; netting, knotting, and knitting

needles; half-a-dozen new pens, the nibs out, to avoid the risk

of iinjurory — or a round ruler; in short hH it be filled with what

it will, the bag is never empty; and yet if you could only seethe

threadbare purse within, worn out, not by money, but by

time — three permits worth of halfpence at one end, and a silver

fourpence and a shilling in the other — you would understand

that tbc daily governess is anything but rich. She is not, strictly

speaking, handsome, but she would bo so, if the weight of anxiety

that presses upon her broad, polished brow were removed. That

countenance (the thoughtless would say) wants expression — it

wants variety of expression, but the prevailing one is that of

pallid, silent resignation ; her eyes have an earnest, gentle look,

when they raise the silken curtains that veil, not their brightness,

but their sadness; and her smile, if a passer-by inquire the way,

is as gentle us her eyes. She is neither short nor tall, dark nor

fair; but her check is pale, not the pudor of absolute ill health,

for she is fortunate in being obliged to walk twice a-day through

our still green and cheerful hedge-rows; it wears the hue of

oppressed spirits. She is young, aud might be mirthful — if she

were not a Daily Governess.

She knows enough to know, that if she bad been taught a

little more of all, or of one, of the accomplishments she is

obliged to teach, she might command a higher salary ; " finish

young ladies," instead of trudging on with little children ; but

her mother is an officer's widow, and could not spend a great

deal upon one, when she hud three children to educate and send

into the world. She looks neither to the right nor to the left,

except perhaps to glance, when she gets beyond the lane, at our

church clock; but she finds sho has no need to hasten her steps

unless when her mother is ill, she is always in time. Perhaps

she casts a wistful eye towards the bookseller's placard, telling of

her greatest luxury — a new book; or at the lineudraper's, with

an undefined hope, that by the time she receives her next

month's salary she may seek a cheap Challis amongst his winter

stock, now selling off, that would do very well for summer ;

dark colours are best for the street ; ribbons do not attract her ;

she has trimmed her borne, and learnt the blessings that arise

from thrift, not extravagance.

She reaches her destination, and knocks at the door, not with

a tremulous hand, for it is practised in such indications of her

humble arrival, but with the modest certainty that she will soon

be admitted, because she is wanted. The footman hears the sound,

but does not hurry to answer the daily governess : because be

knows she is beloved by the nurse-girl, on whom sho smiles, aud

to whom she speaks kindly : and the girls home aud parents are

far in Cumberland. The daily governess can appreciate even

the nurse girl's attention. The children she has to instruct

in this presuming mansion, are wayward aud rude ; but they are

nevertheless affectionate, and would be what are called " good''

if they were properly managed '• out of school hours ;" as it is,

they have too much of their own way, and their mamma "rates"

the daily governess before them, for their faults.

Miss Grey, you must be firm and determined ; Gertrude

complains of her eyes. So, if you could manage to stay aud

teach her lessons, after three, for about bids an hour, to prevent

her poring over her book, she could repeat them the next morning.

Poor darling ! wc must take care of her eyes."

The daily governess knows, if she perform this daily duty, sho

will lose a music pupil, to whom she gives a lesson, commencing

at half-past three, for the sum of one and sixpence ; but this

family live in a large house, and have promised to recommend

her. The daily governess must pay the usual slave-tribute for

patronage.

Miss Grey, it will not do to teach dancing, without doing

tho figures yourself very often before the children."

Miss Grey, Alicia's shoulders are growing round."

Miss Grey, Alfred must not ink his tickets."

Miss Grey, poor little Louisa cannot finish the urn-stand ;

pray take it home and finish it for her."

Poor Miss Grey I her patience, gentleness, and all she has

really done to improve those children, remains unapproved ; but

the faults of her eleven rise trumpet-tongued against her, when in

reality she is in no way to blame ; the affections aud tenderness

which her gentle heart yearns to bestow, is thrown back upon

her. She is a daily governess I What sympathies can they

have in common ?

It was nine when she knocked at the door — it is now three.

She was asked to take something at one, and she had a morsel of

bread with a glass of milk and water. She remains with Miss

Gertrude until half-past three, aud then walks half a mile further

to give an eighteen penny music lesson. She is in excellent spirits

when it is over, for they will wait the extra time, rather than

change. She says " they are very good." Why, the mother of

the musical young lady knows she could not get such another

lesson from any other teacher for less than half-a-crown. This

is a busy day, it is half-past six, and the daily governess has not

yet returned.

She had another lesson to give iv tbc same street — not a music-lesson,

though the echo of " one, two, three," in her bead seemed

for eternity, but to read English for an hour with a young French

lady, who met her at the door, kissed her on both cheeks, made

her drink a cup of coffee — real coffee — and eat a biscuit, and then

sat patiently " doing her translation" into such pretty nondescript

English, that the daily governess chid and smiled until

a peut of merry and mingled laughter rang through the room !

but the laugh was succeeded on the part of the governess, by

such weariness, that the kind foreigner would have detained her

longer, uot to read, but to rest, were it not that she told her.

her mother would be uneasy ; and then the lady, with a pretty

air of mystery, opened her desk, and held up before her eyes a

concert ticket — a real concert ticket— for two ;it was to be her's,

and would enable her and her mother to go together the next

evening, which they would be sure to do, for tomorrow would

not be a busy day, and they could walk there very well, and

leave their bonnets at the entrance, or slide them off, and let

them hang down by their sides — " so" — no one would notice

them. Oh, it would be such pleasure — such dear pleasure ! to

hear sweet music, and her mother was so fond of music, her

mother would enjoy it so much, she was very — very grateful.

The French lady regretted that the distance was so great. The

daily governess said, they would not mid that ; they were

only a mile and a half from Hyde Park Corner — her mother could

walk that — and then an eighteen drive would bring them to

the concert-rooms. Those fly-cabs were so respectable and convenient

— it would be charming ; — she did not mid fatigue ; and

Miss Grey commenced her return with a quick step and a flushed

check. She thought, poor thing ! though she had been teaching

since nine, and it was now nearly half-post six — she thought it

had been a very happy day. As she walked rather quickly,

some impertinent fellows attempted to peep under her borne ;

but she poked the big parasol very low at that side, and walked

on; if the attempt was repeated, her check flushed, her heart

beat more quickly, aud her eyes filled with tears. Tien, indeed,

she felt she had no one to protect lier.

She stopped at a shop at Lowness Terrace, where black silk

and white kid gloves are only a shilling a pair. She feared they

were not very good, uot as good as at Challacombes', but then

they were very cheap, and she fidgeted her purse nearly out of

the bag — then paused, and considered a moment or two; so

much consideration for a single shilling ! Those only who work

for a shilling know how necessary it is to ponder how it should

be Spent. She looked through the window at them — hesitated,

and walked on; perhaps she will wait till her mother is with

her, the following evening, and then she cau choose for her.

What her mother chooses is always best. She has passed our

gate. She is evidently very much fatigued, her steps lag

heavily; she lodges with her mother in that little cottage, for

tho benefit of the soft pure air of good old Brompton. And now

you see the widow's cap through the young sterns and leaves of

the jessamine. The daily governess quickens her step ; — Bhe

pulls from her bosom tho concert ticket ; and after she has

received her mother's kiss — before her mother's hands can untie

her bonnet — she holds it up before her ! Oh, how very much a

little drop of innocent pleasure sweetens the cup of toil ! Drink

of it, long, and deeply, it will not become bitter on the tongue,

nor evil to the heart.

A daily governess has, at least, her evenings. Sometimes, not

often, a friend drops in. To-night our patient, good, industrious

girl has thrust her pretty swollen feet into her mother's easy

shoes; and while the widow reads, or pours out their frugal tea.

she is quilling, or snipping, or arranging something white — a

little finery for " tomorrow" evening. And now the work and

I looks are put by — the caudle Snuffed — they read and pray— not

long, but fervently, and then to bed, despite the labour, which,

fair reader, you shudder even to think upon. The daily governess

sleeps soundly, and will awake as sweet, as patient, and as

gentle — and it may be, a trifle more cheerful, — tomorrow, than

she was 

MOTHER.

SBSfity n,? see only I saw the Lady Elizabeth Montague

fcj^^l-« angry ; aud then it appeared but a slight thing

£«oi^rs *high excited her displeasure. She had been called

JTSs-ft. '-, j. Q L on don on some business of moment, and the

housekeeper took advantage of the opportunity to dust and

arrange the favourite sitting-room. The crimson velvet curtains

were withdrawn from their golden bands, and the rich carpet,

that had imbedded in its luxuriance many a silk-clad foot, was

subjected to the rude brushes of two experienced housemaids.

Nor was this all — the pictures were taken down, aud not a few

spiders-webs dislodged from the gilt cornice and the curious

carvings of the frame-work that encircled the apartment In

replacing the pictures, the housekeeper unfortunately displaced

two miniatures, which had hung the one over the other ; they

were portraits, so alike in age, features, colour, and size, that it

required a quick memory to call to mid that one of there had

worn powder : I have since learned, that the frame of the

powdered " picture was of pure gold, that of the other only

gilt. The one represented a gentleman of some two or three and

twenty years old, of a handsome and gracious countenance, with

deep blue eyes, and an expanded brow. Perhaps there might

have been a more daring look portrayed in the features of the

other ; but it may lie that my imagination conjured up this

character, after hearing the histories of both. They had hung,

as I have said, one above the other, in a little niche, appropriated

to there alone; and very pretty they looked — and so

thought the housekeeper, good soul ! After she had re-arranged

them.

My lady will never know they have been touched," she said

to me ; " but, poor dear lady, I don't think she sees the dust as

clearly as she used forty years ago, when first she came here,

the most beautiful bride that ever the sun shone upon — it's

u great blessing to have good eye-sight ! and if I don't need it,

nobody does, that has so many trooping hussies to look aster. —

But, us I live, here's my lady carriage ! — well, if ever ! — but

all's right — I guess I should have got it if the miniatures had

not been in their places."

And away hurried Mistress Margery Rolls, at the head of the

household, to welcome home her mistress. Presently, I saw the

Lady Elizabeth descend the steps of her old-fashioned carriage.

A footman, upon whose arm she rested, remained uncovered as

she entered the great ball. I fancied her step was feeble, yet it

abated nothing of tho proud dignity of her carriage; and, in

another instant, her voice sounded along the gallery leading to

the crimson room, as her favourite sitting-chamber was called.

After exchanging a brief, but kind, salvation with one who

believes she held much of the favour of this extraordinary

woman, her eye rested on the miniatures.

Who has done this ? " she inquired. " Who has presumed todo

this? " The housekeeper, trembling — for it was her lady

looks more than her words that alarmed her — confessed something

touching " dust and dusting." Lady Elizabeth heeded

nothing of her confession, but, with her own hands, which

vibrated with agitation to her fingers ends, altered the position

of the miniatures, placing the one with powder above the other.

She then left the apartment, and I aid not see her again until

the hour of dinner.

There wus something so elevated and noble in all the arrangements

of Montague House, that it invariably called up the

visions of those days when the baronial hospitality of England

formed the theme of harp and song : the magnificent broad

oaken staircase, dimly lighted by deep arched windows of coloured

glass ; the dense dull figures, that seemed to smile grimly from

their ancient frames, as you descended or ascended the polished

stairs ; the long intricate galleries, leading from right to left,

intersected with nooks, and crossings, and passages, that could

not fail to perplex ; the superb hangings of the various sleeping

apartments, that, flashed upon you through the opening doors —

some of curiously wrought green velvet patterns, on a white

satin ground, which the tint of years had sobered, but not

destroyed — others of crimson, lined with yellow, the draperies

folding round the pillars of some ancient bed, rich iv white and

gold relief ; the ancient chapel, where the devotions of the noble

Montagues of many a by-gone century had been strangely

mingled with the pomps aud vanities of this world — the knee, it

is true, knelt at the altar, but the hand and eye traced the

armorial bearings, in all their intricate and mysterious emblazon-kings,

in the very place where such bravery should be all forgotten

— the bauuer and the flag hung mouldering from the

walls — and the moth sound a dwelling and a feast, within the

time-honoured hassocks, where royalty, if report speaks true, had

often prayed ; then the superb, and yet grave-looking, rooms,

leading to each other, the windows opening into a park, where

wool and water, hill and dale, vied to take from England its

reproach of insipidity — the towering walls, hung with the arts

of kingdoms — the pure, and almost embodied, portraits of Vandyke,

Lely, Reynolds, and the gentlemanly Lawrence, and the

placid landscapes of Gainsborough, nil claiming attention, and

demanding tribute from the eye and heart ; the cold but magnificent

sculpture, standing out, I had almost said, iv native

grandeur, and rebuking, in its silent dignity, tbc thoughts that

wander to less holy things ; the library, stored to the very ceiling

with books, those moral treasures of tho world, that would

fain teach us the sweets of wisdom without giving us to taste of

the bitter witters of experience ; and then the troops of venerable

domestics, silent of foot and lip, attentive both with eye and ear.

The Lady Elizabeth herself — the great, the rich, the noble —

or, better still, as she was emphatically called by her people — the

good Lady Elizabeth — was in admirable keeping with Montague

House. At the time I tell of, she had completed her sixtieth

birth-day. She was tall of stature, aud what her figure wanted

in roundness was concealed by the ample folds of her black satin

robe, which opened down the front, over a petticoat of the same

material ; her sleeves were confined at tho elbows by cordons of

bullion, and the lower portion was open half-way up the arm,

so that a full inner sleeve of most exquisite cambric was seen

descending to the hand, where it was terminated by a frill of the

richest lace ; her cap was ever of peculiar fashion, and yet, from

the fact of its being so adapted to her age and countenance, it

excited no observation, except in commendation of its fitness — it

was shaped something like the head-dress of Mary Stuart, but a

band of crimped crape encircle'! the under portion of her potius

her own hair, of a perfect whiteness, separated over

a high but wrinkled brow ; aud she wore no ornament, except a

chain of the finest gold, united at intervals by stars of diamonds,

rivalling all I had ever seen in brilliancy and quality. It was

a noble sight to see that aged lady rise from the head of her

table, after dealing forth hospitality to some of the greatest in

tbc land, and sweep through troops of ancient servitors, accompanied

by youth, and love, aud beauty, across her marble and

golden halls — the dispenser of good and of happiness to all

around her.

You ask, " Was not she happy ? "

She was a widow — and childless ! "

• » * » »

*•*•••

You now know," continued Lady Elizabeth, " why I replaced

the miniatures ; and this manuscript will convince you that, as

nil is not gold that glitters, so all is not happiness that smiles.

You say, you thought me the most enviable person you ever

knew ; — decide if such be the case, when you have read what

I have written. But never look upon human nature without

calling to mid a beautiful fable, the spirit of which I remember,

though its words have escaped my memory. Jupiter once gave

permission to a number of repining mortals to lay down their

troubles, provided they agreed to hear each the misfortune of

his neighbour: to this they joyfully consented; but when they

came to weigh and consider the nature of the new burdens, they

begged that Jove would permit them to return their own. —

Lady Elizabeth Montague," continued the lady, " never intends

to appear before the world as the author of her own life ; but

you are a professed studier of human nature — it is the book you

love to read — and, if not read deeply, it is a question with me,

whether it ought to be perused vt all. I have written all I suffered

— and much that I thought — during a long half-century.

I should have suffered less, had I not inherited, with vast possessions,

the distinguishing characteristic of my race " — the old

lady drew herself up with the dignity of an empress, who would

use earth as a footstool — " I was proud ! "

I saw that pride had, indeed, been her besetting sin, for there

was a feeling of unequalled pride iv the confession : and, hardly

knowing what to say, I observed, "It was the sin by which

angels fell." Lady Elizabeth turned the light of her flashing eye

upon me ; for a moment it gleamed with unusual brightness,

and a smile of mingled scorn and triumph flitted over her

aristocratic features ; but the flashing of her eye quenched

within its own deep socket, and tho smile faded, as, pressing my

nora with her long thin fingers, she replied, " And the sin thy

which devils triumphed."

The manuscript wis written in a fair Italian hand — stiff aud

formal, but exact and equal in its proportions. I perused it to

the end with an interest which only the real occurrences of life

can excite.

»••••*

I was the sole child of a proud and noble family, branches

of which had intermarried, at different periods, not only into

many royal continental families, but had mingled hand aud

blood with the Tutors, the Plantagenet, and the unfortunate

House of Stuart My mother never forgave either herself or me

for that I was born a female, when a heir wus so much more desired :

but my father — my beloved father ! — loved me for myself; and

he loved me, too, because, unlike my mother, I delighted in the

pursuits he cherished.

My mother's pride wus of the abstract and more narrow

kind : it was a small weak pride — she wus charmed at being

a countess, and vexed because, if her husband died, I could quot

be an carl ; but that wus all. She had wedded my father for

the distinction of a coronet, aud he selected her because she wus

pretty, and belonged to a family which, iv the time of the

Tutors, had been connected with ours; consequently, my father's

honour was concerned in keeping up the dignity of his relatives.

I was fashioned according to the habits of the young ladies of

my time, but readily gave in to ray father's love of heraldry and

history.

When I was fifteen, my mother died ; and I sorrowed for

her, more because England had lost a countess, than that I had

been deprived of a parent. I thought it was dreadful that wc

should be subjected to a shroud — a pall — a cofiiu ! And more

than once the question was debated within my own mid,

whether my mother was a countess in the spirit world; if she

wus not, I felt assured she would be very miserable. It must not

be inferred from this, that I was ignorant of the grand points

and principles of Christianity. Religion — the established religion

of England — was a portion of our prerogative : the chaplain

read prayers daily in our ancient and beautiful chapel, and said

grace after meals with a correctness which, in due time, entitled

horn to a rectory ; when another succeeded, who ]performed

equally well the duties of his station. A young heiress of sixteen

is seldom given to theological controversy : I had every reason

to be happy and satisfied with the dispensation of good — I knew

of no evil ; for my father hud a bountiful hand and a liberal

heart, and there was neither poverty nor went within our towns

or villages. Wc passed among our people, und blessings greeted

us on every side To the poor he was ever condescending— they

were his equals and his superiors who called horn proud. Once

only, during his life-time, I went to Court ; and though my

wealth, aud what was deemed my beauty, created a great sensation,

and the nobles of the land vied for the heiress of Montague,

yet wc returned within a month to our country halls. The

truth is, he was not there lord paramount, — in a Court crowded

with men of equal rank, and doubtless better skilled as courtiers;

he could not exist without the homage of the lip — he missed the

salutations and the deserved blessings of his tenants — and,

having trained me in a strange mixture of pride and usefulness,

he expected that I was to be totally unmindful of the adulations

aud attentions which have so many charms for a young, and not

unhandsome woman.

Offer after offer was rejected, either by my father or myself.

I liked to feel my power over hearts as well as acres ; and, I

confess, I gloried not a little in my triumphs. Yet was I neither

a flirt nor a coquette. I was too well principled for the former

too proud to condescend to the latter: and at one-and-twenty

1 remained in a state of single blessedness.

On the day I came of age, ray cousin, Edward Montague,

arrived at Montague House. He had been abroad for many

years, and wc had not met since my days of childhood. It was

in the carved hall that the dance and the festa was prepared todo

me honour. I sat on an elevated seat at the upper end, surrounded

by six young ladies of the first families in the o >-nty,

who had requested permission to act as my attendants. They

were dressed in the costume of the Court of Louis the Found

d

teeth, the period chosen by me as best calculated to display the

gorgeous and brilliant jewels of our house A tiara of diamonds

sparkled on my brow ; my zone and armlets were of the same

fashion and quality ; and tassels of the finest gold, enriched with

gems, descended from the zone to my feet. Children, habited as

tho slaves of Eastern lands, moved about the room, flinging

incense from their golden censers, and presenting the most

odorous flowers to our guests. From behind a curtain of thin

crimson silk, at the back of tho orchestra, poured forth a flood

of light which enchanted every eye ; while the artists, and

players on the most exquisite instruments, appropriately dressed,

appeared as if amid clouds tinted with the most delicate hues of

the rainbow. It was, in truth, a gorgeous scene, and one I still

love to think upon ; for there, elated by the homage of hundreds

of friends — (friends !) — my father presented my cousin, Edward

Montague, to my remembrance. He had passed, as 1 have said,

many years abroad, and, I knew, had been received with fluttering

distinctions at almost all the European courts. His person

was everywhere admired, but bis learning and chivalrous honour

claimed from all the highest consideration. From the moment

he first entered, I felt anxious to gain his good opinion, a feeling

I had never known before ; for it appeared to me as if I had

inherited the suffrages of nil mankind. ' And so,' he said, ' you

are really my little cousin Elizabeth ! Lady Elizabeth — I remember,

you were always too stately as a child to play ; now,

doubtless, you are too stately us a woman to smile.'

' The lady spares her smiles, iv pity to her slaves,' said one

of my flatterers.

I shall never forget the look of contempt thrown by my

cousin on the speaker ; I thought it perfectly uncalled for—

indeed, I wondered how any one could feel displeasure in my

presence. I spoke to Edward of the ladies of Italy — he praised

their grace, their noble yet gentle manners ; of the ladies of

France — he commended their sprightliness and freedom from

affectation ; of the German ladies — he told of their good sense

and matronly habits, of their prudence and homely virtues.

Had I talked of the Esquimaux, he would have found something

to approve ; and yet lie approved not mc. It was evident that

he debated, within his own mid, whether my jewels or myself

deserved the most admiration — his eye glanced coldly over both ;

and he spoke, notwithstanding the festivity, in a voice which fell

sadly, yet sweetly, on my ear.

I thought the halls und the company less nd less brilliant

as the evening advanced; heaviness came over all — the lights

seemed dim unto mine eyes, the music tuneless to my ears. I

sought, eagerly and earnestly, for his approbation, but he gave

it not. I went dispirited to my chamber ; and, as my maids

unclasped the coronet from my brows, I remembered the text of

Scripture : it was —

' All is vanity and vexation of spirit.'

How often since have I proved its truth i Days and weeks

passed, and Edward remained our guest, often annoying the

heiress of Montague by claiming her respect — a troublesome

feeling to one who demanded homage from all the world. I was

seated oue morning in the embrasure of one of the library

windows, when Edward, accompanied by his favourite friend, Sir

Frederick Mouton, entered, deeply engaged in conversation.

The first sentence nailed me to my seat— I had no power either

to move or speak. It was the voice of Sir Frederick.

' I only wish Lady Elizabeth paid me half the attention she

does you — I should need no further encouragement'

How the blood mounted to my cheeks! my temples throbbed

intensely ; aud I fancied they must have heard the beating of my

heart.

'You are wrong, Sir Frederick,' replied my cousin, 'you are

very wrong ; the Lady Elizabeth regards herself too much to

think of any other human being, either in the way of affection

or admiration. Charitable she is, from her love of patronage ;

beauty she possesses in a dangerous degree; wit, and much

nobleness of soul, are hers ; but. all — all overgrown by tho

rankest pride that ever had root in woman's heart ! '

' The greater, then, your triumph, fair gentleman, who have

conquered it.'

"' I deny that I have done so ; I disbelieve the possibility of

dd 2

such a triumph : but even if it were the case, could any freeborn

man submit to her caprices? No, no ! — for a gentle, a true

woman, I could live and die ; aud were Elizabeth poor, and a

trifle humble, with that elevated soul, that exquisite beauty, and

my own small but independent fortune, I would then act — with

a difference Marry, she may — an emperor, if she can get horn

but there is no room in her heart for love. Why, every day,

she sits at dinner a moving mass of jewels.'

That day I made my appearance with a white rose only in

my hair, and Edward complimented me for the first time. I resolved

to attempt a conquest, simply because I thought myself

scorned, and owns determined to be victorious. I discovered, crc

many weeks, that I bad absolutely riveted chains around my own

heart, instead of enchaining another. Bitter was my anguish ;

my proud heart felt crushed within mc. If I could have discovered

that he regarded me with the least affection, I should

have been satisfied ; but thus to be won unsought ! — it was a

dagger planted — rankling — festering — in my bosom. Bitterly

did I weep over what I considered a degradation ; when the

sudden and unanticipated death of my beloved parent brought

to light that I had both a friend and lover iv my cousin Edward.

Enough of this. Wc were married when two years of

mourning for my father had expired. Married ! — what an infinity

of meaning is comprised in these three little syllables - what a

quantity of hope aud fear, of happiness or misery, do they imply !

My husband was a Montague, so that the honours of our house

remained fresh as ever ; he was one, too, who rather increased

,han diminished the very quality he so earnestly condemned ;

for I was more proud of Edward Montagne than of either my

rii-hi-s or my ancestry. I felt myself elevated, indeed, in the

scale of moral existence, when honoured by his love : and well

I might; for a more noble, a more glorious creature never lived :

he dwelt upon the earth without being contaminated by its baseness;

his mid was a treasure house, filled with all that wus

admirable in ancient or modern times ; aud his knowledge owns

blended with a taste so refined, yet so true, that it consecrated

whatever it arranged. Nor was this all : his temper was of so

gentle a nature that the lamb might lick his hand, aud ringdoves

nestle in his bosom ; yet, being justly angered, he carried himself

with such veritable bravery, that his enemies (if, indeed, he

had any) would quail beneath the lightning of his deep blue eye.

With what a holy, yet decided, spirit would he reprove ray faults,

teaching me humility by his own example, and the wisdom of

holmes by his own life ! Obedience to horn was no task : I

looked — and looked — and loved ; loved ! — that is too cold a

phrase — may God forgive me for it — I worshipped ! — worshipped

my husband as devoutly as ever I worshipped my Creator !

Hitherto, happiness had fenced me in ou every side ; the little

1 had suffered rendered my blessings all the brighter, and still

ray joyfulness increased — for I became a mother !

Poets have written, and may write — write ou for ever — but

they never can portray, never convey even an idea, to those who

have not experienced them, what a mother's feelings are at the

first faint cry of her first-born child ! the creature of her love —

the cause of her lute agony — breathes, lives ; the infants feeble

wail is as the trumpet of hope sounding to her heart, of days —

months — ages — of happiness. She looks on the faint tracery of

its features, and discovers a beauty seen by no other eye ; she

trembles lest her embrace of love should injure its delicate limbs ;

she places it ou her husband's bosom, and, if she never prayed

before, she prays then ; what she prays she hardly knows, but

the Almighty hears, and notes her petition; and my belief is,

that, if fitting, it is always granted at such an hour. Oh ! that

a woman's prayer was ever — ' Lord, this babe is thine !do thou

what is best and meekest for it ! ' Such is the prayer of the

humble and believing Christian — such was my husband's prayer

but such, I fear me, was not mine.

Our boy grew ; and another child came— a little delicate

girl, who was enveloped in cotton, aud sheltered even from the

summer air ; but she, too, lived, and danced after butterflies on

our shaven lawn, and was a sweet soft, silent thing ; yet, when

she tossed her yellow hair from off her small aud lovely features,

it was as if a gleam of sunshine sparkled, then flitted from your

sight k proud woman exults iv her sons, but a tender father

loveth best the imploring weakness of a delicate girl. She is a

renewal of the poetry of his youth — a sort of living dream —

shadowy and trembling like a mooubenm — which he may wake

and lose in a brief moment ; - and ray Olympia was lost ! In

tbc morning she had played at our feet with her brother — she

had chased the shadows over the green turf — she hud watched

the bee collecting honey for its cell, aud had strewed the sweetest

flowers in its path, that, as she said, ' it might not work so bard'

she had done all this, and her father noted, that her voice

sounded more of joy, iv its quiet laughter, than it had ever done

before. That night his beloved, his cherished one, was a cold

corpse — she sickened and died within a few short hours. My

husband sat with her on his knees in tearless agony — for me,

I wept. You see me stern, severe, and cold — sorrow hat hung

its icicles on my heart. Ay, despite our golden pageantry, grim

Death will come — 'tis a sad truth for those who live on gold ;

and even now, I love not much to think of it — and why? There

is another text which I remember —

' It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle,

than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.'

If God had taken all my purpled state, 1 think I could have

borne it ; my heart might have rebelled, but my lips would not

have murmured — would not, as they have douc, have disturbed

the night from its allegiance to repose. Great was my pride,

and great has been my penalty. Yet, still I ask—"

Here a considerable quantity of the manuscript was effaced ;

and, if I noted right, the paper was blistered by tears. What

would she have asked ? I longed, but dreaded to inquire. I fear

me 'thus not mercy; for, though she had quailed, she had not

sunk, before sorrow ; and her lost carriage, her proud, yet

generous conduct, and, above all, the quick rich glance of her

eagle eye, recorded a spirit glorying in earthly dominion. With

how blind a zeal do wc carve out our own misery, magnifying,

by a singular and pernicious effort of human skill, the trials of

a sensitive imagination into the real miseries of life ! The trials

and troubles of this golden lady were not, however, imaginary —

they were real.

I continued.

For some time previous to the loss of my little girl, I had

observed, with breathless anxiety, a sort of morbid, dreamy habit,

in which my husband seemed often to indulge. It was too restless

to be called melancholy — too intense to be disturbed without

considerable care. I have sat for hours together, watching his

eyes fixed on vacancy, and bis lips moving occasionally in abstracted

motion : at such times, I have recalled his attention by

singing at first in a low tone, snatches of his favourite songs ;

sometimes a sentiment appeared to rivet his attention, — at

another period it was the melody that recalled his wandering

thoughts. I would often inquire what he had been thinking of;

but he invariably parried my question, and atoned for his attention

by redoubled vivacity — a vivacity which 1 well knew

was foreign to his nature. My blessed husband ! Years and

years have passed ; many of unutterable happiness. a greater

number of intense misery — misery which the shining of my

jewelled state increased a thousand fold ; for obscurity would

have softened aud concealed my sorrow, but the glare and the

glitter of situation held it up, as a light set upon a hill, to

illumine the humble as to the wretchedness of rank. Years

have, indeed, passed ; aud my hair is grey, my step feeble, ray

eyes have melted their lustre into tears, and I am an aged

woman, tottering on the brink of my ancestors' vaulted graves !

Yet, Edward, thou art with me still 1 In the deep hours of

midnight I listen to thy counsel ; thy shadow comes before mein

all the beauty of seeling and expression; the reproofs so wisely

timed that, even to my proud ears, they sounded more like

praise than censure; the gentle firmness, blending the husband

and the friend iv one ; the quiet eye — I see it now as when in

life — so still, and yet so dignified ! Never does a proud thought

grow into action, or a scornful word rise to my lip, that hit eye

comes not upon me ; and its behest is done — for the action is

repented of — the word suppressed !

Have mercy, Heaven! those are the remembrances of ray

earlier days ; but there are others of far different import I

remember after Olympia's death, how His abstraction increased,

until — but the records, the public papers, those chartered

chroniclers of whatever chances of evil — they told the news! —

they surmised upon it — the Court chattered of it — the members

of tic House that had often rung with acclamations, as his fine

voice, rolling like a flood of light, dispersed the mists from their

minds, and sent conviction to their stubborn heurta — the very

members of that House hud learned to prate of horn as 'poor

Edward Montague!' I could not understand how it was — but

the Almighty hud taken the soul before the body hud yielded to

corruption.

He knew me not — my husband looked into my face and did

not know me — he did not know his own child ! I could have

borne the reviling, the wildness, of a madman; but the helpless,

hopeless — A bus ! alas! that ever I was born!

• •



"My son — I lived for horn ! Time was gaining upon horn, as

upon us all ; but as yet be had the advantage of the destroyer

he distanced horn in the race, for his intellects were far beyond

his age : his beauty ! — but it was enough for me that he was

like his father; he was in every respect — in almost every respect

all that I could desire ; and, with all the devotedness of a

mother, 1 looked forward to what he would be hereafter ; the

staff of a noble house, the observed of all observers. I did perpetual

violence to my own feelings, by endeavouring to nip every

bud that promised a blossom of pride ; for, though my husband

had restrained the haughtiness of my nature, and though,

Heaven knows, he was himself a living illustration of what may

chance to the best aud greatest, yet I cannot now deceive myself

into the belief that restraint is conquest ; and my poor boy

inherited, to the full, his mother's pride ! His temper was

violent in the extreme; anil, with his father's affliction ever

before mine eyes, I yielded to, rather than opposed, his paroxysms

of rage. I dreaded lest I might, by contradiction, bring forward

some dormant malady that would, a second time, destroy my

hopes of everything like happiness. Time! that bane and blessing

of existence — that purveyor of good and evil, softened much

of the agony I at first endured; it taught me patience. My

husband never left his own dwelling; a separate wing of Montague

House was appropriated to his sole use ; and, though he

did not know me, he was evidently pleased and comforted by

my attentions. His wanderings! — I will not stamp upon this

silent paper : the wanderings of a maniac should be as sacred a

deposit with a wife as her husband's faults; a woman forgets what

is due to herself when she condescends to that refuge of weakness —

a confidant : a wife's bosom should be the tomb of her

husband's failings, and his character far more valuable, in her

estimation, than his life. If this be not the case, she pollutes

her marriage vow. •

I have said that time softened my sorrow — it did more — it

created new hopes. At Harrow, my son carried all before horn

his abilities were acknowledged by masters and pupils; but

with all my partiality, I saw that his temper, instead of being

improved, had acquired strength by frequent victory.

The heir of forty thousand a-year is seldom kept in order at

a public school, except by a lad who has fifty in prospective.

I learned that my son h d constantly conquered ; that be

had been first of the first ; that, in mid, he was without a competitor,

and that he had distanced all his compeers iv manly and

athletic exercises. Previous to his going to Oxford, it was

determined that he should spend some months at home; the

truth was, I feared that his health might suffer from continued

application, and I wished also to scan more distinctly into his

character.

My fears were soon aroused, and my perceptions quickened.

"Of his classical attainments I was no competent judge; but

certainly, extreme quickness often, too often, I thought, superseded

the necessity for study. He wrote verses with great

facility; but I saw, with feelings that cannot be described, that

his models were the most licentious of our English poets. Of

his taste for what he termed 'old English sports,' he gave sufficient

proof, by living more in the tennis-court and stables than

in the library or drawing-room. He heard me reprove and

reason, reason and reprove, with tolerable patience ; but, when

I kept horn longer than he deemed necessary, there grew a wild

impatience in his eye that made me shudder and be silent

' Ralph ! ' I heard horn say, one evening, to his favourite

companion, after I hud endeavoured to convince horn of the

necessity for closer study, and extorted something like n promise

of obedience to ray request, ' Ralph, do you know how I silence

Lady Elizabeth ? / tip her the madman's eye — so — and site turns

quite pales

■ " Merciful heavens ! was it possible that my son could jest vt

his father's infirmity — could make sport of his mother's feelings!

1 knew not what to do or what to say. Owns this indeed ray

son — my first-born my only oue — horn ou whom I had poured

out the full torrent of material affection — the being of my

dreams — the son of horn who was all benevolence and honourable

deeds, who abhorred deceit, and scorned all things unworthy !

.•Ufrcd's extravagance and utter heedlessness I little thought of,

for I entertained the opinion, that they are the strongest and

noblest trees which require the most pruning — but tbc expedient,

to rid himself of my reproofs by such a meant ! — When,

in the twilight of that same evening. I sat gazing from hour to

hour upon my poor senseless husband, who, silently aud with

folded arms, paced up and down the long verandah, which I had

built to enable horn to exercise in all weathers ; when I marked

his eye, still exquisite in form, but mantled by the dread disease,

shorn of its beams, yet looking towards the heavens and pointing

with childish glee to the stars us, one by one, they lest their

mysterious caverns and paced the paths allotted to there by the

great Architect of all immensity ; when, I say, I looked at that

human wreck, I trembled — I shuddered to think upon the frail

bark about to launch on the ocean of public life.

My husband had been struck by Heaven ; but my son ! — I

dreaded he would fall by earthly means — become contaminated

by the low and Wise, the prey of designing sharpers and knaves.

Feeling, I was but too well convinced, he lacked ; aud I doubted

his principles — I feared their stability ; I dreaded that tho e

Ikiiii of noble parents were subject to the self-same vices as those

in less exalted spheres ; aud, thoroughly alive to the belief that

the disgrace of the child is the completion of a parent's misery,

uo matter what her former trials may have been, I prayed, while

drops of agony burst upon my brow, that I might be spared

the dreadful results that would arise if my son should be

unworthy of his name. I brooded in silence over the disappointment

which I already felt ; I mixed still less iv society,

aud restrained my sou, perhaps too much, from the sports aud

company of youths of his own age : — perhaps, had I yielded on

minor points, and indulged horn in trifles, he might not have run

so restive in matters of greater consequence. I was mortified

that a Montague should require the same pastime as a Jones ora

Johnson ; I thought of the proud days of my own youth, and,

soured rather than humbled by the trials I had experienced, I

made but small allowance for the difference between a girl and

boy, and, I fear me, too little for the deteriorating influence of

the times. The people now-a-days look upon nobility as a thing

to be talked with— used aud abused — as if it were of themselves;

and though my sou's pride effectually prevented horn from entering

into this belief, it was of the spurious kind that too frequently

mistakes insolence for dignity; so that I was often as much

shocked at his assumption of greatness, where it was uncalled

for, as at his want of it where it was necessary to his state.

He went to Oxford ; aud I was richly complimented on my

son's beauty, wit, and talent. I was told that he excelled iv

qualifications so necessary for a true gentleman ; aud I resolved

to supply horn liberally with money, and such advice as I could

offer. Tbc knowledge of his faults was locked within my own

bosom ; and the world - our world — were loud in their applause.

Mothers, rich and titled ones, told me that they envied my happiness

in having such a son. In the masquerade of life, how

little wc know of what wc do envy !

"It was a quiet, still evening, and I had retired to my

chamber, aster being as usual with my husband, until the hour

when he went to rest. In two months more my son would be

of age ; and I looked forward to the time with an anxiety in

which none but mothers can sympathize. I knew that he had

cultivated his oratorical talents with more than usual care ; and

despite his faults, it was impossible to look upon bis youthful

demeanour without feelings of admiration. My thoughts passed

rapidly over my former years ; and, though I dreamed not of

happiness, I dreamed of triumph. Again I triumphed iv my

son, — but my dream wus disturbed at its commencement, — for

Alfred, flushed with wine, nd under strong excitement, rushed

unannounced, into my chamber.

' Mother ! ' he exclaimed ; ' mother, I must have money.

Money, and instantly, for here I cannot stay! ' I looked on horn,

overcome by terror nut anxiety, while he reiterated his demand

for money.

"Why, — why need I dwell upon it? I discovered he had

gambled. Again and again hud he indulged in this dreadful

propensity. The sums — the enormous sums — forwarded to

Oxford for his authorized wants aud desires, had been squandered

away iv profligate company. And then he came before me,

reiterating his demand for money. He had been publicly arrested

by a tradesman ; und not only that, but scorned and

scouted by his oldest companions for ; but he deserved

it full — all — not only for his want of conduct, but his want of

candour. He placed no confidence in me, — me — his mother,

who Would have died to secure his honour ; and now I was indebted

to circumstances, not. to himself, for the disclosure of his

disgrace — disgrace ! — black and bitter disgrace ! But he did not

feel it — that was but too evident. — He talked of his coming of

age putting an end to his difficulties — rendering everything

smooth — preventing his affairs spreading ; and passed from purpose

to purpose, from scheme to scheme, with a terrific rapidity.

I saw that no time was to be lost. I sound he had already been

in the hands of money-lenders ; nd that even now he would

have resorted to there, had it not been impossible for horn to

raise fresh funds without my consent. But I cared nothing for

the paltry gold. Of what value was it to me ? Aud though the

sum necessary was tremendous, I would have increased it tenfold,

to prevent tbc possibility of the distress of a Montague

gaining the public ear.

"The next morning the following paragraph met my eye in a

conspicuous part of a fashionable journal : —

' Wc understand that a certain scion of a noble house has

been coolly looked upon at Oxford, as not fulfilling his pecuniary

engagements, and neglecting his debts of honour. Wc regret this,

more particularly, as wc know it is his intention to start for the

county after his coming of age. And wc would remind those

who are most severe in their animadversions on the gentleman

iv question, that there may be, — wc do not say there is, wc only

say there may be, — a cause for his eccentricities, which wc

should deeply regret.'

Here followed immediately, but apparently without connexion,

another paragraph : —

' Wc hear the Hon. E. Montague continues in excellent

bodily health : this, under existing circumstances, is hardly to

be desired.'

"Oh for the obscurity of the Smiths, and Browns, and

Buugays ! Who would have observed their • eccentricities,' or

cared for their ' existing circumstances,' or taken the pains to

pen a paragraph to enlighten the world on their movements ?

But the vulgar love to hear and tell some new thing respecting

the ' nobility ;' — they gape for, and swallow, all the falsehoods

put forth as facts, of their frailties and their habits ; and whoever

invents most, is, consequently, the most popular.

How ray heart bled at this fresh wound, and the tearing

open of the old and rankling sore ! Merciful Heaven ! how

many wounds are inflicted on a proud heart, which the humble-minded

can never understand !

I wished — yet dreaded — that my son should see this reference

to him. I afterwards learnt that he had seen it, and

laughed it to scorn.

Whatever I might endure from repeated disappointments, I

kept my feelings to myself. How have I prayed that my husband

had been soared, to direct by bis wisdom, nd render virtue still

more lovely by example ! How have I regretted my poor buried

girl ! Alas ! alas ! I felt more deeply every hour of my existence,

the force of that text, which, like a knell, often rang

mournfully ova my heart - ' All is vanity nd vexation of spirit.'

Yet I clung tc it — to tho pomp, and pageantry, and state. I

clung to it, proudly — earnestly ; and throwing aside my retired

habits, I resolved to celebrate my son's coming of age with festivities

; not nt Montague House,' for I could not support the

idea of mirth and music iv those halls where the poor maniac

wandered ! He, whose lamp once shone so brightly ; it would

have been an insult to his affliction to bring festivity within his

dwelling. And yet it was necessary ;no Montague, for centuries,

had come of age unsung, uncelebrated. And the idea of

such an event being unrecorded, would have confirmed all the

reporte circulated — aud circulated but too truly, to his disadvantage.

Totally reckless of what wus said or thought, for

nearly a month previous lie was busied in arranging a series of

sees and amusements for his birth-day : and I endeavoured to

enter into those plans, out to argue myself into the belief, that

now he would see the error of his ways, become careful of his

society, and do as much credit to his name, by deeds of honour

nd charity, os his manners and personal beauty did to his

descent. — It was a fallacious hope !

At Alfred Park, another of our estates, were assembled the

descendants of, as well us numbers of those, who, on a former

occasion — then many years passed — assembled to celebrate my

age of womanhood. Some I had not seen for years ; and sufficient

of woman's vanity rested round my heart to make me feel

a hope that I was not so changed — so very much changed — as

many I observed around mc.

Wc are so apt to compare ourselves with what wc were a

month — a week ago, that time works its furrows without our

heeding its progress.

The dinner und its attendant ball — a bal masque, — passed off

with much noise and ; but I owns not calculated to judge

of its effects. My boo spoke nd acquitted himself so well that

while listening to the music of his voice — while contemplating

the grace of his movements, the dignity of his address, aud the

purity, both in style and sentiment, of his eloquence — I forgot

all — every thing — except that he was my son.

Agreeably to a determination I had formed, of never sleeping

from under the same roof that canopied, what I may too truly

call my husband's remains, I got into my carriage as the morning

dawned ; and, just as the horses were setting off, a letter

was thrown in at the window, which — God help me ! — I read by

the light of the blessed sun, before it was halt risen.

At the very time when the veins of my forehead were swelled

to intense torture by the perusal of that unfortunate paper, the

elite of three counties were discussing — my jewels — my equipage

— and my happiness! I laughed convulsively as this

thought crossed my mid ; for I saw the impression my son had

made on all, by the grace and suavity of his manners. Even

those (und they were not n sew) who had come prepared to dislike

horn, went away convinced that ' report was a false liar, and

that Alfred Montague was worthy of his name ! I knew all this

and more. I knew that Alfred Montague was — what I dare

not write — what I dare not, even now, though the grave has

closed over my child ; and though the far hand that urged both

by destitution nd despair, traced those k-int lines to me, in her

extreme necessity, is a crumbling skeleton in tbc consecrated

ground, which ray charity, not his justice, bestowed — I dare not,

though they are all one, think upon what I read that morning,

while the beams of the rising sun pried through my crimson

blinds ! Oh, who would wish to be a mother, if they knew a

mother's trials ! But the worst was yet to come ! I had to

endure the laugh of contempt — the sneer — when I repeated to

horn the tale of distress created by bis own depravity. 1 had to

listen to the defence of a heartless libertine, and that libertine —

my owu sou. I was forced, by ray love of justice and of mercy,

to visit the victim of bis sin, to catch the last faint sighs of her

departing breath, and to hear her pray — poor girl— that God

would bless her destroyer, and save horn from the wrath

to come 1

"Her devotion, her noble sentiments, her Christian fortitude,

her pure charity, her freedom from selfishness, rendered her, in

my estimation — poor pale departing flower that sho was — fit

mate for any noble in the land. Deception visits not the couch

of death ; it is no place for a bland smile — no refuge for pride —

no temple for extravagance ; there is a stern reality in the silent

slumber, a truth in the sobbing breath; the pall maybe of silver

or of serge, but death, the same death, is beneath both. My

little girl departed iv a quiet sleep, and woke in heaven. But

this woman was in the blossom of her beauty and her youth;

and, though the spirit may bend to the decrees of the Almighty,

yet the flesh will battle with the destroying angel — will struggle

in his grasp. I witnessed her convulsions aud her death ! It

was a small, a wretched room, and she wus nearly starved ; aud

I saw his last letter ; it lay upon her heart ; aud, cruel as it was,

she kissed it, crc she died. And in it he advised ! Now

may the Lord forgive horn, for it was a foul insult to the faithful

dove, who had left her parents' home, and braved the world,

for horn !

The church clock of the neighbouring village struck nine.

At this same hour, the previous night, I had been entranced by

his eloquence. I had argued myself into the belief that his

faults were venial ; but before me lay the proof of cool and

deliberate vice. She had suffered and sacrificed for horn her

good name ; and yet he had, when tired of his victim, refused

her even the means of existence. He did not think I would

have sought her out; he thought me all too proud for such a

course. He did not know his mother!

I cut off a tress of tbc long black hair which swept round

her like a shroud. I thought that that might move him. He

was still my child, the child of my beloved husband ; and if he

did repent — if a single tear even stood in his eye — I could

almost have forgiven hir n; for in horn, my pride, my love, was

but one feeling — he was my only child.

I directed that everything should bo done in a fitting

manner for her burial : and I was descending the narrow stairs,

when an aged man, travel-soiled aud worn, stood at the door,

and asked some questions of the woman of the house. They

were soon answered ; and the old man staggered so impetuously

jp the creaking stairs, that I was obliged to re-enter the chamfer

of death.

"He gazed for a moment upon the pale corpse ; and then,

throwing from horn his hat and stuff, knelt by the side of the

wretched bed, and buried his face in the streaming hair of what

had been his child.

Here was fresh agony for me I The father hud become

rigid and insensible, aud it was nearly an hour before he recovered

from a state of frightful torpor. He seemed ashamed of the

emotion he had betrayed. His features, though venerable, were

stern and harsh ; his brow wrinkled ; groans and tears struggled

within his bosom; yet he would not let them forth. He looked

at me — I almost thought suspiciously; — but when the woman of

the cottage named my name (for I was too near my own neighbourhood

to be concealed), tho miserable parent burst forth into

a torrent of reproaches upon mine, and mc. He told me of my

pride. He declared that on the only interview ho had ever

obtained with my son, after his daughter's destruction, he had

said that it was his mother's pride loue that prevented his

marrying ' Mary.' The afflicted man spoke iv a harsh, suppressed,

grating voice, grinding out his words, and then bursting

forth his iragor like a torrent over a rugged rock I could not

gainsay the opinion he had formed of Alfred. I could only for

myself say, that I knew nought of the attachment

He knelt again ; but it was to pronounce u curse — the curse

of a desolate parent upon my wretched son. 1 was uot too

proud to supplicate — to implore horn to restrain his imprecations.

' I will not commit murder,' he suit ; ' but I call to

God for vengeance ou the head of the destroyer. The law

of man cuuuot attach his crime, but God can, and will,

punish ! '

I trembled violently while he continued ; the cold dew

stood like hail upon my brow, — my blood curdled and crept

slowly through ray distended veins, — ray tongue clave to my

lips, as the curse of the desolate father mounted to the throne

E F.

of the Almighty. .Again I supplicated. I was mad enough to

offer gold to quell a parent's grief ! ' And you. that are a

mother, think gold can yield consolation to one bereaved like

me ! — to one, whose only child lies there ! 0 Mary, Mary, why

did you not return ! I would not have chided. Wc would

have prayed together as wc used. Wc would have mingled tears

at the footstool of the Lord, and I should once more have heard

you mvrmvr, Father ! But now, Mary, my child, you are dead,

aud lam desolate ! ' A burst of natural grief succeeded, and I

entered tny splendid equipage with a bursting heart 0, misery

unspeakable ! I knew that old man's curse was registered in

heaven, for it was deserved !

"As I entered the hall, I encountered a deputation, at that

unseasonable hour, consisting of some of the principal persons

of the county, who had come to announce to my son the

sudden death of one of the members of the shire, and to request

that he would immediately solicit the suffrages of the

electors.

"I thought I should have sunk into the earth while receiving

the compliments of those men. I crept to my chamber like a

guilty thing ; and, dismissing my attendants, desired my son's

presence. I told horn what I hud witnessed. I dared not trust

myself with reproaches, for, if I hud, they would have known

no bounds. He listened to my tale without emotion. I drew

forth the silken braid of her beautiful hair. He grew pale —

his lip quivered — his eyes filled with tears. Thank God ! he

was not entirely lost ; for, though bo expressed nothing, he was

moved. Even as a drowning mau grapples at a floating straw, so

will a mother seize at any indication of mere humanity in a

profligate child, as a symbol of returning virtue.

A sew days after this, my dear, my venerated husband, was,

by an easy and painless transition, wafted to eternity. He regained

his senses nearly two hours before his death. He called

for me ; yet, when I came, at first he knew me not He had

not traced the gradual changes in my face, and now they took

horn by surprise. Soon he was all horn elf-spoke of his illness

of Olympia's death, as things of recent date. But what was

most strange, never inquired for his son. This, in one respect,

was happy ; for he was absent, canvassing the county, soliciting

the ' most sweet voices ' of high and low, and leading the innocents

of those days to believe that he was a miracle of patriotism

and virtue. But this assumption did not pass with me ; both

my material love and my material pride had been blasted ; and

the curse, the fearful curse, still rung upon my ear.

"He behaved with tolerable decency on his father's death,

which opened afresh tbc wounds I had received when first reason

departed from him. I had often thought that I could have

better supported his death than his intellectual prostration; but

I was mistaken. The adage, ' While there is life, there is hope,'

was most true in my case. While he was before me, I hoped, in

the very jaws of despair ; but the vault was now closed, and

hope had indeed departed !

"My son was elected without opposition ; and though there

were many rumours afloat to his disadvantage, still, patronage

and popularity — and above all, gold, worked their way. There

was seldom more rioting, or more excess, committed in the

neighbouring town, than on the day when he was declared

representative of the county.

I was sick at heart, and happy that my husband's recent

death afforded sufficient reason for my remaining in strict seclusion.

One of the windows of my chamber overlooked the park

gates, and as the shouts of the half-drunken electors came

madly on the air, I glanced for an instant over the seene — it was

no delusion — there stood 'Mary's' father, leaning, like Jacob of

old, on the 'top of his staff,' his eye fixed upon my window,

while a smile of scorn and contempt curved his chiselled lip, and

lighted his hollow eye with an expression most hard to bear. I

was riveted to the spot. Some fools among the crowd espied

me, and called for ' three cheers for the Noble Lucy Elizabeth.'

How I hated popularity! I hastened from the window, but yet

continued long enough to see the old man lift his hat, in

E e 2

mockery, from bis head, while his hair streamed in the wind like

the pennon of a phantom ship.

«

»

»

•

I remained too proud (my foes would say) to permit the

world to know that any difference existed between my son and

myself. He had now entered fully upon his political career ;

and though the party his ancestors, for a series of years, had

invariably supported, were then out of power, still his eloquence

commanded attention, nd his steadiness to his friends,

respect

The dignity of political consistency was then appreciated as

it ought to be. Men — or things called men — were not whirled

about by every blast of interest or wind of doctrine, to serve or

bow to the mania of ill-grounded opinion. It was something to

be a statesman in those days — I will not say what it is now,

because political discussions are opposed to both the delicacy

and dignity of a well born woman. Enough for her that sho

venerates the Church and honours the King. This will sufficiently

exercise her love and faith — a woman's best and dearest

qualities. 'At least,' I argued with myself, 'the world knows

nought of what so rankles in my heart, and even if it did '

Alfred Montague was dressed after, courted, flattered, worshipped.

How little is the world acquainted with its idols— how

little do wc know what wc admire I Wc imagine a deity, clothe

it with our fancy, then fix upon some living temple for our

creation to inhabit,, and call it ' perfection.' Yet was I not insensible

to the homage paid to my son. Next to deserving, there

is nothing so sweet us receiving, praise ; though I knew his

moral hollowness, I clung to the belief that he was politically

honest. And were it not for that old man's curse, I would have

hoped — ay, hoped-for horn for ever ! What a blessed thing it is

for humanity, that hope, like the fabled Phoenix, springs anew

from its own ashes !

I was one morning startled by the intelligence that Lord

L wished to see me immediately. I well knew this sudden

visit boded no good. He thought my son was at Montague

House. He was told so by his servants in town. Three nights

he had been absent, from the House, when questions interesting

to his constituents were debated. He was looked for everywhere,

and certain rumours bad aroused Lord L , who, from an old

friendship subsisting between our families, us well as for other

motives, watched my son's career with as much anxiety as if he

had been his own. He came to me to inquire if he were wavering.

I said I would stake my life ou his integrity. He shook

his head.

I ordered ray carriage, resolved to find my sou, and know

the truth at once. Had the party his father and all his family

so long supported been in power, I could have forgiven his

defalcation, but to desert their cause when his support was

needed 1 Memory whispered that he had deserted a once dear

object, when most she wanted his assistance. Ay, but his political

honour, his fare, the disgrace !

I arrived at four o'clock at Alfred Park. I learned there

that my son had only lest about an hour for town. ' Was anyone

with horn ? ' ' Yes, it was one of the leading members of the

administration.'

"My brain burned. I ordered fresh horses — post horses, and,

without alighting, proceeded to London. It was night as wc

drove past Hyde Park Corner, and the rain pattered heavily

against the carriage windows ; the ponderous knocker echoed

through the aristocratic silence of St. James's Square.

' Mr. Montague had just gone down to the House. He had

not set off three minutes.'

' Was any one with horn ? '

' Yes ; the same cabinet minister who had been with horn at

Alfred Park!'

I drove to the House of Commons, and tis informed by the

usher that Mr. Montague hud not arrived, but that he doubtless

soon would, as a very important motion was to be brought on by

the opposition.

While I was yet speaking, Alfred would have passed. 1

believe he did not know mc. He said he did not I went with

horn into one of the ante-rooms, and at once charged horn with

dishonour aud desertion. He endeavoured to avoid reply, and

stammered forth something about change of times and prejudices,

and all the jargon of those who find it convenient to desert their

friends in their necessities. I argued, I entreated, I endeavoured

to arouse his pride. I spoke to horn of his father, of his family.

I implored his attention. I pictured his falsehood, the scorn of

his partisans, the contempt of his new friends. I talked of the

virtues of those of ancient days, who had died to uphold the

welfare of their country. I reminded horn of the time when he

used to sit upon my knee, and read of the heroes of old, whose

religion was patriotism. I wept — positively wept — burning,

sealing tears, into his bosom. And he promised — swore by all

that was sacred iv heaven and earth — that he would not swerve

from his old party.

I met Lord L , and told horn of my triumph. Nor was

this all. I determined to ascend to the ventilator, and there

exult in the disappointment of that ' dog in office,' who had

tempted horn to disgrace. There were a good many ladies iv

that elevated pest-room ; but they made way for me, aud I was

stationed on the self-same spot, where, many years before, I had

often listened to the sound — I may truly call it 'music' — of his

father's voice. I know not who spoke, nor what was said. I only

know how fatally I distinguished one person — one event

My son entered, in a state of intoxication, with his new

• leader,' took a seat behind the treasury bench, and, not satisfied

with silent disgrace, spoke, aye, spoke (would that he had been

born dumb !) against the principles of his ancestors. He spoke

as well as he could speak under such circumstances, for his

desertion and his intoxication were evident to the whole House.

Groans from one side, and a species of half-applause from his

new friends, were bis reward — the only reward he obtained ; for

before the ratification of the appointment he was to receive as

the recompence of his apostacy, his party went out of power, aud

Lord L , our old and valued friend, was appointed premier.

' I regret, dear Lady Elizabeth,' said this excellent man tome,

' that I cannot do as I would desire for your son.'

' Sir,' I replied, ' the man who is once untrue to his party,

should never again be trusted. I desire none of my country's

privileges for tho unworthy scion of our once noble house.'

As I am a born and living lady, I felt ashamed to return to

Montague House. What could I say to the electors ? How could

I look, or speak, or act ? Was I not an apostate's mother ? Was

not the finger of scorn everywhere pointed at ' Montague, the

fool and the betrayer?' Was uot the county in an uproar? Was

he not obliged to accept the ' Chiltern Hundreds ? ' Did not the

papers surfeit with lampoons, and the print shops with caricatures

? And were there not many, friends they called themselves,

who dared to send me those symbols of his disgrace, expressing

their concern — their pity even — at ' what had occurred.'

My grief was augmented, my degradation made more complete,

by the contrast, so often forced upon me, of my son with

my husband ; the one, all probity, virtue, bravery, and soul-honour;

the other, lost to all the loftier principles of nature, and

utterly unworthy the high order to which he belonged.

In the midst of all these realities, would come the remembrance

of that poor, pale, skeleton girl, and her father's curse

ringing in mine ears. And then, because of his unpopularity,

the ' Oxford business became the subject of county animadversion

; — and — I went to Italy. .

Let no one desire children — let no one wish to have their

quiver filled with those living arrows. I shall die childless — asa

punishment for my pride. If great was my sin, great has been

my tribulation.

My son, too, went abroad, to blot out the memory of past

offences by the committal of fresh faults : — and one night, at

Naples, he was borne into my palazzo, killed, like a dog, in the

streets, by some villain's stiletto, in a drunken brawl — the last

of his line: — a creature of talent, of beauty, of extraordinary

powers, yet wanting in those requisites which, I have observed,

are often granted to those of much commoner capacity.

It was night, and I heard the sound of many voices in the

dissonant tones of drunkenness beneath my palace windows —

and his voice among the rresandt — and a scuffle, and then all was

still. Suddenly, a rush of men, a glare of lights, and my poor,

erring, sinful son, lay on the marble floor, the red blood oozing

to my feet; nd I kissed bis lips, his brow, his cheek — for, oh,

was he not ray child !

For several days I knew not what they did to horn or me ;

but one night I heard a noise of nails and screws — and then it

censed — aud the knowledge of the dread reality was with mc.

And when they slept, I stole into his chamber — tbc attendants

there slept also — and the coffin was fastened down, covered with

black velvet, decked with the solemn magnificence of woe. I

knew tint there he was at rest Rest ! — did I say rest ? God

grant it ! How blessed is repose after this world's turmoil !

Now Heaven shield me from superstition ! After I had

remained awhile over that dismal sight a thin aud vapoury

cloud arose at the coffin's foot ; grey it was, as a mountain mist

and clear, for I saw the tapers burning through it, and tho

sleeping watchers in their repose. But there it stayed, gradually

moulded by some unseen power, into the semblance of a human

being, undefined, nd vet distinct ; it was a fearful creation,

towering to the vaulted roof — a bloodless, colourless thing —

fading, yet remaining, to my sight. Aud — Almighty Powers !

crc it vanished, it assumed the form aud semblance of poor

Mary's father I

This wus no dream. Alas ! I was but too awake to

misery 1 "

Here was another break in this " Tale of Woman's Trials," and

I was thankful for it; for I had read enough of her misfortunes

many of which would not, perhaps, have happened to one less

proud. I knew the rest; for I had often heard, that, ou her

return from Italy, it was seared that her reason had been impaired

by the apostasy and death of her sou. She never spoke

of horn ; hardly ever alluded to " the past ;" and though neither

the present nor the future seemed to have any hope for her, they

were more endurable than the memory of her life. She was

unlike any of her associates; stately and cold, yet much given

to the noblest acts of charity — a charity which usually concealed

the giver from the receiver. I often think of her as a beneficent

and glorious relic of the olden time, and a living proof that no

situation, however exalted, can shield us from the ills and turmoils

of this state of existence, in which wc are doomed to work

our pilgrimage to another and a different world, where " sorrow

aud sighing shall be no more."

THE YOUNG PERSON.

any circumstances, "the young person" would

t £}-, ]*fl\!9 have interested me much. She is of the middle size,

Oyaiip/j slight and well-proportioned; her features are perfect

•SE»f*^*s, in form, but wanting the moral development which

freedom of thought and action gives to every suce ; lies have

been tutored into subjection, consequently their invariable expression

is that of patient, self-denying endurance. I have

sometimes observed a smile relax her well-formed movith, but it

wus always followed by u half-born sigh ; to sigh outright would

be a luxury " the young pc son " does uot dream of.

I was going to write as I feel, and cull "the young person "

my young friend ; but the lady who considers her her own

especial property would never recognise her by that name. " The

young person"' then, moves so silently in, out, and about, that

you never know when or how she comes or goes. She is never

missed or inquired for, unless she is wanted ; never considered asa

being endowed with reason and feeling, except when her reason

and feeling ate necessary to the comforts and convenience of any

individual of the dwelling — save herself.

The mistress looks upon her as a necessary evil ; the master

pulls off his coat and shoes while she is in the room ; the children

torment her, though they cannot help loving the thing they

tease ; tho servants consider her a spy, und hold her up to contempt,

because she wears '■ cast-clothes ; " the lap-dog snarls if

she puts her soot on the hearth-rug; perhaps the old house-dog

is the only living thing that sympathises with her ; his services,

os well as hers, are forgotten ; and the creature licks her haud ;

aud while she " does up " the housekeeper's caps, sits with his head

in her lap, aud his almost sightless eyes fixed on her plaintive face.

You may recognise this " young person " in the street by her

painful anxiety not to he observed, and to keep out of everybody's

way; by her manifest desire to get whatever business she

has on hand performed as quickly us possible. Her dress has so

evidently seen better days, that you know she never had it when

it was new. Her gloves have been carefully mended ; and if the

wind blows, you perceive that her stockings are darned above

the shoe. The trimmings on her borne are faded; aud it always

happens that iv summer " the young person " wears something belonging

to the past season ; while, in winter, instead of cloths, and

furs, and velvets, she trembles iv washed outshines and forwards.

Shop-boys and attorneys' clerks look under her borne as she

passes, aud because she is alone, deem her a fit object for insult;

but high-born gentlemen see an unprotected woman, and therefore

consider her entitled to respect. The spirit of chivalry is

not yet dead in England.

My particular specimen of this no-class, and yet numerous

body, belongs to a family of consideration; consequently there

is an air of humble dignity about her, which both fits and unfits

her for her situation. It must not be imagined that only the rich

and prosperous permit " young persons," like her whom I so

frequently think of, to move within their orbit ; you see

them in all grades of society, but, os I have said, acknowledged

by none.

The green grocer down the lane has oue — a slip-shod, soiled-looking

girl, with tawny plaits hanging down her cheeks, aud tied

by bits of black strings, that have not been untied for a week.

Is that girl your daughter, Mra. Green ? "

Oh, la ! no, ma'am ; my daughter's at the pianar, with Miss

Grubb, the butcher's niece."

Your servant, then ? "

No, ma'am ; my servant never waits in the shop ; she's only

a 'young person,' — a ' young person Mr. Green likes me to have;

nothing, ma'am, but a 'young person'"

Probably in this sphere, as well as in other spheres of life, that

hapless, helpless thing — a poor relation. Dressmakers invariably

designate their pupils as " young persons ; " and upon them

all faults are placed. " I was not so fortunate, ma'am, as to take

your pattern myself, and my foreman was ill ; so I sent a

young person on whom I thought I could depend, but, oh dear ! "

and then tbc " young person," some loue and lovely girl, who

has had but little opportunity as yet to learn how to " take a

pattern," and who must be a slave until her talent enables her

in her turn to become a tyrant, is sent for, aud scolded, aud insulted,

until you forget the ill-fit in compassion to " the

young person's " t ears

The governess to a family of the middle rank of society is

sometimes happily circumstanced — that middle class in England

has made a rapid stride in mental improvement during the last

ten years ; its mid has enlarged, its prejudices have decreased,

it has gained an addition of true dignity ; a little more, and it

will uot only be able to stand alone, but to walk alone : whereto

— is a matter I leave wiser heads than mine to determine ;

in that class a governess is usually very well treated, but a

young person " is there almost a^i badly off as in any other

grade of society. She is with it, but not of it ; if she is asked to

sing, the men of tho family talk louder than they did when she

was silent. She is expected to refuse jelly if there is but one

shape on the table ; to prefer cold meat to hot ; aud drumsticks

to wings ; to laugh at the old gentleman's jokes, aud never to

dress like the young ladies — her hair I mean ; of count she has

no opportunity of wearing the same sort of clothes. She never

dances but when required to make up a set ; aud it is an understood

thing that when visitors come in, she is to go out Fortunately

for herself, she is seldom of so refined a nature as the

"young person " of whom I have already Bpokcn ; every other

heart has its green spots upon which memory lingers — the ploughshare

and the harrow have passed over hers.

I paid a visit the other morning where one of these "young

persons" was sometimes seen dusting the ornaments, or copying

music — nobody ever heard her play. The family consists of

two daughters and a mother ; a rich cousin, " cousin Edward,"

was an occasional visitor — the betrothed, it was whispered, of

the elder of the young ladies. The footman looked perplexed ashe

opened the drawing-room door, and there was a painful flutter

in mamma's manner while she desired " John " to tell the young

ladies who their visitor was.

"You are a neighbour, and must have heard the news, of course."

No, I have heard no news — I am a bad newsmonger."

I really did not think the world was so wicked as it is," she

commenced. " You knew that ' young person ? ' "

'■ I have caught a glimpse of a young lady."

My dear madam, she was no young lady, she was only a

'young person ;' the fact of it was, having her in the house at

all was an indiscretion."

Wc both paused, and I began examining the trimming of my

handkerchief, for the observation was " peculiar."

"Oh! nothing disgraceful — but not a stiver in the world

had she."

Her eyes were fine ! "

"Ah!" she exclaimed, spitefully; "she was clear-sighted

enough, not that wc care at all about it ; girls with ten thousand

pounds each and expectations, have no need to go a-begging —

only for the honour of the family, one does not like those sort of

things to happen, and if his poor dear father could only look out

of his grave and see — "

See what ! " I inquired.

"Why see his son, cousin Edward, married to a 'young

person ! ' "

I certainly rejoiced at this poor girls good fortune, which

made me think, still more, of my too refined and susceptible

favourite, whose lot has been far differently cast A lady-maid

without the salary or the credit, amanuensis aud reader, winder

and worker of silks — to all appearance a mere automaton ; yet

gifted with a heart that will throb, a head that will ache — with

knowledge and memory :- memory, the joy of the happy ; but!

oh, what was memory to her, the once cherished bird of those,

whose eyes filled with love, whenever they named her name !

When she is ill, and unable to rise from her bed ; then, indeed,

thoughts, like dreams, so crowd upon her, that for a time they

bring back scenes and voices - gone from her for ever — here.

Her young father, pale from study and fatigue, the curate of a

large parish, teaching her, his cherished one, that learning, and

that love, which is often rather a bane than a blessing to woman.

A little music, a little French, some dancing, and a very little

Italian, and she might have been a governess, finished young

ladies in what she herself did not understand. But why did her

father teach her the uncompromising dignity of truth ? Why

call things by those plain, unvarnished names of vice and virtue?

Why draw the line between right and wrong with so firm a hand

that she never could — never did — mistake the one for the other?

Truly, that father must have been a man of most unworldly

mid. And so be was ; for iv addition to this, he taught her

the exceeding beauty in woman, of a submissive spirit. He

taught it so weel, that, looking clearly and steadily beyond this

world — its gauds, its paltry, unworthy ambitions, its child-like

pageants, its gilded, yet decaying dross ; looking not only above

and beyond these, but beyond and above death and the grave —

she, "the young person," in her lonely attic, is a happier, and far

holier creature — oh ! a thousand times — than the proud baroness

she serves. When she recovers, and is able to come down again,

she is very grateful for every look and word of kindness. She

bears harshness at all times like a heroine, but tenderness overpowers

her. Speak to her kindly, and tears overflow her cheeks

I think she is paler, more shadowy than ever, her eyes are bright,

and there is a bright pink spot on either check, which bodes no

good. And yet I never saw her look so happy as she did last

Sunday evening as I came out of church. She was reading an

inscription on a tomb-stone, setting forth, that the girl who was

buried there had died young. " What a sweet quiet spot it is !"

she said, looking round ; " how very tranquil ! — I should bo like

to be buried under that humble willow-tree, though I shall have

no choice — have no one to choose for me ! "

How glorious it is to see the power of mid overcoming all

other influences ; to witness the triumph of faith, to feel assured

that no worldly circumstances can change or subdue the Soul !

Nobody could dream of making the " young person " a heroine ;

but she is something better. When she reached the end of the

church avenue, she turned to look back — the setting sun shone

full upon her face, and it seemed bright as that of an angel. She

will soon be one — I am sure of that.

"BEAR AND FORBEAR."

PART THE FIRST.

SIJSjfeHjtOSEPH, my dear," said Mrs. Smith to her husband,

tmBJ^L replacing her watch; Mr. Smith was reading in a

feajjjCTi&p ver 7 indolent-looking lounging chair, and took ii"

notice whatever of the tender epithet that so lovingly

glided from his fair lady lips.

My love," she said, and now a delicate ear could distinguish

that her voie, was raised a semitone higher than it was when

toe said "my dear ; " yet still Mr. Smith made no reply, though

he wielded the paper-knife to accelerate his studies.

Mrs. Smith — Mrs. Joseph Smith, I should say — was as pretty

and pettish a little lady as could be found between Hyde Park

Corner aud the noisy end of Sloane Street ; and Mr. Joseph

Smith was as dreamy and absent in mid and habits as his lady

was irritable, " fussy," and particular. He wus very absent,

sometimes mistaking his wife's borne for his own hat — putting

a white waistcoat over a black one — remembering everything, in

fact, that ought to be forgotten, aud forgetting everything that

ought to be remembered — building castles iv the air, aud paying

no attention, that he could possibly avoid, to the earthly castle

(a gaily-furnished house) in which they resided. He was fond

of reading, and fancied he understood moral philosophy.

"Joseph," said Mrs Smith, and her voice was now so decidedly

elevated, that the little spaniel, who was pretending to sleep ou

the hearth-rug, opened his eyes, yawned, and stretching himself,

walked over to his mistress, who next, in a really angry tone,

exclaimed. " Mr. Smith !" Still the render rnnde no reply; and

the lady, after darting a look of bitter scorn at the insensible

gentleman, flounced out of the room, " banging" the door, while

the little fat spaniel stood looking aster her in stupid astonishment.

Mr. Smith remained alone for about twenty minutes, quite

unconscious of his lady departure. At lost, starting suddenly

up from his book, he exclaimed, " My dear Lizzy, I have made

great moral discovery, which, if acted upon, will revolutionise

society. I cannot explain it to you just yet, but you may guess

its magnitude and importance, when I tell you it will render

mankind honest. They but are you there, my dear ? " He

walked to the buy window, where, half-shaded by the curtain,

the lady generally sat, so that she could see, as she said, her

work and the street, and whatever was going on in the room, at

the same time ; he then opened the drawing-room door, and

called " Lizzy" and " my love" repeatedly; there was no answer;

he rang the bell. "My mistress is gone out, sir," was the footman's

reply.

"J)id she leave any message for me ? " " Not that I know of, sir."

f v

That will do," said Mr. Smith ; and then he thought to

himself, " it was very strange of her to go out without saying a

word to me on the subject ; aud she knows wc had agreed to go

somewhere — I really forgot to find out where — together, aud to

be there exactly at two." He looked at his watch, and found

that, having forgotten to wind it, it did not go ; he then cost ibis

eyes on the time-piece; that, being under Mis. Smiths care, was

clicking away merrily; it was then ten minutes aster the appointed

time. " Dear me," thought Mr. Smith, '• 1 daresay she

is gone to the appointment. How very odd that she should not

have pulled me;" he repented this several times to himself, for

he was sadly perplexed at finding his wife quite out of the way

when he wanted her ; and when his habits and ideas were disturbed,

he always continued fidgety nd uncomfortable until

again chained down by reverting to some old, or commencing

some new, dream. Starting, as if from the action of a galvanic

battery, ho caused the bell to ring a peal through the house.

Tell the cook," he said to the footman, '• there are two gentlemen

to dine here at seven." " Please, sir, my mistress ordered

dinner at half past five, as she said she was going to the theatre."

"Very awkward," muttered Mr. Smith; "1 remember she

said something about that ; but I thought it was tomorrow.

However, it must be seven, und a proper dinner— fish, soup —

you understand me 1 "

About five o'clock Mis. Smith returned in high spirits ; she

had been to a delightful little concert — the engagement her

absent husband had forgotten. Her apparently unaccountable

absence had put horn out of temper. "So," he said, "you are

come back : aud really, Elizabeth, I think it was very wrong of

you to go out, and by yourself too, without saying a word tome,

particularly as wc were going to the Diorama, or some such

place, together."

Now, really, that is very cruel of you, Joseph," answered

the lady, withdrawing the check she bad held down for a kiss ;

'• I called you sour times, and you sat there like a stock or a stone,

minding me uo more than if / were a stock or a stone. I knew

my cousin would be waiting for me ;us the concert was early "

"You know very well," interrupted her husband, "you never

called mc. Now, I remember I particularly wanted to go to a

concert, aud you knew it"

You never told me so."

Psha ! " exclaimed Mr. Smith.

Mrs. Smith stamped her little foot as she rang the bell. Bells

are ill-used things where there is much domestic contention ;

and now the wire reeved and cracked, nd the tongue rattled

violently within its brazen mouth. "Is dinner ready ? " she

inquired. The man looked at his master.

No," said Mr. Smith, and there was much strength and decision

in the little monosyllable. " Mr. Orepoint and Mr. Harrison

dine here at seven. I remember having forgotten to tell you that,

though I did tell you of my wish to go to the concert."

But Mrs. Smith made no retort touching the concert. She

seemed petrified at something her husband had said, until at last

she burst into tears, sobbing forth, she did not know what she

had done, that he should insult her so. Mr. Smith looked

astonished, aud inquired what she meant ; aud she reminded

horn that Mr. Orepoint was " the man " who had jilted her poor

sister Amelia ; that it was impossible he (Mr. Smith) could have

forgotten the circumstance, as he had heard it so often ; aud

that, for her part, she would not stay iv the house with such a

wretch us Orepoint. The moment be came in, she would go out;

she hud made up her mid to that. The absent Mr. Smith was

overwhelmed ; the little resolution he indulged in, vanished. He

remembered the circumstance when it was too lute, reminded his

wife of his forgetful habit, and said he " would do anything he

could." Mrs. Smith dried her tears a little, and replied, that he

must write and " say anything" to put Orepoint off ; aud then

he found he had forgotten Mr. Orepoint's address.

Never was unfortunate husband in a greater fever of perplexity

than Mr. Smith during the next hour and a-half. Finding that

often as he addressed his wife, she in her turn made no reply, he

went into his little dressing-room, with a vague idea that he had

something to do. His reflection in tho looking-glass reminded

horn that he was not dressed for dinner. He went through th

V 9%

duties of the toilet with a perfect attention to what he was

about, and was selecting from a cabinet a table snuff-box, which

contained some peculiar snuff, when a loud double knock caused

horn to hasten down with the first box he met with in his hand,

without taking another peep at his pretty little sulky wife ; if

he had. he would have found that her sulky were gone, and that

she was preparing to do the honours of the house. Mrs. Smith

was not in any degree husband-hunting for her sister Amelia ;

but it occurred to her that Mr. Orepoint. would not have accepted

the invitation, if he had not some desire to renew the intimacy

that once existed between the families. He was still a bon parti,

older by six years than when he jilted Amelia ; and she thought

Amelia had never loved auy one so well since. Besides, Amelia

had been a flirt; she knew that; and fancied her judgment on

Mr. Orepoint was sudden. Nor did she like sitting for four or

five hours by herself; and perhaps, aster all, she had been more

vexed at not going to the play than at Mr. Orepoint's coming to

dinner. So just as Mr. Smith had finished an apology concerning

her absence, she entered the room, and thus afforded fresh

ground for displeasure. A little forbearance, nd she could have

made all smooth, but her pettishness owns again in the ascendant

The dinner increased the formality, which the flirting Mr.

Orepoint had it not in his power to assuage. In his difficulty of

knowing what to talk übont, he inquired after " her fair bister;"

nd Mrs. Smith, while her husband was describing to Mr. Harrison

tbc proposed workings of his new moral theory, managed to draw

horn into a conversation as to old times, that was proceeding

quite in accordance with her desire.

Just at that moment Mr. Smith, with the suddenness which

characterised all his movements, asked Mr. Orepoint if he were

particular in the flavour of his snuff, and Mr. Smith sent up his

snuff-box ; it had hardly glided over the snowy damask to its

destination, when the mistaking Smith exclaimed, " Not that

box, Mr. Orepoint; not t/tat. Do me the favour to return it ;

that is not the one I intended."

"And why not?" replied the bland gentleman; "why not?

Here is a charming likeness of your lady and her sister, most

exquisitely painted, and superbly set, the beauty of the one

doing justice to the beauty of the other."

"Ah ! " said the absent man, " I thought it might revive the

memory of " Mrs. Smith, by a sudden effort, managed to

interrupt the rest of the sentence. Mr. Smith rallied, but was

again stopped by a timely interruption " Mr. Smith, you are

throwing your walnut shells on the carpet, nd they crush into

it and cut it so, that I must beg you to be more careful."

I declare most solemnly," said the husband. " I have not

cracked a tingle walnut yet ; I was only twisting the nutcrackers."



"You say anything to gain your point." muttered tbc lady,

but not so low us to cscapo her husband's ear, who — like the

animals in the lncnagerieß, when "poked up" that they may

waken and show off their nature, such as it is — was on the quivive

for an attack. Without waiting for a reply, she rose from

her seat, and in leaving the table, had the address to carry off,

unnoticed, the unfortunate box to her own apartment.

It was a damp, drizzling evening, and the church clocks hind

just "gone" a quarter past ten, when a carriage stopped at the

door of a handsome house in oue of the gorgeous streets that

have arisen out of the damps and ditches of the "Five Fields"

From this carriage Mrs. Joseph Smith alighted, and rushing up

her cousin Mrs. Mansfield's stairs, did not wait for the servant's

announcement The lady whom she sought, after her day's ill-managed

fever, was very different in character and conduct from

the petted pettish little creature who, full of bitterness and

vexation, flew to her for the advice she persuaded herself she

required from "her dear Madeline;" but pretty Mrs. Smith

always made up her mmd—n ot a very large thing to make up —

aud acted upon her resolve, before she took counsel at all.

Mrs. Mansfield was sitting in her splendid drawing-room

alone ; her embroidery frame stood beside her chair ; and the

bright and dead gold she was working into n satin scarf for her

husband glittered beneath the light of the beautiful lump, that

shone without dazzling or disturbing the stately character of the

apartment "Oh ! " she exclaimed, as she rose to meet her

cousin — " oh I your knock set my heart beating ; I thought it

was Edward."

What ! " inquired Elizabeth, " has he not been home since

the concert ? He told you to wait dinner."

'• So I did until half-past seven ; but he does not wish me to

wait beyond that"

"Then," exclaimed Mis. Smith, "if he did not wish me to

wait, that's the very reason I would wait ; if he served me as he

has been serving you these six years, the un "

Hush, Elizabeth," said her cousin ; aud her " hush " was

decisive, both from its tone and the expression that accompanied

it " I allow no one to cast reflections on my husband. Pray,

sit down, and tell me what fresh annoyance has brought you

here this evening? You told me of your great trouble this

morning ; how that my good friend Joseph would not answer

when spoken to. As you have known that habit as long as you

have known horn, I was somewhat astonished at your making a

complaint of it now ; and I told you to resort to your old

practice, and jog his elbow ; Joseph will feel tho shake when he

does not hear the words."

'• Well, and so I did when I went home ; but he was as rude

as a bear ; insisted that he wished to have been vt the concert,

and had told me so, which he never did."

He thought he bad, nd that should have made you endure

the assertion. You know he is quite iucupuble of intended

falsehood."

I cannot describe his conduct He invited that Mr. Orepoint

with Harrison to dinner, aud he knew I was going to the play."

He forgot it" murmured Mrs. Mansfield.

Orepoint, who behaved bo ill to Amelia," continued Mrs.

Smith; "and I refused to meet horn vt dinner; and then I thought

better of it, and dressed and came down; aud instead of being

grateful for my doing so, Smith looked thunders when I entered

the drawing-room."

Oue kind word from you would have smoothed it all ; but

you are so touchy, that instead of forbearing, you said something

rude or odd," observed Madeline.

I said nothing to horn, at all events," she continued. "He

knows I am hasty."

Granted : and you know he is absent."

'• My goodness, Madeline! you speak as if all the duty was on

one side."

Not at all ; the truest and only rule to render married life

happy — the law, divine as well as moral, 'beau and forbear.'

is imperative on both."

Then it should be practised by both," said Lizzy.

Granted most fully," answered her cousin ; "and in your case

it is simply because it is practised by neither, that you spend

your days loitering about the straws of life."

How you talk, Madeline. Straws, indeed ! Would you

believe it — he owns going to tell the strange odd-sounding story

of the foreigner who painted Amelia's miniature und mine on

the box, whom wc believed to be a count, and — a — desirable person;

in short, one who might have done for Amelia, aud how wc

found horn out. Well, he was absolutely going to tell the whole

of that to Orepoint, and before Harrison, too, who is a sort of

patent reporter."

Oh, you could have turned the conversation," said Madeline.

My dear, I tried ; but it only made matters worse."

How unfortunate ! Well, my motto, remember, is ' Bear

and Forbear.' You know what I have often told you, that

I never knew a matrimonial quarrel where all the wrong was on

one side."

But, Madeline," exclaimed Mrs. Smith, "it's all very well for

the woman to forbear, if the man will bear, or vice versa; but I

cannot understand why a woman is to be trampled on."

Nor I ; if a woman perform her duty, she cannot be trampled

on. There is uo mention in the marriage ceremonial of a wife's

being obedient if the husband be affectionate, or of the husband's

protecting and cherishing 1/ the wife be obedient. No matter

how the husband performs his portion of the compact, the wife

is bound to perform hers."

"The men ought to be mightily obliged to you," said Mrs.

Smith, sarcastically.

Not so much as the women," answered Madeline. " I love to

see a woman treading the high and holy path of duty, unblinded

by the sunshine, uncared by the storm. There are hundreds

who do so from the cradle to the grave — heroines of endurance,

of whom the world has never heard, but whose nnamesand," — and,

carried away by the enthusiasm of the seeling, she clasped her

hands together — " but whose names will be bright hereafter, even

beside the brightness of angels. Lizzy, it grieves me to see you

frittering away your happiness. You are married to a man

without faults — generous, faithful, and wonderfully patient; domestic,

aud yet leaving you mistress of your house and actions."

When he prevents my going to the play, nd insults me at

a horrid seven o'clock dinner? " thrust in poor Mrs. Smith.

Oh, nonsense, dearest ; mere fibres upon which to hang a

quarrel ; he has heaps of peculiarities, I know ; and you have

only to laugh and humour them, as you used to do about two

years ago, to be as happy as a summer day is long ; but beware I

if you get into a quarrelling habit, he will do the same; a straw

has a tube large enough to contain gunpowder : a sew more such

quarrels as that which must have occurred to drive you at this

hour from your bouse, when you ought to be in your drawing-room,

would destroy the happiness of any home. Go back, tell

horn you are sorry for the quarrel, and never mid whether

he says, or does not say, lv is sorry ; but don't strive to find out

who begun it, or who did uot. You are sorry for the quarrel,

are you not ? " There was an increase of pout, but no reply.

Elizabeth, I am older, and you say wiser than you ; do not I

entreat you, thrust your happiness from you ; if you do so in

the days of your early marriage, you may hunt after it in vain.

It is a foolish saying that the quarrels of lovers are the renewal

of love ; but this 1 tell you, wedded quarrels are the knell of

love. Go home, dearest cousin ; forget your offended dignity ;

remember how tender your husband has been to you in sickness

; recall not how much of your waywardness he has resented,

but bow much he has endured ; think how he provided for your

brother, and his liberality to your family — these are great things

to set against small vexations. The idea of quarrelling with a

husband because he sometimes has a little mental wandering,

and does not immediately hear what you say, or because he drops

walnut shells on the carpet, is really too absurd. Go home, my

dear, like a good wife, and think no more of this nonsense."

Mra. Mansfield owns now alone, and alone Bhe remained, until

the chimes of the time piece arrested her attention — it was a

quarter past one. She rang the bell, directed the footman to

desire her maid to go to bed, and ordered that nil the servants

should retire. In a sew minutes an old and faithful domestic,

who had attended Mr. Mansfield from his boyhood, and was now

half-valet, half-steward, entered the room, aud told his mistress

that he hoped she did not mean horn to go to bed. " I've sat up

many a night for my master, and for his father before horn," said

the man, "und never rose the later for it; and I hope you will

let me wait now as well us ever, lam sure, lute or early, lam

never tired. The air is cold, and it looks — I beg your pardon

for saying so-strange to the other servants for their mistress to

open the door : I will only do that, ma'am. I wish I could do

anything to show my gratitude for those who have done so much

for me." Incidents sometimes occur at war with all forms, that

touch the heart deeply ; there wus so much kindness and delicacy

in these few words, that Madeline thanked Lewis, and told horn

he might wait up if he pleased. Mr. Mansfield was a man of

station, wealth — or reputed wealth — aud talents — the peculiar

talents so much admired in society; his humour was buoyant,

graceful, and accompanied by a constitutional good temper, that

cheered others while it was refreshing to himself; but with all

his accomplishments, he had one serious fault — iv his character

there owns no stability ; his good resolutions melted away before

the first temptation, and his want of fixed principles rendered

horn the easy captive of the last passion or the lust speaker. He

was so courted abroad, that if his home had been neglected, or

his wife other than she was, he would never have been seen at

his own house. Mis. Mansfield, loving her husband with more

that tbc usual love even of woman, had latterly entertained the

ambition of being her husband's friend; to accomplish this, she

sacrificed all small feelings, stifled at their birth all petty, or

what many women would consider anything but petty, grievances,

aud determined to watch nd wait for an opportunity to withdraw

horn from the vortex of fashion, folly, and, it might be,

worse, into which he was plunged.

She had observed lately that her husband shunned her more

than usual. He avoided their being alone, though he treated

her with more than usual tenderness. He was connected, she

knew, with many speculations ; and she had heard of the failure

of one or two houses, whose principals frequently dined at their

table. She knew that he had lost at Epsom, but of that they

had spoken. Mrs. Mansfield was too wise to set herself against

her husband's amusements. In reality, nothing could give horn

pleasure without interesting her; and besides, Be dreaded the

coldness which so frequently arises in wedded life from the wife

playing the monitor instead of the companion — the former destroying,

the latter promoting, that interchange of feelings and

opinions beneficial to both husband and wife. She watched for

his return on this particular night with more than her usual

anxiety; she had ample cause for this and other sensations. She

wus less composed than she thought she had ever been before, —

had less command over herself; and thus it was she wished to

have felt that every eye in the house was closed, every ear deaf,

except her owu, when he returned. At last, when another and

another hour had passed into eternity, she lit a taper, and stole

silently, as mothers steal, into the nursery. Her boy was not

asleep ; his hands were hot and feverish ; aud when he saw her,

he sprang up in his little bed, and clasped his arms round her

neck. " I cannot sleep, mamma, lam so hot and thirsty ; but

I did not like to waken nurse. Take me into your cold room,

mamma, do, dear mamma, and I will not wake papa; you see

I did not wake nurse." Madeline was delighted with the child's

consideration, and, alarmed at his evident illness, she carried horn

into her room, and laid horn on the bed, while she found horn

something to drink. " Where is papa ? " inquired the boy ; " the

stars are going out, and the sky will soon bo red before the sun

gets up. Where is papa ? "

A loud knock replied to the boys question ; tbc child drank

eagerly ; and Mrs. Mansfield was hastening across the staircase with

horn in her arms, when her husband, rushing up-stairs, called to

her to stop. Mr. Mansfield was far too refined to yield to a habit

of intoxication, but he was then unsteady from the effects of wine.

Is Charles ill ? " he inquired.

He is a little hot and feverish, dear Mansfield," replied ibis

mother; " and I think the nursery is too close : he will be better

for this little change of air."

Mr. Mansfield stooped to kiss him. "It is you who are hot, I

think," said the child, peevishly, putting up his little haud to push

away his father's face ; " your breath is so hot— there, don't kiss meany

more." And he nestled his head on his mother's shoulder.

Mr. Mansfield scowled upon both, as Madeline had never seen

horn do before. " The child has been taught that," he said, bitterly.

Madeline raised her eyes to his ; she made no reply, nor did

a reproachful expression rest upon her features. Their eyes met;

it would be impossible to describe her look, so clear, so full of

truth. There was evidently a struggle in her husband's mid

between his real nature and the occurrences and habits of the

time ; but his better angel triumphed. He kissed her check :

Bhe made no allusion to the injustice of bis words, but returned

his caress as affectionately as if they had not been spoken.

PART THE SECOND.

Remarkable for early rising Mrs. Joseph Smith

never was ; and on the morning after the incidents

wc have related, she did not descend to the 

till her husband had half finished his

breakfast.

You bad better ring, my dear," he said, " and have some

fresh tea made."

You know I never take tea. Now, when did you ever seeme

take tea ? You are so very forgetful ; you know I always

take chocolate."

So much the better, ray love," replied the good-tempered

husband ; " for then my being obliged to hurry into town will

not inconvenience you."

It is very disagreeable to breakfast alone," she muttered.

Then you might rise earlier," he said, quietly. Mrs. Smith

opened wide her bright round eyes. Mr. Smith followed up the

stroke bravely. "No household wus ever well managed where

the mistress lies in bed till noon " The poor man was fearful he

had gone too far, said too much, hurt her feelings ; and as he

really loved the pretty fool, who seemed to lack the instinctive

knowledge of caring for her own happiness, he paused, and

added, " Surely, my love, illness cannot be your excuse, for

in all my life I never saw you look better than you do at

this moment."

Look hetter? " repeated the little lady — " look better ! So

much for man's consistency of opinion. Why, look at this dress ;

you always said this dress disfigured me — that you hated it: that

was the reason why I put it on this morning ; and now you say

I am looking well."

A proof you look well in everything, my dear," said Mr.

Smith, tapping his second egg.

You are breaking that egg at the wrong end, Mr. Smith,"

recommenced the provoking wife ; " it is very odd you cannot

remember that the round end is the end to break an egg. Well,

it is strange : you know how these little things annoy me, yet

you persist in doing them."

Mr. Smith restrained himself, for peace' sake ; but he continued

breaking the egg at the sharp end ; and having eaten it,

rang the bell. "Do not forget to stop the omnibus," he said to

the servant

The 'bass you go by, sir, to the city, has been gone an

hour. I told you the time, sir, while you were reading," replied

the servant.

Mr. Smith was provoked, perhaps, with himself; but be looked

first at the servant, and then at his wife, who was dividing her

toast into very small particles, and throwing it at tho little

spaniel. " Well," she exclaimed, " that was not my fault Im sure.

I had nothing to do with your delay."

I did not say you had, Mrs. Smith," he answered.

No, but yon looked — you looked, sir I " Then, with a perfect

change of voice, she whined out, " God help us poor women !

Wc little know what wc may live to endure !"

Stuff ! " murmured the angry gentleman, drawing on his

gloves, and marching out of the room.

Mrs. Smith" poised her spoon over her cup of chocolate. "He

will hardly go," she thought, " without saying good-bye ; he

never did that yet." She listened, and certainly the hall-door

did not either open or shut. His step paused — it returned — a

smile of petty triumph agitated her lips. No, he went up stairs.

The smile, however, increased, for she knew he would look in ashe

came down. He did look in.

Can I do anything in the city for you ! "

Mrs. Smith sipped her chocolate, as if unconscious of her

husband's presence or his words.

Elizabeth, do you want anything from the city ? "

If I did, you would forget to bring it"

Well, perhaps so. I shall be home to dinner at five."

I wish — though I suppose it is little use my wishing — but I

do wish that you would sometimes dine at the club. Now, last

night, if you had invited those men to dine with you at the club,

you would have enjoyed yourself more, and I should not have felt

the poor castaway I did." Mrs. Smith intended this as a bit of

touching eloquence, but she had undermined her own influence

by a system of annoyance which some women fancy augments,

when it really destroys, their power.

"Are you in earnest?" inquired Mr. Smith, advancing into

the room, and looking steadfastly at his wife ; " are you in

earnest in saying that you wish I would dine at the club ? "

Why, yes ; you would get better dinners there ; and you

are hard to please in that way ; " and she looked down at her

chocolate with a pretty mincing expression of countenance.

"Very well, Elizabeth," he replied; "I will dine there today.

It is at your request ; my memory will be clear enough

to remember that ; " and without another word, he left the

house, and his lady to the exercise of her temper and imagination.

While Elizabeth Smith was thinking her small thought*,

and arranging her small ways, Madeline Mansfield was seated by

her husband's side ; his face was turned from her, so as to conceal

what he did not wish her to observe.

What you say, Madeline," he answered at last to much that

she had spoken, " what you say is true ; I grant you that ; but.

it is impossible. If I were to change my style of living, it would

be talked of at the clubs, where things small, as well as things

great, are canvassed, the one with as much eagerness as the

other. My credit would be shaken."

"It is shaken already, Mansfield," she interrupted. " Now

do not shrink from or shudder vt it ; I know it is shaken. If it

were not, do you think I should have heard it? But shrinking

will not re-establish it, nor will bravado ; difficulties must be

encountered to be overcome. I am sure," she added, with

admirable tact, " I have heard you say so many times — be they

as bad as they can be, they must be met "

"You are going out of your usual track," said her husband iv

a severe voice, and evidently anxious to escape from her and

from himself.

lam doing," she replied, "as I have ever done; I am following

in yours. I have shared your heart, Mansfield, and your

prosperity ; and if adversity "

Why," he interrupted—" why suy if adversity ? Madeline,

you are a very raven this morning. Who dared to speak of adversity

? It cannot come. Your marriage settlement would protect

you and our child. Adversity ! — like all women, you speak

as if a temporary inconvenience were decided ruin. Who has

dared to bandy my name in this manner ? " He rose from his

chair, and seizing his hat, would have lest tho room, had not his

wife prevented him.

"You will not hear me, Mansfield, will not confide in me

but although you do not know me, you believe in mc. You

know I would not breathe, much less tell, an untruth. I will

not detain you : only this, whatever may occur, there is my

settlement to prop your credit. I can live and rejoice in

poverty, but I could not bear your tarnished name. Do not

hesitate to consider mine, in every sense of the word, yours. If

you would only allow me, there are a thousand things I could

retrench in."

Mr. Mansfield looked at her steadily, aud then said, " Would

you consent to relinquish this house?"

Most willingly - house, carriage, all — go to a suburban

cottage at once. There would be nothing strange iv that I

have been ill, and need change, and pure air, and quiet. Indeed

that would be no sacrifice," was her reply, in a cheerful voice.

Would you take our boy and go abroad," he persisted, " for

two or three years ? "

Madeline's colour came aud went rapidly. " Without you ?"

she faltered.

Certainly — there would be nothing strange in your going

abroad ; the boy would improve rapidly in languages : and you

would (if the crisis came which you consider so inevitable) avoid

much pain."

Mansfield ! " exclaimed Madeline, panting in her utterance,

why will you speak thus, us if wc could have a divided interest?

I could not, Ido not want to avoid pain. Even if I loved you

not, the sacred bond that binds us would prevent it. Anything

but that, Mansfield ; " and she added, while a faint smile

struggled ou her lips, " I am cure you did not mean it"

Wc have met so seldom of late," he answered, " that I should

not think you could feel it so much'' He did not venture to

look at his wife after these cold words ; if he had, his heart,

always movable, must have turned with love aud sympathy

towards the struggling agony she sought to repress. And

it was her agony alone she strove to overcome. No desire to

return pain for pain arose from her generous heart ; nor had she

occasion, iv this great sorrow, to resort to the talismanic proverb

which had so often taught her, on less trying occasions, to

forbear."

Wc have met seldom, certainly," she said, and the composure

of her manner and the trembling of her voice were at sad

variance ; "and I confess that I have suffered much in consequence

; but I knew, day by day, that you were well ; I knew you

were amused. If I did not always see you, I heard your voice

or your step ; aud if you did not come, I could still expect you :

but I cannot leave you. I have never been officious — never

craved for attention, highly as I value it — never, never disturbed

your arrangements, or pushed myself into secrets it

would have given you pain to have revealed. Oh, Mansfield ! let

what will happen, do not thrust me from you.' The idea of

parting from her husband overcame every other feeling ; aud her

deep and earnest love, of which Mansfield felt be was every-way

unworthy, recalled much of his past affection. He left her

with the assurance of attending to her wishes, of steadily investigating

his affairs, of looking all difficulties in the suce boldly aud

at once, and above nil, promising never to hint even at the idea of

their separation again. All this, aud more, he promised, and all

this he intended at the moment to perform ; but when his cab

drove from the door, Madeline felt the oak upon which she

leaned changing into a reed ; for nil her love could not blind

her to the fact of Mansfield's vacillation. It was well that she

had the truest Comforter to resort to. She knew that a married

woman ought to have no friend, in the highest acceptation of the

word — no one to whom she can open her heart fully and entirely

except her husband. Her mother was dead, and her only near

relative — a warm-hearted old bachelor uncle — Uncle Oliver —

bad all the confidence she deemed it right to give to any ;

but she had no thought of complaining of her husband to any

human being.

Before the sound of Mr. Mansfield's wheels had died on his

wise's ears, her faith in his promises was gone. It was in vain

she recalled them ; and the experience of the days and weeks

that followed, only proved the total want of firmness of purpose

in horn she loved.

Instead of retrenching, he seemed to rush more wildly than

ever he had done before through the whirl of the world ;

and her inquiries were avoided with a wild burst of gaiety,

or some bitter words, that were replied to only by unseen

tears. She frequently blamed herself for uot more firmly withstanding

what she considered wrong ; but her position was one

of extreme difficulty. If she were sure of her husband's affeo-

o o

tion, she would have been better able to stern the destruction,

whose course she watched as the devoted villagers watch the

stream of lava that must overwhelm them in the end. Sometimes

his mad gaiety would flash like a meteor through the

house ; at others he was so moody, so reserved, so evidently iv

a state of mental and bodily suffering, that all she could do was

to attend to and console horn ; and this he would not always

permit

She was watching for horn oue night — longing for, yet

dreading the knock that would announce his arrival — when the

servant brought her a letter, a sew hurried hues, Baying he was

suddenly called by business to Antwerp, but she should hear

from horn in a few days. A line at the bottom of the scrawl

implored Heaven to bless her and her child. The next day

passed. She told her servant she would not be at home to anyone.

She might have spared the command, for no one called ;

it was a damp, misty, chilling day ; the fog entered the drawing-room

; and spread its hazy curtain over the looking-glasses, and

mirrors, and windows, and crept about the marble tables and

bronzes, making them feel clammy to the touch.

The following day was bright, und full of sunshine: she

ordered her carriage, and drove into the Park. She was-seeking

refuge from herself. She bowed eagerly to all she knew, and her

salutations were always respectfully and warmly returned ; but

she thought people seemed astonished to see her there. Why.

she could not tell, but she pulled the check, and said " Home."

Her uncle was in the drawing-room : she saw his face at the

windows where she had looked expecting to see her boy ; but

before she was on the stairs, the old gentleman met her — nay

more, he kissed her, and led her into the library. There was

something so melancholy in his eyes as he gazed on her, that she

felt suffocated ; and unclasping her cloak, and throwing back

her borne, she said, as calmly as she could — " You have something

more, dear uncle, than mere town talk to tell me to-day.

Is Mansfield ill ? "

The rascal ! " exclaimed Uncle Oliver ; " the most desperate

rascal!"

You are sure he is not ill ? " she persisted, greatly relieved,

end for a moment losing sight of the injurious epithet, in her

deep anxiety for horn she loved.

111 ! — not he — such rascals are never ill."

Thank God ! " she ejaculated ; and covering her face with

her hands, sobbed bitterly for a few moments.

I wish," thought Uncle Oliver, as he paced up and down

the room ; " I wish I knew exactly what I ought to say, and

what I ought to do. With any other woman, the difficulty

would be how to keep her down ; but with her, it will be how to

get her up."

Don't cry, Madeline ; don't cry," he said at lost ; " I am

sure the involvements are greatly exaggerated ; and, aster all,

there is not so much to regret, for he was never at home ; so

cheer up, my dear niece. I should be as happy us a prince,"

he muttered to himself, " quite, if she would only call horn

a rascal."

Whatever there is to tell," she said, " tell me now ; I can

bear it. I would not seek any whom wc know, lest I should

hear ill of him. I dreaded lest some one should come nd

tell me evil ; but Ido not mid you — I never minded you,

Uncle Oliver." .

The old man looked sadly perplexed ; he did not know

how to say what he felt he must communicate. He began

by talking of Mr. Mansfield's embarrassments, and follies, and

extravagances. Of all these, Madeline assured horn, he might

spare himself the mention : she knew all. Yes, she believed

every one, and she thought she saw a clear and direct way to

avert the disgrace, though not the ruin. Her relative looked

astonished.

Then you know," he inquired, " the cause of his journey ;

do you not ? "

Business, uncle, I suppose ; business," was her answer.

Most villanous business," he said. " Have you had no suspicion

idiot he loved you less than formerly ? — have you had no

reason to believe why ? "

Madeline grew deadly pale. "It cannot be, uncle," she said,

o o 2

that you come to me, in this hour of trial, to insult me by the

gossiping reports of the town ? "

He placed a letter iv her hands ; it was directed to horn from

her husband, signed by his name, entreating horn to go at once

to "poor Madeline," and cursing his evil destiny. It left no

doubt as to who was the companion of his flight , no doubt as

to his having violated the laws of God and man. Madeline

folded up the letter deliberately, but, in the act of returning it

to her uncle, she fell ou the floor. There was neither scream

nor tear ; she fell as one struck off the life-roll into eternity.

When she recovered her reason, she asked if Mr. Oliver were

in the house. He was soon by her side ; but, contrary to his

expectations, contrary to his hopes, deep and bitter ns were Mrs.

Mansfield's feelings, uo word of censure towards her husband

escaped her lips.

I am not able to think yet," she said ; " I can only feel; but

tomorrow I shall be better. Come to me tomorrow at two,

and pray for me, dear uncle ; I need the prayers of the good and

gracious creatures of the world."

The poor old gentleman brushed many tears away from

his furrowed cheeks, aud drove immediately to those who

could give horn information as to the real state of Mansfield's

affairs. He found they were by no means in so

bad a state as he had heard at first ; that if the heedless

man had possessed tbc moral courage to investigate them

steadily, some outlay at the present, and retrenchment for

the future, would bring them round. But it was iv vain he

Bought to discover what spell could have deprived Mansfield of

his reason, and tempted horn to outrage all honour as he had

done; indeed, Mr. Oliver was so incensed at Mansfield, that he

seemed to retain only what told most against him. And what

was there that did not tell against horn? That a foreigner,

whose code of morals falls far short of our English standard, and

whose profession extracts the blush from the purest check, that

braves the glare of footlights aud men's eyes - that such a one

should have admired the gay, the witty, the handsome Mansfield,

was no wonder. She had no position to sacrifice, uo

scruple to overcome ; but that he should have been so infatuated,

was past all understanding The next morning, although he was

rather before than after his appointment, Mrs. Mansfield had

been in consultation for some hours with her husband's " man

of business."

When Mrs. Mansfield rose to meet her uncle, he was shocked

at the change which a few hours had wrought ; but she was perfectly

calm, and the lofty purpose that filled her mid imparted

a more than usual dignity to her manner. She left the room to

procure some papers, and the lawyer, addressing her uncle, said,

Her going out, sir, is a relief to mc. I never understood

what woman could do before. She gives up the whole of her

own property — the whole, sir, without reserve, to free her husband

; and this, mid you, unconditionally. She is devoted,

heart and soul, to save his credit — never thinks of tbc privations,

or the loss of position, or the confined means, which such

a voluntary sacrifice will oblige them to submit to for

some years."

Nor of her child?" questioned the old gentleman.

I spoke of horn," was the reply, " and she said the proudest

event of her life was being able to save bis father's name from

reproach "

Her head is not cool I " exclaimed her uncle. "No woman's

head can be cool whose life has been but oue entire sacrifice to au

ungrateful rascal, working up her maxim of 'bear and forbear'

until it brings "

Peace in the end, believe me," added Madeline, who had

returned unperceived by her uncle. " Believe me, for whatever

I suffer, I shall be greatly rewarded — rewarded as women

deserve to be, when they do their duty."

"Duty!" repeated Uncle Oliver— "duty ! Stuff! A scoundrel,

to desert "

Uncle, uncle," interposed Madeline ; " this house is his — I

am his wife ; and before me no one — not even you, who are my

nearest and dearest kinsman — not even you — shall utter one disrespectful

word of my husband."

The lawyer thought it better to withdraw, promising to do

everything that could be done, and to see her again as soon

as possible. Uncle Oliver remonstrated, aud stormed, or

tried to storrn ; but his anger dissolved under the influence of

her gentle words. She could not, indeed, trust herself to name

her husband's name ; but she spoke of what a happy thing it

was that she could do so much ; and she entreated her undo to

bear with her if he loved her, and to believe that she should

yet be very happy — and here tears denied the assertion of her

lips — and she would have said a great deal more perhaps, avoiding,

yet returning to, the subject of her Borrow, but she heard

Mrs. Joseph Smiths voice upon the stairs, and hastily retired

into another room.

Mrs. Smith hoped her cousin would see her. How sorry she

was; everyone said how it would be from the first, with her

yielding quiet way, suffering herself to be trampled on, grudging

herself every little indulgence, while for gloves and flowers

alone Mr. Mansfield squandered in one day upon " the creature"

eight-and-thirty pounds. She would take care not to be such a

patient fool ; aud so ran on the little lady, repeating all, or at

least all she had heard of, the on dits of the town, concerning

what, fresh as it was at that moment, would never extend to

a nine days' wonder.

Now, Uncle Oliver could find fault with Mrs. Mansfield

himself, and say more that Lizzy had ventured to say, but

he would suffer no one else to do so. He told her that

if the town talked of Madeline's forbearance, they would never

have an opportunity of talking of hers; and that she wa 3

more inclined, if " the town " said truly, to emulate the gentleman

than the lady. He read her a long lecture ; told her she

had cast God's goodness from her; and ended by offering

to see her home, " where she would," he added, "do well to

remain more constantly, except when escorted thence by her

husband."

Indeed, it owns painful to see how the easy quiet nature of Mr.

Smith, disturbed out of its usual course by the perpetual annoyances

of a silly wife, sought the comfortable refuge of his gilded

club, " soaking " away existence, and becoming more and more

attached to the creature-comforts, as opposed to the intellectual

— of which clubs are not the nurseries. He became,

perhaps, on the whole, as little inclined to bear as she was to

forbear; in all domestic matters, instead of drawing together,

running full tilt against each other ; sometimes with only straws,

it is true, but still opposed. Mrs. Smith was ever whining about

her husband's continual absence from home; and when he did

come, he more than once expressed his displeasure, of course

at the wrong time, at Mr. Orepoint's being installed "as the

friend of the family." The world began to talk — the ladies, of

course, finding fault with the woman, and the gentlemen laughing

at both. In this war. commenced of nothing, the happiness

of both was wrecked.

After a sew weeks had passed, Uncle Oliver received au unexpected

letter from Mrs. Mansfield. She expressed much gratitude

to horn for the affectionate tenderness he evinced towards her.

and continued :

Finding that my husband will not return to England,

yet that wc must together sign various papers, bo as to

realize a sufficient sum of money to discharge all that is necessary,

I have determined to go at once to Paris, where I find he

is, and let the lawyers meet us (perhaps I should write me) there.

Is it not unaccountably strange, my dear uncle, that he should

persist in refusing to ' rob' me, as he calls it, when in reality the

only jewel I prized — himself — is gone? Independent of all

business motives, I feel it is my duty to endeavour to wm horn

back. I cannot hope that the love which deserted me, when

I was still what be once admired, will return ; but I know that

my devotion, and desire to make horn happy, may withdraw horn

from what, sooner or later, must bring its punishment. In this

great trial I have some consolation. I cannot call to mid

having ever driven horn from home by any disturbing or fretful

conduct : my exceeding love for horn made my enjoyment so

perfect, that, whatever cause I might have for discontent, vanished

at the bare echo of his voice. But although I cannot accuse

myself of a word that made horn frown, I remember how much

he must have lacked amusement from one whose love, though

deep, owns silent ; and whose anxious, thoughtful character, united

to delicate health, rendered her an unassuming companion for

one so sought after, so admired, so brilliant as Mansfield. Men

have greater temptations than ever, of late years, to lure them

from their homes. Those garish clubs ! where everything is

done to render a man perfectly and entirely independent, of his

own house ! People little consider how a separation in amusements

leads to a separation of interests I tried to enter into

his, and, strange as it will sound to you, though I am now

deserted, I feel assured my duties have been so fulfilled, he

cannot fail to remember, at one time or other, that he has one

unchanging friend, whose lip never spoke reproach — whose heart

never beat but with love for him. I fear you will hardly understand

me, when I sny tint in this is my unspeakable consolation

in this, forsaken as lam now, shall I triumph in the end.

Yes, my dear uncle, if women have patience to endure, they may

die. but they must conquer. Do not mistake me — I mean by

conquer, the achievement of no command, the exercise of no

authority ; but I do mean that it will be their exceeding glory

to wm back the wanderer — to find horn return — to save horn for

time, and, through God's blessing, for eternity. This is a Christian

woman's triumph — a triumph in which angels will rejoice.

I do not say I shall achieve this now with Mansfield — he is still

in the toils ; but when passion fades, and reason and affection

return, he will return with them. Do uot think Ido not feel

what all women mutt under such circumstances, nor do uot give

me more merit than I deserve. I love him — that of itself is

sufficient to keep me in the path of duty ; but even if I did not

I would, I hope, do from principle what I now do from affection.

It is only then I should deserve praise. Poor Mansfield ! he will

have that to contend with hereafter that will bitterly try his

temper aud character — the falling away of summer friends, which

like summer flies, vanish at the first chill of winter — the loneliness

and self-reproach — the restricted means — the impossibility

of indulgence in tastes and refinements which habit has rendered

necessary — the coldness of the few whom he respects. These

form his future — a future that would drive horn to utter despair,

or more degraded sin, unless some haven be opened to receive

him."

There owns much more, but this is all that need be quoted

from a letter that startled and astonished horn much— by

which her feelings could not be comprehended, nor her mid

understood. She was already gone when Uncle Oliver received

the letter — gone with her child, his maid, and the faithful

Lewis.

Have you heard the news ? " exclaimed Mrs. Joseph Smith,

as a lady of her acquaintance entered the drawing-room, and discovered

Mr. Orepoint holding a skein of worsted which she was

winding for her " crochet." "I am really quite broken-hearted

and half-ashamed that one so nearly related to me should be so

tried, and so lost, because there never wot anything so foolish.

Madeline Mansfield has given up the whole of her marriage-settlement

to clear away all the debts and things that tormented

her good-for-nothing husband. So much ; but that is not all.

He would not come back to sign tbc papers which were

necessary, and so she is quietly gone to find him. Now, did

you ever, in all your life, hear of such a thing?— putting in

practice what wc rend of in old books — only meant to be

rend, not done, you know, my dear. I never could have believed

such folly — the foolish, foolish woman ; and for such a

husband ! "

Most true," said Mr. Orepoint, while working with marvellous

industry at a knot in the lamb's-wool ; " for such a

husband — or for any husband ! "

I wanted to ask you," resumed the visitor, " if there will bean

auction at the poor Mansfield'? It is a matter iv which

I feel the deepest interest."

I don't know; but if there should be, and I could get Smith,

by some miracle, into a good humour, I should like that harp —

it is such a love ! "

I shall certainly go and see the things, whether I buy or

not" half yawned Mr. Orepoint. " I always doubted the console-tables

being real mosaic ; and I must ascertain, as I have a bet

at the club about them."

•' Everything in the house was real," said Mrs Smith, bridling

a little — for she fancied the observation a " slap " at the family —

I assure you everything in the house was real."

•' Except the happiness," sneered the mau about town — "except

the happiness,"

PART THE THIRD.

<S|&J£*?i!jOOß Madeline ! she had overrated her strength and

powers of endurance; the nearer she drew to Paris,

(jM.'fVA? the more nervous she became — the less fitted for

Gy^^'-Za the task she had set herself. At one time she would

order the postilions to double their speed, and tbc next direct

them to go slower, for that she was distracted by the rapidity of

movement More than once she felt she had done foolishly in

bringing her child with her. She entertained no idea of using

horn, as in a drama, to draw her husband back. She knew this

to be equally mean as useless, and that nothing but time could

restore her husband to himself and to her.

As the carriage whirled through the streets of Paris, Madeline's

heart beat so quickly, that she could hardly breathe : even the

servants seemed too. absorbed to note the strangeness of the

motley city. Arthur had been some time asleep, aud when the

postilions drew up at the hotel, Mrs. Mansfield felt completely

paralysed; she could uot move. Her blood, stagnant for a

moment, rushed suddenly to her head, which swam and reeled;

nd although her maid assured the servants that her mistress

was only suffering from fatigue, she seared she was actually

dying.

Tho next day, when bodily exertion had somewhat abated,

Madeline collected her thoughts, and endeavoured to arrange

the best, because the most effective, mode of appealing to her

husband. She ascertained that he was still in Paris. The lawyer

was expected to arrive that evening, or the next morning.

Should she suffer horn to see Mansfield first, or should she go

herself to her husband ? There would have been no cause for

deliberation, if she was certain of seeing only him. She would

go at once ; but could she bear to meet another 1 " Nothing

will happen to me, good Lewis," she said, in reply to his respectful

protest, — " nothing, believe mc. Let the man drive on." Tho

servant bowed ; aud the uneasy machine, lined with crimson-velvet

— a specimen of finery and discomfort — proceeded to rattle

over the ill-paved streets. " Open the door, Lewis'' she said ;

I will myself inquire."

"May God protect her!" muttered the old servant; "how

pale and resolute she looks, and yet how gentle 1"

To Madeline's inquiries, the attendant who answered said that

Monsieur was out, but " Madame" was at breakfast. Mis.

Mansfield paused, and the repeated question of " Who shall I

say wishes to see her ? " fell unheard upon her ear. She walked on.

It was a strange, I had almost written an unnatural, meeting

vice aud virtue face to suce — and yet such scenes occur almost

daily in this great world, without many taking note of them.

The unhappy woman, whom Madeline found reading one of the

frivolous journals of the day, rose to receive her with an ease

and grace of manner which, at any other time, or from any

other person, would have at once prepossessed her iv her favour.

She requested her to sit, but Mrs. Mansfield was for a few

moments incapable of motion. She stood with her eyes fixed

upon the frail and delicate-looking Italian songstress, and at lust,

iv as firm a voice as she could command, said, " My name is

Mansfield." A tremor, sudden aud violent, agitated the frame

of the stranger; she attempted to ring the bell, but her arm fell

powerless at her side ; her lips moved, but no sound escaped

them ; and at length, after various ineffectual struggles, she

fainted. Mrs. Mansfield moved to where she hud fallen upon

the couch, from which she had risen on her entrance. She

looked at her pale once, and, upturned us it then was to the

light, she saw how much older she was than she had imagined,

and what strong lines, passion aud — it might be her imagination,

but she thought — sorrow had eaten into her exquisite aud delicate

features. She poured over her brow some eau de Cologne

from a flagon that stood ou the table, aud pushed a pillow beneath

her head. As she gazed on one who hud done so much to

destroy her peace, she felt suffocated ; acute pains darted through

her frame, and her head and temples throbbed violently. She

was there, alone aud powerless — her for whom she had been

deserted. All that Madeline had ever heard or read of demons

taking possession of the human form crowded her confused mid.

How beautifully hideous the woman became the longer she

gazed ! She bent over her to examine more keenly the features

she hoped never again to see, and her eyes wandered to an ornament

that, suspended from a black velvet ribbon, glittered on

her bosom — U was her husband's miniature I If a serpent had

stung her, she could not have writhed under a more bitter pang.

Strange it was that she, knowing all Bhe did, should in a moment

become so changed. Strange that a disposition to revenge should

rush through her heart aud brain, nerving her arm, so that she

could have clutched and used a dagger in the wild anguish of

that fearful moment As if the fiend had fully prepared for

that terrible passage of her fevered life, almost beneath her

hand, close to where the insensible woman lay, beside the very

pillow, was a glittering stiletto, one of those with jewelled

handles which are used upon tbc stage; but the momentary

frenzy passed away us rapidly almost us it came. Bewildered by-its

unknown violence, dreading herself, chilled in every pore, as

if the burning fever of the past emotion had drawn vitality even

from her shivering heart, she staggered to the window, and

throwing up the cumbrous frame, gasped in the reviving air, as

if she had never breathed it before.

When she recovered herself, she saw the stranger looking

around with a distrait air, rising slowly from the couch, and

passing her hand repeatedly across her brow, as if she was

recalling the events of the minutes past. When she perceived

Madeline, bhe clasped her hands and screamed. Mrs. Mansfield,

perfectly restored, said, "Make no noise; you shall hear me;

you owe me more than a sow moments silence."

You will not hurt me," exclaimed the trembling foreigner —

"you will not hurt mc."

May God forbid that I should hurt you ! I would rather

save you from yourself," owns the reply. When Madeline recommenced,

her voice wus weak and feeble, but it gained strength as

she continued. The Italian listened at first with compressed

lips, a haughty and determined gathering of her brows, and her

small bands so tightly clasped together, that the jewels by which

her fingers were encircled pressed into the flesh, while her eyes

were fixed ou tho ground. At first, too, Madeline's words came

slowly from her lips. She drew a picture of a devoted wife and

mother, one who loved us passionately, as firmly, and more holily

than the person she addressed could have doue — deserted by her

husband and the father of her child — for whom ? She paused;

there was no reply. As she continued, she gained strength aud

courage. She used no offensive word. She remembered that

the Italian was not tutored as she had been ; that she was quot

only born of other blood, but educated — if such tutelage could

be called education — in a different world; not thinking her

thoughts, hardly understanding her language. Her momentary

madness overcome, she wus quite her noble self, nd that self

was full of the charity " which suffereth long aud is kind." She

spoke of the past — of her deep aud devoted love to her husband,

and of his to her ; of the present — her utter desolation of heart

aud spirit, forsaken by horn to whose love and protection she had

a right given her by the Almighty ; of her child — of the effect

his father's conduct must have on his after-life ; how, despite her

exertions to keep horn in ignorance of his parent's abandonment

oi her aud himself, he must know it hereafter, and grow up with

the consciousness of his father's sin ; puny, that ou her would

devolve the almost impossible task of dividing the sin und the

sinner — teaching horn to hate the one, and cleave to the other.

She the passed, by men's of a few rapid but heartfelt words, to

the hereafter to which they must all come — the hereafter of

thought and age — leading to the dread hereafter of the grave.

Before this, she saw that, however passionate and wilful, however

wayward and devoid of woman's most essential virtue, the frail

creature she addressed might be, feeling was at work within her.

Her expressive features changed, her brows relaxed, large tears

trembled on her eyelashes, and her fingers moved convulsively.

Madeline said, that whatever her feelings might be, whatever

she felt towards her, she did uot come armed with a wife's

authority to reproach, to wound, to insult her ; she came as loue

woman to another, to show her the abyss of guilt into which she

had herself plunged, and the misery to which she had devoted

others

Madeline perceived that, prompted by a sudden impulse, she

endeavoured to unclasp the velvet from her throat ; but her

agitation prevented her effecting her purpose. She tore the

bund apart, flung the miniature on the ground, then springing

up, her foot was raised to crush it into atoms. Madeline held

her back. " No, no," she said, " that shall never be while lam

present."

There I " exclaimed the passionate woman ; " you do not

hate horn this moment as I do — could not curse horn as I

could."

"See," replied Madeline, "the different character of our affections.

You, whom he has so little wronged, would curse horn ;

1, his forsake wife, the mother of his child, pray for aud bless

horn every hour I live."

Oh, why 1 " sobbed the Italian, " why did no one tell me

this before f I knew he had a wife, but did not think she was

like you ! " and flinging herself on her knees beside Madeline,

and hiding her face in her dress, she became almost convulsed

with weeping. It would have needed a sterner heart than

Mrs. Mansfield's to have witnessed such sudden agony unmoved.

There was none of the hardness of hopeless sin about the frail

creature who clung to her - more us a child clings to a mother,

than as one woman supplicates another. " Let me weep," she

said ; " such tears do me good. I never shed such tears before.

I thought if you came, you would kill me ; but you forgive mc.

I will sin no more. If you forgive me, I will sin no more."

This, and much of the same kind, was said in the musical tones

of her native tongue ; aud Madeline's emotions, strange as it

may seem to suy so, might well be envied. Here owns a glorious

Christian triumph. She had wrestled with and overcome herself;

she had foi-borne not only violence, but reproach ; and if her

mission was even still to be accomplished, she had awoke in

an erring woman a sense of wrong, a resolve of right — sentiments

and feelings which, if properly moved, would lead many

a sister from sin to salvation, even at the eleventh hour. Suddenly

the Italian put her finger to her lip, and pointed to a door

which Mrs. Mansfield had not before perceived. At the same

moment she picked up the miniature, placed it in Madeline's hand,

aud closing her fingers upon it, pressed them to her lips. "He

is coining," she said in a hoarse voice ; "he was not out — not

up; that leads to his dressing room." She flew across the

chamber to a door at the other end, then returning and bending

towards where Mrs. Mansfield sat, overwhelmed by the expectation

of seeing her husband, she muttered something which Madeline

did not understand, aud sobbing more bitterly than ever, quitted

the apartment Mausfield entered shortly after. Mausfield ! —

but how worn, how broken down, be looked ! — not as one from

whom health fades gradually, not as one whom over labour, or

over-anxiety, works down from the healthful bright-eyed man to

the bent and hollowed shadow of humanity, struggling with the

toils and troubles of life, but struggling with au honest purpose

and a clear conscience. Such a one may be bent aud bowed to the

earth, but he never can have tbc tom, and soiled, and haggard

look, that effaces God's image, in the debauchee, or even in horn

in whom weakness produces the effects of vice. They looked at

each other in silence. Mansfield would have returned whence

he came, if he had had the power. While she. First and most

enduring in all good deeds, advanced to meet him. She could

not speak. Sho extended her hands towards him — he saw the

miniature. "I have seen her," she said ; "I have exposed to

her her own sin, and she has blessed me for it ; " and this was

the only allusion she made, during that important interview, to

his crime. On the contrary, she endeavoured to draw his attention

to tbc mere business portion of her mission ; but this was

impossible. He could not attend ; he sank into a paroxysm of

the deepest despair — reproached himself, reproached her — said

he could have endured anything rather than the love she bore

him — that it was a curse, a very poison. She heard all this ;

Bhe heard it all, crushing her love closer and closer into her

heart — assuming a coolness of counsel, so as to assure his mid,

in its present mood, that it wus business - tbc advantage both

would derive in the end, the advantage their child would derive

that brought her there — not denying her affection, but never

for a moment dwelling on it. Mansfield caught at the mention

of the child, and inquired if he were in Paris. He became at

once anxious to see horn ; be would have horn there : but no ; he

would go to him. It must be evident to all, that mere feelings

aud affections, however pure and kind they might be, could never

have guided Madeline through the perils of this momentous day.

Her husband's eyes, unnaturally wandering, now fierce with

sudden brightness, now dim, and red, and in looking, the shivering

despair which made horn firm in the belief that nothing could

save horn, the unmanly dread of investigating the debtor and

creditor columns of his accounts ; all these called for her

strength, and made her, while she trembled for hit reason, exert

her own. The vacillations of the man of fashion, from whom

the gilding is all worn off — tho wit, whose arrows are no longer

tipped with brilliant — the man, in fact, once so rich in all but

H H

Moral strength, now poor in all things, was as tenderly beloved

by his devoted wife as ou the day she placed their first-born in

his arms ; the same rich natural unsullied love hovered with angel

wings above the wreck which, like the life-boat, Bhe was just intime

to save. There are passages in human nature bo difficult

to decipher, that the closest observer cannot account for tbc

workings of the various feelings, and their effects, broken up, as

they are, by thoughts, and motives, and intentions. Madeline

could not understand how it was that her husband left the hotel

without seeming to think or care for the creature whose image

haunted her, even while she looked upon him. The sight of

his child subdued horn altogether ; and os the little fellow clung

round his neck, its father burst into tears so rapid and violent,

that his strong frame seemed hardly able to endure the shock.

Anxiously did Madeline look for the lawyer's arrival with the

necessary papers ; every carriage that drove into the courtyard

drew her to the window. She knew that if he came then,

Mansfield would do everything she required : but (oh, the misery

of having to do with the unstable !) she could not trust horn

from hour to hour. She judged of the present by the past It

was nearly night, aud no lawyer had arrived. Subdued as her

husband was by the emotions of the day, he became suddenly and

alarmingly excited, talked wildly and incoherently of bis past

experiences, and of what his future should be, aud wanted

Madeline to go with horn to the opera. This fancy seemed to

have taken possession of his mid altogether. His poor wife

would as soon almost have gone to her grave ; but be insisted,

and she prepared to dress. What a mockery it was, aster what

she had suffered during the last twelve hours ! He faulted the

simple arrangement of her hair. " Flowers," he said, " must be

mingled there ; she could not go with her hair unadorned: if

she had uot brought them with her, she must send out and buy

them. No flowers like the French flowers ; " and to delay the

time, she did us he desired. But before they were placed iv her

hair to his satisfaction, the excitement deepened into disease.

He complained suddenly of the most racking pain iv his head

and temples ; every sound distracted horn, and he could endure

no ray of light ; then, in the midst of his fevered description of

a favourite song, he paused, and in a voice of child-like confidence,

whispered, " Let me lay my head upon your bosom,

Madeline ; there was its first peaceful repose, and there will be

its last ; " but there was no repose for a head tortured with

distracting fever of the brain. About an hour afterwards,

the lawyer arrived, to find the unhappy man in the wildest

ravings. If ever Madeline had been tempted to question the

will of Providence, it was then. Before the morning dawned,

her husband had ceased to recognise her ; and in his wanderings,

the name of another was frequently mingled with her own. The

physicians said that weeks must puss before the patient had a

chance of being able to attend to business of any kind, if and

they shook their heads; his faire owns debilitated, his constitution

anything but strong; they hoped, but they also feared ;

they had never seen the disease under a worse form. It was

useless for the man of business to wait ; when needed he would

return. One thing it. Is necessary for the honour of human

nature to record ; when he arrived in London, and stated to

the various persons whom the subject concerned, the circumstances

under which he hud lest Mr. and Mrs. Mansfield, they,

without one single exception, expressed their determination to

wait until Mrs. Mausfield should be able to net for there, so convinced

were they of her noble mid and high integrity. This

compliment, when conveyed to her in the business like letter of

the solicitor, certainly made her heart beat more fervently,

though she read it by the dim lamp-light of a chamber, sick well

nigh to death. It was matter of astonishment to Madeline's

friends how she ever lived through a month of never-ending

watching and suspense. There was no rest — no reprieve. It was

only the exchange of one anxiety for another. The struggle

between life and death, between reason and insanity, was such,

that her very devotion to the sufferer would have tempted her to

pray that he might be released, had it not been for the blessed

faith which, the greater the peril, the wilder the storrn, will of a

surety go on increasing in the true believer; that which cause

the feeble to cry to the grave for refuge, ennbleth the brave in

H h 2

faith to defy death. Thus it was with Madeline. The strength

of the spirit withstood the tremor of the flesh. Shaken for a

moment, as all Christians are, at times — however oppressed, or

worn, or weary, in the twilight, in the noonday, in the dim

midnight watches, even when she deemed horn she loved in the

valley of the shadow of death — she never doubted ' Her worthy

Uncle Oliver, much as he blamed her, could not avoid following

her to Paris, where, despite the kindest intentions in

the world, he materially increased her discomfort, by his dislike

to the country and to her husband ; but nothing moved her

from her duty.

Sho was by her husband's bedside one evening, when Mansfield,

who had been for upwards of three weeks in a state that

defies description, had fallen into a comparatively quiet sleep ;

his poor restless head was still, and his arms were quiet. Madeline

was thankful for the repose, when she thought she heard

voices in the ante-room in low but earnest discourse. The

chamber of the sick man was so spacious, that it took her some

little time, stealing along on tip-toe, to reach the door. There

she found Lewis opposing a lady entrance — not satisfied with

his powers of persuasion, but standing so as to prevent her from

entering. Madeline at once knew who the stranger was ; but

the instant she saw Mi's. Mansfield, she threw herself on her

knees, and, in smothered accents, entreated to Bee Mr. Mansfield

once more. "He will uot know me," she murmured ; " and as

I am returning to my own country, I could not bear to depart

without imploring you to grant me this act of mercy." Instead

of repulsing her, as Lewis expected sho would have done, she

suffered her to follow her to the bedside ; and, though her hand

trembled, she shaded the light from his eyes — eyes that, sleeping

or waking, were unconscious of all that hud occurred, and only

saw the dissolving phantoms of a heated brain. The Italian

looked long and earnestly upon horn ; and what passed in her

mid can only be known to the Almighty, for she spoke no word.

At last, she sunk on her knees by the bedside, and, pressing her

face on the counterpane, wept most bitterly. The unconscious

sufferer tossed his hands, and as one rested for au instant near

her, she kissed it. Madeline turned away. The quick Italian

perceived it, and rising, whispered her, " It is the lost — wc shall

meet no more." She drew the curtain, and added, " And you,

can you forgive me ? — can you really forgive me ? Can you

think of, and not curse me ? Are you really so good ? You are

not cold, but calm. Can you forgive the warm blood of the

South ? You, who know it not, have you that charity in the

heart for a sinner? — you, who have walked with your God so

long ? " With such murmured sentences, she bent lowly before

Madeline, who, deeply affected, drew her into another room.

•' I do forgive you," she said ; " and to prove it, if I can, now

or hereafter, by taking from the small share of tho comforts of

life which I am likely to enjoy, I will bestow on you what will

save you from the want that is so often the parent of sin. God

knows how gladly I will do it. I would be your friend, and save

you. Do not believe that, as a woman, having sinned, you cannot

be saved. There are some, even of your owu land, who

would urge this as a reason for your continuing in sin ; but

I tell you it is not so: and let this conviction be with you night

and day. I, Madeline Mansfield, have told you so — I, who of

all others you have most wronged. I repeat what I have learned

from the book of life : I say, ' Neither do I condemn thee. Go,

and sin no more ' "

And they parted. Long after, when that ardent, erring spirit,

bright, yet spotted with both folly and crime, pursued a profession

replete with dangers and temptations to tho purest and

the best — often, amid the plaudits of approving hands — often,

in the poisoned atmosphere of envy, or the lying sickness of

flattery, or the dangers of unholy jesting, did that real scene,

and those blessed words, return to tbc wanderers memory ;

never but to serve — often to save ! When the glittering gems,

false as the scenes in which they glittered, fell from her brow,

and self-reproach — for much that she had left undone, and much

that she had done — smote upon her heart — then would the

words of forgiveness come to her, full of healing. And in her

dreams, the vision of Madeline would stand before her — the

image of her, whom, when unseen and unknown, she hated with

a Southern's jealousy ; but who, when seen, won her by conduct

so different from anything she had imagined possible, that she

became enshrined to her poor erring spirit, as a holy memory,

for ever.

How many are there who puss through life without noting

that in the exercise of forbearance is a mighty power — a power

felt and appreciated when the storrn and tbc reproach would be

forgotten ! At last, the patient, whom Madeline had so watched

and so prayed for, begun to recover ; his consciousness returned,

and then he hung upon Madeline's words and Madeline's looks,

with apparently the same seeling which makes a child cling to

its mother. His mid was even more feeble than his liody.

When he was able to endure an increase of light in his room, he

begged that the curtain might be withdrawn ; nd Madeline sat

writing with noiseless pen by his side. Suddenly she looked up,

and saw his eyes fixed upon her.

Speak," he said, " speak ; for I can hardly believe that you

are there."

Madeline smiled — a smile which expressed more than mere

mortal beauty ever could — and said a few fond words.

He passed his hand over her suce, nd amid her hair, and

then felt the arm, so thin and work, that not a trace of its

roundness remained. " How changed," he sighed — " how sadly

changed ; and it is all my work ! " and he sobbed and cried,

covering his suce with his bounds. This little scene was frequently

repeated. She could not go near horn without his recalling what

she was, and blaming himself; while she assured horn that now,

as he was recovering, she was quite happy, aud felt her happiness

must increase. But time passed, and was passing, and their

affairs must be speedily arranged. The agitation might cause a

relapse, a return of inflammation of the brain, and either destroy

life or deprive her husband of reason. Still, he was much better,

and she prepared horn for his lawyer's presence. He came ; but

before Mansfield knew of his being in the hotel, he visited Uncle

Oliver, who wus laid up with a fit of the gout. While Madeline's

husband slumbered in the easy chair, to which he hud been

removed, she went to her uncle's room, and found the old gentleman

in a great state of excitement As she entered, she heard

such epithets as " the fool," " the idiot," " the senseless, brainless

fool." " It's no use, Mr. Bramwell," quoth the old gentleman,

when Madeline stood at his side—" it's no use ; but there is no

such thing as a sensible woman — no such thing. One rushes

into one extreme, like Mrs. Smith ; and the other, like Madeline

: and yet, I'll tell you what it is, sir," he continued, moving

bis gout-stool with his stick — "I'll tell you what it is — (hung

this stool ! the French air, sir, has spoiled it altogether — warped

the English elm. more than it could ever do to the English oak)

I'll tell you what it is, it does not at all signify to such a

woman as Madeline who she marries ; it is sufficient that he is

her husband — that is all, sir. If she had the misfortune to be

married to a Frenchman — I put the case as strongly us I can —

if she, Madeline, hud the misfortune, though an Englishwoman,

to be married to a Frenchman, even to Bonaparte, my belief is,

she'd have followed horn into exile — there !" aud he struck his

stick violently upon the floor.

"My dear uncle ! " said Madeline.

Here, again, she gets over me, sir, with her softness, and

drives me mad with her resolution. Look at her; the shadow

of herself— fading — faded ; nearer death at this moment than he

she has been watching over und praying for, as if he were a sant

instead of a sinner."

A sant would not need my prayers," replied Mrs. Mansfield,

parrying the old gentlemans bitterness.

A rascal ! " persisted Uncle Oliver.

Uncle," interrupted Madeline, " you know I suffer neither

hard names nor hard words towards him."

Look at her now," said the old gentleman ; " see how

crimson her check is, and how her lip trembles the momenta

word is said against horn ; and now, because she will neither

quarrel with me, nor hear horn abused, she walks out of the

room. I'd give a hundred pounds to seed the Frenchmen for

one day with good roast beef, if she would only call horn a rascal !

but she won't - she will not Mansfield will sign anything shell

ask now, and so shell give up her property ; and when he

gets better, hell be off again. The evil spirit is lulled, not

expelled ; und then, when the devil (who likes new and rich

faces) bids horn good-bye, shell believe he is reformed. My

poor Madeline, my bright pure spirit, bo like my sister I And

you nd I, Brarawell, who would have made such admirable

husbands — you and I " — and the old gentleman shook his head.

But, sir," observed Mr. Bramwell, "do you not see that

Mrs. Munssicld's suppress consists in the very sacrifices you

deplore ? She is like the angels — rejoicing over the one that

repented ; like the martyrs — glorying iv her duty, as they did

iv their faith ; and, despite what you say, she will have her great

reward ? It is a clear impossibility that such goodness and such

virtue will be without their recompense. Mr. Mansfield will

strengthen in her strength, and become a new creature : he will

see the world as it is — he will."

He will do no such thing," exclaimed bitter Uncle Oliver.

"When he does, I will sat my crutch!"

Remember your promise," said Mr. Bramwell, laughing

Uncle Oliver remained silent, and the lawyer again spoke. " And

worn and faded as Mrs. Mansfield looks, after sufferings that

would have killed persons with stronger bodies but weaker

minds, she is uot so worn and faded as the creature who has

destroyed her husband's peace aud lor own by perpetual Jan.

Such scenes us have passed between Smith und his wise make me

bless my bachelor estate. — A woman who cannot indulge her

husband, may marry a man of five-and-twenty, but ought never

to venture on five-ands thirty. Wo stiffen mightily iv all thugs

after wc puss thirty. Don't you think so, sir?"

No, sir ; /do not," said the testy Oliver. " I am au

example to the contrary. lam at sixty-six, as pliant as a

willow ; if I were not, how could I have gone through all I

have, aud in France too ; but I heard that Elizabeth had been

spoken lightly of, and that Joseph has absolutely got a habit

of drinking."

They say so," observed the cautious lawyer.

They ! " repeated Uncle Oliver, angry at what he knew was

a fact receiving confirmation. " And who are ' they? ' Everybody

— nobody. ' They ! ' ' They ' is a regular scandal-monger

—an unknown, unacknowledged, unseen, unanswered, unauthorised

creation, quoted on all occasions, and, be he ever so great

a liar, believed, while doubted — aught ! "

You asked me, or I should not have spoken on the subject,

as Mrs. Smith is your relation," said Mr. Bramwell.

And what is that to me?" exclaimed Uncle Oliver. "Do

you think I am such a fool as to cure for her the more for

that ? Relationship is no guarantee for liking or protection ;

if it were, would Mansfield have behaved as he did to that

angel ? "

On the other hand, would she behave as she does to

any "

Not a fair answer, sir," interrupted Uncle Oliver. " She'd

behave well to every one. What do you think of her telling that

woman that she'd But it's no matter ; she little thought I

heard her. When I speak of Madeline, I become a fool." And

the old gentleman wiped his eyes, and then holding his stick by

its crooked head, made it perform sundry evolutions in the air

until it unfortunately struck his gouty toe, and then he roared

so loud, as to recal his niece, and bring little Arthur scampering

into the room.

Those who have not watched the fearful ravages of a disease

such as Mr. Mansfield encountered, are invariably shocked at the

appearance of the convalescent ; and while his friends, who have

been with horn day and night, think how much better he is,

strangers believe horn to be on the brink of the grave. The

witty, high-spirited, handsome Mansfield - the man whose word

established the reputation of a horse, the character of a tailor,

the excellence of a new opera or a uew novel, and whose bow, so

slight, yet, when necessary, so impressive, wus reported as " the

most elegant thing iv the Park " — wus now a worn, attenuated,

panting skeleton, unable to think, but not to feel, tears rushing

on the smallest occasion to his aching eyes ; while his mid,

reeling from over-wrought excitement and disease, could not rely

upon itself. It was piteous, while he signed, nd assigned, and

did as Madeline requested, to hear his child-like entreaties that

she would uot wrong herself, that she would leave horn to perish

rather, that she would let things take their course ; while she

soothed and calmed horn, fixed, in her high-mindedness, in her

purpose to save his credit at the lust, and pass most likely all

the remainder of her days in comparative poverty, glorying — as

she smoothed the abundant tresses of her boys head — in the

feeling, that her practice and precept would, by God's blessing,

give her such power over her son's education, that he would feel

hereafter that the glory of au honest name was better than the

glitter of dishonoured gold

Did you see her when her folly was completed ?" whispered

Uncle Oliver to Mr. Bramwell. " Did you over see such a change

iv a human being? You woidd have thought she had just

received, instead of having just resigned, a fortune ; while her

husband was ya-king and ha-king, and wiping his eyes ;" and then

Uncle Oliver wiped his. " Now, I suppose, they will have about

four hundred a-year to live and educate their child on. The

child's maid, I find, is to return to England with you ; and

tomorrow, as Mansfield is able to be moved, they leave the

hotel, and go to Versailles. Ah, sir, sho has sold every jewel she

had in the world, and offered Lewis six months' wages to leave

them ; but tho old fellow sell on his knees, aud entreated to

remain. Don't talk to me about the wickedness of human

nature. Sir, I glory in human nature. There are specimens of

it in all ranks of life, that should have temples built to them.

Those who undervalue it do not deserve well of it ; you may

carry that us a conviction to your grave."

I believe you are right," said Mr. Bramwell.

I am, sir ; I am always right ; and I am right in leaving

Madeline for a time. It breaks my heart that I have not

thousands to give her. I try her too much, and sho has plague

enough without mc. I want to see aster that fool Smith and

his wife, and shall be in London a day or two after you."

Madeline was now alone with her husband, suiting her

expenditure to their narrow means, and rejoicing that she had

been able to defray the cost of his illness from a fund raised by

the sale of her jewels. At first, Mansfield's returning health

Drought back many of his old habits, and though he tried to

restrain them, the very necessity for doing so produced an irritability

of temper that would have worn out any human being

less sweet than Madeline. It is certain that wc are less grateful

for large than for small sacrifices. If Mrs. Mansfield hud been

content to think, " I have given up a fortune to save and to

reclaim horn, and will do no more," she would never have succeeded.

A great sacrifice is very frequently felt as a reproach,

when a small one is considered a mark of affection. Once, aud

only once, he questioned her us to the events of the day when

che visited his hotel. Certainly it would be easier for any woman

to praise the exquisite delicacy nd truth of her statement, than

to follow her example ; it is the passage in her life which has

always been to me the most exalted. It was a glorious thing to

hear her doing justice to one whom a woman of ordinary mid

would have considered a rival ; while, by her noble conduct, she,

without intending it, raised herself immeasurably above all comparison

with the Italian. Mansfield, abashed more by her

heroism of the heart, than by all her more business-like exertions

or patient endurance, implored her forgiveness, and spoke of his

being so degraded in such sinless eyes us hers, with the simplicity

of a child that makes confession at its mother's knee. She told

horn how the spirit of jealousy and revenge had stirred within

her, and how little she deserved that he should rate her so

highly. And now, poor us they were, Madeline lægnn to feel the

reward of her forbearance. Never, in the days of his early love,

had Mausfield evinced the same continuing tenderness, guarded

by a watchfulness over himself, that he did now ; he seemed

to look upon her us a protecting angel. When still weak from

any exertion, he leant upon her arm in their morning and

evening walks . when she worked, or read, or wrote, or philosophised

in her own quiet way (which slœ could uot think

philosophy) upon past times, and tried to make Mansfield

deem well of Uncle Oliver, or play the tutor to his son, an

occupation which seemed to interest horn in earnest — at all

these times he gained uot only strength of body, but all

unhealthy excitements being far from horn, his mid, refined

and polished, strengthened also. He was, like all of his peculiar

temperament, much the creature of habit, and what he did

to-day he wished to do tomorrow. His affairs had been at

last skilfully managed, and he could not meet a man whom

he need have been ashamed to look in the face. Still, the idea

of being called "poor Mansfield" haunted his imagination ,

much, that Madeline had never hinted at their return to England,

which she still fondly thought of as their home. It

certainly did them both honour to see how they brought their

habits to the level of their circumstances, enjoying existence,

notwithstanding the shadows left by the past. Mansfield would

have been much happier, hud it not occurred to horn so frequently

as to retard his recovery, that his wise was hastening

before horn to another world ; aud certainly those who had

known her a few months before, would hardly have recognised

the outline of her former self. They had been inhaling the soft

evening breeze, which does not bring, as with us, those heavy

dews fraught with danger, now sauntering nloug a shaded

alley, and then sitting upon the trunk of a fallen tree, when,

just as they were seated, they heard a laugh from the path

they had quitted, aud immediately after the sounds of English

voices.

Mansfield grew at once red and then pale. "It is really too

bad," he exclaimed ; "wc must plunge farther into the depths of

France, to escape these perpetual intrusions."

Madeline's colour also heightened, but from a different cause —

she thought she knew the female voice. "How shall wc retreat

? " she said ; "wc must pass them to get home."

Mr. Mansfield rose, and took hold of Arthur baud. "If wc

walk quickly," he replied, "wc can pass the wood before they

leave it." But he miscalculated; a group of persons emerged

from the shade us they reached the spot of which Mr. Mansfield

bad spoken.

"Well, I declare!" exclaimed the lady iv a loud strange tone,

there are the poor Mansfield ! " and the same moment Mrs.

Mansfield's haud was grasped, and her check kissed, by little

Mrs. Smith.

As well as Mr. Mansfield's confusion and annoyance permitted

horn to observe, there were two ladies and two gentlemen of tho

party, one of whom was Mr. Orepoint, who advanced and held

out his hand to Mr. Mansfield.

Well," continued Mrs. Smith, with more than her usual

volubility, " who could have fancied meeting you here, after all

that wc heard; but, Madeline, you were always au angel!"

Then turning to Mansfield, she said, holding up her finger, while

her jewelled cassolette dangled from her hand, "Ah, you naughty

boy Indeed, you are such a naughty man, that I don't think

I shall speak to you ! You know I am not at all like my

cousin ! "

I am quite aware of it," said Mr. Mansfield, bowing proudly.

Not a bit. My goodness, how ill you both look ! But no

wonder, yon have gone through so much. Wc drove down hereto

see the water-works, or fire-works, or whatever they are ; but

it's tho wrong day, so wc must come again."

"Aud where is your husband?" inquired Madeline; while

Mr. Mansfield, having regained his self-possession, addressed a

tew words to Mr. Orepoint.

Mre. Smiths countenance darkened. " Oh, you need not put

on your most proper face. Wc go on much as usual ; but he is

at the place where wc dined. He remained with another of our

party, drinking brandy nd water and discussing moral theories.

I tell you frankly, Madeline, I shall not be able to bear horn

much longer."

Hush, here they come," said her companion, touching Mrs.

Smiths sleeve; "here they come; do let us run away down this

valley; 1 know tho path. A lions, all cis, messieurs!"

"Au revoir!" exclaimed Mrs. Smith, taking Mr. Orepoint's

arm, and following the lady — " au revoir / "

And they did come. Joseph Smith — and his friend, I suppose

I must call him — stood, not very steadily, either the one or the

other, before the Mansfield, while tho tone of the revoir fluttered

and ached in Madeline's ear.

I beg your pardon," said poor Smith, lifting his hut, for he

did not recognise them immediately, and he looked stupidly

wise while he spoke — " I beg your pardon ; but have you seen

my wife ? "

Few words ever caused Mrs. Mansfield a more acute pang

than these. The kind, simple, absent, and thoughtless man, so

completely, so entirely changed. There was a tipsyness about

his dress and gestures — in the way his foot moved when he

meant to stand still, as if it clawed the earth for support —

in the careless rest of his hat, and the slothful sit of the stock

and half-buttoned waistcoat. Absent and strange he had always

been, but it used to be the absence of mid, uot the presence of

serai-intoxication.

"I am sure I beg your pardon," he repeated ; " but have you

seen my wife ? "

"Do you not know mo ? " said Mr. Mansfield.

And me ? " added Madeline.

He was, indeed, earnestly rejoiced to see them. " I know

you 1" he repeated ; " to be sure I do, and have heard so much

about you. Why, you were town-talk for a month; first abused,

and then praised, and then forgotten. Know you ! "

Mansfield turned away, and Mrs. Mansfield raised her finger

to her lip. Mr. Smith understood the sign.

"I would rather see you, Mrs. Mansfield, than any living

creature," he said. " You are the only one who can do anything

with Fur. She is worse than ever. Wc separated — yes, that

was it — and then it was made up by Uncle Oliver, and I agreed

to bring her here for a treat ; but wc quarrelled all the way.

Aud here wc met. Orepoiut — and then — and then — these last two

days she has been like But it's the champagne," he added ina

confidential tone. " She drinks — she does, faith ! She drinks

aud when a woman does that, why it's impossible to tell what

a woman may do who is too fond of champagne."

Or a man either," said Madeline, looking steadily at him.

That's severe for you," he said, returning the look with his

dim and filmy eyes. " A man like me, who can propound great

moral theories, is not likely to do that; it's contrary to all

philosophy. But she's a fool, and you cannot give to fools the

understanding of the wise. I never could comprehend, myself,

how our little disagreements grew into such feuds, though I had

an inkling of it "-he paused with a most painful gravity —

the Sunday before wc left home, when the rector preached

about a gram of mustard-seed growing into a great tree ; that

was it, our first disagreement was a gram of mustard seed,

our last, the great tree. My life is a curse to me — a deliberate

curse. Perhaps you could talk to her. But how very odd

1 am. I must go and console Mansfield, aud tell horn all the

people said."

'• For Heaven's sake." interrupted the anxious wife, ' do not

speak to horn at all of tho past; he cannot bear it Oil dc

understand mo ; Mausfield cannot bear to hear of the past"

"Oh, very well - as you please," answered Smith, with au air

of stupid astonishment ; "as you please. Not hear of the past!

oh, very well, I'll take care to remember that. I remember, too,

what you told me about clubs, and I told her of it; but she

drove me there to get rid of mc. That's a charming thing : a

man marries to make his home comfortable, and then his wife

drives horn to the club - ah I "

Madeline could endure a great deal, but she could endure

this no longer ; it was sickening — more than she could bear. The

mixture of truth and stolidity, the aspect of the man so

changed, his hanging cheeks, aud meaningless eyes, all spoke the

rapid issue of what she feared. Many persons are knitted

together, and endure the tortures (which early and steady attention

to the golden rule, bear and forbear, would prevent) for

their, children's sakes ; but the Smiths were not bound by auy

such tie, and the result was before her. Sad us it was to see the

wreck of such a human being, it is almost impossible to conceive

the revulsion of feeling which Madeline experienced when her

eyes rested upon her husband. Worn and ill us he still wus, she

thought he had never looked so dignified, as if, having cast away

all that obscured his better qualities, he had grown above himself

Contrary to his usual practice, Mausfield told Mr. Smith

where they resided, and then they pursued their homeward

walk; while Smith amused a party of Frenchmen whom he met,

by asking " if they hod seen his wife ? "

Mndclinc," said her husband, after they bnd entered her

apartment, " I do not think I ever felt the fulness of what you

have done for me until within the last hour. My God I if you

had been such a woman as your cousin, what should I have been

now ? How you have borne with me, and why, I cannot tell.

I have been your bane, while you have been my blessing. May

1 fe, who gave me an angel as my guardian, make me in some

degree worthy of her. Oh, if I could but obliterate from your

memory my past neglect, my unfaithfulness, I should care for

nothing else ; for, iv all the business transactions which you

investigated, there was no dishonour I"

Thank God," replied Madeline. " there was uot, aud I knew

there would be none ; nd He also knows, that my love is as

deep for you as ever."

I know that," he replied ; '' but your trust it gone."

She raised her eyes to his — eyes whose lustre hud never been

dimmed by the least wavering of untruth.

"It is gone!" he repeated passionately.

"It was gone, dear Mausfield," she answered. "It has returned;

it has been returning long, when, day by dny, I have

heard you rend and explain to our boy tho words of Holy Writ.

When wc knelt together in this land of a faith foreign to our

own, and prayed to our Creator, as I think wc never prayed

before ; when I have seen how eagerly you drank of the fountain

of living waters, strengthening your spirit, without tho

parade of words, or cant of reformation, oh ! how I have bowed

in gratitude to Horn who has poured His grace into your soul !

Yes, I do trust; for your trust is established where the powers of

evil cauuot prevail against it." And Mansfield believed her.

Well he knew, that though he might deceive himself, Madeline

would never deceive him. Is not the establishing such gracious

confidence as this one of tbc best triumphs of wedded life?

It was long since they had enjoyed such happiness ; the night

was passing, but they noted it not ; former times were talked of,

but Madeline had the blessed power of abstracting their sting.

And when she painted a future, it was not with the vividness of

an exaggerating dreamer, but with the reality of the exercise of

Christian conduct, calling the best energies of our nature into

action, in the full confidence that such is the desire of God, and

trusting that He will bless them.

Mausfield hardly ventured to plan for the future, though his

mid, healthier than it had ever been, purified by the fire of

adversity it had passed through, was beginning to desire a more

active and useful existence. They watched the moon climbing

the heavens, and the stars silently pursuing their noiseless and

appointed paths, aud were astonished when they found it was

past midnight. Mansfield was about to shut the window at

which they had been seated, when they heard a rush in the

garden, and, guided by the light, footsteps ascended to their

room, and the haggard suce and wild beamless eyes of poor

Smith glared upon them.

"Is she here ? " he inquired breathlessly ; "is my wife

here ? Ha e you seen her ? For the sake of mercy, tell

Me so."

The Mansfield assured horn they had not ; aud he then told

them that neither she nor Mr. Orepoint had returned to the

hotel, although their companions had — saying they missed them

in the wood, and expected to find them there. This intelligence

completely sobered the unfortunate husband, although it had

evidently not restored horn to his senses. He sent the police in

search of " his wife " in every direction ; and then it occurred

to horn that it might have been only a freak to frighten horn,

aud that she hud gone to her cousin. Pained and distressed,

the Mansfield entreated horn to remain with them until the

morning. He consented to do so, weeping like a child, then

bursting forth into loud indignation. Then wailing again — " If

Bhe had only borne my little faults — oh, if sho had but borne

them — instead of being what I am — what I feel I am — I might

have been honoured iv a peaceful home. Let no man say I will

be honoured, I will be respected, unless his wife wills he shall be

so." The first light of day was streaming through the sky, as

they watched the-unhappy man making his way through the

mazes which led to the old chateau, of which they occupied a

portion; and as they closed the window, Madeline said, "There

i i

was truth in what he said of the gram of mustard-seed — their

first quarrels were hardly as large as that ; yet see the fearful

termination. I warned and watched, but her folly and obstinacy

were both deaf and blind."

Mi's. Mansfield never saw her unfortunate cousin after that

night, though, in three weeks, she heard she was deserted by

a man who never cared for anything beyond amusement, and

who lamed her husband for life in a duel in the Bois de Bologna

; and the jesters of the time called horn " The Wife

Hunter!" He is sometimes seen at the British Museum, and

sometimes limping about the genuinely old curiosity shops —

having taken to antiquity as a solace, instead of brandy, which

he says Mrs. Mansfield persuaded horn to give up — not, however,

before it had injured his constitution.

It. Is time this story was concluded ; and yet how limited its

space to describe tbc events of a life I I have, after all, made

but a feeble sketch of Madeline ; and though Uncle Oliver has

not ate bis crutch, he confesses he ought to have done so ; for he

has ceased to call her husband " a rascal."

The Mansfield had not been a year abroad, when an excellent

appointment was offered horn in one of the public offices. He

shrank from a London residence, fearing to meet cold eyes and

distant bows from those who revelled with and in his wealth.

And Madeline — what said she ? Why, she laughed, and said

surely her husband jested ; if such looked cold, they would look

colder, and if a distant bow were given, not only seem, but wish

to cut the giver. Aud sho walked down the streets where once

her carriage rolled, with the dignity of a most honoured and

honourable woman ; and those who saw it were ashamed to call

them "the poor Mansfield" any longer — for self-dignity commands

even a fool's deference. And by degrees, to the delight

of the faithful Lewis, carriages drove up to their door, and she

received visitors as if they had parted but yesterday, yet

declined their invitations as cheerfully as Mansfield had declined

the club;" and then her son — if she had no other reward for

her past endurance, his honour and his love might have been

envied by the mother of the Gracchus ; and his father loved horn

as dearly, and was as proud of horn as she was — nay is; and it

is delightful to see how the young honour her ; how husbands

point her to their wives, and mothers to their daughters; and

even while all lament they cannot be like her, yet all believe in

her, and still she is unconscious that she deserves either praise

or admiration.

A. LIST OF BOOKS

SELECTED FROM THE

Catalogue

OF —

J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY,

(Complete Catalogue Sent on Application.)

pisceltattcous.

Rand.

Elements of Medical Chemistry. 1 21110, cloth, $2.00.

Ad. Wurtz.

Elements of Modern Chemistry. Translated and Edited by

Prof. Wm. H. Greene, M.D. Illustrated. Third Edition.

Revised to date. 121110, cloth, #2.50. Sheep, $3.00.

Lessons in Chemistry. With numerous Wood-cuts. imo,

half roan, cloth sides, $1.25.

Contemporary Science Library.

The Science of Language. By Abel Lovelace. Imo,

cloth, $1.50.

Biology. By Dr. Charles Letourneau. Illustrated. Crown

Svo, cloth, $1.50.

Anthropology. By Dr. Paul Topinard. Crown Bvo, Si. 50.

Æsthetics. By Eugene Vernon. 121110, cloth, Si. so.

Philosophy. By A. Lefevre. 121110, cloth, $1.50.

J. H. Hobbs.

Country and Suburban Residences. With upwards of 100

Engravings. New Revised Edition. Bvo, cloth, J3.00.

Samuel Sloan.

City and Suburban Architecture. Imperial 4to, cloth, Jio.oo.

Constructive Architecture. Quarto. Cloth, 57.50.

Homestead Architecture. Bvo, cloth, £3.50.

The Model Architect. 2 vols. Imperial 4.0, half morocco,

$18.00. All fully Illustrated with Plates and Drawings.

Addison.

Complete Works. 6 vols. 121110, cloth, $7. 50.

Ancient Classics for English Readers.

A popular Translation of the Classics. Edited by the Rev.

W. Lucas Collins. 161110, per vol., cloth, 50 cents.

New England Bygones. Fine Illustrated Edition, with

Memoir by Gail Hamilton. Bvo, cloth, gilt extra, $5.00.

Tree calf, 59.00.

Old-Time Child-Life. l6mo, extra cloth, $1.25.

John W. Nostrum, C.E.

Pocket-Book of Mechanics and Engineering. Nineteenth

Edition, Revised and greatly Enlarged with Original

Matter. By William Dennis Marks, Ph.B., C.E. (Yale

S.S.S.). 161110, pocket-book form, S ; .50.

H. C. Carey.

The Principles of Social Science. 3 vols. Bvo, cloth, $10.00

Foreign Classics for English Readers.

Edited by Mrs. Oliphant. imo. Per vol., cloth, $1.00.

Complete Works. II vols. l2mo, cloth, $11.00. Full alligator,

yellow burnished edges, $27.50. Full alligator, in

alligator box, $33.50. Half calf, gilt, $27.50.

Hahn.

Hebrew Bible. Bvo, half morocco, $3.15.*

G. Henry Horseman.

Consular Reminiscences.

l2mo, cloth, $1.25

Mrs. B. C. Howard.

Fifty Years in a Maryland Kitchen. imo, cloth, $1.50.

Emma Seller.

The Voice in Singing. New Edition. imo, cloth, $1.25.

The Voice in Speaking. Illustrated. 1 21110, cloth, $1.25.

Francis S. Drake.

Indian Tribes of the United States : Their History, Antiquities,

Customs, Religion, Arts, etc. Illustrated with over

100 Fine Engravings on Steel. 2 vols., quarto, half morocco,

$25.00. Sold by subscription only.

Laurence Sterne.

Complete Works, with Life of Author. Globe Edition.

!imo, cloth, $1.50.

Tristan Shandy. 121110, cloth, $1.00.

Sentimental Journey. 121110, cloth, $1.00.

That. S. Up de Graff, M.D.

Camping in the Allegiance; or, Bodies. A Complete

Practical Treatise and Guide to Camping Out. Profusely

Illustrated. Ntw Edition. l2mo, cloth, $1.25.

Edward Whimper.

Scrambles Amongst the Alps ; also, Down the Rhine, by

Lady Blanche Murphy. I vol. Illustrated. New Edition.

Large Bvo, cloth, gilt edges, $3.00. Alligator, $5.00.

Morocco, $5.50.

Marshall Brown.

Wit and Wisdom of Proverbial Philosophy. 121110, cloth,

$1.00. Paper, 25 cents.

Francis Turner Palsgrave.

The Golden Treasury of the Best Songs and Lyrical Poems

in the English Language. With a continuation, embracing

Selections from the Works of Recent and Living English

Poets. Edited by John Foster Kirk. Illustrated. Red

line. Cloth, gilt edges, $3.50. Alligator, $5.00 Morocco,

$5.50. Tree calf, $8.00.

Rev. F. Sydney Morris.

Wisdom, Wit, and Pathos. Selected from " Ouida's" Works.

With Portrait. l2mo, cloth, gilt top, $1.50.

Wm. Carey Crane, Dad., LL.D.

Life and Select Literary Remains of Sam Houston, of Texas.

Illustrated. Royal Bvo, cloth, $4.75. Sheep, $5.75.

Col. W. C. Falkner.

Rapid Ramblings in Europe. Illustrated. l2mo, cloth, $2.00.

J. T. Rothrock, M.D.

Vacation Cruising in Chesapeake and Delaware Bays. Illustrated.

!imo, cloth, $1.50.

Mrs. H. E. G. Are.

Home and School Training. 1 21110, cloth limp, 75 cents.

Frescoes.

A Scries of Dramatic Stories. By"Ouida." l2mo, cloth,

$1.25.

P. W. Norris.

Calumet of the Coteau, and other Poetical Legends of the

Border. Together with a Guide-book of the Yellowstone

National Park. Illustrated. imo, cloth, $1.50.

The Seven Ages of Man.

From Shakespeare "As You Like It." The Artists' Edition.

Illustrated with Photogravures from Original Paintings.

Quarto, extra cloth, $3.00. Alligator, $3.50. Morocco,

$4.50.

Cheap Edition. Illustrated with Wood-cuts. Small 4to,

extra cloth, $1.50. Alligator, $1.50. Morocco, $1.75.

Rev. W. Pittenger.

Capturing a Locomotive. Illustrated. imo, $1.50.

Paul Bert.

First Steps in Scientific Knowledge. Seven Parts in one

l6mo volume, or in Four Books, as follows : Book One.

Natural History of Animals. Book Two. Plants, Stones,

and Rocks. Book Three. Physics and Chemistry. Book

Four. Anatomy and Physiology. Translated by Madame

Paul Bert. Revised and Corrected by Prof. Wm. H.

Greene, M.D. With 550 Illustrations. Complete in one

volume. l6mo, extra cloth, 75 cents. Price per Book,

30 cents each.

William Dennis Marks, Ph.B., C.E.

The Relative Proportions of the Steam Engine. A Course

of Lectures ou the Steam Engine, delivered to the Students

of Dynamical Engineering in the University of Pennsylvania.

Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged. With

numerous Illustrations. 121110, extra cloth, $3.00.

Robert Ridgway.

Manual of North American Birds. For the Naturalist and

Sportsman. Containing Concise Descriptions of every

Species of Bird known in North America, and Illustrated

by 425 Outline Cuts of the Generic Characters. Library

Edition. Large Bvo. Bound in cloth, $7.50. Sportsman's

Edition. Crown Bvo. Bound in leather, $7.50.

Prof. J. H. Pepper.

Cyclopædic Science Simplified. The Work embraces Light,

Heat, Electricity, Magnetism, Pneumatics, Acoustics, and

Chemistry. With 650 Illustrations. Fourth Revised

Edition, with Additions. Bvo, cloth, gilt, $2.50.

W. H. Barlow.

Normal Phonography. Adapted to All Styles of Reporting.

!2nio, cloth, $1.00.

Col. H. C. Seddon, Ree.

Builders' Work and the Building Trades. By Col. H. C.

Seddon, Ree. With Illustrations. Bvo, cloth, $4.00.

A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy.

By Laurence Sterne. New Edition. Small 4to, extra

cloth, gilt top, $3.50.

The Enchiridion of Criticism.

Edited by William Shepard. Small quarto. Uniform with

the *' Enchiridion of Wit." Extra cloth, gilt top, $1.50.

Vellum, $2.00. Half morocco, $3.00.

Through Spain.

A Narrative of Travel and Adventure in the Peninsula.

By S. P. Scott. Profusely Illustrated. Small 4to. Handsomely

bound in cloth, gilt top, and rough edges, $5.00.

The Inca Princess. An Historical Romance. Cabinet

quarto. Containing 12 beautiful Illustrations by Church,

Sedley, Pyle, Chase, and others. Cloth, full gilt, $2.50.

Vellum, gilt top, rough edges, $2.50. Alligator, $2.50.

Full morocco, $3.00.

Ogle and the Elf. A Fantasy. Illustrated with 13 Photogravures

of Original Drawings by eminent artists, also with

incidental designs. Imo, cloth extra, $2.00. Alligator,

$2.50. Morocco, $3.00.

Iris. The Romance of an Opal Ring. A Poem. Handsomely

Illustrated. Small 410, cloth, gilt, $3.00. Turkey

antique, $7.50.

Anti Ora. A Poem. Elegantly Illustrated from designs by

W. L. Shepard. Small 4.0, cloth, gilt, $2.50.

Eudora. A Tale of Love. With Illustrations by H.

Siddons Mowbray and W. Hamilton Gibson, and with

decorations in the text by L. S. Ipse. Cloth extra, $2.50.

The Song of Songs.

Super-Royal quarto. Illustrated with 26 full-page Original

Etchings from Designs by Bid. Etched by Edmund

Bedouin and Emile Boiling. Also 12 Culs-de-Lampes

from Designs by Gustave Grex. Morocco extra, $18.00.

Will Carleton, Alice Cary, Cooper, S. M. Clemens (Mark

lin, O. B. Nottingham, Prest. C. C. Felon, Parke Godwin,

Helen Hunt, Dr. Isaac I. Hayes, Dr. O. W. Holmes,

Irving, Henry James, Jr., James Russell Lowell, Longfellow,

Motley, Horace Mann, Edgar Allan Poe, Prest.

Noah Porter, Wm. H. Prescott, Theodore Parker, James

Parton, J. G. Percival, Geo. D. Prentice, Francis Parian,

Richard Henry Standard, Joseph Story, W. W. Story, H.

R. Schoolcraft, Bayard Taylor, Charles Dudley Warner,

Whittier, Theodore Winthrop, William Wirt, Mrs. A. D.

T. Whitney, Richard Grant White.

Selected and arranged by Charles Morris. Complete in four

crown octavo vols. of about 500 pages each. Cloth, gilt

top, $6.00. Half morocco, $10.00. Three-quarters calf,

$13.00.

The Ingoldsby Legends ;

Or, Mirth and Marvels. By the Rev. Richard Horns

Barbara. The Burlington Edition. With Illustrations by

Cruikshank, Leech, and Tenniel. 3 vols. Cloth, gilt top,

$4.50. Half morocco, $6.00. Three-quarters calf, $9.00.

Charles Lamb's Complete Works.

New Edition. 6 vols. 161110. Cloth, gilt top, $9.00. Half

morocco, $12.00. Three-quarters calf, $18.00.

This edition, published in connection with the English publisher,

is the most complete, and is uniform in size with

the Cabinet Edition of George Eliot.

Emily Thornton Charles (Emily Hawthorne).

Lyrical Poems, Songs, Pastorals, Roundelays, Madrigals.

Bvo, cloth, $2.00.

Three Poems.

Royal Bvo, cloth, $6.00. Ivory surface, $6.00. Full t.cc

calf, slo.oo. This volume contains " Gray's Elegy," "The

Hermit," by Oliver Goldsmith, and " The Closing Scene,"

by T. Buchanan Read. Illustrated by the best artists.

Thomas Buchanan Read.

Poetical Works. 3 vols. l6mo, cloth, gilt top, $5.25.

Illustrated Library Edition. Bvo, cloth, gilt, $4.00.

The Wagoner of the Allegiance. Bvo, cloth, gilt top, $1.50.

Drifting. A Poem. Illustrated. Small 4to, cloth, gilt, $1.50.

Brushwood. A Poem. Illustrated. Small 4.0, cloth, gilt, $1.50.

Christine. A Poem. Illustrated. Small 4.0, cloth, gilt, $1.50.

Gems from Read's Poems. Three Poems. Drifting, Brushwood,

and Christine. Illustrated. Small 4to, cloth, $3.00.

The Closing Scene. A Poem. Illustrated. Small 4to,

cloth, $3.00. Alligator, $3.50. Morocco, gilt, $4.50.

Shakespeare.

Complete Works. Edited by Charles and Mary Bowden

Clarke. Illustrated. 4 vols. Bvo, cloth, gilt top, $12.00.

I vol. Bvo. Printed on toned paper. Embellished with a

fine Portrait and 12 Steel Illustrations. Cloth, gilt, with 20

plates, $3.00.

Bells Edition. 6 vols. Illustrated. Cloth, $7.50.

Chadwick Press Edition. Edited by S. W. Singer. 10 vols.

imo. Illustrated. Full alligator, yellow burnished

edges, $25.00.

Goethe Poems.

Translated from the German by Edgar A. Bowing. New

Edition. Revised, and including Herman and Dorothea.

i2nu>, cloth, gilt, $1.25. Also Revised Edition. 1 vol.,

12:11", cloth, $1.00.

Sir Walter Scott.

Waverley Novels. Abbotsford Edition. 12 vols. Demi

Bvo. Illustrated. Cloth, $18.00.

People's Edition. 6 vols. Illustrated. 1 21110. $9.00.

Nnv Library Edition. 25 vols. Bvo. Illustrated. Cloth,

gilt top, $1.25 per vol. Half morocco, gilt top, $2.25 per vol.

W. M. Thackeray.

Complete Works. Library Edition. Illustrations by the

author, Richard Doyle, and Frederick Walker. Complete

in 24 vols. Bvo. Price per set, English cloth, gilt, $48.00.

The Globe Edition. Illustrated. Complete in 13 vols. Crown

Bvo, per vol., $1.25. Per set, $16.25.

Popular Edition. Complete in 26 vols. 121110. Profusely

Illustrated. Per set, cloth extra, $32.50.

Standard Edition. Complete in 26 vols. Profusely Illustrated

with Steel Plates and Wood Engravings. Large

Bvo, cloth, gilt top. Also in English cloth style. $3.00

per vol.

Handy Edition. 27 vols. Half cloth, 50 cents per vol.

Half morocco, $1.00 per vol.

George Macdonald.

Malcolm. Bvo, cloth, $1.00. Paper, 50 cents.

The Marquis of Lassie. Bvo, cloth, $1.00. Paper, 50 cents.

Sir Gibbie. Bvo, cloth, $1.00. Paper, 50 cents.

Paul Faber. Bvo, cloth, $1.00. Paper, 50 cents.

Odd Trump" Novels.

The Clifton Picture. Bvo, cloth, $1.25. Paper, 75 cents.

The Odd Trump. Bvo, cloth, $1.25. Paper, 75 cents.

Haywood. Bvo, cloth, $1.25. Paper, 75 cents.

The Lacy Diamonds. Bvo, cloth, $1.25. Taper, 75 cents.

Flesh and Spirit. Bvo, cloth, $1.25. Paper, 75 cents.

The Ghost of Redbrook. Bvo, cloth, $1.25. Paper, 75 cents.

Misses Warner.

!imo, cloth, $1.50. Sets of 7 vols., in box, $10.50.

Daisy. A Sequel to Melbourne House.

Dollars and Cents.

My Brothers Keeper.

Queenly.

Say and Seal.

The Hills of the Shatemuc,

The Wide, Wide World.

The Wide, Wide World. Fine Edition. Illustrated with

Etchings. t2mo, cloth, $2.50.

Charles Reade.

Complete Works. 20 vols. Profusely Illustrated with Portrait

and Full-page Engravings. Best English Edition.

Sold only in sets. 121110, extra cloth, $25.00.

Mrs. E. Lynn Linton.

Patricia Kendall. !imo, cloth, $1.25.

The Atonement of Lean Dundas. Illustrated. Bvo, cloth,

$1.25.

The World Well Lost. Illustrated, Bvo, cloth, $1.25.

Ellen W. Olney.

Love in Idleness. Bvo, cloth, $1.00.

Through Winding Ways. Bvo, cloth, $1.25.

His Heart's Desire. l2mo, cloth, $1.50.

Fairy Gold. Illustrated. Bvo, paper, 40 cents. Cloth, 75

cents.

Clare and Bee. imo, cloth, $1.25.

Rosa N. Carey.

l6mo, half cloth, 50 cents. Paper, 25 cents.

Barbara Heathcote's Trial.

For Lilies.

Wooed and Married.

Nellie's Memories.

Queene's Whim.

Not Like Other Girls.

Wee Wise.

Robert Ord's Atonement

Uncle Max.

Esther ; a Story for Girls

Illustrated. Cloth, gilt, $1.25.
