OF THE
U N Diversity
Of ILLINOIS


J488r

a laobeu

IN THREE VOLUMES.

MRS. ARTHUR TRISTRAM Jervis.

Author of " Holding Fast and Letting Go."

VOL. I.

REMINGTON AND CO
New Bond Street, W.

1884.

All Rights Reserved.

CONTENTS OF VOL. I

CHAP. PAGE

.7 I. Sunshine . . . . . . i

'■ II. Dreamland i6

III. Aunt Flora ^^

IV. Love and Trust . . . . . 47

V. The Very Dear Cousin-69

VI. The First of September 97

1^ VII. Without "Good-bye" 125

VIII. Mystery 136

^" IX. Taunts Succeed at Last 152

X. An Only Love 178

'sci XI. Bad Form 194

A XII. Another Tete-a-Tcte with Rachel 205

V XIII. Ghosts 220

S

\ XIV. In the Billiard Room 234

V XV. It came as a Message from the Dead 249

^

^

SUNSHINE.

It was a lovely day In the month of August.
The summer sun shone high in the heavens,
while the sheaves of corn, which stood bound
and leaning one against another In the
broad fields surrounding Brashleigh Manor,
seemed each moment to grow yet more
golden In Its golden beams. Every ear of the
ripe grain betokened in its fulness the perfect
work of cradling earth, mellowing sunshine,
and rain-dropping skies ; while the ravished
ground but waited for Its produce to be
gathered in and garnered.

'' What a lovely day ! " involuntarily exclaimed
Esse Montague, as she looked from
an open window of the mansion belonging to
the Manor. " What a lovely day ! " she repeated,
as her bright eyes wandered from one

VOL. I. B

object to another — from the tall trees all
robed in their rich raiment of summer foliage,
to the smooth green grass beneath them,
and the silvery Trent winding in and out and
glistening in the distance.

Beautiful as the Leicestershire landscape
was, however, upon which she gazed, it failed
to arrest the attention of Esse for any length
of time. Weary of her solitary work of
admiration, she turned from the window, and,
shading her eyes with one hand as if dazzled
by the brilliancy of the sunlight, she crossed
a corridor, and entered a spacious picture
gallery.

But here, her footsteps were brought to
a standstill by a voice, which exclaimed
eagerly —

'' My little Esse ! where are you going ?
I have been looking for you everywhere."

A smile and a blush struggled hard for the
supremacy over the dimples and lilies in the
face of Esse, as she was thus accosted j but

she vouchsafed no reply. Poising her small
head somewhat proudly, she stood quite still,
only drooping her blue-veined eyelids so that
their long lashes might veil the pleasure
which danced in her eyes.

^^ My little Esse ! " said the voice again,
and now a note of love stirred in its glad
tones.

'' My little Esse," echoed the girl, '' I tell
you once for all, Arthur, that I will not be
called your little Esse. I claim myself, for
myself. I am my own property. Besides, I
reach almost to your chin, so how dare you
call me Little?' It was only the day before
yesterday that I allowed you to measure me."

As she uttered these words, partly in
childish petulance, and partly in womanly
scorn, she was a dangerous spectacle for one
of Eve's sons to behold.

She stood, beautiful as the craze of a
Pygmalion, amid a profusion of flowers,
which, in the eagerness of speech, she had

let slip from her hand. But, whatever the
peril of her charms might be, the danger
was met undauntedly. The tall figure of a
man advanced towards her, while, in answer
to her assertion, the voice which had spoken
before replied —

'' I know it was only the day before yesterday,
darling, and you shall be called great
Esse, or Httle Esse, or, in fact, anything on
earth that you wish — only " —

Only what ?" was the somewhat saucily
put interrogation, while smiles and dimples,
blushes and lilies, again gave chase to each
other upon the fair face of the speaker.

The tall, manly figure drew closer to Esse,
stooped to pick up some of the flowers which
lay at her feet, and then said earnestly —

Only my Esse you must always be.
Please God, nothing can alter that ! "

She made no answer as he wound his arm
around her waist, and led her towards the
seat from which he had just risen.

'' You are dreadfully sentimental this morning,
Arthur," she said at last, darting a sunny
glance up into eyes which she knew were looking
fondly at her. Too happily engrossed
for speech, her companion made no attempt
to gainsay her. ** You know I don't like
romance," she went on, '' I like you ever so
much better when you look angry, or are
riding an awfully spirited horse, or driving a
tandem straight through an impossible gate,
or"—

'anything else, Esse? " he enquired
demurely, as she paused, either from want of
words or of breath.

'' Yes, of course, heaps of other things, but
I don't like to be teased, so I shall not
speak another syllable to you."

Her red lips pouted with such provoking
prettiness, that Arthur very narrowly escaped
a relapse into the forbidden state of sentimentalism,
from which, to tell the truth, he
had barely rallied. Struggling valiantly to

repress any expression of its almost overwhelming
force, he rejoined —

*^ Not a syllable ! That would be awfully
slow for both of us, daring."

The pouting lips tried hard to maintain
their semblance of scorn, but without avail ;
and as they reluctantly parted, a merry little
laugh escaped from between their rosy
portals.

The joyous notes brought Arthur Greatorix
from his standing position to one which was
more lowly. Kneeling down by the side of
Esse, he gazed with infinite tenderness upon
her face. It was very bright and fair — bright,
by reason of the innocent, undimmed happiness
of its expression — fair, in the porcelain
tints of its complexion ; the delicate regularity
of its features. And the countenance beside
it was noteworthy, although it possessed
neither a delicately hued complexion nor a
faultless contour of feature.

Arthur Greatorix was in the prime of manhood.

Nevertheless he had passed the freshness
oi premier jeunesse while many a battle
with self, many a fixed resolve, and many a
noble thought had stamped their lines of
gravity upon his brow. He was close shaved
with the exception of a heavy brown
moustache, which, while it hid a well-formed
mouth, could not entirely conceal the set of
white even teeth within. But the charm of
his face lay in the expression of his eyes, an
expression which, in its combined fearlessness
and tenderness, possessed a remarkable
amount of fascination for most persons. He
was very tall, some two or three inches over
six feet, broad shouldered, with a muscular
and well-proportioned frame. Still kneeling
before Esse, his smile answering hers, he
said suddenly —

'^ I have something very important to talk
to you about this morning. May I begin,
dearest ? "

'' Important ! Nonsense, Arthur''

I wish It were nonsense," he broke in,
with such vehemence that Esse looked up in
astonishment.

She laughed, however, another joyous little
laugh, and then said gaily —

^' I verily believe that I know what it is.
You are positively repenting that you have
asked someone, tee Esse Montague, to become
one day Mrs. Arthur Greatorix, and you
are such a coward you are afraid to tell her
that her visions of living, part of every year,
in your dear old tumble-down Cornish castle
are doomed to end in anticipation only. I am
right, am I not?" she asked gaily.

'' No, darling, no — a hundred times no !
You are out of it altogether."

'' Out of it ! — out of the castle," she
laughed, with eyes which danced and sparkled
with merriment ; '' of course I am, that is just
what I meant."

But somehow her gaiety was not so infectious
as usual. Arthur shook his head byway

of protest against her raillery, and his
voice was low with earnestness, as he made
reply —

'' I only wish that I could carry you there
directly — this very instant."

''Oh, Arthur!" and a little mouth was
pursed up, while two wee white hands
were clasped together in token of mock
despair, '' how dreadful of you. What !
before the butcher and the baker — I mean,
before the architect and paper-hangers have
made all things ready. How can you be so
.absurd?"

Am I absurd? " he asked absently.

*^ Very ! Who ever heard of a wedding
taking place, without fuss and ceremony
enough to frighten one nearly to death ; and
how could we arrive in Cornwall without bonfires
and bell-ringing, and all those sort of
things ? I cannot think what has happened
to everybody this morning. You look as
if you had been studying tragedy, Arthur;

and Uncle Ralph came to me directly after
luncheon, in a most perturbed state of mind,
and, with a very long face, begged me to goat
once to Aunt Flora. I knew that something
had gone wrong, so I went immediately,
and found her in much dudgeon because
Uncle Ralph had asked her to receive a
cousin of his here for a week or two. Unfortunately,
Aunt Flora professes to entertain
apecuhar dislike to this same cousin, so I did not
quite know what to say. However, I stayed
with her for nearly two hours, doing all I
could to reconcile her to the idea of the proposed
visitor. I am afraid it was waste of
time, for when I was retiring, Aunt Flora
told me that I had tired and bored her fearfully.
Pleasant, was it not ? " asked Esse,
archly, '' to think that I had done nothing towards
helping either dear, good Uncle Ralph,
or his unfortunate cousin, besides having lost
two hours of beautiful sunshine, and kept a
true lover waiting'*

No gravity could withstand such a sally as
this, and yet it but very slightly relaxed the
seriousness which was fast deepening over
the spirit of Arthur Greatorix.

We all know what it is to have a disagreeable
subject uppermost in our thoughts, for if
disagreeable, uppermost it will most assuredly
be. We have all felt the dragging influence
of such a state of mind upon our speech, and
have tested into what mockery it can turn our
mirth.

Most of us, also, have experienced the
misery of having unpleasant tidings to impart
to others. Did the joy of those, for whom we
bore our message of woe, ever appear to us
to be so thoroughly unalloyed, as when we
knew ourselves about to quench that joy ?
Have they not, the ill-fated ones, at such
times coursed merrily with unwonted glibness
from one topic of conversation to another ;
but they never gave us a lead, whereby we
could run them into the subject, which, however

reluctantly, we were bound to put before
them.

It was an experience of this nature, which
held in thrall the spirit of Arthur Greatorix, ashe
knelt before his light-hearted Jiancee, and
replied —

^^ If I was kept waiting, I suppose it was
good for me, and that it gave me a lesson in
self-denial."

'' Perhaps so ! But do you know, Arthur, I
have very little faith in the virtue of that same
self-denial. In fact, I am a frightful sceptic
upon the matter. I read pages and pages
about it, in all sorts of good books, but whenever
I try to practise it, which, by-the-bye, I
am very much afraid is not so often as it
ought to be, you cannot think what a dismal
failure I contrive to make of it. I snub myself
tremendously, and go through all sorts of
unnecessary unpleasantness, and then discover
that it would have been better, not only
for myself, but for everybody else, if I had

followed the bent of my inclination, and left
self-denial alone. It is a dreadful confession,
I know, but it is really true, and I often feel
very penitent in consequence."

There was not much contrition in the gay
tones which proclaimed this shortcoming.
Gay as they were, however, the next instant a
soupgon of pique mingled with them, as Esse
continued —

^' I am going to run away from you now,
Arthur. You are so dull, and besides, I am
tired of remaining indoors."

Arthur rose, and drawing a chair close to
her, said, as he seated himself —

Do not leave me yet, Esse. I cannot
let you go so soon. You are my prisoner
you know, I caught you fairly, just now."

Not fairly ! You were hidden by the
screen, and you intercepted me craftily.
Soldiers may lurk in ambush to surprise a foe,
but not brave men to capture fair women,"
she interposed, merrily.

Arthur looked fondly at her, as he returned
—

'' I shall have to teach you, dearest, that
all things are fair, both in love and war. You
are my prize. I will not give you up, even to
the sunshine ; so listen to me, darling, and let
me tell you what is weighing on my mind'*

Something unusual in his manner attracted
the attention of Esse at last. Resting her
hand gently upon his shoulder, she said,
affectionately —

You have an attack of the blues this
morning, you dear old Arthur ! But come
with me into the drawing-room, it is cooler
there, and we will discuss this momentous
matter. Lord Oakdene and Uncle Ralph are
inspecting shorthorns : Aunt Flora is trying
to get rid of her fit of the vapours in her pony
carriage : and Hannah, la belle ^ is closeted
with her maid. So come, and tell me your
wonderful news. We are not likely to be
interrupted. Has Poole proved faithless, or

has your groom broken your heart by breaking
the knees of your pet mare ? "

Arthur Greatorlx looked wistfully into the
beautiful eyes which were lifted to his. Light
strains and playful words, jarred upon his
heart-strings. With a smile, which had the
arriere-pensee of a sigh for its companion,
he accompanied Esse to the room, which she
had chosen for their conference.

DREAM LAND.

The individual, whom Esse Montague had
designated to her lover as " Uncle Ralph'*
was none other than Ralph Grant, the owner
of Brashleigh Manor; while 'aunt Flora"
was Ralph Grant's second wife.

But although he had been twice married,
it was not until he reached the meridian of
life that he succumbed for the first time to
the power of Cupid. No charms, before then,
had been so potent as those of the gigantic
mills, which wove for him no gossamer fabric,
but a very substantial and tangible cloth of
gold.

With his father's last blessing these mills,
together with land and wealth, accrued to
Ralph Grant.

The digger, on the far off fields of Australia,

who has braved the perils of travel and voyage
in order to reach his coveted destination ;
and the thriving manufacturer, in England,
who drives luxuriously along the well-made
road to his place of business, share in a
similar excitement. In the one case, an
eager hand grasps a pick-axe, or carefully
sifts our mother earth for precious ore, while
in the other, fingers point exultingly to the
accumulating balance of the banker's book,
and add triumphantly to the figures of the
ledger. Each man is busy with his own plan
for aggrandisement, and, whether successful
or otherwise, it is often difficult for each to
stay his work. So, at least, Ralph Grant
experienced it to be, and so, perchance, it
might have continued, but for an accident,
the result of which changed the whole current
of his life. Turning round hastily one morning
to give some directions to a gardener, his
foot slipped from off the stone step whereon
he was standing.

VOL. L C

He recovered his balance without falling to
the ground ; but, upon attempting to resume
his walking powers, he found that he had
sprained his ankle. The inconvenience of
this disaster was felt keenly by a man of
his active habits, and it was in vain that his
medical man insisted upon perfect rest for
the injured limb. As a last resource, the
refractory patient was peremptorily ordered
from home, and, after many rebellious protests,
he finally consented to go for a short
time to Matlock Bath. Here the romance of
his life began.

Not many days after his arrival, as he was
resting under the shade of a tree in the
grounds of his hotel, with his foot carefully
supported upon cushions, his attention was
arrested by a little girl, who, as she softly
stole past him on the tips of her tiny toes,
appeared to be intent upon covertly obtaining
some earnestly desired object. Afraid of disturbing
her, Ralph Grant, neither spoke nor
moved.

She was a wee sprite of a child, not more
than four years of age, dressed in white, with
long light hair falling from beneath her sun-bonnet.
Regardless of the proximity of a
stranger, she suddenly turned back, and
paused for a moment by the side of Mr.
Grant. As she did so, his eyes involuntarily
followed the direction of hers, and he quickly
discovered that she was watching the movements
of a gaudily-coloured butterfly. The
insect was lazily flying a few feet only from the
ground. Presently it settled upon a flower
close by. Creeping towards it, the child
exercised numberless infantile manoeuvres before
attempting its capture, and she manifested
considerable baby surprise at the failure of
her efforts. Again and again the butterfly
flaunted jauntily from blossom to blossom,
while as often the little figure, with outstretched
hands, attempted to make it her
prisoner. It almost seemed as though the
insect took a pleasure in being thus pursued,
so closely did it sometimes allow her to

approach it, before it spread its wings, and by
flight overthrew her hopes. The patience
of the tiny Diana promised to be inexhaustible,
and her Httle feet carried her
bravely through the chase.

Ralph Grant was literal as well as prosaic.
He drew no poetical metaphor from the scene
before him. He did not, as he regarded it,
speculate how, in after life, that fair child
might often stretch out her hand for that
which she desired, and as often, be compelled
to draw it back unto herself, empty of the
treasure which she sought. But he watched
the mimic drama with an interest which was
intensified by the last act. The object of
pursuit soared gaily away, when the child,
sorrowfully drooping her head and clasping
her hands, cried, in lisping accents —

/' Good-bye, butterfly dear — give my love
to ;mamma when you go up to bed in the 'tars
to-night."

The unconscious insect was scarcely lost

to sight, before an elderly woman advanced
with hurried steps, and taking the little girl by
the hand, led her away.

That night Ralph Grant had a wonderful
dream. It was a marvellous chaos, a
mysterious jumble of children, stars, butterflies,
and flowers. Nevertheless, he ever
afterwards professed to have received therefrom
a teaching, which its mystery disclosed
distinctly. In this dream he had flown ;
butterflies had talked, and otherwise disported
themselves, in a manner which would have
astonished the most learned of entomologists.
In his magical dream of the heavens, stars had
been transformed into lovely faces, one and all
of which beamed tenderly upon him ;-while he
had been surrounded by an innumerable company
of fair-haired children, who traversed
space perpetually, and who, by the swiftness
of their evolutions, contrived persistently to
hide from his gaze the one star, or face, upon
which he most especially desired to look.

And that face was the point upon which his
waking imagination dwelt.

Convalescence is a dangerous period to
most natures. Somehow, hearts are apt to
be more susceptible to soft impressions at
that time, than at any other, and it is probable
that Ralph Grant's vision would, have
melted into forgetfulness had he been immersed
in his usual business cares and
occupations. But away from these it was
altogether a different matter. He pondered
over his dream until it haunted him, and, erelong,
beautiful faces seemed to smile into the
possibility of his future, bringing with their
smiles a sense of present loneliness, which he
had never before experienced.

Thus far, his habitual stoicism was broken
up. The plough of happy fancies had gone
over it, while the harrow of pleasant imaginings
duly prepared the soil for the reception of that
seed, which was destined to be sown through
the agency of the little butterfly-chaser.

There are few things more provoking to
an impetuous individual than an unanswered
bell. In this manner, a few days after the
little episode in the hotel garden, the patience
of Ralph Grant was sorely tried. The
weather was oppressive, the room uncomfortably
warm, and, notwithstanding all his
efforts, he could get no notice taken of the
bell which he rang repeatedly. Again and
again the summons sounded louder and
louder, but still neither his own servant, nor
any belonging to the hotel, appeared. At
last a breathless waiter entered the room,
who gasped —

"Very sorry to have kept you a' waiting,
sir, but I've been helping to look for the
lost child."

Lost what? " enquired Mr. Grant hastily,
forgetful, in his suddenly awakened interest,
both of his previous anger and discomfort.

Lost child, sir ! Strayed, sir ! out of our
gardens here. She were left in charge of the

lady's maid, and when the nus' went for her,
the little lady couldn't be found nowhere, and
they hasn't found her yet."

'whose child is it?" interrogated Mr.
Grant.

Well, sir, you see, sir, she's a orphan
so I can't exactly say ; but she is a visitor in
the 'ouse, and they call her Miss Hesney, or
Miss Hesmey, I can't be sure which."

''A little girl with light hair?" suggested
Mr. Grant anxiously.

'' Yes, sir, the same as everyone takes
notice on. There are four on 'em stopping
'ere — the young lady as the little lady which
is lost calls aunt, the little lady herself, the
lady's maid, and the nurse."

'' And the little girl is lost, you say ! God
bless my heart, what a terrible business ! Go
back by all means, and join in the search for
her."

The man needed no second bidding, and
Ralph Grant, hobbling to the door, was about

to follow him, when, just outside the room,
he almost fell into the arms of a young lady,
who was swiftly proceeding in another
direction. A slight collision ensued, which
brought both parties to a standstill. It was
not altogether an unpleasant catastrophe, at
least, so thought Ralph Grant. The blushing
girl courteously received the commencement
of his apology, but he was considerably
startled when she suddenly drowned his
syllables with a wild cry, and bounded from
him like a young gazelle.

Ralph Grant was a bachelor, middle-aged,
and endowed with considerable presence of
mind. Nevertheless, this finale following so
closely upon the news of the lost child, and
the collision with the fair stranger, entirely
upset his accustomed equanimity. Hat in
hand, he remained for some moments staring
down the empty passage, with a vague
wonderment in his mind of what unlikely
event was likely to overtake him next. Fora

brief space of time he seemed destined
to solitude and speculation : but only for a
brief space. Very soon the sound of voices
and of trampling feet smote upon his ear, and
a procession of waiters, chambermaids, and
servants of all denominations, headed by a
lady and a little girl, with a very hysterical
maid by their side, came in view. He recognised
them at once, and hastened to offer a
few words of hearty congratulation to the
lady, upon the finding of the child. His congratulation
was cordially received, and, in
accepting it, an apology, was tendered by the
lady, for the abrupt departure which had taken
place upon her part a short time before.

Sundry sounds, she proceeded to explain,
without the hotel, had suddenly induced her
to hope that the search for the lost little one
had been successful. Wherefore, forgetful of
everything but the great relief and joy which
this hope inspired, she had flown to the spot
from whence the sounds issued.

Ralph Grant was quick to comprehend all
the bearings of the case, and with a few more
kindly words, together with a friendly pat upon
the cheek to the small author of the morning's
excitement, he retired to the seclusion of his
bachelor apartments, where his day dreams
speedily became as vivid as his visions of the
night.

It did not take long, for the confidential
servant, by whom he was accompanied, to ascertain
full particulars concerning the party
at the hotel, in whom his master was so interested.


The negligent lady's maid was garrulous in
her own exculpation. With her self acquittal
from all blame respecting the straying of the
little one, who had been temporarily confided
to her charge, she was communicative about
her employer.

'^ My mistress. Miss Lily Carlesford, is
an orphan. Her little niece. Miss Esse
Montague, is also an orphan. They have

lived together for nigh upon three years.
Miss Carlesford is the guardian of Httle Miss
Esse, and she has got another guardian ; a
tall, fine-looking gentleman. His name is
Mr. Arthur Greatorix, and he was Mr.
Montague's bosom friend, he was, and Mr.
Montague was the papa of Miss Esse, and
Mr. Arthur Greatorix happened to be in Italy
when Mr. and Mrs. Montague was travelling
there, and when their horses took fright and
ran away and nobody could stop them, and
the poor lady and gentleman were thrown out
of their carriage all down a precipice and was
both killed on the spot, and they was both
of them handsome and young, the poor lady
only nineteen, and the poor gentleman hadn't
so very long before come of age, and they
had one Httle baby. Miss Esse, and plenty
of money. And after their bodies were
found, they were buried, and the lawyer wrote
word as Miss Lily Carlesford, for she was
poor Mrs. Montague's sister, you know, and

Mr. Arthur Greatorix was to have the charge
of Miss Esse ; she was only a baby then,
but she was to be what they calls their ward,
and my mistress doats upon Miss Esse, and
makes a fine fuss about her. She hasn't any
other relations, you see, my mistress hasn't, at
least none as ever I heard of, no more hasn't
Miss Esse either ; and as for Mr. Greatorix
it is very seldom that he comes nigh them ;
he's always away in foreign parts, and ain't
much good to either of them as I can see*'

Such was the information given by the
maid — information which was quickly imparted
by man to master. Armed with it,
Ralph Grant soon contrived to commence an
acquaintance with the strangers. Neither
*' Carlesford " nor " Greatorix " were unknown
names to Ralph Grant. By a little dexterity
he quickly drew Miss Carlesford to speak of
her guardianship to little Esse, and from this,
it followed naturally, that Mr. Arthur Great
her co-guardian, was spoken of.

The ball, as it were, being thus opened,
Ralph Grant made the most of his opportunity.
Question and answer followed each other
rapidly, and the fact was soon patent that
Lily Carlesford and Ralph Grant had many
acquaintances and friends in common. So it
often comes about, and the old saying, 'the
world is not so large as it seems to be," was
fully exemplified in their case, while the likeness
of Esse to her aunt fully accounted to
Ralph Grant, for the mystery of the beautiful
face, in the star of his dream.

The steps from acquaintanceship to friendship,
and from friendship to love, were
made almost at a bound by the hitherto unsusceptible
Ralph Grant; while more slowly,
perhaps, but, nevertheless, quite as surely,
were the like progressions made by Lily
Carlesford.

Six months sped away. At their expiration
Brashleigh Manor held a loved and
honoured mistress within its walls, and little

Esse was duly installed the pet and plaything
of everyone therein.

Alas, that so it might not continue ! The
remorseless Angel of Death swept over the
happy household, and, enfolded the sweet wife
in his dark wing, ere the first anniversary
of her bridal day came round.

Broken-hearted, well-nigh despairing, Ralph
Grant retired from business, Brashleigh
Manor was closed, and he, with little Esse,
turning their faces to other lands, roamed far
and wide.

My star — my flower — my beautiful Lily ;
your pure light has gone from earth to the
bright heavens above. Shine on me still,
darling, from your new home — light my darkness,
my pitiful darkness. Lily — my wife —
my dream — my star — my flower — my Lily."

Thus wailed Ralph Grant, and thus sorrow
winnowed all harshness from out of his honest
nature ; while thus also he became the tender
and devoted slave of the little Esse.

AUNT FLORA.

During the ten years which succeeded his
bereavement, Ralph Grant rarely visited
Brashleigh Manor. Meanwhile, many an eye
was cast with curiosity upon the deserted
mansion, and speculation was frequently busy
concerning its ultimate fate. At last, however,
a rumour arose in its neighbourhood.
At first it was only a nervous and mysterious
whisper, but presently the whisperers grew
bolder, and before long more than one tongue
loudly proclaimed, that '^ Mr. Grant was going
to marry again."

And it was even so. Satiated, perhaps,
with travelling, Roman villas, French
chateaux Swiss chalets table d'hotes^ and all
the various unhomelike attributes of other
climes ; anxious, maybe, that Esse should

have the constant companionship of one of
her own sex and station, Ralph Grant not only
determined upon returning to sojourn in his
native land, but also upon bringing with him
a wife to share that sojourn.

Unfortunately, his second venture upon the
sea of matrimony was less successful than his
first ; nevertheless, Cupid was not altogether
blameless in the matter.

Possibly, Ralph Grant supposed that it was
Minerva, and Minerva alone, who turned the
scales in favour of his marriage ; in fact, that
he had yielded rather to the suggestions of
the goddess in question, than to the temptations
of the god. If so, his delusion was
destined to be somewhat roughly dispelled.

Caring nothing whatever for the pleasures
of a country life, nothing for its duties, interested
neither in sport nor land, few women,
could have been found, who would have proved
to be so unlikely to make his life once more
happy, as she upon whom his choice fell.

VOL. L D

For many a weary month, striving loyally
to believe both in her amiability of character
and in her affection for himself, he resolutely
shut his eyes to the fact of his mistake. But
his wife would not help his shaking faith.
He stretched out his hands to her with a
prayer for aid. He might as well have implored
a heathen to unravel for him some
abstruse doctrine of Christianity. Flora
Grant neither understood, nor cared to understand,
his petition. And the blank in his
heart was almost greater than that, which,
heretofore, had been made by death.

But, of this, what recked his wife ? Heading
his table, reclining comfortably in his
handsome carriages, surrounded by all the
luxuries and trappings of wealth, with a tolerable
amount of beauty and the gift of health,
she drifted contentedly far away from out of
the innermost life of the man by whose side
she had stood at God's altar.

Alas ! how many of those who should be one

only, are two ! If, for a time, the knowledge,
that such a division must henceforward be his
fate, cast an expression of anxiety over the
ruddy countenance of Ralph Grant, in time,
the gloom wore away. Turning to Esse,
he found in her a solace and a comfort under
his unconfessed disappointment, and, Flora
Grant, misconstruing this affection into a
morbid love for the memory of his dead wife,
resented it accordingly.

'ewe men are a little breed' and, with an
intense worship of self, we speedily dwindle
and become less. Selfishness eats away all
fineness of perception, pollutes fair deeds
with foul suspicions, and stifles at last the
starved-out emotions of better nature. But
it carries with it its own curse. They who
sow must reap.

With interests which were too wholly con -
contracted, upon her own well-being, to allow
her to feel aught of concern for that of any
other living creature. Flora Grant yet deemed

herself to be ill-used, beyond conception,
by the cordiality which existed between
her husband and Esse. Their content
fretted her, and as time went by, and the
devotion of Arthur Greatorix to his fair ward
manifested ' itself, matters became worse.
Angry, it was hard to say for what reason,
and absurdly jealous of Esse, Flora Grant
grew daily more fractious and exacting. So
by degrees, she was treated as a spoiled child,
indulged in every caprice ; but, never leant
upon, for either counsel or sympathy.

Esse felt this keenly, in the early days of
her engagement to Arthur Greatorix. She
could understand nothing of the workings of
a discontented mind, and she turned to those
about her for love and sympathy in her joy,
as naturally as a flower turns to the light.
But she met with sore rebuffs at the hands of
Flora Grant.

Don't talk to me about your engagement,
Esse J the whole thing is too absurd. No one

but your Uncle Ralph would be silly enough
to permit such a foolish affair. Arthur
Great oris is old enough to be your father."

'* Not quite," interposed Esse, good-humouredly.


But her forbearance failed to mollify Mrs.
Grant.

Don't contradict me, Esse. I am not
strong enough to bear it. You ought to know,
by this time, how delicate my nerves are, but
no one ever considers me in this house. I
might as well be Alexander Selkirk, for any,
notice that is ever taken of me. If I were
one of those wretched dogs that whimper and
howl all night, or a horse, I daresay I should
fare better."

** Aunt Flora has been reading Tennyson, I
suppose," thought Esse, a wicked little smile
playing around the corners of her mouth, but
she maintained a discreet silence. Whereupon,
as was her wont. Flora Grant continued
her wail.

*' I hate England."

Oh, Aunt Flora ! " burst emphatically
from her companion.

*' Now Esse ! don't make me ill. How
violent you are. I mean what I say, I
do hate England, all except London in the
season. What on earth can women do in
the country ? "

Ride, drive, walk, skate, sketch," — but
Esse was stopped before her Hst of occupations
and pleasures were half enumerated.

Yes, of course ! a mere animal existence.
Your lovely idea simply means riding hard
until you are purple in the face, and, by way
of variety, grilling in the sun until the purple
becomes brown."

*' But it is so beautiful about this dear old
place," pleaded Esse, who was unwilling
either to prolong the conversation or to be
drawn into an argument.

'' So your Uncle Ralph made me believe
before he brought me here to live. I wish, withall

my heart, that I could discover what it is
which you and he persist in calling beautiful.
It seems to me that trees are all much alike,
and that hedges and ditches are plentiful
enough everywhere."

'* But no hedges can be Hke the Brashleigh
hedges, dear Aunt Flora, they are so full of
flowers and ferns."

'' And toads and frogs, and all sorts of
horrors ! And then the people about are so
stupid and so badly dressed. I declare sometimes
the women's gowns give me quite a
headache ; the colours are so hideous, and
the make so abominable."

Now Esse Montague liked well-assorted
colours and pretty dresses quite as much as
Flora Grant. Moreover, the fair Esse fully
understood the respective merits of both
Worth and Elise, and remembering the
peculiarities of many of the garments, which,
at various times, she had beheld upon the
backs of some of her acquaintances, she was

at a loss how to defend either these same
garments or their wearers. But she could not
let the attack upon the intelligence of the latter
pass unnoticed.

'arthur thinks that Miss Bashaw is a
very intellectual person, and he says that Mrs.
Buckleton understands politics better than
any lady he has ever known."

'arthur!" interrupted Mrs. Grant contemptuously,
" how preposterously foolish you
are, Esse, to mention him. His judgment is
not worth having. What can a fox-hunting,
Cornish squire know about intellect? "

The young girl reddened, and for the
second time during that conversation wisely
kept silence.

If you are going, Esse, to pin your faith
upon the opinions of Arthur Greatorix, you
might as well have been born without brains.
Besides, it is very bad taste for a woman
to quote a man before she is actually married
to him."

** But it was only to you, Aunt Flora,"
interrupted Esse, gently.

*' Oh ! yes, of course, I know, oily to me !
As I said before, I am of no consequence ;
I never have been since I came here, but
there was a time when it was altogether
different. Now, Esse, I warn you. I disapprove
altogether of your engagement to
Arthur Greatorix. Of course, I am nobody,
and what I say will not be heeded. But
I consider it my duty to warn you. He
is too old, and you are too young, and you
ought not to be married until after next
season. I have been looking forward to that
time ever since I married your uncle. I
mean, to the season which I thought we
should spend in town after you were presented,
and now you are to be presented
upon your marriage ; and, of course, my
wishes are forgotten, and no one thinks
of my disappointment. I ought, of course,
to have been consulted, but I was not.

That is because your uncle is so much older
than I am. If he were a younger man, he
would be more polite and considerate. I
mean " — she hesitated, noting sundry signs
of indignation upon the face of her listener
'' I mean that he would understand me
better, and that he would not, so continually
give way to you, at my expense. The idea of
allowing you to be married at Christmas
under any circumstances would be ridiculous
enough, but when you are only seventeen and
Arthur Greatorix is six-and-thirty " —

I shall be eighteen, the day before
Christmas Day," Esse ventured to interpose.


'' Why will you keep worrying me with
such silly remarks? What difference can
that make ? You are still years and years
younger than your intended husband, and I
know, well enough, what perpetual discomfort
disparity of age entails."

Esse looked at the speaker, wondering, as
she looked, whether Flora Grant really meant
that which her words implied.

And Flora Grant was sharp enough to
guess that some such wonder was crossing
the mind of her young companion. Consequently,
she attempted to palliate her statement.


*M do not wish you to run away with the
notion either that I am positively miserable
or actually ill-treated ; but, you see, I am so
sensitive, so delicate, and so nervous, that I
am neither appreciated nor understood. Other
women might find enjoyment in things which
absolutely annoy me. Rude health and boisterous
spirits try me dreadfully. I shrink
from contact with them. But, as I said
just now, I am not understood. Therefore
I do not complain ; I only shudder and
suffer. You and your uncle are both so
painfully robust that I never expect consideration

upon any point from either of you.
Seldom, however, as I express my opinions,
I must frankly tell you, Esse, that I consider
Christmas to be a horrid, vulgar time for
weddings. And then, how red the cold will
make the noses of your bridesmaids ! You
cannot expect to look well either ! I do not
admire fair brides, they are too colourless
in white, which, of course, sets brunettes off
to perfection. The summer, perhaps, might
be more becoming to you, or London, where
the churches are well warmed and comfortable."


Since Flora Grant was a most decided
brunette, Esse felt utterly unable to make
any reply whatever, upon the subject of bridal
beauty. Therefore, with rather a heightened
colour upon her cheeks, she merely said
shyly —

The poor people would be quite unhappy
if my — if our — if the wedding did not take
place at Brashleigh."

Poor people invariably grumble about
everything," was the retort.

And then ensued a lengthy, and not particularly
charitable lamentation over the
general ingratitude of the working classes,
and of those around Brashleigh Manor in
particular.

Esse was but an indifferent listener to the
complaint. Totally undismayed by the evil
prognostications concerning her future life
with which she had been assailed, her
thoughts had wandered happily away to her
lover. Indeed, such prognostications had
so often dropped from the lips of Flora
Grant, that it was well for the wooing of
Arthur Greatorix they should fall thus powerlessly
upon his lady-love.

From consequences, however, they could
scarcely be entirely void, although of what
nature such consequences might prove to be,
Aunt Flora gave no thought.

*' Aunt Flora," so called by Esse Montague,

because, in accordance with the simple, old-fashioned
notions of honest Ralph Grant, his
wife's relations were in very truth his own, and
vice versa.

The '' Deceased Wife's Sister " Bill would
perish forthwith, did all men think likewise.

LOVE AND TRUST.

From the digression of the last two chapters,
the reader will have gathered a few particulars
concerning the principal inmates of Brash-leigh
Manor.

'* Well, Arthur! now for your news," began
Esse Montague, establishing herself comfortably
in the corner of a low couch in the
drawing-room, whither, it will be remembered,
she and Arthur Greatorix had withdrawn from
the gallery to pursue their conversation, " I
am all attention, so begin at once."

It is not exactly news," he returned.

'then what can it be ? "

"A disagreeable fact, Esse."

Her blue eyes opened wide with amazement.
Disagreeable facts and Arthur
Greatorix did not run together, in her experience.

Beyond opening wide her beautiful
eyes, however, Esse remained passive.

Finding that she spoke not, Arthur continued
—

*' Yes, darling, awfully disagreeable. I
could not sleep last night for thinking of it.
I heard two, three, four, five, and six o'clock
strike."

*' I call four, five, and six o'clock, morning,
not night," interposed Esse, with returned
gaiety.

Sorrow had not touched her yet, wherefore
she was slow to take alarm. It is otherwise
with those who have been oft-times stricken
by woe. Then, shadows are as substances,
and timid souls flee swiftly forth to meet a
grief.

Arthur looked somewhat rueful, as he
replied —

** They were small hours anyhow, but nevertheless,
such awfully long ones that I most
sincerely desire to cut all acquaintance with

them in future. I was afraid of alarming the
establishment, or I should have got up and
tried the fresh air."

I wonder whether you really were awake
all the time," incredulously put in Esse.

Every bit of it, every atom. How could
I possibly sleep, when I knew that I was soon
going away from you, my daring?" he
answered earnestly.

It was out now. The disagreeable fact
was launched, and not only launched, but inadvertently
launched, notwithstanding the
many wakeful hours which Arthur Greatorix
had expended upon the plan of its launching.

Esse was completely taken by surprise,
while, Arthur was uncertain whether to feel
glad or sorry, that the expression of his reason
for anxiety had thus slipped anchor.

Both remained silent for a few seconds ;
then Esse said —

** Going away, Arthur ! I thought you had

VOL. L E

arranged to stay and help Uncle Ralph with
his shooting parties. Going away from me.
I mean, from Brashleigh."

'^ I am afraid so, my own, own darling."

'but does Uncle Ralph know?" interrogated
Esse.

** Not yet. I have thought only of you.
I must, of course, inform him soon."

But why are you going, Arthur? "

The question was simple enough, and
under the circumstances perfectly natural ;
yet, perhaps, it caused more disquietude to
Arthur Greatorix, at that moment, than any
other could have done. Scarcely venturing
to glance at the lovely face which was lifted
'SO wonderingly to him, he said, hesitatingly —

I cannot explain the reason, Esse
dearest. It is very urgent, or, you may be
sure, it would have no weight with me."

I thought we were always to tell each
other everything, to have no secrets. You
have always said, Arthur, that — that love and

trust are inseparable. I feel as if I could not
understand it " —

'' Do not try to understand it," he interrupted
quickly ; '* the cause is born of the
past, not of the present."

'* But have I nothing to do with the past,
with your past, Arthur ? " Esse asked, her
fair face still wearing an expression of
innocent bewilderment.

'' Nothing to do with my past ! " he echoed,
noting with pain that Esse slightly turned
from him. " Nothing to do with my past ! "
he repeated. '' Oh ! Esse, my darling, listen
to me, listen to me."

She did not speak, and, with increasing
disquietude, Arthur took her two hands in his.
They were cold from excitement, and fora
few moments, he chafed them gently to
and fro, before he continued —

I watched over your safety, Esse, when
you were scarcely more than a baby. I loved
you tenderly in your childhood, and, in the far

. .^ Me ffi 9 mats

away haunts to which I travelled, I mused
often over your lisping sentences and merry
prattle. God knows, I am ruffian enough
still ; but, Esse, I first began to ponder overall
things that are holy and of good report
from my contact with your innocence. And
when years went by, and you grew into something
more than a child, I tried to become, ina
manner, more fit to hold the little hand,
which, unasked, you would often place confidingly
in mine. Years still went on, and
there grew up a precious hope in my breast,
a hope, darling, which you have turned into a
deep joy. Ah, Esse ! past, present and
future hold but one image for me. And you
know that it is so, do you not, in spite of
your question ? From the lightest word that
I ■ ever breathed into your baby ears until
now, I have never deceived you. God helping
me; 'I never will."

I never dreamed of your deceiving me,
Arthur 1 " she remonstrated.

Arthur saw at once that his concluding
remark had been inconsequent, and that he
had, in fact, rather followed his own train of
thought than her words.

'' No, darling, no ! I am at my wit's end,
I think, this afternoon," he cried.

"And a little unreasonable, it seems to me,
now you have arrived there. You have not
yet told me, either where you are going or for
how long you will remain away," returned
Esse.

*' Have I not?" he asked absently. ''I
am going to Gibraltar."

''To Gibraltar!"

And the cold little hands, which Arthur
held, trembled exceedingly.

'' Yes, darling, but I shall not be gone
many weeks. It is not really far."

A very frigid '' No," interrupted him.

The taunts and evil prophecies of Flora
Grant were guilty of its coldness. For the
first time, her words assumed weight with

Esse, and, recurring unbidden to her memory,
arrayed themselves against Arthur Greatorix.
She made one last appeal, however, to her
lover. Choking back the pride which was
struggling to vanquish her softer feelings, she
asked —

*' Is the business, or whatever it is, which
takes you to Gibraltar, so important that I
may not be entrusted with a knowledge of
it?"

'' Unfortunately, most unfortunately, it is,
dearest."

A profound silence followed.

Without the house, all nature was blithe
in the summer sunshine, but within, in that
gorgeously appointed drawing-room, a young
heart received its first stab of distrust. And
the pain of that stab was very hard to bear.
Esse struggled silently with its agony, she
was too proud to make if known, too inexperienced
to guess its danger. Looking
towards a time-piece, she said quietly —

*' There is nothing more, I think, that we
need discuss ; therefore I will enquire whether
Miss Wycombe is disengaged, and inclined
for a stroll with me."

Arthur released the hands he was holding.
In mute despair, he rose to his feet, and
pushed aside a chair, as though to make way
for Esse to pass from him. Then his mood
changed. Flinging his arms suddenly around
her, he exclaimed, passionately —

*' You are all unlike your sweet self, Esse!
You are mistaking me altogether. Tell me,
darling, before you go, that you love me the
same, quite the same, as you did before
this miserable journey was ever mentioned.
Tell me, Esse, that you love me and trust
me, oh, in pity tell me so, darling ! or" —

The sentence was not destined to be concluded.
A quick footstep sounded on the
gravel path beside the window, and the next
instant the cheery voice of Ralph Grant was
heard, exclaiming —

*' God bless my heart ! What can you two
be thinking of to stay Indoors all this lovely
afternoon ? "

The interruption was peculiarly unwelcome
to Arthur. Esse flew from him, and passing
quickly through the window which opened
to the ground, she took up her position at
the side of her uncle, who, nodding at her
approvingly, said —

"That is right. You are not afraid that
the sun will hurt your complexion, as, I
believe, a good many ladies are."

By way of answer she put her arm affectionately
through his, and leaning upon it, she
rested one of her hands upon the other.

Arthur watched her sorrowfully. It seemed
to him as though she had escaped to take
refuge with her uncle, who ran on with increasing
cheerfulness —

'' Plenty of fresh air, Greatorix, and as
much exercise as you can get. There Is
nothing like it. I can no more sit indoors

when the sun Is shining than I can when I
hear a ' view holloa.' "

Neither Esse nor Arthur spoke. Without
appearing to notice their taciturnity, Ralph
Grant pointed to a clematis that clustered
luxuriantly around the window, through which
Esse had just passed, and said enthusiastically
—

** Splendid, Is it not ? I never saw so many
blossoms upon It before, and the flowers are
larger than ever. It Is not a bit hurt by the
late frosts we had this spring ; Oakdene says
the creepers at his uncle's place are cut all
to pieces."

Splendid," returned Arthur laconically,
with his eyes fixed upon Esse, rather than
upon the flower in question.

The assent to his opinion was enough for
Ralph Grant, who forthwith began an eloquent
recantation upon the treatment and
growth of plants In general. His listeners, or,
perhaps, his companions would more faithfully

describe Esse and Arthur, made no
attempt to interrupt him. The most absurd
botanical theory would have met with
neither astonishment nor contradiction at
their hands. So Ralph Grant, who, by
the way, was eminently practical in all his
doings, continued his remarks. They were
exhausted at length. Complete silence is
sometimes a wonderful check to loquacity.
Anyhow he paused, and looked inquiringly
first at Arthur and then at Esse. Something
in their faces puzzled him. He would have
been utterly at a loss to explain what it was.
He felt mystified, without knowing wherefore.
Lover's quarrels, and their accessories, are
common enough generally, but they were
altogether foreign to the experience of the
lovers whom Ralph Grant now regarded. The
love of Arthur for \\\s Jiancee had brought her
no heartburning. She had rested hitherto in
his affection with a calm and perfect satisfaction
; hence, roses without thorns, smiles

without tears, had been her portion, while
for Arthur it had been the same. And Ralph
Grant comprehended much of this in spite of
his mature years, and comprehending it, he
was the more bewildered by their evident
tribulation. After another scrutinizing glance
at them, he cried with characteristic impetuosity
—

'^ God bless my heart, how quiet you both
are ! Get Esse a sunshade, Arthur, and
come and look at the grapes."

Arthur turned instantaneously to comply
with this request. He was scarcely away a
minute, but, short as the space of time was, he
found Esse gone when he returned.

*' What is the matter with Esse ? " was the
query with which Ralph Grant greeted the
luckless bearer of the sunshade.

'' The matter with Esse," repeated Arthur
drearily to himself.

Awkward questions seemed to be his doom,
upon that sunshiny August afternoon. He

hesitated, opened his Hps as if about to
speak, and then remained silent. After a
short reflection, however, he repeated the
information, concerning his impending departure
from Brashleigh, which he had
previously given to Esse. It was received
by his host with equal, and much more noisy
astonishment. Interrogations and ejaculations
followed each other in rapid succession.
Arthur stemmed the torrent as best he could.
It was easier for him to strive against,
than were the gentle tones, and simple words
of Esse. Moreover, he knew that it sprang
from anxiety for her.

"Well, my boy! I can't say any more.
Of course, I don't want to pry into your
affairs. Every man is the best judge of his
own business. But I'm disappointed, and
I'm afraid, it will trouble the little one.
Parting means sorrow. She has a high
courage, but a tender heart, and saying
good-bye ' will be an ugly wrench for her.

You must break it gently to her, Greatorlx.
I don't like it. I thought the hunting and
the shooting, between them, would have kept
you pretty close to us, until your wadding. I
don't like it," he repeated; 'rand out of the
country too ! I am over anxious, perhaps,
about the little one ; but I can't help it. God
bless her sweet face, I couldn't bear to see
a shadow on it ! Think it over again,
Greatorix. Don't decide in a hurry. Why !
you and Esse might go to Gibraltar together,
if you only waited until next year."

Arthur struggled desperately, not only to
maintain his composure, but also his resolution.


I wish with all my heart that it could be
as you propose ; nothing on earth would
delight me more," he returned, gravely.

Then why, in the name of all that's good,
don't you settle it so ? " burst in Ralph Grant
eagerly.

Time must show you why ; I cannot."

'' Time," interposed Ralph Grant, "makes
many things plain to those who live long
enough, I grant you. But there is another
side to the question. Many go down to the
grave, while mysteries are being solved.
Perhaps all things are made clear to those
who have so gone, but to those who are left
those who are left, the satisfaction of an
explanation is denied. Forgive my gravity,
my boy. We will talk of this matter another
time. Keep trouble from the little one. It
is all I ask."

'rand it is all that I live for," interposed
Arthur warmly. '' I have two strong arms, and
trouble, must have a tough wrestle with me,
before it breaks through them to reach
Esse."

Ralph Grant thanked the speaker, and,
with the hopefulness of his cheery nature,
tried to feel satisfied ; nevertheless, a gloom
hung over him, as he turned away.

Left to himself, Arthur plunged his hands
into his trousers pockets, with a sigh, which

had a good many elements of a groan in
its composition. He was dissatisfied with
everything ; with himself most of all. His
interview with Esse had been interrupted: his
conversation with Mr. Grant unsatisfactory.
Nothing had turned out as it ought to have
done ; consequently, Arthur thought, no man
was so ill-used, so completely wretched, as
himself. There was only one hope left
to him, he silently assured himself, and
this hope rested in Esse. He must see her,
must hear, from her lips, words of pardon, of
love and trust. Then, he could bear anything
which the fates might send him. He could
not, nay ! he would not, endure the torturing
memory of her averted face. So he sought
her diligently ; but in vain. Shady bowers
and favourite trysting-places were alike desolate.
Patiently and wearily he plodded from
one to the other, dreaming of happier hours
and yearning for her presence with unutterable
longing.

Suddenly a bright thought, in the shape

of afternoon tea, presented itself. He hailed
it as a shipwrecked mariner might a sail.
It was past five o'clock. Esse was a
zealous devotee of the tea table, and there,
surely, he would find her ! Accordingly, he
bent his footsteps towards the conservatory,
in which, during the summer months, it was
the will of Flora Grant to have afternoon tea
served. Reaching the spot, he looked anxiously
around, but china cups and saucers, a hissing
silver urn, and gay flowers, were the principal
objects visible. They were a present disappointment,
but some part of the mute array
gave promise of good for the future. The
repast was evidently an event to come. All
was in order ; chairs were set, tea-cups unused.
He resolved, therefore, to take his
stand and to wait.

Before very long, a patter, the gentle tapping
of a high-heeled slipper, upon the tesselated
floor, made his heart beat fast. Pretty as the
figure was, however, whose coming was thus

heralded, It was not that, for which he was
sighing. Scarcely daring to lift his eyes, he
was swiftly made aware that Hannah Wy-combe,
and not Esse Montague, had entered
the conservatory.

'' Where is Miss Montague, Mr. Great-oris?"
exclaimed la belle, as soon as she
espied Arthur.

^' Indeed, I cannot tell you. I hoped to
have found her here," was the grave reply.

'^ And so did I," answered Hannah
Wycombe, more promptly, perhaps, than
truthfully.

Esse was not quite the person whom the
fair Hannah sought. The conference with
her maid at an end, la belle had taken refuge,
from the cares of her toilette, in a novel, the
plot of which was not sufficiently interesting
to entirely absorb her faculties. With her
eyes on the book, therefore, her ears had been
open to passing sounds. The room, In which
she sat, led into the conservatory. It had.

VOL. L F

seemed to her quite as possible a probability
that the creaking of Arthur's boots should
betoken the approach of Lord Oakdene, as it
had seemed to Arthur a probable possibility
that the footsteps of la belle should be those
of Esse. It was a blank meeting, therefore ;
in sporting phraseology, both were '' at fault."
Conventionally is, however, a splendid cover.
Whatever the chagrin might have been which
lurked in the respective hearts of Hannah
Wycombe and Arthur Greatorix, politeness
held it at bay.

Woman's wit is proverbially quick. It did
not take la belle long to divine that Arthur
was waiting anxiously for his fiancee. She
accordingly said good-naturedly —

"' I will go and tell Miss Montague that weare
both dying for some tea, and yet, in her
absence, are too conscientious to rifle the
contents of the teapot."

In his heart, Arthur fervently blessed la
belle, for the suggestion. Alas, for her

kindly proposal ! Temptation, in the shape
of Lord Oakdene, assailed her before she
had gone many paces from the presence
of Arthur. The temptation triumphed ; the
search for Esse was relinquished. The fact,
that his blessings had been premature, was
revealed to Arthur by the fluttering of the
rose-coloured ribbons of la belle's sunshade
among the trees which skirted the lawn.
The ribbons fluttered on a little further, and
then the head of Lord Oakdene could be seen
in close juxtaposition to them.

Arthur absolved la belle for the disappointment
which she had caused him. Nevertheless,
in the disappointment, he felt that another
straw had been added to the burthen of the day ;
moreover, that any addition thereto would inevitably
prove fatal to his powers of endurance.
At the sound, therefore, of the tinkling of
silver bells, which silver bells he knew proclaimed
the approach of Mrs. Grant's pet
dog, and if of her pet dog, then of Mrs.

Grant herself, he fled.' He could not encounter,
under existing circumstances, a tete-astute
tea with his hostess.

The fabulous camel, of whose straws
Arthur had been thinking, might for ever
preserve Its back entire, could It thus easily
escape Its threatened doom.

THE VERY DEAR COUSIN.

^' Very unlucky to help anyone to salt,
Gweatowix. Help them to salt, help them to
sorrow, you know," exclaimed Lord Oakdene,
jestingly to Arthur, who, seated by Esse at
the dinner table, was placing some of the
thus maligned condiment upon her dessert
plate.

Lord Oakdene's remark was inopportune.

Two days had elapsed since Arthur fled
from before the coming of Flora Grant.
They had not been happy days to him-gaiety
and amusements of various kinds had
kept the inmates of Brashleigh Manor constantly
astir. Through them all, he had
found it hard to determine, whether Esse had
purposely kept aloof from him. True, she

had accepted all his 'sweet observances' as
usual, but yet, whenever he thought that he
had secured a tete-astute with her, she had
slipped from him like snow before sunshine
and was nowhere to be found.

He was In no mood, therefore, for banter.
Putting a cheerful countenance upon the
matter, however, he asked —

'^ In what old wife's school did you learn
that balderdash, Oakdene ? "

'' Why, in that establishment for education
which the world keeps, to be sure," laughingly
replied his Lordship. " Everybody knows it
is awfully unlucky to help anyone to salt. Do
they not, Mrs. Gwant ? "

''I thought so, certainly. It seems, however,
that you and I are in a minority upon
the matter. Miss Wycombe, and Miss
Montague both look incredulous. For my
part, nothing would induce me to allow anyone,
for whom I had the smallest regard, to

help me to salt. But we must hope, that, in
this instance, the old saying may not be
verified."

Flora Grant sighed plaintively, as she
emphatically pronounced the word 'hope."
The sigh was accompanied by a meaning
shrug of her shoulders, and a melancholy
attempt at a smile. It was quite evident,
that she believed her charitable wish ran but
very little chance of meeting with fulfilment.

The sigh, together with the words of his
wife, attracted the attention of Ralph Grant,
who said briskly —

Nonsense, my dear Flora ! you need not
hope at all about it. Greatorix is right.
Such fables are all rubbish. Esse has given
me my salt at breakfast, ever since she wore
short frocks, and I don't think, she has
brought me into any very heart-breaking
tribulation, as yet."

Esse rewarded her uncle with a smile of

affection, and Arthur, ignoring the covert
attack which Flora Grant had made upon him,
again addressed Lord Oakdene.

'' Come, old fellow, since you have given
us the dark side of the picture, it is only fair
that we should have the other. There is an
antidote to most poisons they say. Can't I
undo this horrible deed of mine ? "

'' I don't know," returned Lord Oakdene ;
^' there is something, I think, about showing
salt over your left shoulder, I " —

'^ No, no," chimed in pretty Hannah
Wycombe, with a laugh which allowed her
pearly teeth to be displayed to advantage,
*' that is only to be done when it is spilled."

*' You are quite wight. Miss Wycombe, soit
is. I am afraid it wouldn't help Gweatowix
out of his present scrape."

At any other time, Arthur would undoubtedly
have prolonged the badinage. As it was, he
merely replied curtly —

*' Then I must trust to my own resources."

Whereupon Lord Oakdene said, sotto voce,
to Hannah Wycombe —

The great man seems father irate this
evening."

Hannah Wycombe replied by a smile only.
And so the short conversation upon superstition
ended.

The persons, who were assembled that
night around the dinner table at Brashleigh,
formed a charming picture, to which the
handsome room, all aglow with the rich
tints of the setting sun, formed a fitting
framework.

Flora Grant wore a dress of old gold-coloured
brocade, with crimson flowers in her
dark hair. The attire becameher brunette complexion
admirably. She was looking less discontented
than usual, perhaps because she had
wit enough to know that she had somewhat
disconcerted Arthur. She was always more
amiable when others were uncomfortable. The
sight of contentment was displeasing to her.

The countenance of Flora Grant ought to
have been piquant. Arch smiles should have
dwelt persistently upon her full red lips ; and
her dark eyes should have sparkled often with,
merry glances. Alas, that arch smiles and
merry glances were alike doomed to be absentees
! By no means absent were they, however,
from the face of Hannah Wycombe, who, in
the palest of pale pink robes, formed a charming
contrast, not only to her hostess, but
also to Esse. La belle, with her golden'
hair, brilliant complexion, flashing eyes, white
neck and handsome arms, was so dazzlingly
attractive, that even the rare beauty of Esse
ran the danger of being temporarily eclipsed

In addition to her personal charms, la belle
was invariably gay and good-humoured ;,
consequently, she was universally popular.
It followed, as a matter of course, that she
gained the reputation of being a flirt — not,
perhaps, altogether unjustly ; but since she
neither encouraged deserters from the ranks

of rival queens of beauty, nor resented desertions
from those of her own, she made but few
enemies. She was very much in earnest
about her flirtations, so long as they lasted ;
but, she was in no wise cast down, when they
came to a conclusion.

At the time of her present stay at Brash-leigh,
she was indulging in a decided
tendresse for Lord Oakdene, by whom it was
fully reciprocated, notwithstanding the fact
that he believed himself to be suffering
poignantly from the life-long misery of a
hopeless passion for Esse. Perhaps, he conceived
his woe to be as a bitter which gave
additional zest to his appetite for the enjoyment
of other sweets.

He was a petted, rather than a spoiled
favourite of fortune. Sang bleu and gold are
talents, which, too often prove worse than useless,
in the heedless hands of their possessor.
In the present instance, they had not, at any
rate, been abused. If, but a small amount of

positive good had been effected by Lord
Oakdene, during the four-and-twenty years of
his existence, it is surely something, in these
days, to be able to aver, that no act of his
tarnished the lustre of his ancient name ; no
fashionable folly or vice, call it which you
will, blemished his honour. He was not only
an aristocrat, but, — a gentleman. And it
came to pass that the knowledge of Esse
being engaged, and, as a consequence, forbidden
fruit to him, stimulated him to no
unlawful or ungenerous dealings.

Calling and esteeming Arthur Greatorix his
friend, Lord Oakdene allowed no sign of his
intense admiration for Esse to escape him.
Sure of his honesty of purpose, he braved the
dangers of her presence, returning again and
again to Brashleigh Manor. He prided himself
a good deal upon the self command
which he there displayed, and he thought
with complacency upon the secret devotion
which inspired him. He, at least, could

suffer and keep silence ; he, at least, could
rejoice in the joy of a friend ; he would lay-down
his life for the unconscious object of
his adoration, should the necessity for such
a sacrifice arise ; he would worship secretly,
and endure patiently. So whispered Lord
Oakdene, many times, to his heart of hearts.
Meanwhile his spirits lost none of their lightness,
his appetite was not impaired, nor his
repose destroyed. His visits to Brashleigh
gave general satisfaction. To Flora Grant
they were the solitary circumstances to, which
she raised no dissenting voice.

Lord Oakdene was a connection of Flora
Grant's. Very distant, it is true ; but, he was
a lord, and not only a lord, but an earl ! Had
it not been so, good looking young guardsman
(he belonged to the Coldstreams, or as he
called them to the " Coldstweams ") although
he assuredly was, with his tall, soldier-like
figure and his pleasant face, with its aristocratic
features, it is more than probable that

he would have been allowed to slip altogether
from out of her list of friends and
acquaintances.

But, being so, she claimed him as her kith
and kin. She prided herself vastly, not only
upon her ancestral tree itself, but likewise
upon her knowledge concerning it. Horace,
Earl of Oakdene, was a twig which she unhesitatingly
declared could be plainly traced
to the parent stem, and, with a little access
of ingenuity, she as unhesitatingly gave
cogent reasons for claiming him her cousin.
He made no protest to this, and so the
cousinship was established as a fact. It
amused his Lordship, and it pleased Flora
Grant, so it mattered little to the rest of the
world, saving and excepting to honest Ralph
Grant, who winced considerably at the oft
repeated phrase, ''my cousin Lord Oakdene,"
which fell from the Hps of his wife.

Upon such occasions, a gesture of annoyance
would escape the master of Brashleigh ; but

then, he was unskilled in heraldic lore, unversed
in the mysteries of pedigree, and so his scruples
were accounted worthless ! Scorned as
lie and his scruples were, however, by the wife
who headed his table, his character, and even
his appearance, won respect from all others.
The dignity, not the infirmity, of years was
upon him. Time had neither robbed his eye
of its kindly light, nor bent his stalwart frame ;
his cheery voice was still lusty, his arm still
vigorous. Few better shots than he could be
found in the county, few men rode straighter
to hounds ; while, over and above all, there
shone that warmth of heart and active benevolence,
which had endeared him alike to
rich and poor.

Personally, Ralph Grant liked Lord Oak-done.
Had it been otherwise, even the
*every dear cousin," nobleman although he
was, would have found no place at Brash-leigh
Manor. But, next to Esse, it was
to Arthur Greatorix that Ralph Grant

turned for companionship and sympathy.
The bond between these two men was very
strong. Hence the perfect satisfaction with
which Ralph Grant looked forward to the
cementing of that bond, by the marriage of
Arthur with Esse.

It was in vain that Flora Grant moaned and
prophesied evil in the days that were to come ;
in vain that she snubbed Arthur ; in vain that
she issued terrible warnings to Esse. The
betrothal went on all the same. Until the
question of Arthur's leave-taking arose, the
course of true love had run smoothly ; scarce
a ripple stirred the calm sea of delight upon
which the lovers sailed, not a breath of
adverse wind disturbed them.

Of the impending leave-taking. Flora Grant,
as yet, was unaware. She saw that, for some
reason, Lord Oakdene's jest about the salt had
perturbed Arthur, and she knew that she had
done her best to add to his perturbation.
More than this, she did not know. If she had

not lacked the tenderness usually to be found
in her sex, the gravity which overshadowed
Arthur Greatorix would have made her merciful
towards him. As it was, it only enhanced
her triumphant feeling and made her the
more keen to pursue her advantage. Unusually
silent, with a sadness in his eyes and
a deepened colour upon his bronzed cheek,
his appearance would have disarmed most
women of all spite towards him. But, like a
gnat. Flora Grant returned again and again
with words to buzz about and sting him. It
was with a certain weariness, therefore, that
was born of his spirit, and which manifested
itself outwardly, that he rose from his chair
as the ladies prepared to leave the room ; a
weariness, however, which was dispelled by
so sweet a glance from Esse, that rapturous-hope
quickly replaced it. Her blue eyes had
been turned to him with, once again, their
old expression of loving trust, and what cared
VOL. I. G

he for a hundred Flora Grant's, and ten
thousand stinging words?

Many a malicious intent has brought about
a blessing upon those whom it was meant to
harm. Just so, the ill-concealed unkindness of
Flora Grant produced a total revulsion, in
favour of her lover, in the heart of Esse
Montague. In her generous wrath at the
attacks upon him, which she, and perhaps
she only at the table, understood, away went
all the pique, which his proposed departure
had aroused, all the pride, which his refusal to
explain the motives for that departure, had
engendered. She remembered only, all his
love for her, all her own love for him, and,
with her whole soul looking forth from her
beautiful eyes, she told him in mute language
of her restored faith.

Are any so quick as lovers at reading
signs ? A closely written volume of the most
logical and elaborate argument could not have
carried such firm conviction to the heart of

Arthur Greatorix, as did that one, short, sunny
glance. And what a change that conviction
wrought ! It chased the shadow from his
brow, unloosed his tongue, uplifted his head,
and dispelled many a dreary misgiving. Such,
was the good wrought over him. The evil
was impatience — impatience to be up and
away from his host and Lord Oakdene ;
impatience, in fact, to revel in the joy which
his conviction told him was in store for him.
And, this could only be, in the presence of
Esse.

Ralph Grant was no wine-bibber, but to
use his own words, " I enjoy a glass of good
wine myself, and I Hke to see my friends
around me doing the same." In accordance
with this assertion, he was wont to sip his
port, leisurely, after dinner, enjoying, meanwhile,
the cheery conversation, in which his
genial nature took delight. Unluckily for
Arthur Greatorix, upon this particular evening,
the respective rights of landlord and tenant

were under discussion, in consequence of
which, the sitting was graver and more prolonged
than usual. The sound of music
from the drawing-room, however, brought
Arthur's emancipation.

'' God bless my heart ! I had no idea it was
so late," exclaimed Ralph Grant, as the
strains reached him.

Then, to the relief of Arthur, he proposed
to join the ladies, and they went.

There was one moment of wild hope in
the breast of Arthur Greatorix, the next
instant, he was overwhelmed with despair.
To use a schoolboy's phrase. Flora Grant
proved herself to be, 'one too many," for the
impatient lover. No sooner had Lord Oak-done,
who was closely followed by Arthur,
entered the drawing-room, than, music in
hand, she accosted the former ; and with an
affectation of extreme earnestness, she entreated
him to sing the duet, with the music
of which she had fore-armed herself, at once,

with Esse. What could his Lordship do
but acquiesce in such a request, even had he
been reluctant instead of willing ?

Taking the piece of music from his hostess,
he went immediately to the piano. Esse
was already there.

Thus Arthur was foiled. Mentally acknowledging
that it was so, a bitter smile
wreathed itself upon his Hp beneath the
cover of his heavy moustache. The smile
would have been less bitter, if, with second
sight, he could have known, that this malice
aforethought upon the part of Flora Grant
was working for him further good.

Swiftly glided the fair fingers of Esse
over the ivory keys ; fresh and full rose her
young voice in the song. Not a false chord
was struck, not a wrong note uttered, although
her heart and brain were burning and busy
with the resolution that, coilte qui contes she
would see, and speak alone with Arthur, before
she went to rest.

Meanwhile, matters were growing more
desperate for him. La belle had betaken herself
to her hundred and first examination of
a bulky photographic album, which graced
a table at some distance from the piano,
and was listlessly trying to discover, some
fresh acquaintance, among the stolid visaged
men and women whose likenesses were
therein ; Flora Grant was listening with
pretended rapture to the performance of the
singers, while her husband, leaning against a
window, leisurely turned over the leaves of
a newspaper. Arthur, although hopelessly
unmusical, hovered close to Esse.

Suddenly there was a stir. He knew only
too well what it betokened. His doom was fast
overtaking him. The whist table appeared.
Forgetful of the music, which but a moment
before had been so wholly engrossing to her,
Flora Grant clapped her hands with childish
glee.

*' How delightful ! We are just the right

number. Esse and Lord Oakdene will sing
to us, while you and I, Hannah, have a rubber
with Mr. Greatorix and Mr. Grant."

La belle was very weary of her solitary inspection
of the well known photos. She hailed
any change, therefore, with pleasure, and,
rose up with alacrity, at the words of Flora
Grant. Unlike Arthur Greatorix, Hannah
Wycombe was musical and could sing, but
that she should do so, upon that evening,
formed no part of the plan of her hostess.

'' Come, my dear;" and the voice of Flora
Grant had an unusual amount of sweetness in
it.

Thus accosted, Ralph Grant looked up
from his paper. A slight astonishment betrayed
itself upon his face as he walked on
tip-toe, so as not to disturb the vocalists,
to his wife, and said —

Did you speak to me. Flora? "

Yes ! Come and have some whist."

He nodded his acceptation of the proposal ,

and with dumb show invited Arthur to share
in the game. Poor Arthur ! With a scowl at
Lord Oakdene, whom, in his wrath, Arthur
deemed to be as guilty as Flora Grant, he
slowly left the piano and stood by the whist
table.

Flora Grant was prompt in arranging
matters. The ladies would play the gentlemen.
No one objected, so they sat down to
the game. One song succeeded another,
while still Arthur Greatorix was forced to bear
his share in tricks, trumps and honours.
They came to an end at last. But not before
it was so late that even Flora Grant felt her
work to be accomplished. Night had come,
Arthur .had been successfully kept from his
fiancee all the evening, and for the present,
spite had done its worst.

*' Good-night" sounded on all sides. The
soft rustle of silken robes, along the hall and
staircase, ceased. All was quiet, save the
murmur of men's voices in a distant room.

Then a door opened in a corridor at some
little distance from the gallery, which has
been before mentioned, and the somewhat
frightened Httle face of Esse peered out into
the darkness. Still all was silent. Gaining
courage apparently therefrom, Esse stepped
quickly forward, and passed swiftly to the
gallery. The moon shone brightly through
the mullions windows ; nevertheless, she
cast many a timid glance around her.

There were not wanting ghostly legends
in connection with the spot, and, as the tardy
minutes '' dragged themselves along," she
half repented of her resolve to wait for Arthur.
Her heart beat quickly. *' Suppose after
all," she thought, " he should not come.
And yet he must. He always comes this
way to his room. Surely, he will do so tonight
! And then, as surely, he must come
directly ; he always changes his coat before
going into the billiard-room to smoke."
In this manner, Esse argued to herself ;

nevertheless, she grew more nervous every
instant, more distrustful of the success of
her enterprise. For an enterprise, and a very
daring one, did the measure which she had
adopted seem to be to her. True, Arthur washer
guardian, but he had become her lover, and
that which would have been undertaken without
a flutter of her heart in the one instance,
became altogether a different matter, now that
the twofold relationship was established
between them. Esse knew quite well that it
was not a guardian only, but a lover for whom
she waited — a lover who needed comfort,
comfort which none but she could give. Her
conscience smote her for the coldness with
which she had treated him during the past
few days. But it was all over now, she
told herself, or it soon would be. She would
tell her own, old Arthur, that it had been
no wish of hers to keep away from him
all that evening, and to sing so many
songs with Lord Oakdene. She could not

possibly go to sleep without explaining this,
and without expressing her indignation at
Aunt Flora's unkind remarks and unjust
words. Indeed, it was those very remarks
and words which had decided Esse upon her
present step.

But here, again, the conscience of the
fair Esse pricked her. Had she not been
allowing similar unjust speeches and unkind
syllables to rankle in her own bosom ?
Oh, it was all too dreadful ! How ungenerous
she had been ! She must make Arthur some
atonement ; something more than just waiting
to see him there. Yes, she knew what she
would do ! She would tell him that she
trusted him implicitly, for she did trust him,
she had trusted him all along, only she had
been so childish and silly. Yes, she would
tell him that she trusted him fully and
entirely, even if he really did go to Gibraltar ;
only — only — she was getting so horribly
frightened, she wished he would be quick

and come into the gallery. If a cloud passed
over the moon it would be quite dark, and
then she could not stay in that dreadfully
bogie sort of a place, with the statues all
looking like ghosts, and the suits of armour,
as if men were hiding in them.

Darkness, however, did not overtake Esse.
She kept her ground, therefore, in spite of
statues and suits of armour, until her
quickened ear caught the sound of approaching
footsteps of the one whom she
loved right well.

None save Esse would have recognised
these footsteps to be those of Arthur Greatorix.
They were quite unlike his quick, elastic tread ;
depression made them lag. Slowly and
moodily he was pursuing his way. Too love-loyal
to cast a thought of blame upon Esse,
his full ire fell upon Flora Grant and Lord
Oakdene. What a powerless puppet, Arthur
thought, he had been in their hands.
He was too angry to understand that Lord

Oakdene was innocent in the matter.
Suddenly a slight movement betrayed the
presence of Esse.

'' You here, my darling ! " he exclaimed,
bounding to her side with a swiftness which
formed a marked contrast to the pace at
which but a moment before he had been
proceeding, '' you here, my own Esse. This
is, indeed, a stroke of good fortune ! I was
thinking of you, and longing to see you, but
with about as much hope of having my wish
gratified, as there is a chance of my being
made Prime Minister of England tomorrow.
I thought you were half asleep, darling, by
this time."

'' No, Arthur dear ! I could not go to sleep
until I had seen you. I want very much to
speak to you. I have something to say — I
thought I knew exactly how to say it just
before you came, and now, somehow, it all
seems fooHsh, and — and — I wish I had not
come."

'* Not come ! " echoed Arthur in dismay.

Yes — well, not quite that, perhaps. First
of all, I think I have been a little frightened,
at being here alone, and now, I feel a little
frightened of you."

Arthur laughed. It was the only expression
of genuine mirth which had escaped
him, since Esse and he held their last
tete-astute. His laugh did Esse good.
Rallying her composure, she put her two
hands upon his broad chest, and, looking
straight up into his face upon which the
moonlight rested, she said timidly —

'' I am sorry I asked you not to go to
Gibraltar. I trust you quite, quite. I know
you would not go unless you were obliged,
and — and Arthur, you must not mind any of
those silly things which Aunt Flora sometimes
says. They are so unjust, and I know they
vex Uncle Ralph almost as much as they
do me." Esse paused. A crimson blush
mounted to her cheek and brow, as she

added, " They vex me, Arthur, and they dome
harm. Forgive me, that I have let them
do me harm."

Was any petition, ever made, so certain
of being granted as this ? Without enquiring
what it was that he was asked to forgive, he
tenderly raised her hands ; and, stooping low,
placed them around his neck, pouring forth,
meanwhile, thanks, love, blessings and protestations,
in a breath.

Fortunately, incoherency of speech in no
manner interferes with the bliss of lovers ;
nevertheless, it renders their conversations
somewhat difficult to repeat. And such conversations
are bewildering ; and they are also,
somewhat difficult of comprehension, to any
mortal save the lovers themselves. But, thus
much could be gathered, from the murmurs and
disjointed sentences which fell that night from
the Hps of Esse and Arthur. He had never
been, '' so perfectly happy in all his life before
" — Esse was, '' very glad and very happy

too" — they, 'would not be parted after all "^
he, '' had given his word to go to Gibraltar,
but how could he go and leave his darling? "
he must, '' get off his promise somehow."
Whereupon, there ensued a lengthened protest,
but the girlish voice in which it was
uttered, was so soft and low, that, even Arthur
failed to catch all its syllables, greedy as he
was of them.

When, with lingering touch of lip and hand,,
the second 'good-night" passed between
the lovers, Arthur Greatorix had forgotten,
not only, his wrath against Flora Grant, but
also, against her " very dear cousin."

THE FIRST OF SEPTEMBER.

It is marvellously pleasant to find, upon
awaking, that the sun is brightly shining ;
and more especially, after days of gloomy
weather. It is even more pleasant, perhaps,
with returning consciousness, to know that
the cloud, which has been overshadowing the
happiness of life, has disappeared. This was
the agreeable experience which came to
Arthur Greatorix on the morrow, and he
rejoiced exceedingly.

It was all, " made up," as nursery parlance
has it, between Esse and himself, therefore,
it was small wonder that the first of
September found him still lingering at
Brashleigh Manor. Cupid held him fast ;
the boy's rosy fetters could not be broken.

VOL. I. H

■ Manifold attractions had combined to keep
Hannah Wycombe and Lord Oakdene also
there. They were amusing themselves to
their heart's content, with everything around
them ; and, with each other, possibly, most of
all.

The addition to their numbers consisted of a
Scotch laird, who, had shot with Ralph Grant,
except during the interregnum of his residence
abroad, for over thirty years. The best
shooting in the country, would not have compensated
to either for the loss of the other's
society, when September came round ; and, if
the pockets of the laird were almost as empty
as those of his friend were full, he could at
least match that friend in warmth of heart,
in love of sport, and in endurance of fatigue.
The laird had a fund of dry humour at command
which amused everybody ; everybody,
at least, but Flora Grant, who chose to condemn
his bonhomie as vulgar.

Perhaps, however, after Ralph Grant, the

individuals, who most thoroughly appreciated
the wit and anecdotes of the old
laird, were two brothers, who were also
guests at Brashleigh.

They were agreeable young men, ready
both to be pleased themselves, and to give
what pleasure they could to others.

Frank Lashmore, the elder brother, was
a subaltern in a marching regiment ; while
his brother Cecil, had yet another year to
pass at Oxford, before taking his degree.
They were not often together. Leave seasons
and vacations found them, generally,
in different parts of the world. But they
were much attached to each other, and the
prospect of their stay at Brashleigh was very
welcome to them both. They were sons of a
keen sportsman, and had handled guns all
their Ives. Hence their invitation to join the
shooting party which was staying at Brash-leigh
Manor, for the first of September.

There was one other person, among the

guests at Brashleigh, who must be mentioned.
That other person, was, Rachel Triton.

Rachel Tritton ! the cousin about whose
coming Esse had, in vain, endeavoured to
reconcile Flora Grant.

The visit of Rachel was eventually brought
about in the following manner.

A morning or two after Esse and Arthur
had recovered their wonted light-heartedness,
Mr. Grant bore a letter to his wife. She was
in her boudoir. Hastily scanning the contents
of the epistle, she cried, angrily —

'' We must put her off. Indeed, I have
quite made up my mind to do so. Do you
understand me, Ralph? I shall put her off."

'' Put who, off, my dear? "

*' Who ! How particularly dense and trying,
you are this morning, Ralph."

Very likely I may be, my dear Flora, but,
how can I possibly tell, of whom you are
speaking?"

In answer, Flora Grant contemptuously
tossed the letter to her husband.

Rachel ! " he exclaimed, in pleased
surprise.

'eyes, Rachel Tritton, of course! Who,
but she, would have had the bad taste to propose
coming to us the last week in August ?
But it does not matter. I shall write and
tell her that it is not convenient for her to
come then."

Rachel ! " said Ralph Grant, again.

He had not heard the last remark which his
wife had made.

Yes, I tell you it is from Rachel. How
slow of comprehension you are."

'' Poor little Rachel! " he continued, still not
heeding the words of Flora Grant, and speaking
half to himself.

Poor ! Of course, she is poor. No
people on this earth are such a bore as poor
relations. Thank goodness ! I have none

belonging to me. One, Rachel Tritton is
enough. I shall put her off, Ralph, that is
settled."

'' No, Flora. Rachel must not be put off.
The change will do her good. I am glad
she has written to say that she can come."

'* But, as mistress of the house, I decline
to receive her ; therefore, I am afraid you will
not have the pleasure, which you seem so
much to anticipate, of her arrival."

Thus addressed, Ralph Grant passed his
hand caressingly over his bald head, and,
he paused, before trusting himself to reply.

Emboldened by his apparent hesitation,
Flora Grant continued —

'' You always contradict me, Ralph. If I
were not one of the best tempered women
in the universe, I should not stand it. I
invariably give way to you, but, I mean to be
firm, in this instance. It really is most annoying
to have such a visitor proposed. You
know quite well, the house will be full."

'' Nonsense, my dear ! The house being
full will not make any difference ; Rachel can
come all the same. Besides, the more the
merrier, you know ! "

'' Really, this is too bad ! Can't you
understand, that, Rachel Tritton is not the
person I wish to have here, with Sir
Marmaduke and Lady Alicia Hargreaves?"
was the impatiently put query.

Ralph Grant looked gravely at his wife, ashe
said gently —

'' No, Flora, I cannot understand you. This
is the second time, during: our conversation
about Rachel Tritton, that I have not been
able to do so. Rachel is my own cousin, and
she is as good a little soul as ever breathed.
What are you driving at ? "

Well, you know, I meant — you see — I
meant — that — that — in fact — she is — not —
well ! — that she is not quite in the same
position as ourselves — does not move in the
same society, and all that sort of thing."

*' The plain English of which Is," interrupted
Ralph Grant, warmly, '' that she does
not drive a carriage and pair, keep a tribe of
idle servants, and have a new gown to her
back every other day. My best friends are
also friends of hers. If her father had stuck
to business, as Industriously, as mine did, she
might have had as many of these fine things, as
as " — he was going to say 'ras you have," but
he checked himself, and simply added, *ras
other people have."

'' For mercy's sake, do not speak of business,
Ralph," cried Flora Grant, with a
gesture of supreme disdain. '' Please to have
•a little respect for me, if you have none for
yourself. If you are so unfortunate as to
have mercantile connections, I think it extremely
bad taste of you to allude to
them. I know nothing at all, about people
in business. If I did, I should not take the
smallest Interest in them."

'' I daresay not," drily, returned Ralph

Grant. Then he continued, 'but I am no
more ashamed of being connected with
business people, and of having been in business
myself, than I am of my dear old native
land."

I have no doubt your sentiments are very
charming, but you will oblige me by not
giving them expression. When we were
dining out the other evening, I heard you
talking about those odious mills, or whatever
they were, which belonged to you before I
knew you. You were positively raving about
them. It annoyed me exceedingly. Please
do not repeat the annoyance. My headaches
frightfully. You are making it worse,
every instant."

Ralph Grant listened demurely to his wife,
who, enforced her complaint of the headache,
by saturating her pocket-handkerchief with
eau de Cologne, and applying it with a martyr-like
air to her forehead. Without noticing
the beginning of her remark, he said, kindly —

Can I get you anything, my dear, or shall
I ring for your maid ? "

'' I want nothing, thank you. I am
gradually becoming perfectly accustomed
both to pain of body, and to vexation of mind.
It is my lot. You may congratulate yourself
that I know both how to suffer, and how to
be patient."

As she thus spoke, the victim of these
imaginary ills applied herself with fresh
vigour to her scent bottle, and, leant back
upon her couch, with affected resignation.

Ralph Grant cast a furtive glance at the
door of the room. Escape would have
been an immense relief to him. He
was not quite sure, however, of the
righteousness of such a proceeding, under
existing circumstances. His wife, perchance,
might be suffering, although her cheek was
blooming. So he approached her, and said,
affectionately —

'' There, there my dear ! you are vexing

yourself foolishly, this morning. Neither the
Hargreaves, nor anyone else, could possibly
object to meet little Rachel. I am grieved
to upset your arrangements, as I told you before
; but I particularly wish my cousin, (for
Rachel is the daughter of my father's
only sister, you must remember) to be put up
somehow. We asked her to name her own
time for coming to us. Now that she has
done so, it will look unkind if we write and
say we cannot have her. "

'' It is not very polite of you, Ralph, to remind
me of my own stupidity. I must have
been perfectly idiotic to fall in with such a
plan, as that of telling her she might come
whenever it suited her. I hate those free and
easy ways, but, I suppose, I did it to gratify
you and Esse."

Scarcely Esse, I think ! She has only
seen Rachel once, and then only for a short
time. I do not suppose the matter would
particularly interest Esse."

'' It would interest her, I daresay, if she
thought it was anything to which I had an
objection, and I tell you again, Ralph, that, I
have a very decided objection to entertain
your cousin, until our shooting parties are
over. Who would have thought of her wanting
to come at such a particularly inconvenient
time ? Those kind of people, however,
are always utterly devoid of tact and
consideration."

The patience of Ralph Grant was fast
giving away. The attack upon Esse had
not fortified it. He exclaimed impetuously —

'' God bless my heart, Flora, what a fuss you
are making about nothing at all ! Rachel will
not, interfere with you, in any way. Esse will
take her off your hands." He knew of old
that it was useless to notice the aspersions,
which his wife cast upon those with whom she
was annoyed. Making no attempt, therefore,
to defend either the tact, or the consideration,
of Rachel Tritton, he continued, '' You have

not a trouble in the world, Flora. Take
care that you do not make some for yourself.
Such troubles are the hardest to bear."

'not a trouble !" whimpered Flora Grant,
when you are so unkind, and Esse is so
obstinate. Oh, no, of course, I have not ! "

No, Flora, in very truth, you have not.
Look around you, and thank God. We are
both strong and hearty — I beg your pardon
my dear, except your headache, which I
hope will soon be better — and we have everything
which we desire. Dry your tears, my
dear. Crying is bad for your head. Do
not worry yourself about trifles. Rachel's
position is a sad one, or I should not stick so
closely to my point. She has had a long
round of sorrow. Most of those, whom she
loved best, have been taken from her, and she
is now in almost constant attendance upon
one, whom she regards as a mother. The
old lady is crochetty, I believe, and a great
invalid. From all that I hear, it is no sinecure

to be always with her. But Httle Rachel
plods on bravely. You see from her letter,
that some good Samaritan has offered to
supply hef place for a week or two. If, therefore,
she does not take her holiday now, the
chances are, that, she will not be able to get
one at all, another time. Besides, it will do
her more good to come, when there are plenty
of people about ; she wants cheering. Do
not bother yourself any more. I will take
care that Rachel is no trouble to you, and
Esse shall answer her letter. Shall I find
an interesting book for you, or, would you like
a drive ? Perhaps, the fresh air would cure the
pain in your head."

Ungracious to the last. Flora Grant pettishly
declined both book and drive. Disappointed,
but not entirely rebuffed, her
husband essayed one or two more kindly
propositions. They met with a like refusal.
At last, in despair of arriving at a better understanding,
he desisted from his overtures of

peace, and withdrawing from the presence of
his wife, sought that of Esse.

It was the old story — the old feeling of
relief to be away from the one woman, and
with the other. Fain would Ralph Grant
have had it otherwise. There was yet enough
of love for his wife, in his heart, to make it
very sore at leaving her thus. Esse understood
at once how matters stood. She had
learnt to know the outward signs which betokened
fresh domestic disquietude for her
uncle, and, by a variety of affectionate endeavours,
she succeeded in chasing the cloud
from his brow. Promising to take Rachel
Tritton under her charge, and to be especially
careful that she should be no burthen to
Flora Grant, Esse wrote the letter which
eventually brought Rachel, on the last day of
August, to Brashleigh Manor.

It would have surprised the said Rachel
amazingly, if she had known that she had
given occasion for a matrimonial dissension of

a somewhat unpleasant character. Nothing-could
be more foreign to her imagination.
She deemed herself, to be an utterly unimportant
atom of creation, to the world in
general. And an atom, was she truly, in
one sense. A wee, fragile woman in body,
slight and delicate ; a woman whom a puff
of wind might have lifted from off her small
feet. But nevertheless, she was a woman,
strong in heart, and brave in endurance.

Ralph Grant was right. No one could
possibly object to meet '' little Rachel." Indeed,
few could pass her by, without feeling
that she had awakened their interest. Sorrow,
had set its chastening seal of meekness on
her — goodness, its patent of nobility.

It so happened, however, that Sir Mar-mature
and Lady Alicia Hargreaves did not
meet Rachel Tritton, at Brashleigh Manor
The desire of Flora Grant's heart was in this
respect granted to her. She had not to pass
through the ordeal of presenting, her husband's

unfashionable cousin, to her fashionable
friends.

At the hour which had been appointed
for the arrival of Rachel, Esse loitered in
the entrance hall. True to her promise, she
wished to take the stranger at once under
her especial charge ; and so she waited to give
her welcome. While Esse thus waited, a
servant approached, bearing a telegram and
a note.

The telegram was, for Flora Grant. The
note was, for Arthur Greatorix.

Esse possessed herself, of both the telegram
and the note. Arthur was away, and
was not expected to return for an hour or two.
The note, therefore, was carefully placed in a
rose-coloured, satin-lined receptacle, which
Esse designated her 'work basket." Thus
safely housed, Esse left it. Her next care
was to find Flora Grant.

There is always a sort of half-frightened
excitement attendant upon the appearance of

VOL. I. I

a telegram. Such an excitement, made the
footsteps of Esse even sweeter than usual, as
she bore the one in question to Flora Grant.
When she reached her, that lady, read the
announcement upon the thin, yellow-looking
paper, with a sigh of relief. The telegram
was from Sir Marmaduke. Lady AHcia had
been taken suddenly ill, and their visit to
Brashleigh was impossible. Without a pang
of sorrow for the sickness of her friend,
Flora Grant congratulated herself upon the
turn which affairs had taken. Rachel Tritton
had not been put off, and, the Hargreaves,
after all, would not see her. How luckily
everything had happened !

Pleasing herself by thus reasoning, it was
almost with cordiality that Flora Grant received
Rachel ; and Rachel, who looked for
no attention — who found great pleasures in
small things — who saw beauty in everything
and kindness in everybody, was charmed with
her reception.

Truly, so far as Flora Grant was concerned,
Ignorance was bliss for Rachel !

The first of September, therefore, dawned
upon contented inmates at Brashlelgh. At the
close of the day, a jovial party assembled around
the dinner table. The weather had been perfect,
and the sport excellent. The appetites
of the sportsmen were good — their spirits
high. Repartee and laughter sounded on
all sides. Fair cheeks were radiant, and
soft eyes sparkled with amusement.

Rachel looked wonderingly from one to
another of those by whom she was surrounded.
She had been so long isolated
from every description of gaiety, that, it
bewildered her, at first. By degrees, however,
her bewilderment cleared away, and she
was able to enter, with a keen relish, into the
pleasure of the hour. It was the relish of a
healthy appetite ; the thorough, unquestioning
pleasure of a child. All that glittered was
gold to Rachel. She had no thought either

of sham or of tinsel. Her laugh told that thus
it was with her ; it was so true and genuine
a laugh. In all its soft low cadence, there
was not a wrong note — not a sharp of the
discord of satire, nor a flat of the dulness of
ennui. It was very pleasant to Hasten to its
harmony ; and, Arthur Greatorix, was quick to
mark its peculiar beauty, as it floated softly
amid the more boisterous sounds of merriment.
It seemed to him, as the simple air of
some sweet old melody, in contrast to the
noise and show of a modern variation.

The '' great man," as Lord Oakdene called
Arthur Greatorix, had needed no second bidding
from Esse, to befriend Rachel. His
sympathies, had been warmly enlisted upon
her behalf, before he saw her, and, when he
saw her, he liked her even better than he
thought he should. He was glad, therefore,
to see her happy and amused.

But, while light laughter rang within the
walls of Brashleigh Manor, a lonely watcher

Stood without. The sounds of merry-making
reached her, as she paused upon a terrace-walk
within a short distance of the diningroom
windows. For the space of a few
moments she bent forward, as if Hastening to
the din of joyous voices which floated from
the room into the quiet evening air, and then,
turning away abruptly, she wandered farther
from the house. Twilight came, its shadows
deepened, and night set in ; but still, she
roamed restlessly to and fro, returning, from
time to time, to within a few paces of the
Halted windows.

At last, leaving the vicinity of the house
altogether, she plunged into a narrow grass
path which ran between two high yew hedges.
This path, she traversed from end to end,
again and again.

Suddenly, with a gesture of impatience,
she bent her steps in another direction, and
quickly gained a more distant part of the
shrubbery. Still hurrying on, she did not

stop, nor slacken her speed, until she reached
a disused summer-house, which, half fallen to
ruin, was situated beneath the wide-spreading
branches of a tree. The entrance, to this
place, was black and cavernous. Undeterred
by its gloom, she crossed the dilapidated
doorway, and, in an instant, vanished from
sight.

Nearly an hour passed. The night grew
cloudy and chill. The summer-house was
damp and drear ; but the figure did not
emerge therefrom. As a distant clock, however,
chimed eleven, something, which looked
more liked a shadow than a substance, stood
again in the doorway.

Spectre-like, it hovered there for some
moments. Then, stepping forth from out of
the darkness of the vault-like opening, it
paused beneath the gently-rustling trees, and
the tall, slight figure of a woman was distinctly
visible. For a while she stood perfectly
motionless. A bat whirled close by. She

did not stir. She might have been carven
stone, for aught of Hfe's token that she displayed.
No statue could have looked more
still. Her attitude was that of Hastening ; and
listening, as though, she watched and waited,
for the coming of another. If so, watching and
waiting alike proved futile. A flash of lightning
broke the spell which bound her. With
a start, she darted forwards, and retraced her
steps to the hedge-bound path. The mossy-turf
gave back no sound to her footfall.
From end to end, again she wandered,
swiftly at first, and then more slowly, until
at length she swayed, feebly stretched out her
arms, and sank silently to the ground.

As she fell, the young moon came forth
from beneath its curtain of clouds. Its soft
light rested, as if in pity it would point the
way to succouring hands, upon her prostrate
form half concealed, although it was, by
shrubs and ferns.

But no succour came. The fleecy clouds

again obscured the pale moonlight. All was
silent as the grave, while, ever and anon, the
lightning played fitfully, over earth and sky.

Presently, a gay whistle broke the stillness.
The whistle rose and fell : now sounding close
to where the figure lay, then floating afar off,
and dying away In the distance.

By-and-bye, the noise of the striking of a
fusee succeeded to the whistle. A moment
afterwards, the red light of a cigar glimmered
along the hedge-bound path, while Arthur
Greatorix, sauntering thereon, leisurely trod
down the impress of the small footprints,
which still remained upon the damp grass,
and strolled towards the ferns.

Twice he passed them by, unconscious of
what they concealed ; but, as he was about to
turn for the third time, he started. Bending
low to ascertain what the dark huddled-up
mass could be, which had attracted his attention,
he uttered a suppressed exclamation of
dismay.

Without a moment's hesitation, however,
he Hated it from the gromid. As he did
so, the long fair hair of a woman streamed
over his hand. Stooping down, so that he
might look upon her face, he murmured
breathlessly, '* My God, it is Alice ! Can
she be dead ? "

Roused, to partial consciousness, by the
change of position, a few incoherent sentences
fell from the lips of her upon whom Arthur
•Greatorix thus gazed ; but, before he could
gather their meaning, his agitation was increased
by the sound of approaching footsteps,
and the voices of Lord Oakdene and
Frank Lashmore were speedily distinguishable.

There was not an instant to lose. Gathering
the slight figure in his arms, as easily as a
mother might enfold the form of her babe,
he fled with it swiftly.

As he disappeared. Lord Oakdene and
Frank Lashmore turned slowly into the hedge-bound
path.

'' Upon my word, It is really very remarkable,"
commenced his Lordship, '' but I could
have sworn that I heard Gweatowix, and
something very like a woman, talking down
here just now. Didn't you, Lashmore ? "

But Mr. Frank Lashmore had not heard
anything of the sort. He suggested, however,
that it was a most decidedly romantic spot
for a rendezvous.

^' Rendezvous ! " exclaimed his companion,
'' what can Gweatowix want with a rendezvous
; at least, not with a woman, and I'm
positive it was his voice''

Better not be too positive, perhaps," was
the interruption. " Greatorix is a very big
man, too big to thrash, and the earth can't
have opened and swallowed him up, lady and
all."

Lord Oakdene laughed, and after puffing
away at his cigar for a few seconds, he said,
reflectively —

'' He might have bolted."

Bolted ! Oh, yes, of course ! He has
taken good care not to leave his fair Juliet
behind him though, hasn't he?" replied
Frank Lashmore.

Lord Oakdene again took refuge in his
cigar. He was more puzzled than he chose
to appear. The thought of Esse stirred in
his heart. Something within him bade him
say no more about the two voices which he
had heard, or which he thought he had
heard. He knew not why it was, but, for the
sake of Esse, he felt that he must be silent.
He wished that he had not mentioned the
subject at all to his companion.

Lord Oakdene had spoken upon the impulse
of the moment, and he regretted his
indiscretion. Vexed with himself, he pondered
how best he might efface the impression
which he feared his remark, concerning Arthur
Greatorix, had made upon the mind of Frank
Lashmore. Fortunately for Lord Oakdene,,
Frank Lashmore took the initiative.

'' Let us get out of this place, Oakdene.
It is all bosh about Greatorix having been
here, I feel convinced. It is an awfully
dismal hole — just like a cemetery."

'' Bar the tombstones," laughed Lord
Oakdene. '' But come along," he continued,
wisely refraining from further comment upon
Arthur Greatorix, 'rit is time that we returned
to the house."

And they went.

When next the young moon peeped forth
from under the clouds, neither human voice
sounded, nor human foot stirred, within the
narrow grass path, between the high yew
Hedges.

WITHOUT " Good-bye."

Do you really think that I had better go
without taking leave of Esse ? "

The speaker was Arthur Greatorlx. The
person, whom he thus addressed, was Ralph
Grant. Scene, the gun-room, at Brashleigh.
Time, six o'clock in the morning. Date, the
second of September, i8 — .

The manner, in which Arthur Greatorix put
his question, was dejected beyond description.
Scarcely more than a few short days
had elapsed, since the cheek of Esse had
rested against his in the happiness of restored
confidence, and now — where were the protestations
which had mingled with her whispers ?

Ralph Grant seemed loth to speak. When
he did so, he looked furtively around the
room, as if afraid lest the walls might in very

truth have ears, then drew nearer to Arthur,
and, in a nervous voice, replied —

'' She would be certain to ask you questions
if she saw you — would she not ? It would
only be natural. And you know you could
not answer them — could you ? "

'^ No," sighed Arthur.

His forlorn hope was fast faiHng him. It
had been a dismally forlorn one, all along.
The next words, which were spoken by Ralph
Grant, annihilated it completely.

'' I will take care of her while you are gone.
It is a miserable business, from beginning to
end. But it can't be helped. Esse must
not know anything about it, so I am quite
sure it is better for you to get off at once.
The sooner matters are settled the better
for all of us. Meeting, only to part, would
be as hard for you as for Esse. Give me
the letter which you said you had written
for her. I will see that you have an answer
as soon as possible." '

WITHOUT "Good-bye." 127

Under the circumstances, there was not, at
the moment, much comfort to Arthur, m the
prospect, which was thus held out to him, of
a speedy answer to his letter. Small as
the comfort was, however, he was in too
sore a strait to reject it. The letter had
taken him one half of the night to compose,
and the other half to write out fairly.
And yet, what a feeble production he felt
it to be, as he reluctantly placed it in the
hands of Ralph Grant ! How he longed to
scatter it to the winds, and, at all cost, to
see Esse instead of sending it ! But it
might not be. Time pressed. His dogcart
had already been waiting some minutes.
There was a long road to be got over, and
an express train to be caught. Moments,
therefore, were precious. Accordingly, the
leave-taking between Arthur and his host,
was brief. Both men were considerably
agitated. Of the two, the older man betrayed
his agitation most.

Glancing despairingly at the closed blinds
which shrouded the windows of the chamber
wherein Esse, unconscious of the disappointment
which the hour of awakening had in
store for her, peacefully slumbered ; Arthur
reluctantly stepped into his dog-cart and was
gone.

The station for which, he was bound, had
not many persons waiting upon its platform
when he arrived, and of those who waited,
none presented a sufficiently attractive
appearance, to account for the searching
scrutiny with which he regarded them.
Searching as it was, however, it was apparently
unsatisfactory. Uttering a smothered
exclamation of impatience, he took up his
position at the outer door of the booking-office,
and looked moodily down the straight
piece of road which it faced.

There was nothing to be seen upon this
road, although the train was almost due
Cautious passengers had already arrived ;

tickets had been taken, and luggage labelled.

Presently, the bell sounded. There was a

hurrying of feet. Porters looked expectantly

down the line, along which the mighty engine

soon came swooping.

Arthur Greatorix maintained his post. The

prevailing excitement had no effect upon

him.

A whistle, a puff of steam, and then, creaking,
panting, and grating, the train entered
the station.

At that instant, and not until that instant,
an old-fashioned, closed conveyance turned
the corner of the road, and became visible to
Arthur. The jaded steeds were being urged
to their utmost speed, by their shabbily-attired
driver ; while, once or twice a wan face
looked, from out of the window. Arthur
waited, but to assure himself of the identity
of the occupant of the vehicle. Then turning
upon his heel, he passed to the ticket-office,
VOL. I. K

and procured two first-class tickets for
Haddington.

Meanwhile, the late comer, stepped
quickly from the carriage, counted some
pieces of silver into the hands of the coachman
; and, without luggage, wraps, or parcels
of any description, passed Arthur, and proceeded,
to the platform, without delay.

Once again, a deafening whistle arose; once
again, the mighty engine puffed and snorted.
Doors were slammed, important-looking
officials gesticulated, all was ready ; the signal
was given, and the train was off — off, and in
one of its compartments sat the lady who had
arrived so late at the station, and, opposite to
her, Arthur Greatorix. If any greeting had
passed between them, it had been of a very
slight nature. Nevertheless, oneof the tickets,
which had been procured by Arthur, had found
its way into her hand. They were not alone
in the railway carriage. It held a third person,
who proved to be acquainted with Arthur.

WITHOUT "Good-bye." 131

This meeting was purely accidental. It was
not until the train was in full swing, that the two
men recognised each other ; until then, they
had each been occupied in settling themselves
comfortably for the journey.

Not so the lady. With her face towards
the window, and with her left shoulder turned
upon the rest of the carriage, she remained
in precisely the same position as that in which
she had at first placed herself. She wore a
broad brimmed hat, which shaded the left side
of her face, so that very little of her features
could be seen by her fellow passengers.

The train sped on. It dashed past hedge
and field, wood and water, mansion and
cottage, signal-box and station, until at
length a junction was reached.

Here, eager eyes anxiously scanned the
passing carriages, and, at the same time,
waving hands told that hoped for meetings
were passing rapidly into certainties. But
such a happy experience was not for all.

The mighty engine had brought disappointment
to some loving hearts ; and, the moment
of parting from dear ones, to others. Such
is Hfe, in our railway days !

Hedge and field, wood and water, mansion
and cottage, signal-box and station, meetings
and partings, however, alike failed to extract,
any show of interest, from the lady who shared
the journey of Arthur Greatorix. Her wistful
gaze was never turned from the window by
which she sat ; while her hands lay clasped
upon her lap. If she saw aught, it was as
though she did not see ; if she heard aught, it
was as though she did not hear.

With Arthur, it was far otherwise. He was
restless, now taking up a book or paper, then
casting it discontentedly aside ; while, from
time to time, he glanced stealthily at the
motionless female figure. The eyes of the
third individual in the railway carriage were
also, from time to time, from behind the folds
of his newspaper, cast furtively upon the

same figure, the rigidity of which puzzled
him. He was not a believer in the placidity
of womankind, more especially, when the
fair creatures indulged in travelling. " Fuss
or fidget" here, however, there was none;
and he marvelled greatly that so it was.

He would have marvelled still more, if he had
known how the heart of that passive figure
was throbbing with impatience, and how fierce
longing and icy despair in turn possessed it.
He would have marvelled, truly ! But he was
not one who could have comprehended the
nature of those agonising pangs.

It is not given to all men, either to suffer,
or to enjoy, keenly.

But, his speculations concerning his
feminine fellow traveller were brought to an
end, by the termination of his journey.

He quitted the train with alacrity, and was
soon lost to sight. Probably, the object of his
curiosity, was immediately forgotten.

Thus left alone with Arthur Greatorix, the

mysterious lady turned eagerly towards him,
and fixed her eyes, which had been so
mechanically staring into vacancy during the
journey, inquiringly upon his face.

It was well that she did so. At that momenta
resolve was taking shape in his mind to
leave London, for Brashleigh, by the next train.
The questioning gaze disenchanted him of his
half-formed purpose. He knew that purpose,
to have been a delusion, which he had forged
for his momentary comfort. Those wistful,
questioning eyes, told him so. Answering
their mute interrogation, he said —

*' I hope my brougham is here, Alice. I
telegraphed to Stevens to meet me by this
train, so it ought to be all right. Stay here a
moment, while I go and look for it."

She, whom Arthur Greatorix had thus
called '^AHce," silently acceded to his
request.

He was no sooner gone from her, however,
than, uttering a low moan, like one in bodily

pain, she wrung her hands despairingly ; and
then pressed them tightly to her brow. A visible
tremor shook her from head to foot. Her
gaze was no longer fixed and expressionless.
It was exchanged for wild and startled
glances. A mental anguish was upon her.
And that anguish was born of terror. Terror,
lest Arthur Greatorix should not return to her.
When, after a few moments, he did so, her
words betrayed the cause of her emotion. '' I
have been nearly mad, since you went away.
I thought you would not come back."

Oh ! it was such a weary voice, which
answered, gently —

'' For what reason should I have come at all,
if I had not intended to return ? You might
have judged me less harshly. I am not going,
to break my promise, a second time. Come
with me, I have found the carriage."

He assisted her to alight from the train.
Then, side by side, they passed along the
station, and disappeared together.

MYSTERY.

That evening, an anxious face looked from
the window of a house in the Regent's Park.

The face, which was that of a woman, was
worn, white, and suffering. Nevertheless, it
was a fair face — one, which would have been
esteemed beautiful, had it not been so
blanched by sorrow.

Only a few short years before, and men
had turned to look with pleasure upon its
brightness ; while women regarded it with
envy. Alas, the day had dawned, when men
and women alike passed it by without a
second glance !

It was the same sad face, over which, the
young moon had tenderly cast its pitying
light, as it lay upon the dark ferns, in the
grass path, between the high yew hedges —

the same wan face, which had looked out,

expectants, from the shabby fly at the

station — the same face, which ashen and
quivering, had awaited the return of Arthur
Greatorix to the railway carriage. And, pale
and trembling, again, it waited for his coming.

It was past nine o'clock. The street lamps
were lighted. The stars twinkled in the
heavens. Pedestrians had become scarce.
The pavements were almost deserted. No
loungers, of those within society's pale, were
to be seen. Well dressed individuals, had, for
the most part, either gone to their several habitations
; or showed, by their hurrying gait,
that they were pressing towards some special
destination. Here and there, maid servants,
jug or basket in hand, tripped briskly
along. At last, even their white aprons ceased
to relieve the scene. The face pressed closer
to the window, as these various signs of
coming night manifested themselves.

All gone home;" moaned the quivering

lips, as for a moment not a human being was
visible. '' All gone to husband, wife, and
child ; father and mother, but, O great and
merciful God ! no home — no place on earth,
where any loved ones rise up, and call me
blessed."

It was a pitiful wail. The silence, by which
it was succeeded, remained unbroken fora
few minutes. Presently, the sound of
wheels drew near ; and soon a well-appointed
brougham stopped before the door of the
house.

Whereupon, the solitary watcher arose, let
fall the blind, closely drew the window curtains,
and lighted a gas chandelier which
hung from the ceiling. The light fell over a
prettily furnished apartment of tolerably good
dimensions. The walls were somewhat profusely
adorned with pictures and mirrors,
while the crimson seats of the couches and
chairs gave a cheerful appearance to the
room.

Drawing up her remarkably tall, and equally
remarkably slight, figure, she, who had been
watching from the window, pushed back the
disordered hair from off her forehead ; and,
with panting breath, and dilated nostril,
listened to the footsteps which could be
plainly heard ascending the staircase. There
was no smile of welcome upon her face, but
only an expression of fierce anxiety.

The door of the room was opened, and
Arthur Greatorix entered. He received no
greeting, and he proffered none. He looked
silently upon the woman before him, who,
impetuously, exclaimed —

'how late you are, Arthur! I have
been waiting for you, for I don't know
how long. When they began to light the
lamps in the street, I thought I should
have shrieked aloud for help. You have no
conception what a wretchedness it is to wait,
and wait — to see the darkness coming on,
and the daylight departing, without the

arrival of that relief, for which you have
looked, and longed, and hoped. Most
women, are afraid to go out of doors,
when good men are either asleep, or
praying, and when none but the wicked are
about, lurking in those dim shadows which
best suit their evil deeds ; but, I was much
more afraid of the long night hours, which I
knew were before me, when I thought that it
was growing too late for you to come. I
could not have borne the suspense which I
should have had to endure before morning
broke."

'' I could not arrive earlier," Arthur replied,
" I have had so much to arrange — so
much upon my hands."

'' Happy people always have," she interrupted
bitterly. 'rand the unhappy ones —
those who have been set aside by the world,
like superseded inventions, and old novels,
and who have no occupation but to muster
their woes to their memories for inspection,

must wait patiently, until their more fortunate
fellow creatures find leisure to bestow some
attention upon them."

You are complaining unjustly, Alice. My
time has been almost, if not entirely, occupied
for you, although I could not manage to
get here earlier."

What have you done then — or, better
still, what are you going to do?" she enquired
gloomily.

'' Start for Gibraltar, tomorrow."

The words had scarcely left the lips of
Arthur, before Alice cried, passionately —

Not without me. I cannot stay here,
while you go."

He shook his head sorrowfully, and was
about to speak again, but his companion prevented
him. '' It would be torture, I tell you.
I cannot, will not, stay." As she. spoke, she
rose from her chair, and, flinging herself on
a couch by the side of Arthur, clung beseechingly
to his arm.

The strong man looked pityingly upon the
impotent grasp. Speaking gently, as though
to some fractious, fever-stricken patient, he
said —

'' Do not ask impossibilities. I will do
all that I can ; but, you must remain here
until I return. There is no alternative."

'^ I will not, remain," she rejoined decidedly ;
"it is easy enough for you to ask it, but I
will not do it. I must accompany you. All
through those summer weeks which have
just gone by, and which where so dreary tome
— so bright to all the world beside — I
stayed here, because you bid me stay. I
cannot again submit to such utter wretchedness.
I cannot again watch from dawn
to night, from sunset to sunrise ; not knowing
what is happening, where you are —
what doing. If I may not be actually with
you, surely the same vessel can bear us
across the Atlantic."

There was a pause. A deep flush had

mounted to the white cheeks of Alice. On
the other hand, Arthur was paler than usual.

"Alice Royston," he began, still speaking
in gentle and soothing tones.

"Ah, call me so," she interrupted; " it is
such a splendid mockery — such a taunt — so
false, like everything else which appertains tome.
Yes, call me Alice Royston. I am so
proud of my ancestry. I wonder what dim
walls their grim portraits adorn. My own
should surely, one day, there be added. It
is so grand to have an honourable name ; I
needs must glory in such grandeur. What
more would you have of Alice Royston?
Would you bind her, by her name, to obey
you ? Ah, was ever chain forged of such
alloyed metal ? Were ever links wrought so
easy to break? "

Without heeding her sarcasm, Arthur
Greatorix replied —

I would not ' bind ' you to anything,
Alice. I only wish to repeat what I have

before said. It is utter folly to suppose that
you can go with me. It would mar much of
that which I hope to accomplish. Have
patience " —

'' Patience ! " she echoed, interrupting him,
^* preach patience to the winds. They can
howl you down, and scatter your words in
their gusty blasts. Do not preach patience
to me. I never possessed any, or, if I once
did, it perished miserably beneath your
mother's doubtful reception of my statements,
when I, long years ago — fool that I was ! —
sought to unburden my grief to her."

*' My mother was ill at the time, and
passed away soon afterwards ; she could
scarcely be blamed," returned Arthur, musingly.


Alice caught his words. She looked up
sharply at him. A fierce light gleamed in
her eyes. Her breath came and went in
short, quick gasps. For a few seconds her
emotion was so intense, she could not articulate.

When at last she spoke, her voice was
low and husky with agitation, but her words
did not falter —

Because I had been cruelly maligned
to her. Good women are always hard,
or nearly always. They gather up their
skirts lest they should brush against an
erring sister's petticoat ; but they do not
stop, these righteous women, to gather up
the crumbs of truth, which, if gathered,
would whiten the blackness of many a foul
report. Ah, Arthur, you know that I speak
truly. Have pity, then. Do not doom me
to solitary confinement. I should not even
have the relief of hard labour."

Placing his hand gently upon hers, he said
kindly, '' One moment's reflection, Alice,
will show you that I am not in a position to
comply with your request. For a time, be
content to be guided by circumstances."

She dashed aside his hand, and cast herself
upon her knees before him. Ere he had

VOL. I. L

time to raise her from her lowly posture,
she cried entreatingly, '' In the days which
are yet unborn, when I, perchance, have
ceased to live, it may be that you will taste
the agony of being far from one whom you
love — may God help you ! — better than your
own soul. Aye ! you may not only drink of
that agony, but you may know the still
keener pain of fearing that the place, which
your absence should have made vacant, is not
all vacant. Should this grief ever come to
you, you will understand some of my pitiful
longing to accompany you tomorrow. Nay,
do not turn away ! Who knows but that
mercy, if shown now to me, may not win for
you a blessing in the future ? Can any torture,
devised of man or devil, be equal, think you,
to that of sitting alone, afar off, dreaming of
another resting upon the heart for the possession
of which, you have sacrificed every
hope, both in life and in death ? Such a
torture will you doom me to suffer, if you

leave me here. You cannot be so hard, so
cruel. My tongue has, before now, cloven to
the roof of my parched mouth with unutterable
horror ; before now, my heart has well-nigh
broken under a hideous weight of woe ;
but never, through all the thirty-seven years
of my most miserable existence, have I sued
so humbly, begged for pity so earnestly, as I
do at this moment."

God knows, Alice, I would take you with
me, if "—

If, what?" she asked impatiently. ''Ah,
Arthur, why did you linger at Brashleigh ?
Had you forgotten me, until you found me
lying half dead in the grass path between the
yew hedges ? Had you forgotten me ? I ask.
And yet, little wonder if you had ! Who
would care to remember such a discord in
life's harmony as I am?"

Nay, Alice, I had not forgotten you. My
-conscience smote me daily, almost hourly."

But still you lingered," she retorted,

rising abruptly, and accepting the chair
which Arthur placed for her.

Yes," he answered sadly.

'' Then surely you owe me something —
some reparation."

*' Yes," he replied again, with increased
gravity.

The cords of his resolution were sustaining
a mighty strain. He had much ado to prevent
them from giving way.

Alice divined this. Hope stirred within
her breast. Speaking more calmly than heretofore,
she said —

"With all the world against me; with
deadly wrong in the place of right; with
mourning where there should be rejoicing,
and with misery where happiness should
reign ; with foes in the place of friends, and
with treachery given back to me for truth ;
with my brain dizzy, my heart aching, and
with my fair womanhood trampled in the

dust ; yet I protest, that, there Ives not the
human being who can deny my right to proceed
to Gibraltar, if so I choose. You cannot
gainsay me."

*' I do not seek to do so."
You admit my right to go, then ?"
Certainly. But not with me tomorrow."
"Oh, Arthur, have you turned coward?"
she asked touchingly, while a soft melancholy
stole over her face, giving it for the
time a weird, inexpressible charm.

Arthur could make no reply ; and she
continued —

Can one so helpless as myself harm
you ? Have beautiful eyes robbed you of
clear-sightedness, and have fresh rosy lips
tainted you with the breath of selfish caution
? Must the weak and the erring lift
up their hands to you in vain, because
soft white fingers, which have never been
wrung together in agony, have rested in

your grasp; and, has such resting made your
arm nerveless, to succour the oppressed ?
Save me, Arthur, as you alone can."

*' Heaven only knows what I am to do.
At your request I am here, Alice. For your
sake I am leaving England, but for the sake
of others, as well as of yourself, I must go
alone. There is no alternative."

'' Very well," she returned, with sudden
composure; 'there are some miseries which
God sends. They are those which He helps
the righteous to bear. There are some which
men make. They are far harder to endure.
Such are mine. I have whined enough.
Forgive me. Let us look over the papers."

Too much relieved by this diversion, Arthur
did not question its sincerity. He produced
a packet of papers from the pocket of his
great coat, and untied it with alacrity. For
the space of nearly an hour, Alice and he
were busily engaged in an examination of
various documents. They possessed, seemingly,

a vital interest for both. When the
last had been perused, Arthur, with a considerable
amount of nervous hesitation, prepared
to depart. He dreaded a recurrence
of Alice's petitioning. She wished him
Good-bye," however, with perfect calmness.
After he had gone, she stood for a few brief
moments lost in thought. Then, seizing a
hat and cloak which were lying upon a chair
in a corner of the room, she opened the door,
and sprang down the flight of stairs leading
to the hall. It was the work of an instant.
Gaining the open air with incredible swiftness
she bounded to the edge of the pavement,
just as Arthur entered his brougham. Quicker
than thought, her fingers turned the silver
handle of the door, and, as she stepped into
the carriage, her voice called authoritatively
to the coachman to '^ drive on." The man
obeyed. And thus for the second time, since
he bade adieu to Brashleigh Manor, Arthur
Greatorix journeyed with Alice Royston.

TAUNTS SUCCEED AT LAST.

Either affection for Esse had converted
simple-minded Ralph Grant into a diplomatist,
or, he was in very truth perfectly satisfied,
with the abrupt flitting which Arthur Greatorix
had made from Brashleigh Manor.

It was only natural that Esse should
receive, with child-like confidence, whatever
dictum her uncle should propound upon the
matter.

As one undaunted spirit may check the
panic of a multitude, so his quiet assurance,
that all was as it should be, allayed her
sorrow, and calmed the rebellious feelings,
which otherwise might have risen in her heart,
against her lover.

Esse wept to find that lover gone, but her
tears fell gently. They were only a summer

shower, and they barely left a trace upon
the roses of her cheek. Softly as her teardrops
fell from her long lashes, however, Esse
told herself that, they scarce would have fallen
at all, could she but have taken farewell of
Arthur. Everything she knew would be very,
very dull without him ; but then he would soon
return, he said so several times in his letter,
and he was going to write to her every day,
sending his letters whenever an opportunity
occurred. He would not have gone away if
he could possibly have avoided doing so.
Uncle Ralph had told her this over and over
again. And Uncle Ralph had particularly
begged her not to be unhappy, for his sake,
as well as for Arthur's — and she did not mean
to allow herself to be unhappy. Uncle Ralph
and Arthur were both so good and so clever,
of course they knew what to do for the best
about everything. No, she was not going to
be miserable ; although there were one or two
little things she would like to have said to

Arthur before he went away. Thus soliloquizing,
with a faith which was firm both
in lover and uncle, Esse soon resumed her
smiles.

She placed Arthur's photograph in a more
conspicuous position in her room, pleased herself
by wearing his favourite dress, hid his
written words of love within her bosom,
covered her little fingers with as many of his
gift rings as they could possibly carry ; and,
within a few hours after his departure had
been made known to her, she went bravely
forth to face the blank, which she knew his
absence had created for her. A blank to her — a
change to others. And a change which, to
one at least of those who were assembled
at Brashleigh Manor, was in no manner
beneficial.

Had Lord Oakdene been less rash, he
would have followed with all possible speed
in the wake of Arthur. But the snare was
too pleasant. Lord Oakdene no more dreamt

of quitting Brashleigh than he did of cutting
his own throat. Life, near to Esse, was by
far too fascinating in the one instance, and
too enjoyable altogether in the other.

Hugging the delusion that the absence of
Arthur could in no way affect him. Lord Oak-done
contentedly remained where he was.

La belle could have whispered a different
story to him. The most obtuse of women
know intuitively when their power of enslavement
is on the wane. La belle was anything
but obtuse upon matters of this kind, or, in
point of fact, upon that of any other.

Before Arthur Greatorix had been many
days upon the briny ocean, she knew quite
well, by various signs and tokens, not only
that Lord Oakdene was fast foreseeing his
allegiance to her, but also that peril was
ahead for him.

It was scarcely to be expected that
she should issue a cry of warning to her
recreant knight, as he veered from her ta

Esse. The generosity of la belle was great,
but so was her pride ; therefore, she preferred
to watch events quietly, and, so far as
in her lay, smilingly.

Since Arthur Greatorix had, apparently without
either rhyme or reason, vacated his post
at the side of his ^om\g fiancee, it was only
natural, perhaps, that Lord Oakdene should
find himself frequently filling it. Esse
evinced no objection to this. She was perfectly
at her ease with him, and she was
utterly unconscious of his intense admiration
for her. Her mind was very full of her absent
lover; and, she rarely bestowed a passing
thought upon Lord Oakdene, saving and
excepting when actually in his presence.

So far, all was well for Esse ; but, for Lord
Oakdene, it was a very different matter. By-and-by
there crept into his heart hard
thoughts of Arthur; and hard thoughts of
Arthur, induced correspondingly tender ones
for Esse. In the somewhat severe judgment

which, by degrees, Lord Oakdene mentally
passed upon his absent friend, he believed
himself to be fully justified. He had allowed
his suspicion, with regard to the two voices
which he had heard, or which he thought
he had heard, in the hedge-bound path, to
grow into a certainty ; he had coupled this
certainty with what he chose to consider
a "mysterious" disappearance of Arthur;
and, out of the two circumstances, he had
fabricated an alarm for Esse, which alarm, it
is needless to say, sufficed, as an excuse to
himself, for any increase of devotion which he
permitted himself to feel for her.

Flora Grant was perfectly unmoved by the
flitting of Arthur. Perhaps, Ralph Grant was
almost as nervous about breaking the news of
it to his wife, as he was at imparting the
intelligence of it to Esse. If so, his trepidation
was needless. Flora Grant merely
shrugged her shoulders, and with the remark,
that it would be " quite a relief to have the

love-making put a stop to for a little time,"
went on her way with perfect unconcern.

But if Flora Grant had neither sympathy
for Esse, nor regret for Arthur, Rachel Tritton
possessed plenty of both to bestow upon
them. She sadly missed the frank kindness
with which Arthur ever accosted her ; while,
strange although the heedless would have
deemed such an assertion to be, she understood,
even better than la belle, what a void
had arisen for Esse.

Rachel loved to look upon the young girl's
face ; so pure, as well as so beautiful. And
as Rachel looked, she marvelled, sometimes,
as to what could have taken Arthur Greatorix
away from it.

In this wonderment of Rachel's, there was
not a vestige of treason to Arthur. Esse
herself could scarcely be more loyal to him
than Rachel. But Rachel questioned the
wisdom of his absence. And she did so,
the more especially, when she noted how

frequently the eyes of Lord Oakdene were
riveted upon Esse.

Esse was very calm and serene. The
glances, and blushes, which the words of
Arthur, and the approach of Arthur, would
call forth, had gone with him. None other
had power to evoke them. This rejoiced
Rachel Tritton. To her simple ideas, a great
deformity would have fallen over the beauty
of Esse, had it been otherwise.

Rachel saw beauty so plainly in truth, that,
without truth, she could discern no beauty.
She marked her line of truth very plainly,
and very boldly. There were no " ins and
outs " to be found in it.

Glances and blushes would not be accounted
untruth to an absent lover, by fashionable folk,
because the fashionable world is apt, sometimes,
to think Lightly enough of honest faith,
and purity in love. Lax enough, too, as a rule,
is this same fashionable world in its notions
upon such matters. And, when it chooses,

indulgent enough also, to its votaries. It
loves, sometimes, to smooth over pitfalls, and
to blink at danger. It does not always like
to call a spade a spade ; while folly is often
so trimly decked that it is well-nigh mistaken
for wisdom. But, what a hue and cry follows,
when the unwary slip into a pitfall, or danger
overtakes and crushes the rash ! The agricultural
implement is called by its right
name then. Neither feminine nor masculine
tongues halt over its pronunciation. But
so long as no harm happens, or, if it happens,
so long as it is not found out, no blame is
accorded.

All this would have been as Arabic, or
Hindoostanee, to Rachel Tritton. She could
not have understood the creed which holds it
right for a woman to accept, either with
feigned, or real smiles, the admiration of one
man, while the love of another is in her keeping.


The doctrine was too subtle for the simple

comprehension of Rachel. The tenets, to
which she clung, were more clearly defined ;
while the action of her charity was altogether
different. She did not wink at evil, until its
consequences were disastrous. She turned her
back resolutely upon it from the outset.

But when the evil came, who so pitying,
so gentle to the evil-doer, as she ? There
was no hue and cry with her. Only grief for
another's mistake, and a mantle of tenderness-stretched
forth to hide another's fault.

So faiths differ, and so Rachel Tritton,
differed from some of the world, in her ideas
of how an affianced maiden should keep her
troth.

Arthur Greatorix had been gone nearly a
fortnight, when the calm, which thanks to
the care and watchfulness of Ralph Grant
still rested upon the spirit of Esse, was.
somewhat rudely disturbed.

Lord Oakdene had for several days been
away from Brashleigh, but had returned upon

VOL. L M

some trifling excuse ; consequently, he formed
one of a walking party who, one morning,
were looking at some colts, which had been
brought for inspection to within a short distance
of the house. It was not long after
breakfast. Early hours did not suit Flora
Grant, who was generally more snappish and
ill-humoured before luncheon, than afterwards.
Upon that particular morning nothing
pleased her, while even Lord Oakdene met
with a rebuff. It was an unfortunate time
for the mention of Arthur's name. Nevertheless,
it fell unwarily from the lips of Esse.
'* The brown colt is the handsomest, Uncle
Ralph ; Arthur always said it would be."

It was a very natural Httle speech, but, it
brought about many unpleasant consequences,
to her who made it.

*' Instead of instructing you upon the merits
of horseflesh, it would have been more to the
purpose I think, Esse, and at any rate more
suitable, if Arthur had kept you a little better

Informed respecting his movements. But as I
have often told you, you are too much of a
baby to have any understanding, so, of course,
he would not trouble himself to tell you his
secrets."

These remarks from Flora Grant, which
where utterly irrelevant, startled Esse, and
worse, they opened afresh an old sore from
the pain of which she believed herself to have
been cured.

Thought is very swift. Quick as a flash of
lightning there ran through her mind the
remembrance of that sunshiny August morning,
when she had first heard from Arthur of
his meditated visit to Gibraltar — of her ungranted
request to be told the why and the
wherefore, of such an intention — of the few
constrained days which followed upon the
fulfilment of that request — of the moonlight
interview which she had held with him in the
gallery — of the subsequent happiness, and last
of all, of his sudden departure.

Each of these circumstances came before
her with distinctness, while, with them,
and through them, there beat on her brain,
words which had been heretofore uttered by
Flora Grant ; but which words, Esse had
buried in forgetfulness, until by an unlucky
remark she called forth the answer which
awoke them to renewed life within her
memory.

'^ Too much of a baby to have any understanding
" — '' of course he would not trouble
himself to tell you his secrets."

'was this really so?" Esse asked herself.
Would not Arthur take the trouble to tell her
his secrets (and had he any secrets from her)
after all that he had said to her about the
perfect trust and confidence, which, in everything,
all through life, was to exist between
them. Surely not, it could not be ! And
yet, yet, oh ! how she wished it were otherwise,
he had (she could not deny it even to
herself) gone all the way to Gibraltar without

telling her, In the very least, why he went.
Even in his letters he never said a word about
it. They were full of affection, but not of
explanation. Was this the beginning of those
dreadful things to which she had ever before
refused to give credence, and against which
Aunt Flora had so often warned her ?

Very wild was the tumult in the gentle
breast of Esse. Very faint and sick her
heart. For, in the want of trust in her,
which she now for the first time read in the
departure of Arthur, and in his silence concerning
the reason for that departure, lay
all her woe — all the smart of that freshly
opened wound — all the power to sting, and
to torment her, of the taunts, both past and
present, of Flora Grant.

Esse had listened to the words of her lover
with a blind belief not only in them but in him,
and, she had dreamt of sharing every joy, hope,
and sorrow of his heart, as he had so often
told her that she should. She was awakened

roughly from her dream. A reality, which
she seemed suddenly to understand, displaced
her sweet vision. She felt that she would
like to have slumbered on. In this instance,
she was a very sluggard.

Too much engrossed with her own reflections
to heed what was happening around
her, she was not aware that a silence, which
her companions, one and all, felt to be
awkward, had succeeded to the ill-timed
remark made by Flora Grant.

Rachel Tritton was the first to speak ; but,
although for a time conversation flowed
again, a check had been given to the pleasure
of the ramble ; and, the party soon sauntered
towards the house, there to amuse themselves
until luncheon as each might like best.

Esse was ill at ease. Her uncle was not
at hand to pour oil upon the troubled waters
of her soul ; he had, in fact, purposely disappeared.
Like a child in bodily pain, she
scarce could give her suffering, words. For

the first time in her hitherto untroubled Hfe,
she felt lonely and alone. She had none to
lean upon ; no gentle mother's knee beside
which to kneel and make her moan ; no
mother's breast whereon to lean her throbbing
brow and gather counsel ; no mother's
tender hand to point the way, with loving
wisdom, through all the shifting sands of
hopes and fears by which she was surrounded.
Ah, is there aught upon earth which can
compare with the strength and the stay of
maternal affection ? There is little need of
word — little need of explanation — to a mother.
Only a sob, or a sigh, and forthwith, without
that questioning, which so often bruises
the jaded spirit, the mother's love is poured
out, her tenderness is unsparingly lavished,
and the comfortless is comforted.

Esse Montague might never taste of this.
Hence, perchance, many a blunder in her
judgment, many an hour of suffering for her.
Ralph Grant and Arthur Greatorix had been,

and still were, nearest and dearest to her.
They were her strongholds, her citadels of
affection. Nay, they were all her world ; and
hitherto she had been content. But, in this
her hour of disquietude, a vague, undefined
longing possessed her for something more :
a longing which the presence of Arthur would
doubtless have dispelled as soon as it arose,
but which, under existing circumstances, drove
her disconsolately from room to room in a
very weariness of spirit. Ordinary occupations
failed to interest her, and ordinary
amusements to amuse her. Is there anything
so hard to bear as dissatisfaction with
a loved one ?

There was an especial apartment, in 
Manor, which had been dedicated to
Esse almost from her infancy; from the time,
in fact, when she had first arrived there with
her Aunt Lily.

It was a very delightful sanctum. Within
it Esse had stored, all the relics of her childhood,

and all the treasures of her girlhood. Its
ornaments and appointments were, perhaps,
somewhat incongruous. Half nursery, half
boudoir, with here a doll's house, there a
work of art, a stranger might have cavilled
at the want of harmony in its arrangements.
To the eye of its mistress it was simply perfection.
Toys and trinkets were alike hallowed
by recollections. Not one seemed to
her to be out of place.

Such rooms are generally looked upon asa
sort of haven by their possessors. It was
scarcely surprising, therefore, that in a
moment of tribulation the restless feet of
Esse should carry her thither.

Rachel Tritton had observed, with no small
-degree of concern as well as of surprise, the
unusual gravity and absent - mindedness of
her young friend. Rachel knew that for some
reason a sudden chill had fallen over the
spirits of those who were assembled to inspect
the young horses ; but, she was unable,

to connect this with the change in the demeanour
of Esse. After returning from the
inspection, Rachel saw how the piano was
shut almost as soon as it was opened by
Esse — saw, too, how idly the gilded leaves
of numberless volumes were turned backwards
and forwards, in the vain endeavour to
extract an interest from them, and as she
saw, she marvelled.

Esse, had by no means played the part of
a love-sick damsel, either before or since the
departure of Arthur. What, therefore, could
her present mood mean ? Sorely wounded
herself in the battle of Hfe, Rachel was quick
to take alarm for the safety of others.

Before long, Esse absented herself altogether.
Rachel thought of '* Miss Montague's
room," as it was generally called, and
she conjectured rightly that thither Esse
had betaken herself.

Rachel resolved to follow her ; but not immediately.
Rachel took nothing by storm.

She had the rare gift, not only of saying the
right things, but of choosing the right time
for saying them. So she waited a little, tarrying
until she thought that, solitude having
done its work, Esse might possibly be glad
of companionship.

It was even so. Rachel's gentle tap at
the door brought her a speedy admittance to
the presence of Esse, who, was seated at a
table near an open window, brush and pallet
in hand, with a half-finished picture before
her.

Rachel understood everything at a glance,
together with the wearied expression of the
beautiful face which looked up at her entrance.

'' Are you going to finish that picture
before Mr. Greatorix returns?" she asked,
after having duly admired both the subject
and its treatment.

*' I don't know," replied Esse, with just a
soupgon of surprise at the question in the
tone of her voice, ''I had not thought of

doing SO. I am afraid it would be impossible.
I want some of his touches to finish it off forme."


'why not finish it off yourself?" suggested
Rachel with a smile.

I don't know," replied Esse again ; and
then she added ingenuously, " Yes, I do. It
is because I am idle, and like having things
done for me better than doing them myself."

'' I wonder, who does not," said Rachel
cheerfully ; 'but it is better to feel that one
can be independent, if a necessity for being
so should arise."

"Is it ? " Esse asked doubtfully.

I think so. It is pleasant certainly to be
helped, but it is even pleasant, perhaps,
to help others," returned Rachel.

My help will never be worth anything
to anybody, I am afraid," answered Esse.
^' Besides, as I said before, I like having
things done for me. I would rather be a
queen bee. I always pity the working bees."

Rachel looked at her young companion.
A queen bee, in the splendour of her queenly
beauty, Rachel thought, might that young
companion surely remain, if so she willed it.
Rachel pondered, also, of the talent which that
marvellous beauty was, and how all-powerful
it might become either for good or for evil.
Drawing her chair closer to Esse, Rachel
seated herself comfortably, and beginning
some work which she had brought with her,
said —

*' You see, I am settling myself for a chat
with you, and am showing you practically
that I do not incline to this queen-bee notion
of yours."

What are you making? " inquired Esse.

'* Knee-caps for my mother. She thinks
those which I make for her are softer and
warmer than any others. I have no doubt
you have never seen such articles of wearing-apparel
before."

No, I have not. But they seem to be

beautifully knitted. If I had a mother, I
would work all day long for her! " exclaimed
Esse.

Rachel was too wise to allude to the queen-bee
idea which this assertion somewhat contradicted.
She saw that she was drawing
Esse out of herself, and she was satisfied.
Pausing a moment, she replied gently —

'' God will send you someone to work for in
His own good time, I doubt not, and then, you
will love the work, for His dear sake. Like
yourself, I am motherless. She, whom I call
my mother, was the step-mother only of one
I fondly loved. In reality, she is not even
related to me."

The attention of Esse was completely arrested.
Pushing aside her painting materials,
she said eagerly —

I like you to talk to me in this manner.
Mr. Greatorix — Arthur does sometimes, but
I am afraid I laugh, and do not attend to
him."

Rachel smiled.

** Mr. Greatorix has not much chance, then,
of enforcing what he would teach, I am
afraid."

*' Oh, but he only talks about grave things
with reference to himself. He says that I do
not need what he calls discipline and teaching,
and that he only wants me to keep just
as I am," returned Esse, blushing, as she
spoke, and playing nervously with her rings.

It did Rachel's heart good to see how well
her plan for amusing her companion was
prospering, and she answered cheerily —

''Mr. Greatorix is the best of tutors. You
have the teaching of joy, dear Esse : only let
it be a thankful joy, and all will be well, while
you will keep pure and true. Cold, bracing
atmospheres are needful for some constitutions,
you know, but not for all. Sunny
comes and balmy breezes bring others to
perfect strength. I am given to preaching.
You must stop me, if I tire you."

'' I am not in the least tired, thank you,"
answered Esse, warmly. '' I hope you will
not think me dreadfully inquisitive, but, I
cannot help wondering, how and when you
learned all this."

'' By experience. I once had the sun and
the warmth, the light and the love, of earth.
I basked in them, and dreamt not of night.
There was One Who knew, that so it would
continue until my strength was all spent.
But a cold wind was sent in mercy, and I
cowered down shiveringly beneath its cutting
blast. Darkness — a thick, impenetrable darkness
— a starless night of woe — accompanied
the blast. It swept over the sea of life, upon
which my fair ship, laden with happiness,
was launched, and sank it. It snapped the
brightest flower, which bloomed in the land
of my rapture, and laid it low. I sank into
a fathomless abyss with the one ; and I cast
myself prostrate to the ground with the other.
I had not let the sunshine do its work, and

God, in His marvellous compassion, sent me
the trial of His storms.'^

Rachel paused. Her head was bowed, her
hands were clasped ; while, she seemed to
have forgotten, all save her sorrowful reminiscences,
and for the moment to be unconscious
even of the presence of Esse.

VOL. L N

AN ONLY LOVE.

Rachel's reverie was of short duration.
Taking up her knitting, which had fallen from
her hand, she said to Esse —

** Shall I tell you ' all about it,' as people
say?"

'' If you please, dear Rachel, but not if it
will either tire you, or give you pain," returned
Esse.

*' It will do me good," answered Rachel
quickly, and then with a gentle smile she
added, '' Perhaps, it may do you good also.
I have no doubt you will consider me a very
ancient personage to talk about lovers, but if
I tell you my little history I shall be obliged
to do so. Mine was an early, as well as an
only, love. His name was Edward St.
Vincent. I was just seventeen — about your

your age, Esse — when he first came to the
village in which, after the death of my father,
we (I mean my own mother, my brother Fred,
and myself) had taken up our residence. The
good rector of the place, who had been for
some time in failing health, talked often of
establishing a curate to share his work. But,
loth either to make any change, or to spare
himself labour, he was slow to carry out his
proposal.

"In those good old days, there were no
School Boards to sit in judgment upon his
teaching ; while his flock gave him loving
as well as unquestioning, obedience. But,
alas ! new arrivals, in the shape of a large and
decidedly rabid High Church family, came
amongst us. From that moment the peace of
our parish was sadly impaired. Our old customs
and habits were called in question.
Discussion speedily brought dissension, until
at length the much tried, much enduring
rector, laid some of his troubles before my

mother. Her advice was both prompt and
decided. * Union was strength she said,
with a curate, a fellow worker, the battle
would be more equal' So, before long, a
curate was found. The fact of his advent
was supposed to be a profound secret between
my mother and the rector. Of course, it
oozed out somehow, and there was no small
amount of excitement, I can assure you,
amidst the members of our primitive congregation,
when Mr. St. Vincent entered the
church. I am afraid, I was mischievous
enough to fancy that the inflexions of the
five Misses Simpson, who, varying in age
from thirty to five and forty, composed part
of the High Church family to whom I have
alluded, were more exaggerated than usual.
Anyhow, I am quite sure, that I was irreverent
enough to look with especial favour upon the
handsome face and tall figure of our new
curate. Truant thoughts, however, could
scarcely ramble for long with his earnest voice

calling them back to the paths of devotion ;
and although, I fear, they started often upon
their idle wanderings, they were as often
arrested and brought back. My mother was
right. The curate soon proved to be an undoubted
benefit both to rector and people.
My emancipation from the school-room had
not then taken place ; consequently, I was
not present, when my mother made the
acquaintance of Mr. St. Vincent. It was
not long, however, before he and I became
fast friends.

** One particularly warm afternoon, it was
a half-holiday, I had been amusing myself
with an industrious search for a rare fern
which was said to grow on a bank at a
short distance from our house, but which to
my disappointment I had failed to find. Tired
out with my fruitless search, I cast my hat
aside, and seated myself upon the grass
beneath the shade of a tree. For some little
time, I gave myself up to the enjoyment of

the rest and the shelter from the sun. Then
I grew weary of my solitude. Like the boy
in the fable, I longed for someone, or something,
to share my idleness. Laziness is a
great snare. From futile wishes I fell into a
profitless vein of thought. I began by declaring
to myself, that I had grown terribly
tired, both of my governess and of study —
that I should like to go to London, be presented,
and go through the gaiety of a season.
Presently, I took altogether another view of
matters. I wished that I was my brother
Fred, that I could go to Oxford, pull in the
eights,' and go, as he did, on walking tours
to Switzerland, and other beautiful places.

'' I cannot tell what my next desire might
have been, for my ambitious ideas and flights
of fancy were suddenly laid low. Looking up,
I saw Mr. St. Vincent approaching me. He
was walking slowly as if in pain, and I
remarked immediately that he was very pale.
I rose from my lonely seat, shy and uncertain

what to do. But, as he came close to me, I
saw him put his handkerchief to his forehead,
and I also saw that the handkerchief
was stained with blood when he removed it.
My shyness vanished at the sight. Springing
forward I obeyed an uncontrollable impulse
; and, without hesitation, offered the
assistance, which I gathered from his appearance
that he needed. He thanked me
cordially, and we made our way at once for
the house. As we proceeded thither, he told
me that he had been thrown from his pony
carriage on to a heap of stones, cutting his
hand and forehead by the fall. I took him
straight to my mother, who promptly supplied
him with remedies and restoratives. She was
particularly skilful at prescribing upon such
occasions. Under her care he was soon
better, and — and — ah, well — what a happy
summer followed ! I never wanted again to be
my brother Fred."

Here, Rachel paused, looking very much as

if the remembrance of that bygone happiness
had made her once more forget that she was
not alone.

'^ Where was I ? " she asked after a few
moments, as she brushed a tell-tale tear
stealthily away. *' Oh ! I remember now, I
was telling of that glad time when Edward
St. Vincent and I first began to care for each
other. Six months after his accident, which
he always declared was the luckiest ' spill ' a
man ever had, he and I were engaged. My
mother, in sanctioning our attachment, made
one stipulation, and one only, which was that
our marriage should not take place for a year
and a half. To this, Edward agreed ; while,
at the expiration of that time, Fred vowed to
bring home a wife who should live with my
mother and take my place."

Did you and Mr. St. Vincent tell each
other everything, when you were engaged ? "
asked Esse abruptly. '' I beg your pardon for
interrupting you, but I mean, had you no

secrets from each other — if he went a long
way off, used you to know why he went ? "
she added, anxiously. ^^

Edward St. Vincent was a clergyman,
you know, Esse, therefore he could not tell
me everything " —

Yes, that would, of course, make it different
— different from " —

Esse hesitated painfully, and grew so embarrassed,
that Rachel, anxious to relieve her,
continued gently —

You are right, clergymen are, in many
respects, different from other people ; it would
not be proper for them always to speak
either of where they go, or their reason forgoing."


No," returned Esse absently.

Rachel was puzzled. But still, she read
nothing more than a young girl's natural depression
at the absence of her lover, in the
returning gloom which was fast overspreading
the face of Esse. Thinking it kinder, therefore,

to continue talking, Rachel took up the
thread of her story, which had been somewhat
let go, and resumed —

'^ If, Edward St. Vincent and I had a joyous
summer, before our engagement was permitted,
we had a still more joyous winter
afterwards. The season was very severe,
but it had no dreariness for us. With
hearts so warm, and light, what cared we for
frozen window panes, and ice-clad paths?

'' All through the succeeding spring time,
and until summer had waned into autumn, no
cloud arose to dim our happiness, and then
• — but I must not anticipate the sadness by
which our bliss was destroyed. One day, my
mother and Edward, with Fred and myself
were returning from the Rectory, where we had
been having luncheon, when a terrible cry of
fire suddenly rang through the air. It arrested
our steps instantaneously, and I clung, with
frightened amazement, to the arm of Edward.

At first, we could not determine the

exact direction from which the cry proceeded.
Soon, however, a dense cloud of smoke rose
slowly in the heavy autumn atmosphere,
telling us, only too surely, where the mischief
was raging ; while, men and women, with
panting breath and blanched countenances,
rushed past us. The fire, we made out from
them, was at the prettiest end of our village,
and thither Edward and Fred pressed at once,
leaving my mother and myself to return home.

"Arrived there, we could see the fearful
flames bursting from time to time through the
columns of smoke, which continued to rise
steadily heavenward, and we could hear the
hum of voices from the terror-stricken
villagers. My mother was full of consternation
and pity for the sufferers, but, I am
afraid that I had no thought, no anxiety,
save for Edward. My terror for his safety
shut out all other considerations.

'* We waited long, before we heard anything
either of him, or of Fred. At last a servant.

returned from the scene of the conflagration,
who told us that the fire was almost extinguished,
although not before terrible havoc
had been wrought. The cottages were for
the most part thatched, and stood so closely
to each other that the flames had spread with
marvellous rapidity. I listened, to the man's
account, with burning cheeks, although I
shivered until my teeth chattered one against
the other ; while my trembling hands would
scarcely permit me to assist my mother in
the various arrangements, which, she forthwith
commenced, for giving aid to those, who,
alas ! were that day made homeless.

'^ By-and-by Fred returned, and then I
was dismissed to bed. Edward was still
working hard, but was safe, my brother said,
so, although I would fain have lingered to hear
more about him, I had no excuse for disobeying
the wish of my mother. But,
although I retired to bed as she desired, I
could not sleep. When I dozed into forgetfulness,

the horrible cry of * Fire ! ' seemed to
be ringing in my ears again, and I started
up trembling, and affrighted.

The next morning it poured in torrents.
The rain, perhaps, was providential, as it extinguished
any fire which might have been left
smouldering. As soon as we had finished
breakfast, I asked my mother to allow me to
accompany Fred, who was going to see
Edward. At first she refused to listen to my
request, because of the inclemency of the
morning. I was not to be denied, however,
and after a great amount of persuasion, and
coaxing, she relented, and finally gave a reluctant
permission.

'* Edward was not at home, when we
reached his cottage, and his house-keeper informed
us that he had been out during the
greater part of the night. Fred proposed
to take me home again, but after a second
edition of coaxing, when he, instead of my
mother, held my fate in his hands, I was

allowed to continue my search for Edward.
Anxiety to see him, prevented me from feeling
at all tired, and securely wrapped in my waterproof,
I trotted bravely by the side of my
brother through the drenching rain. As we
neared the still smoking ruins, the aspect of
everything was forlorn, and wretched in the
extreme. I cannot attempt to describe it.
The work of devastation had been too terrible.
The cottages were mere shells, with here and
there, perhaps, a blackened doorway still standing
; and with here and there, charred masses
of thatch hanging over the shattered frames
of broken windows.

'' Desolation was written everywhere, and
nowhere was it written more plainly than upon
the haggard faces of those, who, in the pitiless,
pelting rain, stood staring blankly at the destruction
before them. I tried, as best I could,
to speak a few words of sympathy to them, but
the sight of their distress unnerved me, while
they, I think, were too much stunned by their

misfortune, to gather the meaning of my
words.

*' Edward was not amongst them, but
I found out from one of the poor women that
he was at the school house, which he had
converted into a temporary refuge for the
sickly, the aged, and the children. There,
Fred and I found him, administering comfort
alike to body and mind. He looked
very worn and tired, and his clothes
were wet. I noticed all this directly, and,
with the quick alarm of affection, begged
him to return home immediately.

*^ With his usual thoughtfulness for me,
he prepared to comply with my request,
confessing that the double necessity of
breakfast, and a dry coat, had been
forcing itself upon him for some time.
So we turned from the school house
together, leaving Fred to help the rector,
and the sisters Simpson, who, of course,
were there."

Rachel smiled a little, as she said the last
few words.

I had much to say to Edward, and to
hear from him about the sad night which
had just gone by. As I listened to his
account of it, I drew closer to his side,
thanking God fervently for my darling's
escape from its perils ; but, ah, that happy,
lingering walk sealed the death warrant of my
best beloved ! Cold, wet, and fasting, he " —

Here, Rachel's voice failed her, and she
fairly broke down.

Esse was much distressed, but Rachel,,
rallying her composure and looking from
the window, said with a feeble attempt at
cheerfulness —

*' I am afraid I have been selfish to keep
you here so long. I see Lord Oakdene is
wandering disconsolately about the lawn,
looking, I have no doubt, for you. I only
hope that, I have not quite tired you outwith
my long story."

Esse eagerly assured Rachel to the
contrary, and with many affectionate thanks
entreated that she would conclude her
narrative at the earliest opportunity.

This, Rachel promised she would do, and
then she retired to her own room, but, neither
she nor Esse left their respective sanctus
until the gong sounded for luncheon.

While the past afforded Rachel much
matter for reflection, the present gave an
equal amount to Esse.

VOL. L

BAD FORM.

Rachel Tritton was perfectly correct,
when she supposed that Lord Oakdene was
wandering about the lawn in search of Esse.
At luncheon he contrived, as he generally did
now that Arthur Greatorix was away, to place
himself next to her at table.

After a few observations upon the weather
and other ordinary topics, he remarked —

*^ Very dull, I should think, Miss Montague,
to be shut up nearly a whole morning alone
with Miss Tuition."

'' On the contrary," returned Esse quickly,
*' I have not passed such a pleasant two hours,
since" — she was going to say, 'since Mr.
Greatorix left," but she checked herself, and
added instead, " for some time."

Lord Oakdene winced a little. He knew
perfectly well what the hesitating *' since "
meant. The knowledge was not gratifying to
his self-love, seeing that he had relinquished
more than one day's sport in order that he
might devote himself to the service of Esse.
His glance wandered somewhat superciliously
over Rachel, who was nearly opposite
to him, as he said in reply to Esse —

I am father inclined to be incredulous.
Miss Twitton looks very quiet. I don't
believe you will twy a tete-astute with her
again."

Indeed! you are quite mistaken. I shall
be only too delighted to do so. I thought
tilsit you knew, I always mean what I say."

There was just an atom of balm for Lord
Oakdene to apply to his ruffled feelings, in the
latter remark. Under its soothing influence,
he applied himself to some of the viands
before him, and with a dainty morsel delicately
poised upon his fork, returned —

I often twy to hope that you do not always
mean exactly what you say."

Esse slightly elevated her eyebrows, giving,
meanwhile, the least possible shrug of her
shoulders ; but, she vouchsafed no reply, to
that which was intended to be a pointed
remark.

Lord Oakdene, therefore, once more took
refuge in his knife and fork, leisurely refilled
his glass, and then said with assumed lightness
of tone —

'' It is very remarkable, but women, always
seem to find any amount of things to talk
about, when they are shut up together in their
own sitting-woods."

'' Don't men ? " laconically enquired Esse.

'* Not as a rule — at least, not in the morning.
They are generally all wight after
dinner."

Esse laughed, which encouraged his Lordship
to continue —

'' While you were so engrossed with Miss

Twitton, I felt like a lost spirit within sight
of Pawadise. I could hear your voices
floating on the breeze, though your open
window."

'' How extremely romantic ! " exclaimed
Esse, laughing, '' but I am very glad you did
not think yourself a Peri."

I would have thought myself any mortal
thing," began Lord Oakdene eagerly.

But he was interrupted by Esse, who exclaimed
merrily —

Ah ! but then, you know, Paris were not
mortals."

'' Never mind their natural history," he
returned with equal gaiety, '' I would have
imagined myself to be anything, or nothing, and
would have tried to find — it is very remarkable,"
he continued, after pausing abruptly,
'' but, for the life of me, I cannot remember,
what on earth it was that those wretchedly
industrious Pierces did twy to find."

'can't you, Lord Oakdene?" demurely

asked Esse, her eyes the while dancing with
merriment.

No," he returned gravely.

'' Well then ! I will tell you what it was not,
if that will help you. It was neither cold
chicken, lobster salad, nor cigars."

'' That is father a hard wap upon my heavy
luncheon and my smoking ; but when a fellow
is so desperately miserable he must do
something," was the reply.

'' It is a very good sign when the patient
can eat," said Esse, her merriment in noway
diminished.

'don't the Pierces eat?" asked her
companion.

'' No ! " answered Esse promptly.

'' Very remarkable," said Lord Oakdene
seriously, '' they must be awfully hard up."

'' For what ? " enquired Esse.

For everything, I should think, but I
wish. Miss Montague, you would tell me what
it was in reality they went prowling about ta
find."

'' You are too absurd."

*' No, upon my word, I am quite In earnest.
I do really want to know."

*' It was," began Esse quickly, but she
as quickly stopped speaking. '' It was," she
continued in some confusion, for she did not
find the information so easy to impart as
she had imagined, " it was," she repeated
hesitatingly, " sighs, and tears, and good
works, with which the Peri in the poem
sought to gain an admittance into Paradise. '*

'' I could have brought plenty of sighs,
and of tears also, if they would have helped
me to win an entrance into the Pawadise of
your boudoir this morning."

'' Nonsense," said Esse. '' Why did you
not go out shooting ? "

'^ Because both Pawadise and the beautiful
Pierwy were here, and I liked better to keep
near to them."

As Lord Oakdene said this, he pushed
aside his plate, leant his wrists upon the
table, interlaced his fingers, and turning

slightly round looked earnestly at Esse. It
was impossible to feign an ignorance of his
meaning. She did not attempt it. Meeting
his gaze steadily, she said coldly —

'' It is what the Cambridge Mr. Lashmore
would call ' bad form ' to make the badinage
personal."

Lashmore is an idiot," was the impatient
rejoinder.

And you, I suppose, are imitating the wise
men of Gotham, but remember, I am not
like King John," said Esse, less frigidly
than before.

"It is awfully hard to remember anything
properly, when one is talking to you, Miss
Montague. I always contrive somehow to
lose my head."

But not your tongue," Esse could not
refrain from saying.

*' Wap, number two," he returned good-humouredly,
*' but whether I lose my head
only, or my head and my tongue both, I know

that I feign nothing — nothing," he repeated
with marked emphasis and gravity.

Before Esse could make any further comments,
she heard her name pronounced very
distinctly at the other end of the table. Ralph
Grant was addressing her. Somehow, he
often did so, when her conversation with
Lord Oakdene appeared to be interesting.
Flora Grant pursued an entirely different
course of action.

'' Esse, my dear, I want you to give Miss
Wycombe a mount to-day. Can you spare
the chestnut ? Nothing else would suit her so
well. Ride your bay, and come with us. It
is going to be a lovely afternoon," said Ralph
Grant.

I am such a coward you know, Esse,"
chimed in pretty Hannah Wycombe, before
Esse had time to answer her uncle. '' Lord
Oakdene's pet, ' Scamper,' nearly terrified
me to death, when I rode him last week."

I was awfully sorry, and very much

annoyed about it. He is generally quiet
enough, but he hadn't been hidden by a lady
for some time," said Lord Oakdene apologetically,
feeling, that la belle was looking
volumes at him, although his gaze was turned
in any direction rather than towards her.

'' ' Beauty' will not frighten you, Hannah.
She is a dating — can go like the wind, but,
is as quiet as a mouse," added Esse, who, unlike
Lord Oakdene, was looking at la belle,
and who saw at once that part of the eulogy,
which she had bestowed upon her favourite
mare, was not altogether pleasing to la
belle,

"' I expect that our ideas, differ concerning
quietness," laughed la belle ; 'however, with
your recommendation, and under the escort of
Mr. Grant, I have no doubt that, I may safely
trust my neck to the keeping of ' Beauty,' for
an hour or two. Are you going to ride this
afternoon, Lord Oakdene ? "

'' Oh, no," Esse answered archly for him

Lord Oakdene has taken a literary turn, and
intends to stay at home and study Paradise
and the Peri."

I should have thought that ' Maud '
would have been more in Lord Oakdene's
line," suggested la belle, who had witnessed
his disconsolate roaming about the lawns
and garden, together with the furtive glances
which, from time to time, he cast towards
the windows of the boudoir of Esse.

In no way disconcerted by the double
attack which had thus been made upon him,
and determined, not to commit himself with
regard to the riding-party, until fully assured
of the plans of Esse, he said —

'' I quite agree with you, Miss Wycombe.
It is very remarkable, but ' Maud ' has
always been one of my favourite poems. I
like it better than anything else which the
Poet Laureate has ever written."

Mrs. Grant now rose from the table.
Taking advantage of the general movement

which ensued, Lord Oakdene added in an
undertone to Esse —

''Lashmore's phrase, might fairly be applied
to others here besides myself, it seems
to me."

'' Hon soit qui mal y pense she returned
evasively, as they sauntered into an adjoining
room.

Lord Oakdene was about to reply, but his
eyes met hers, and for the moment he forgot
his repartee.

Perhaps, like good wine, it proved all the
better for keeping.

ANOTHER TETE-astute WITH RACHEL.

'there we are at last, Rachel, and with a
good two hours to spare before we need
begin to dress for dinner. Sit in this low
chair, while I go and have my hat and habit
taken off, and be sure that you do not fall in
love with Arthur's photo during my absence,"
said Esse Montague.

Rachel took the offered seat, and smilingly
promised not to lose her heart to the portrait
in question.

Two days had elapsed, since Rachel and
Esse had been closeted together in the
same room wherein Rachel now again found
herself. During those two days, Esse had
more than once tried to bring Rachel thither ;
but something had always happened to frustrate

her endeavour. Now, however, she had
carried her point. Nothing could be more
cosy, and more inviting, for a confidential
conversation than the aspect of everything
around. It was growing dusk, but a bright
fire threw its cheerful blaze over a tiny
tea-table with fairy-like tea appointments ;
while opposite to Rachel, on the other side
of the table, and drawn up to the fire, there
was another even lower, and, perhaps, still
more luxurious, chair than that in which she
was seated.

Rachel was not alone for many minutes.
When Esse returned it was in such a bewitching
tea-gown, and she looked so radiant
after her exercise in the open air, that Rachel
thought she had never seen her look so
lovely. Thus thinking, Rachel could not
help saying —

'' There is much more danger, Esse, of
my falling in love with you than with the
picture of Mr. Greatorix. Your cheeks put

the embroidered roses on your gown to
shame."

Poor roses ! " laughed Esse, glancing
down upon the soft pink silks of the well-simulated
flowers, " I am sorry for them ;
but please, dear Rachel, talk about yourself
instead of me. Moments are precious, you
know, and Aunt Flora is exigeante. If I am
not in the drawing-room when the good
people begin to arrive to-night, she will be
very much annoyed."

'' Is there a dinner party ? " asked Rachel.

'' Did not Aunt Flora tell you ? I am so
sorry. Yes, we have quite a great dinner
to-night, in more senses than one ; our M.P.
and his wife, with all the biggest people
around to meet them. I have positively a
new gown, for the occasion, a present from
dear Uncle Ralph, who ordered it for me
from Paris."

Mrs. Grant had grown reconciled to the
presence of Rachel Tritton, or, perhaps, it

would be more truthful to say, she entirely
overlooked It. She never introduced Rachel
to man, woman, or child ; never by word of
mouth included her in any arrangements, nor
took any trouble to exclude her therefrom
never enquired for her if she were not
present, nor betrayed the slightest annoyance
if she were. It was not surprising, therefore,
that she had not informed Rachel of the
expected dinner party. A more self-asserting
individual than Rachel Tritton might have
found matter for resentment, in the conduct
of Flora Grant, covered although this conduct
was by the constant kindness and attention
of both Esse Montague and Ralph
Grant.

Without a harsh thought of her hostess,
and without an anxiety concerning her own
attire, Rachel was vastly interested in the
fashion and colour of the finery which was
destined to adorn her young friend. When
Esse had fully enlightened Rachel upon

these points, the latter resumed her story,
and, without preamble, said —

'' Edward never came adam to my mother's,
after that walk from the schoolhouse which we
had in the rain together. He took me home,
but did not stay to breakfast, as my mother
invited him, because, as I told you the other
day, he was wet through. In the afternoon,
I rather expected him to appear, but, as the
weather did not improve, and I knew that he
was very busy, his absence gave me no anxiety.
In the evening, however, while we were dining,
I noticed that my mother, and also Fred,
looked unusually grave. I did not in anyway
connect their gravity with Edward, and
yet, an unaccountable depression stole over
me, as the meal proceeded. When we retired
to the drawing-room, my mother called me
to her.

*' ' Rachel, my child,' she said, ' your
brother tells me that Edward is not well.'

VOL. I. P

My arms were around her in an instant,
and, with my cheek pressed against hers, I
cried piteously —

"not well, dear mother; what do you
mean ? '

She hesitated, caressing me fondly, meanwhile.


' I mean, my child, that last night's exposure
to the cold rain has given him a chill,
and the doctor ' —

But here I interrupted her with so vehement
a gesture of despair that she stopped,
and, smoothing back my hair, kissed me again
and again. Illness was, happily, almost unknown
in our household. I could scarcely
remember the death of my father, and from
then, thanks to the healthfulness of our constitutions
and the skill of my mother, a doctor
had rarely crossed our threshold — at least,
not in his professional capacity.

'' When, therefore, my mother spoke of
a doctor, in connection with Edward, I was

filled with dire dismay. It was in vain that
my mother strove to calm my fear. I could
not take comfort. I tried to do so, but I
could not. Her words fell on my ears, it is
true, but for the first time in all my young
life her tender syllables were utterly, and entirely
powerless. Terror of a coming evil possessed
me ; a wave of undefined sorrow swept
with irresistible force over me.

While my mother was patiently striving
to soothe my excited imagination, my brother
Fred returned to Edward. This return was
soon followed by a note, to me, from Fred,
containing the welcome information that he
had found Edward decidedly better. The
bearer of this note was to wait for an answer.
I felt sure this meant that Edward would
like me to write to him. Need I tell you,
how much I was comforted by thus being
able to pour out some of my affectionate
anxiety ? My note despatched, I grew more
composed, and listened eagerly to a promise

from my mother that at early morning I
should go with her to Edward.

'how long the night hours seemed! At
last, the dawn stole over my weary, wakeful
eyelids, and then I slept — slept as the
anxious so often do when darkness disappears.
My mother came early to my room,
and was retiring stealthily when I awoke and
espied her. A lingering mother's kiss, an
earnest ' God bless you ! ' and then she
left me to prepare for that day, which He,
the merciful One above, alone knew was to
be fraught whether with weal or with woe tome.


When I saw Edward, his flushed cheek
and bright eyes gave encouragement to my
inexperience. My apprehension rolled away
like a heavy cloud, hope replaced the agony
of terror, the wave of sorrow receded, while,
the anxiety of the hours of darkness seemed,
but as some horrible nightmare through
which I had passed long, long ago. With

his hand in mine, and with his gaze resting
fondly upon me, even his short, hard cough
awoke no suspicion of evil in my heart. I
stayed with him for some time, and when I
left him my spirits had recovered their elasticity
; my joyful anticipations of the future
were undimmed.

'' Alas, that I could have been so blind !
That very night acute inflammation of the
lungs set in. On the morrow, my mother
again visited my room before I awoke. This
time, however, instead of ' God bless you ! '
being murmured with her morning kiss, it
was a tearful, solemn ' May God help you, my
child ! ' I sprang from my bed. My limbs
trembled.

'''What is it, mother? Edward! oh, he
is not worse! Say there is no bad news
about him!' I cried, clinging to her with
childlike dependence, and with all my previous
fears a thousandfold intensified.

' Would that I could say so, my darling,'

she returned gently, * but he has sent for
you, and, you must be brave, thinking only
how best to comfort him in his suffering

'' No other words were needed. I dressed
myself like one half-stupefied. I drank mechanically
the cup of tea which my mother
put to my lips, and then, half-carried, I
was placed in the carriage and driven to my
darling. Shall I stop, Esse, or would you
like to know how peacefully he went to his
home?" asked Rachel, noting the falling
tears of Esse, and trying hard to keep back
her own.

Esse entreated her to continue.

With a pathos which was as simple as it
was touching, Rachel resumed —

** All through that terrible day, the struggle
for breath continued. Doctors came and
went, but no one took me from the side of
Edward. When the sharpest paroxysms
seized him, he still held my hand, smiling at
me through his pain, as if to sustain my

courage. Ah, me ! it was a fearful, terrible
battle for me to watch ; the battle between
death and the young, strong life of my
darling. At last he slept, and my mother,
drawing a pillow softly beneath my head,
motioned me to rest thereon. The angels
took pity on me, I think, for, strange to say,
I sank into a sweet, although brief, repose.
My mother's touch aroused me. Looking up,
I saw that the eyes of Edward were upon
me, and I heard him feebly pronounce my
name. I slid to my knees, and still holding
his hand, nestled my face close to his.
Hushing my sobs and almost my breath, thus
I listened to his last words — thus I heard for
the last time those accents which had brought
me such untold joy — that voice which I loved
so passionately — so well. He spoke slowly,
at intervals, and with difficulty. I heard him
tell of Heaven, of that blessed place, whereby
a wondrous cleansing, we might hope to
meet again, and live for ever. Suddenly, a

terrible faintness overpowered him. The
doctor was summoned hastily, and I was
taken from the room. I remember nothing,
after the agony of being lifted from the
presence of my Edward, for days — nay, for
weeks. I, too, it was thought, had taken
cold upon that never to be forgotten morning
after the fire, and this, together with the
shock which my nervous system sustained in
the loss of Edward, brought me very near
unto the gates of death, through which he,
alas ! had passed. But, I recovered, to live a
life without him. There was small joy to mein
the thought. I would fain have rested by
his side ; and, it was long, before I could lift
up my heart and take unto myself that bright
hope which, with his dying breath, he had
bid me hold.

'' Thank God ! the cloud, which hid that
hope from me, has departed. In moaning for
the earthly bliss which, in Love Infinite, He
had seen fit to remove, I forgot the crown which

Edward had won already — the crown which
I must try to win. You will see now, dear
Esse, how needful the storm of chastening
was for me, and you will comprehend
something of the hope which prevents me,
lonely old maid although I am, from feeling
either sad or desolate. I do not know that
I have much more to tell that will interest
you. My mother was spared to me for
some years, after the Angels took Edward to
Heaven ; but, doubtless, you have heard from
your uncle of the terrible accident which
bereaved us of my bonny, light-hearted
brother Fred. Since my mother and my
brother both passed away, I have lived entirely
with Mrs. St. Vincent, endeavouring,
as best I can, to soften the suffering of her
declining years. She was only the stepmother
of Edward, but she loved him fondly,
and, for his sake, she is inexpressibly dear
to me."

The dusk had faded into darkness, and the

fire burned low, as Rachel finished speaking.
It was well. Light would have revealed the
paler of her face — the tear-drops in her eyes.

There are some moments when words seem
too poor to express our sympathy. There
are some moments also when we shrink from
listening to words — moments when the contact
of flesh and blood — the mere pressure of
a warm, living hand — imparts more solace
than the tenderest eloquence ever uttered.

So, it was, that evening, with Esse and
Rachel. The one could not speak the words
which filled her soul. The other could scarce
have borne to hear, had those words been
spoken. But, to that other, the two loving
arms which were cast around her, and the two
soft hands which stole to hers, gave a welcome
aye, a most welcome — assurance of affection,
and she rose up comforted.

Life is made up of smiles and tears. A
new dress, a dinner party, quickly followed

Rachel's story. But Esse could not forget
it, nor did she wish to do so.

By the light of sorrow, pale although it be,
wonderful mysteries are oft-times revealed.
Did Esse look for them, even while an assiduous
abigail fitted on a gorgeous robe, and
while, amid the glitter of silver and glass,
M.P's talked politics over their soup ?

GHOSTS.

ESME had a dog ; a small, white, long-haired
terrier, which she called " Cinderella." It
was a vastly privileged animal ; allowed to
curl itself, unrebuked by its mistress, upon
the hem of her most delicate robe, to sleep
upon the very softest of soft pillows at the
foot of her bed, and when it was awake, a
somewhat rare circumstance by-the-by, it ate
rich morsels from off transparent china. The
natural consequences followed. It snapped, it
snarled, and it growled, at all who came near
it, and, excepting to Esse, it was as cross-grained,
and as obnoxious as a well-bred
dog could possibly be. Nevertheless, it possessed
great charms for her. It was somewhat
hard upon her, therefore, that, through
its agency, fresh disquietude concerning

Arthur Greatorix should arise to torment her.
Yet so it was.

She had received a budget of letters from
Arthur, since the morning upon which Flora
Grant had called forth such disturbing
thoughts ; and these letters, coupled with
Rachel's story and Rachel's influence, had
gone far towards restoring the mind of Esse
to its usual serenity. Far towards restoring it,
but it was not restored. Rents may be neatly
mended, rivets hold breakages together, but
the rent and the damage are still there. Esse
did not thus reason of herself. She only knew,
that she was not so perfectly and completely
happy as heretofore. She only felt, that she
was more of a woman, and less of a child.

There was no element of suspicion in her
nature. Its vile seed had been thrown thereby
a ruthless hand, but the soil was not propitious,
and the seed languished well-nigh to
destruction. Adverse circumstances alone
could fructify it. One was nigh at hand.

Amongst the many foes which Cinderella,
by its ill-temper, created for itself, none were
more bitter than Flora Grant, unless indeed
it was Flora Grant's pet pug, *' Countess."

Very jealous were the rival pets of each
other, and, very savage the one to the other,
so far as opportunity allowed them to be.
Therefore, as Esse was preparing to go fora
walk the morning after the dinner party.
Flora Grant said to her sharply, as she was
leaving the room —

If you are going out Esse, I hope, you
will take Cinderella with you."

'' I should like to do so, but I suppose I
had better not. The ground is so wet, it will
make her in such a mess."

Then pray take her away from this room
before you start. She is abominably cross
this morning ; it makes me quite nervous
to hear her growl. Now my little Countess
never growls, " returned Mrs. Grant,

patting her sleek apoplectic-looking pug
affectionately.

But Countess bites instead, which is not
altogether a pleasing variety, or an innocent
little pastime," replied Esse merrily.

Of course, a warm vindication of the
amiability of Countess speedily followed from
its mistress. Perhaps, it was unanswerable, for
Esse made no attempt to refute it, and very
shortly afterwards she quitted the apartment
with Cinderella in her arms.

The weather was hopelessly damp and
dreary. Esse went to several rooms trying,
amongst the lady visitors, to find some
recruits for her pedestrian expedition. But
no one was inclined to venture out of
doors. Even Rachel Tritton, pleaded letter
writing as an engagement, looking lovingly
the while at her nice warm fire.

Thus deserted, without a thought of what
it would shortly cost her, Esse deposited

Cinderella in her boudoir, and still without
a suspicion of coming evil, resolved to sally
forth alone. As she was crossing the hall,
she encountered Lord Oakdene. Somehow,
he was singularly adroit in the art of making
his appearance, when Esse had not anybody
with her.

As a matter of course he promptly offered
his escort, while also, as a matter of course,
Esse could hardly refuse it. She was bound,
for a saunter in the grounds only, she told
him, and he, perfectly contented so long as
she was his companion, declared that nothing
could be more delightful.

Thus tastes differed respecting a stroll, upon
that drizzling morning, and thus Esse Montague
found a more than willing escort.

They started very cheerfully, those two ;
that bonny English maiden, and that blithe
young lord. The elements did not affect
them. Their footsteps went lightly over soddened
leaves and wet grass, while their voices

sounded gaily beneath the dripping branches.
As they passed the grass-path between the
yew hedges, Esse started forward suddenly,
and turning to her companion, asked
eagerly —

Did you see anything move across that
path near to the ferns ? I could declare
that I did."

"Very likely," he replied gravely, *' I
firmly believe that place to be haunted."

Esse laughed right merrily at the idea.
But, Lord Oakdene looked unusually grave,
as he continued —

"I do, upon my honour, Miss Montague.
I believe It Is haunted, and that an Innumerable
company of spirits hold their seances
there."

** How very entertaining ! I should apply
for a ticket of admission, if I were you,"
suggested Esse.

*' P'waps I might, only it is such a we-vol.

I. Q

remarkably dull, cut-throat looking place," was
the response.

** I think it is one of the prettiest spots in
the garden, so do not abuse it. I own, however,
that it looks a little dismal this morning.
But never mind, you must remember,
ghosts and cheerfulness never go together.
It is a pity, by-the-by, that the ghosts" —

Spirits, Miss Montague, I said spirits,
not ghosts."

'' I beg your pardon, or their pardon, or,
the pardon of both you and them, if necessary.
You must forgive my ignorance, I really
thought they were one, and the same."

'* P'waps they are," returned Lord Oakdene
reflectively.

** Very Hkely " answered Esse demurely,
*' but whether ghosts or spirits, they would
doubtless feel very much honoured by your
patronage, if you informed them by telegram,
or telephone, or something of that sort, that
you wished to attend one of their meetings.

They might promote you to the office of first
medium, and then you could tell me some of
their secrets, although I do not suppose that
you would find them very conversational."

'' I am not so sure, about that," was the
prompt rejoinder, '' I could have sworn that I
heard Gweatowix and a woman talking in that
path, one night just before he went away.
Lashmore was with me, and we looked about
every where. It was very remarkable, but
we could not see a soul."

'' It would have been infinitely more
remarkable, if you had done so," returned
Esse, curtly.

There was nothing that was either pleasant
or amusing to her, in the supposition with
which Lord Oakdene had just acquainted
her. It checked her raillery considerably.
With all banter gone from her voice, as well
as from her words, she continued —

'' I really must go and ascertain beyond a
doubt, whether or no my eyes deceived me

just now. Let me explore the mysteries of
this hedge-bound path by myself. I am not
at all afraid of haunted places."

She turned quickly from her companion to
prosecute her search, but, before she reached
the broken, half withered ferns, she discovered
a small child, shyly trying to hide herself in a
natural hollow formed by one of the yew
hedges.

'' Now this is really remarkable, is it
not ? " enquired Lord Oakdene, who, it is
needless to say, had followed Esse closely.
'' I declare you have wun that child to ground
splendidly."

Hush, you will frighten the poor little
creature to death. Keep quiet, while I ask
her what she has been doing, and whether
she has lost her way."

So saying, Esse accosted the little figure,
in the checked pinafore, whom she had so
unexpectedly discovered ; but it required no

small amount of patience, to extract an answer
therefrom, as well as of ingenuity.

By dint of gentle questioning, however,
Esse at last made out, that the scrap of
humanity before her had been sent to the
house with a message for one of the under-servants.
Moreover, that the beauty of the
place had tempted her small feet to stray,
until hearing voices she had, in shame and
terror, tried to hide.

Soothed by the kindly bearing and reassuring
words of her interrogator, the juvenile
offender took courage, and, forgetful of her
trespass, looked with a timid smile from under
her wet calico bonnet into the face of Esse,
contriving, as she did so, to twist her little
body into a contortion which she intended fora
courtesy.

Have you ever been here before?" asked
Esse, presently.

The question was put carelessly ; rather, in

fact, by way of saying something else to the
child, than from any motive for the enquiry.

Yes, miss," was the reply which accompanied
another spasmodic bob of the little
body, and which, like its predecessor, was intended
for a courtesy.

'* Indeed ! when ? " exclaimed Esse, unable
to repress her surprise.

I can't remember, how long ago, please

miss."

'' Try," said Esse.

A suspicious pucker came over the rosy
face of the little one, and her fingers played
nervously with one corner of her pinafore, but
she uttered no sound. The effort of memory,
for which Esse had asked, was too great,
apparently, to be attempted.

*' Was it a week ago?" enquired Esse,
anxious to prevent the tears, of which the
pucker " had given warning, from falling.

The child shook her head, dolefully.

'^ Please, miss, I don't know."

*' Never mind," returned Esse kindly,
*' although you cannot tell me how long it is
since you came here before, I have no doubt,
you have not forgotten why you came."

With a sigh of intense relief, the child
replied —

'^ No ; please, miss, I brought a letter from
the pale lady — I brought it, please, miss, for
Mr. Greats."

*'Ha— ha— ha!" laughed Lord Oakdene,
*' fancy Gweatowix hearing himself called
Mr. Sweats."

There was an awkward silence.

You mean Mr. Greatorix," said Esse to
the little girl.

Yes, please miss," was the very faint
reply.

The merriment of Lord Oakdene had
checked any further desire, which Esse might
have entertained, of gaining additional information
respecting either the pale lady or the
letter.

With a few kind words, the child was dish
missed. Then Esse Montague and Lord
Oakdene turned their faces homewards.

In after days, when he had learned to probe
the motives from whence his actions sprang,
Lord Oakdene could never quite determine
whether he had, or had not, with malicious
intent of purpose, made known to Esse the
mystery of the grass path, between the high
yew hedges.

Be this as it may, that rainy walk with
Lord Oakdene was but a sorry one for Esse.

Alas ! her return from it proved to be,
but little better.

Cinderella was still in the boudoir, and upon
the floor, lay a work-basket, with thimble,
scissors, pin-cushions, and needle-book, scattered
here, there, and everywhere.

Patting the perpetrator of the disorder
with a rebuke so gentle that it sounded more
like a caress, Esse stooped to pick up her
treasures. To her surprise, she discovered a

letter amongst them. A deep flush overspread
her face, as she recognised it to be the
letter which had arrived for Arthur at the same
time as the telegram to Mrs. Grant, from Sir
Marmaduke Hargreaves, announcing the
sudden indisposition of Lady AHcia.

But it was something more than annoyance,
for so carelessly forgetting the existence of
the letter, which sent the hot blood so swiftly
to the cheek of Esse.

A noble lord, a small child, and a pet dog,
had contrived, between them, to conjure up
veritable ghosts for Esse Montague. And
these ghosts took the form of a pale lady
and — a letter.

IN THE BILLIARD ROOM.

"Well, my dear! and what do you find so
perplexing in the fact that a letter, or rather
a note, should be sent here to Greatorix ? It
is doubtless an invitation to dinner, or to
shoot, or something of that sort. Why, God
bless my heart ! eligible bachelors, nowadays,
may eat every meal in the day in a different
parish, and, never sleep two nights in succession
in the same house, if so they choose !
Everybody knows that Greatorix is often
to be found here, and if they didn't, it
would be all the same ; dowagers with
daughters, and men who want guns, would
be certain to hunt him up," said Ralph
Grant to Esse, who, after a few days

of ineffectual combat with her " ghosts,"
resolved to seek counsel from the stout heart
of her uncle.

Esse, could not vanquish these same
"ghosts," alone and unaided. They haunted
her with too much pertinacity. Neither daylight
nor society routed them. So, she went
one morning, directly after breakfast, into the
library, and taking a stool, which had been
her privileged seat from childhood, she drew
it to the feet of her uncle, and, with her arms
resting upon his knees, told him of the overturned
work-basket, together with the finding
of the forgotten letter.

Here she paused, and Ralph Grant made
answer immediately. But his answer failed to
satisfy her. With a faint smile upon her. sweety
upturned face, she said —

I am not exactly perplexed. Uncle Ralph."

That's right, my dear, I am very glad to
hear you say so," he interrupted.

*' Not perplexed," she interposed gently,

and still with her face upturned, " but vexed
vexed with myself, you know."

'' Pooh — pooh ! Don't talk such nonsense.
What have you done with the letter, my
love ? "

Sent it to Arthur with an apology for my
stupidity," was the grave return.

*' Well, well, my dear, you know best ; but
I think you might as well have kept it until he
returned. Why, God bless my heart, we shall
have him here, before we can look round ! "

There was a wealth of comfort to Esse, in
this assertion. Nevertheless, her head drooped
a Httle, as she asked —

*' When do you think we may really expect
him. Uncle Ralph ? "

In a fortnight, perhaps, or three weeks at
the outside. Gibraltar is no distance, and,
when he gets to England, he will come straight
on here. No one will be glad to see him, I
expect," said Ralph Grant, looking at Esse

with a sly smile, and patting her affectionately
upon the shoulder.

It was astonishing how fast her misgivings
vanished, under the influence of the presence
and the cheery words of her uncle. A thought
of the 'pale lady" crossed her mind, but only
to meet with instant banishment ; while Lord
Oakdene's suspicions, concerning the voices
in the grass-path, appeared now but as the
veriest fable.

No one will be glad to see Greatorix — eh,
Esse ! " repeated Ralph Grant. '' No little
woman is counting upon his return, eh ? "

Of course not ! " returned Esse gaily,
with a quick thought that she had been uncommonly
silly, and with as quick a determination
to hide, the rest of the history of her
foolishness, within the precincts of her own
bosom.

Her mountains had suddenly become molehills.
Her ghosts were scared, at any rate,
for the present.

'' No, of course not," echoed Ralph Grant,
and then, still in the same bantering tone, he
continued, *rand of course there is not going
to be a gay wedding at Brashleigh when
Christmas comes round ! What with wedding
chimes, and Christmas chimes, and ringing in
the New Year, and ringing out the old, the
bell-ringers will have a stiffish time of it, my
dear."

'' Aunt Flora says, I am too young to be
married at Christmas," said Esse involuntarily.


*' Tut — tut — folly and nonsense. You will
soon grow older. Youth is a fault which
Father Time makes small ado about curing.
It doesn't seem to my mind that it has taken
him long to make an old man of me. But,
between ourselves, my dear, it is the knowledge
that he has done so, which makes me
so anxious for your marriage. I shall die the
happier, for knowing that you are safely in the
charge of Great oris."

Don't call yourself an ' old man,' dear
Uncle Ralph ! And don't talk about giving
me into the ' charge ' of Arthur ; it sounds so
like pick-pockets and handcuffs," said Esse,
anxious to dispel the gloom which had
suddenly stolen across the countenance of her
uncle.

Her affectionate solicitude was successful.

A golden ring will be strong enough to
hold the offender I have in view," he returned
with restored cheerfulness.

At this moment, a knock at the door heralded
the approach of a farm bailiff. Esse did not
attempt to leave the room. There was a
sense of security, and of peace, to her in its
very atmosphere. Still retaining her seat
upon her favourite stool, therefore, she took
up a newspaper, while Mr. Grant withdrew to
a table at some distance from her, and was
soon busy with pens, ink, and bailiff.

Thus, nearly an hour passed away. A book
had replaced the newspaper, and Esse was

beginning to wonder how much longer the
conversation at the writing-table was going to
continue, when a fresh arrival, appeared upon
the scene, in the shape of the vicar of the
parish, who came to discuss coal and clothing
clubs, together with the like local charities.
In this discussion, Esse was not only willing
but able to take her part. Mr. Grant would
in no way dispense with her presence. So it
came to pass that she spent nearly the whole
of the morning with him. Through all her
life, the remembrance that she had done so
proved more than a satisfaction to her ; while,
even of greater comfort than this satisfaction,
was, the remembrance that she had forborne
to trouble him with a relation of those grievances,
which she had held to be so great,
when first she presented herself before him in
the library.

The vicar gone, Esse learnt that an en-^
engagement to attend a coursing meeting, for
which he was already late, was also about to

carry her uncle away. Then, and not until
then, did she remember that she likewise had
an engagement, for which, alas, she was not
only late, but too late ! In extreme consternation,
she exclaimed —

What will Rachel think of me ! I promised
to drive her out this morning."

Your pony carriage has not been announced,
my dear."

'* No ; I never even ordered it," replied
Esse, looking a very picture of penitence.

By this time, both she and her uncle were
anxiously consulting their respective watches.
Ralph Grant read a warning, upon the face of
his, to hasten his movements ; while Esse
sought, upon hers, for the comfort which was
not there. Hour and minute hands were alike
obdurate. They told of a broken promise
and of an intended drive which could not
take place, at any rate, that morning.

It was with rather a distrait air, therefore,
that Esse received the adieu, and parting

VOL. I. R

kiss, of her uncle. He had no sooner gone,
however, than her conscience smote her for
her careless '' good-bye " to him. Some inward
monitor bade her follow him, ere he had time
to quit the house.

'' Good-bye, dear Uncle Ralph. I was
obliged to run after you to wish you ' goodbye
' again. I was so taken up with thinking
about Rachel and the drive, that I hardly
knew what I was saying, when you went away.
Good-bye ! I hope you will have a pleasant
ride, and that you will enjoy the coursing."

Ralph Grant turned from the hall door
with a smile of pleased surprise, as the voice
of Esse thus reached him ; and when, shortly
afterwards, she watched him mount his horse,
she thought she had never seen him look so
hale and stalwart.

There was a slight delay, of which she took
advantage, before he started. Passing from
under the portico, she went to his side, and,
chatting gaily meanwhile of horses, sport, and

weather, bestowed sundry pats of approbation
upon the sleek neck of the animal
upon which he was mounted. At last all was
ready. Lifting his hat with old fashioned
politeness, he stooped towards her, and said —

*' God bless you, my child."

Many a time before had such a farewell
to her fallen from his lips. But, to-day, it
seemed to Esse to have a new and an
especial force — an earnestness which was
akin to sadness — an affection that was
almost overpowering in its intensity.

Dear Uncle Ralph ! how good and kind
he is!" she murmured, striving by the thought
of his excellence to overcome the unaccountable
melancholy, which his departure, together
with his words had occasioned, as she watched
him lovingly, until both he and his good
horse were lost to sight. Then again, Rachel
Tritton became paramount in her mind.

With a last lingering glance in the direction
which her uncle had taken, Esse re-entered

the house. She had scarcely done so before
she encountered Rachel.

Forbearance often deepens penitence. The
good-humoured smile with which Rachel
greeted Esse increased the regret of the
latter for her broken promise, while, at the
same time, it rendered doubly awkward
the unpleasant confession that, all through
those long morning hours, she had entirely
forgotten her friend. Between sorrow and
confusion, therefore, Esse made but a stammering
apology, an apology, however, which
Rachel good-naturedly cut short, by saying —

*' My dear Esse ! pray do not look so
doleful. I have been very happy all the
morning. Your maid told me you were in
the library with your uncle, so I thought,
perhaps, you would not be able to come outwith
me."

'' But I ought to have sent to you " —

** It does not matter in the least," interrupted

Rachel, ^'thls afternoon will do quite
as well for our drive."

So the matter was settled. Anxious to
atone for past neglect, Esse was ready and
waiting for Rachel at the appointed hour. The
afternoon was cold, but not raw ; Esse was a
good whip, her ponies were fleet, and Rachel
was not nervous, therefore nothing marred
the pleasure of the drive, which terminated
without either adventure or misadventure.

In answer to her interrogations, when they
reached Brashleigh, Esse learned from the
butler, that his master had not returned, and
also that none of the other gentlemen, all of
whom had gone early to the coursing, had
come back. Mrs. Grant was at home, but
two or three ladies had gone out in the
carriage.

While these questions and answers were
being given, and received, Rachel vanished.
Those fragments of time, which are commonly

called " spare moments," were religiously
utilized by Rachel. Her absence,
therefore, was no sooner discovered than it
was understood by Esse. And, moreover,
Esse knew that while she was idly wondering
how next she should amuse herself,
Rachel had, in all probability, quietly settled
down to some employment.

Drawing off her driving gloves with a sigh,
which was almost a yawn, Esse sauntered
into the billiard room. It was not nearly
dark, although the shadows of night were
stealing up '' gloomy and black."

The room was empty. A wood fire blazed
upon the hearth, but the window curtains
still remained looped back from the windows,
while the blinds were not yet drawn
down.

Esse was half inclined to ring for lights,
have the table uncovered, and practice a
stroke or two. But upon second thoughts
cannons " and " kisses " with no one at hand

either to admire, or to envy, seemed dull, and
uninviting.

The fire, with its crackling logs, and bright
sparks, was far more seductive. And it wooed
her to its side. Once there, she fell into a
reverie. How long this reverie lasted, she
could never tell. While, however, with her
hat and fur coat upon her lap, she let go
her fancy, and built bright castles in the air,
a peculiar sound arose without the house.
She heard, and yet she only partly heard
it. She was only half conscious of it, as a
heavy slumberer, often is, of the first awakening
knocks at his or her chamber door. It
smote upon her ear, although not sharply
enough to arrest her attention, and, by so
arresting, to dispel her daybreak.

A few moments passed, and then the noise
grew more distinct. At last, making itself
heard, it penetrated her perception. Starting
to her feet, she Hastened, more, perhaps, in surprise
than in alarm. The wind, a dog, a bird,

anything, in fact, might have occasioned it,
and even while she thus reasoned, all became
so quiet, that she was re-assured. Scarcely,
however, before she could resume her seat,
the same strange sound arose again.

The ear of Esse was dull no longer. It
was quickened by anxiety.

No one could be abroad and stirring in the
grounds, at that hour. Gardeners and workmen
had long since gone home. Yet, surely,
the fallen leaves were rustling ominously — and
it was foot steps — nay ! — the sound of many
feet — a dull, slow, heavy, measured trampling,
which she heard, in the shrubbery close by.
There could be no mistake. With a dread
of coming evil, Esse flew to the window.

IT CAME AS A MESSAGE FROM THE DEAD.

We all know what strange, fantastic shapes
the most common-place objects assume, when
the weird shadows of twilight are over them,
and the difficulty, at such a time, of distinguishing
anything clearly.

It was even so with Esse Montague, as
she peered from out of the billiard room
window into the uncertain gloom. But, after
gazing steadily for a few moments, she felt
convinced that figures were moving stealthily
amid the trees. Moreover, that the direction,
in which they were proceeding, was that of a
path which led to a private entrance from the
gardens to the library. This entrance was
reserved so exclusively for the use of the
master of the house, that Esse turned at
once to raise an alarm.

She had already left the room, and was
rushing breathlessly across the hall when she
encountered Lord Oakdene. Before she had
time either to address him, or to wonder at his
troubled, and haggard appearance, he had
seized her by both hands, exclaiming in extreme
agitation, " Not there Miss Montague
for God's sake do not go into that woom.'^

'* Which room Lord Oakdene — what do you
mean — is anything the matter ? " she gasped,
striving to free herself from his hold. But he
grasped her the more firmly, dragging her
with him, almost by force, towards the drawing
room, saying the while —

No, no, there is nothing the matter — at
least, nothing really, only, only — I thought,
I beg your pardon ; but I thought you were
going to the liberwawy — and — and — I wanted
you to come to the drawing whom, or somewhere
else instead."

Amazement and terror, of she knew not
what, rendered Esse speechless.

'' Don't be frightened," continued her companion,
trembling as he had never trembled
before. '' Don't be frightened," he repeated,
while the lovely face which was looking so
piteously at him grew each instant whiter. *' I
did not mean to say, don't be frightened.
What a fool I am — of course I didn't mean to
say that. It was the wong word altogether —
it was indeed — way believe me. I shall
never forgive myself for having startled you
so."

"You have not startled me. Lord Oakdene,"
returned Esse, with lips so quivering that
they not only beheld her words, but prevented
her further utterance.

I was afraid I had" — he began.
But here his desire to screen Esse from a
sudden blow was completely frustrated by the
unexpected appearance of Flora Grant, who,
between hysterical shrieks and wails, sobbed
out —

Why did you not come to me, Esse, instead

of remaining here with Lord Oakdene ?
How could you be so cruel and so selfish !
The shock has nearly killed me, but you do
not seem to care. Where have you been?
It is nearly an hour, and it seems like a century,
since Dr. Wyldham broke the news tome,
and I have been expecting you to come
to me ever since. I never thought you would
leave me alone, at such a time as this. And
now they have brought the body " —

'the body!" groaned Esse, a ghastly
suspicion of the truth suddenly overwhelming
her.

'' Of course they have. They could not
leave it where it was."

'' It !" interposed Esse in horror-stricken
accents, her agony of dread fast becoming
torture.

Yes, don't you know ; have you not been
told— that "—

Lord Oakdene started forward stretching out
his hands deprecatingly towards Flora Grant,

but he could not stay the terrible announcement
which she sobbed out, *' that — your poor
dear uncle is dead."

There was no echo this time to the sorrow-giving
words. Without a sign or a sound,
Esse slipped from her seat, and lay senseless
on the floor. The swoon frightened Flora
Grant into silence, and in this manner it might,
perhaps, be accounted a mercy for Esse.
But the return to consciousness brought with
it indescribable suffering.

Death is more terrible to the young than to
the old. It had never come nigh to Esse
before ; never, at least, since she had been of
sufficient age to realize its dire mystery. And
now, it had come so close, so very close, to
her. It had entered her home, silenced forever
the voice she loved so well, and laid low
the head she honoured.

The 'silver cord" was 'Moose." Flora
Grant had spoken only too truly. Good
Ralph Grant had gone to his rest. Henceforth,

his place upon earth might know him
no more.

As he was returning from the coursing, he
was observed to swerve suddenly in his saddle.
His friends were with him immediately, but
the decree had gone forth ; the irrevocable
fiat had been issued, and in a few moments
the cheery, hospitable host, the warm-hearted
friend and neighbour, had left earth far
behind, had crossed the dark bridge, and had
entered into that life which knows no end.

All too soon, therefore, did Esse Montague
comprehend the meaning of the mysterious
trampling in the shrubbery. No one had
thought of looking for her in the billiard
room. Hence it came to pass, that Flora
Grant was the first to impart the sad intelligence
to her.

And, the shock was very heavy, to Esse.
A mighty terror seized her ; an untold horror
encompassed her ; an icy coldness shrouded
her spirit. She could not weep ; she dared

not pray. An awful, mute, indescribable despair
overshadowed her.

The blow has been too sudden. Great
care is needed. Quiet and sleep will be the
best restoratives."

So spake the doctor, who had been hastily
summoned to the spot where Ralph Grant
breathed his last, and who, stricken with
grief at the loss of his friend and patron, was
administering to the various needs of the
bereaved household. But notwithstanding
all his endeavours, for two whole days, Esse
lay, pale, almost motionless, tearless, and
passive beyond description. Then, in the
third night, she suddenly awoke to find herself
alone, and unwatched. As she awoke,
a remembrance, clear and distinct in every
particular, came to her of a request which
her uncle had made to her, long months
before, and of a promise which, she had
given to him, in answer to that request.

It was a message, she thought, from the

dead : a summons for immediate action, a
behest which could not be withstood.

Trembling from head to foot, she arose,
arrayed herself in a loose morning wrapper,
took a small key from amongst some others,
and, with her hair falling like a glory around
her, she descended, taper in hand, to a small
and now almost disused room.

This room had once been her uncle's study.
In one corner, there stood an escritoire.
Pointing to this same escritoire, Ralph Grant
had, upon more than one occasion, said to
Esse.

'' In the right-hand drawer, my child, there
is a roll of papers. Should any accident
ever happen to me, or should I be called
away suddenly, take care, that no one gets
possession of these papers but yourself. I
wish you only to see them. There are two
keys to the drawer. One, I have already
given to you ; the other, I keep carefully put
away. You will not forget, my child ; the

roll is In the right-hand drawer, the next but
one from the top."

And holding up the little key, which she
generally wore upon her watch-chain, Esse
would promise both obedience and remembrance.
It was easy enough to do so then,
with the strong, erect form of her uncle before
her. But, it was a very different matter, now
that the hour had come for the promise to
be redeemed, and the remembrance to be
acted upon. Upheld, however, by her love
for the newly dead, Esse neither flinched
nor faltered in her purpose.

It was past midnight, when she glided
stealthily towards the escritoire. Darkness
reigned, and all was so profoundly still, that,
she thought, with a shudder, the house resembled
some vast tomb, while its silence was
like the silence of the grave.

Scarcely daring to glance around her,
afraid of her own light footstep, and still more
afraid of the slight rustle which she made in

VOL. I. S

passing the various articles of furniture standing
between the door and the escritoire, she
went breathlessly on her way, and without
hesitation, albeit with well-nigh powerless
fingers, fitted the key in the lock. The key
turned easily, and the drawer was with equal
facility opened ; but when so opened, there
was nothing to be seen therein ; nothing of
that for which Esse sought ; nothing but a
piece of string, some old envelopes, a broken
india-rubber band, and a box of pens.

Too much agitated to feel disappointed at
the fruitlessness of her search, or, indeed, to
be conscious of any emotion, save a mournful
satisfaction at having, so far as it lay in her
power to do so, accomplished her task ; she
shut the drawer, re-locked it, and quitted the
apartment.

As she softly closed the door behind her,
she was astonished to see the flicker of a fire
in an opposite room. It was suggestive of
an idea that some member of the household

might possibly be astir. This idea was an
inexpressible relief to Esse. The silence,
the solitude, the darkness, were, each and all,
becoming insupportable to her. Forgetful,
therefore, that, by so doing, she might be
imperilling the secrecy of her midnight
mission, she stepped across the threshold of
the fire-lighted room.

Misery often creates a sensation of cold,
while, on the other hand, cold often increases
the sensation of misery. Esse shivered
from the combined effects of both misery and
cold, as she looked around her. There was no
one to be seen ; and, as she thought of the
hope which the glimmer of the fire had
created, but which to all appearance was
utterly futile, her heart died within her.
Nevertheless, her hope was not so futile as
she imagined ; better, perhaps, that it had
been !

Hidden by a folding-screen, with a pile of
letters ready for the post at his side, and with

his head thrown back against the cushions of
his easy chair, slept Lord Oakdene. His arms
were folded across his breast, and his brow
was slightly contracted, as though troublous-thoughts
had followed him even into dreamland.
Slumber had apparently overtaken him
at the conclusion of his occupation.

Esse had left her taper in the hall, and the
candles, of the writing-table at which Lord
Oakdene sat, were burnt out. There was
no light, therefore, save the flicker of the
fire : that flicker which had tempted Esse
thither.

From the door of the room to the folding-screen
was but a few paces. These were
traversed in an instant. Another short
moment, and Esse was facing the slumberer.

Words cannot fitly describe her amazement.
With a start, which she was powerless
to control, she uttered a faint exclamation of
surprise. Faint as it was, however, it aroused
Lord Oakdene, as if by magic. From the

time that, she had been carried from his
presence, white as a snowflake, after the
terrible revelation made by Flora Grant, Esse
had been constantly In his thoughts, while
he had ceaselessly experienced the keenest
anxiety upon her account. When, therefore,
he suddenly awoke, and saw her standing
before him in her pale-coloured robe, with all
her shining hair falling like a glory around
her, he deemed that the Angels had already
claimed her for their own, and that as one of
their bright band she had come to visit him.
Bewildered, he gazed wonderingly and awestricken
upon her. Then, as the firelight
danced and flickered over her, he covered his
face and groaned aloud. Assuring himself
that it was her spirit which stood before
him, with all the reasoning power of which
he was master, he believed her to be one of
the dead.

The nerves of Lord Oakdene had been a
good deal shaken. He had been one of the

first to notice Ralph Grant sway and lose his
seat — one of the first to reach him — one of
the first to learn that all was over — one of
the first to raise the motionless form, and
help to bear it back to Brashleigh ; and,
having borne it thither, he stayed within the
darkened doors, mourning with those who
mourned. Silence and gloom had replaced
light words and laughter, guests had departed,
servants trod softly and whispered low, windows
were scarce permitted to admit either
the light or the breath of Heaven, but still he
did not flinch, nor seek to flee. Nevertheless,
as it has been said before, he was to a
certain extent unnerved, and the indisposition
of Esse, the report of which was considerably
exaggerated, tended to add to his depression.


As a terror of death was upon Esse, so a
dread of death was upon him — he dreaded it
for her. It was a groan of veritable agony,

therefore, which Esse heard him utter, and
it enlisted her sympathy immediately.

Advancing timidly, she gently spoke his
name. It was enough. Reality, at once, took
the place of un-reality. Roused as from some
horrible night-mare, and overjoyed, with a joy
unspeakable, at the knowledge of her presence
in the fresh, it was with extreme difficulty that
he preserved his presence of mind sufficiently
to conceal the terrible supposition which the
sound of her voice had dispelled.

The force of habit rests very strongly upon
most of us at all times. By this force. Lord
Oakdene was rescued from all extravagance
alike of word and action.

He arose, and with a few words of greeting
wheeled his chair towards her. She accepted
the proffered seat with a smile so wan and
so woe-begone, that tears, he thought, would
have betrayed less sorrow.

The strangeness of their situation occurred

to neither of them. Conventionality fades
into insignificance, before acute suffering,
whether it be of body or of mind. Thus
Esse was obvious of time and circumstance.
Her affection for Ralph Grant was
that of a child for a parent, and not only her
affection, but her courage also, had been
severely tested.

The effort, consequent upon her search,
being over, an inevitable reaction set in.
It could not be otherwise. Companionship,
therefore, was more than grateful to her ;
the sense of protection, which it gave, was
more than welcome. She realized this, without
understanding it. It stole over her,
bringing with it untold comfort. And no
disturbing question either of etiquette or propriety
overthrew its consolation.

But he, Lord Oakdene, ah, well ! his grief,
naturally enough, was far less poignant than
the grief of Esse ; his mind, was not filled
to such a painful overflowing with regret for

the departed, sore although it assuredly was.
The current of his life had not been changed,
as hers had been, nay, well-nigh brought to a
standstill, by the slipping adown it, far away
far, far away out of sight for ever, of a
dearly loved form ; his woe, was very feeble,
when compared with hers. And yet, he too,
Alas oblivious of time, if not of circumstance ;
while he, as well as Esse, was perfectly undisturbed
by any thought of Mrs. Grundy.

There was this difference, however, between
Esse Montague and Lord Oakdene. Her
oblivion of present surroundings was brought
about by the agony of her young heart ; his
by unfeigned concern for her, and by
delight unbounded at the mere sight of her
pure face, and slight, graceful figure.

To stir the fire into a brighter blaze, to fetch
a wrap from the hall, (Esse still shivered)
and to place it around her, was the work of a
very few moments. They were small offices
for the performance of one, who felt that he

would gladly suffer martyrdom for her, and he
looked anxiously around, eager, if possible, to
add still further to her comfort. Her eyes
followed him wistfully, as he moved to and fro.
She had many enquiries to make of him, but
she knew not how to commence them.

At last, he understood her mute questioning.
As he understood, he grew nervous and
uneasy. Alas ! what had he to tell that was
not sadder than sad ? What answers might
he give to those questions which he felt most
certainly were awaiting him ? What could
he say to soften that pain which, he would
have died to spare her, rather than inflict ?

When at length her pitiful accents framed
themselves into words, and their faint whispering
replaced the mute interrogation which
had preceded them, he stepped behind her
chair. He felt braver there. The sight of
her large, sorrowful, tearless eyes unmanned
him. What then she asked of him needs
not to be repeated. He tried to hide as-much

as he could from her. But, womanlike,
little by little, she drew from him the
whole sad history of the particulars concerning
the sudden death of her uncle. And
when it was finished, she covered her face,
and wept. Tears were granted to her at last,
relieving, as they fell, her overcharged bosom.

Lord Oakdene was sorely distressed. Pity,
they say, is akin to love. He needed no pity,
to quicken his affection for Esse ; there was
love in his heart for her and to spare, without
pity ; but, with pity added to his love, he
lost his footing, and was swept onwards by
an overwhelming force.

He struggled desperately, at first, and then
more feebly. Like a mighty sea his passion
bore all before it, breaking down the barriers
of self-restraint, upon which he had relied so
firmly, with a sudden crash. The past, the
future, sorrow, joy, death, everything was
forgotten, in that wild tumultuous present.
The woman he adored was before him

bowed down by grief alone. He stooped
over her — lower — lower yet — stooped, until
his lips were close to her small bent head,
and then a very madness seizing him, he
kissed her soft bright hair, again and again.

His Nemesis was close at hand. Shrinking,
cowering, trembling, Esse let fall her hands
from before her face and started to her feet.
His sin had found him out and punished him,
already. In that instantaneous recoil from
his touch, he read both his fault and his doom.
No words could have reproached him so
keenly as that terrified shrinking of her slight,
quivering form. His penitence was swift.
His remorse was bitter. With a deep flush
mounting to his temples, he approached to
a few feet of where she stood, and said
despairingly —

'' Forgive me ! I implore you to do so,
.although I can never forgive myself."

Unbroken silence reigned in the room.

'' Forgive me," he repeated, " I cannot tell

how it is that I dare to beg for your forgiveness,
only — only I could not live without
it ; oh ! say that you forgive me."

There were tears in his voice although none
upon his cheek, but still Esse gave no
answer to his appeal.

The fish died out from off his brow ;
his pallor matched hers, as he murmured
hoarsely —

I was off my guard. My honour is turned
to dishonour. The bitterness of this can
never cease. I thought myself so strong —
God help me."

His self-humiliation and earnestness could
not be longer withstood. Esse remembered
many a kindly word spoken by him, many a
kindly deed done by him, and it was with
sorrow rather than with anger that she said —

The bitterness will pass away, Lord
Oakdene. Regret will wipe out all dishonour."


He shook his head ; and, she continued

gently, from out of her woman's noble
nature —

Do not look so sad. Forget, what has
passed, as I shall."

He would have thanked her — would have
grovelled at her feet in gratitude, but she
gilded past him, and was gone.

END OF VOL. L



a i&obeL

IN THREE VOLUMES.

BY

MRS. ARTHUR TRISTRAM Jervis.

Author of " Holding Fast and Letting Go."

VOL. II.

gaaban :

REMINGTON AND CO.,

New Bond Street, W.

1884.

Alt Rights Reserved.

CONTENTS OF VOL. II.

HIS OWN FAULT.

Sympathy, as a rule, does not flow plentifully
over the heads of those unhappy mortals
who suffer from the immediate consequences
of their own fault.

The pangs of remorse, hard as they were
for him to bear, which Lord Oakdene had
brought upon himself, will, in all probability,
elicit but an infinitesimal amount of commiseration
from the reader. Like many
another child of clay, of his own freewill, he
had walked down the flowery path of temptation.
He had chosen it recklessly, secure in
the strength of his own power, either to pause,
or to turn, should danger threaten. Day by day
the path grew more alluring, the blossoms
which adorned it more brilliant, and their per-vol.

II. B

fumes more entrancing. A delicious hope of
coming bliss stirred his pulse. Intoxicated
therewith, he pressed on heedlessly. Esse
was so near, Arthur was so far. Peril came,
but, when it came, the vaunted power to turn
therefrom had perished. Lord Oakdene fell.
As he raised himself, all giddy, sore and
bruised, he recognised, that by his fall he
had forfeited the confidence of Esse, sacrificed
the friendship of Arthur, and irreparably
injured his own self-respect.

Our broken resolutions are unpleasant subjects
for contemplation. They have a peculiar
ugliness of their own. Twist and turn
them as we may, they are but a sorry crew.
And more, there are moments when we are
forced to look upon them.

Such a moment came to Lord Oakdene,
when Esse vanished from his presence, thus
compelling him to withhold his thanks for
her graciousness.

They were dreary objects these self-same

broken resolutions. Almost maddened by
the sense of failure which they produced,
Lord Oakdene resolved to quit the scene of
his defeat. Filled with this purpose, he
ascended to his chamber, rang for his valet,
and was about to give orders for a departure
from Brashleigh at daybreak, when he
remembered that by such a proceeding he
would most surely add cowardice to his other
shortcomings. For the time being, he was
the only gentleman beneath the roof. The
sudden demise of his host had brought about
a variety of business matters, both with regard
to the arrangements for the funeral, and otherwise,
which, as a connection of the family,
or, as Flora Grant would have it, a relation,
had naturally devolved upon him. To leave,
therefore, at such an hour, from stress of his
own unhappiness, was a manifest impossibility.
His orders for flitting were not given. The
brunt of the storm must be faced where he
was.

Thus prudence was revenged, for many a
day of past neglect.

Lord Oakdene would not listen to her
before, and, now that he would do so, he could
not.

When next he met Esse, it was in the
presence of Flora Grant. Happily, that lady
was too self-engrossed to mark the altered
demeanour of each. Curiosity, or suspicion,
concerning this alteration, might have led to
the discovery of that secret promise to her
uncle, which Esse desired to preserve intact.

For once, therefore, the ruling passion of
Flora Grant was of service to others, but
only for once, for at that especial time, it
already had become a sore burthen to Esmr.
whose active mind, so soon as she had shaken
off the effects of her indisposition, suggested
many a loving deed to be performed in
memory of him, who had but just passed
away. Trifling as these deeds were in themselves,
the very performance of them would

have been of infinite comfort to Esse, in
those dreary days which preceded the funeral.
But they were perforce left undone.

Flora Grant no sooner became aware that
Esse was sufficiently recovered to leave her
room, than she peremptorily sent for her, and
from that hour insisted upon her constant
attendance. Esse gave it ungrudgingly.
It was not the " In Memoriam " her heart
dictated. The noisy lamentations, mixed
often with voluble plans for the future, were
almost a profanity, she thought ; while it was
with dismay that she learnt an edict of
banishment had been issued against Rachel
Tritton. Upon no pretence whatever would
Flora Grant permit Rachel to enter her
presence.

No, Esse, I will not see Rachel. Make
some excuse ; tell her to go away. She
reminds me so painfully of your poor, dear
uncle, that I cannot, I will not, have her in my
room. There are plenty of things to be done

downstairs, so why does she want to con
here? It is so like her to come knocking at
this door, so gauche. So foolish, too, to
make such a fuss, about that absurd little
fainting fit you had, and to pretend that
you ought not to sit up at night with me. Of
course you are the proper person to do so.
My maid would not be fit to do anything
for me all day, if I kept her up at night,
and I need so much attention just now. And
even if it were not so, I can trust you, more
than I can her, to keep awake all the time,
and to see that the lamps do not go out.
You are so strong, no fatigue hurts you, and
I could not close my eyes with your poor
uncle's dead body in the house, unless I was
quite positive that the lights were burning
and that, somebody close beside me was
awake, while I slept. I daresay Rachel Tritton
would do her best ; it is the fashion to
think her so good, but if good people were
all like her I should never care to have their

company. She is much too interfering ;
indeed, if I were not so crushed and sorrow-stricken,
I should say it was exceedingly impertinent
of her to propose that you should
go to bed, and that, meanwhile, she would
take your place. She will find things very
different by-and-by, when I am myself again."

By-and-by." There were no words in
all that tirade so grievous as these to Esse.
They fell constantly from the lips of Flora
Grant, now in threat, and then in an anticipation,
which almost seemed pleasurable.
The future, without " Uncle Ralph," was a
thought which Esse dared not face, a coming
evil of which she felt it impossible to speak.
No wonder, therefore, that she marvelled, and
was utterly unable to comprehend the workings
of a mind so completely unlike her own.

Loneliness, at that especial time, had no
peculiar terror for Esse, while it was awe, and
not fear, which possessed her, as she thought
of the form, now rigid, but which in life she

had held so dear. In very truth, she was far
more afraid of " by-and-by."

Nights of watchfulness, coupled with trying
days, did not, however, tend to strengthen
her for the solemn ordeal of the funeral, the
particulars of which it is needless to relate.
Such a relation would, perchance, but open
grief afresh on the one hand, while on the
other it might invoke a vision of sorrow to
come.

To flesh and blood, the time of burial must
needs be the darkest hour, in the dark days
of bereavement. Then it is, however, that
the Blessed Beams of our most Glorious Faith
shine with ineffable brightness into the bowed
hearts of the bereaved.

With a light resting upon her white face
which came of that faith, and with unspeakable
comfort therefrom nestling in her heart,
Esse turned from the flower-strewn grave.

It was all over. "Dust' had been given
back to dust," and the by-and-by, which

Esse so much dreaded, was very close at hand :
so close, indeed, that before many hours had
elapsed she found herself engulfed in all its
cares and perplexities. And yet neither she
nor Flora Grant were called upon to encounter
any of those peculiar trials and difficulties,
which the death of one individual too
often occasions.

Ralph Grant, with all his liberality had been
a careful man. His investments were safe ;
his will valid. By this will, the wealth of
Esse was considerably increased, while
Brashleigh Manor was absolutely and unconditionally
bequeathed to Flora Grant. Moreover,
the income with which she was endowed,
was sufficient to enable her not only to reside
therein, but also to maintain its splendour undiminished.


Unfortunately, these facts afforded her no
satisfaction. Her complaining was as ceaseless
as her wailing. Nothing was right, in her
estimation. Arrangements which had been

made should have been left unmade, and viceversa.
Accordingly, she lost no time in expressing
her hatred, not only of Brashleigh,
but of all things appertaining to it. Indeed, to
change its aspect as much as possible, and to
put out of sight everything both animate and
inanimate which had been either cherished or
prized by her husband, became her constant
aim and endeavour. Rooms underwent a
complete dismantling and re-arrangement,
servants were suddenly and remorselessly dismissed,
horses sold, dogs sent away, and a
perpetual sense of alteration kept up.

Nothing could be either more painful or more
distasteful to Esse, and thus it was, that there
arose for her unnecessary cares and trials.
Her spirit underwent a constant chafing,
which not even the oft repeated asseveration
of Flora Grant, that devotion alone to the
memory of the dead was the mainspring of
her actions, could soothe.

Esse was not wanting either in sense orin

forbearance. She did not need to be told
that grief affects different natures differently ;
while, on the other hand, she was more guileless
than suspicious. But the evidences of the
boasted devotion were so few, the tokens of
forgetfulness, even in those early days of
widowhood, so many and so manifest, that
Esse could not be blind to truths which were
so palpable.

Before long, Rachel Tritton was compelled,,
by the increased illness of Mrs. St. Vincent,
to take her departure. The hour came also
for Lord Oakdene to leave Brashleigh.

The absence of the former was a terrible
blow to Esse ; but that of the latter was in a
certain sense a relief to her. The freedom
of her intercourse with him had been
destroyed, and, in spite of her endeavour to
the contrary, a constraint had grown into
her manner towards him, which she was
powerless to prevent. She hoped he did
not observe it. She had no wish, by any

show of resentment, to perpetuate a remembrance
of an action, which she had promised
to forget. But strive as she might, she was
ill at ease with him. And, perhaps, the entire
loss of the gay and airy bearing, which had
formerly characterised him, was partly to
blame for this. If not a wiser, Lord Oakdene
was at any rate a sadder man, and he betrayed
his sadness unconsciously.

Repentance does not, all at once, eradicate a
fault, which has been for long encouraged and
held dear. Shame, maybe, bows the contrite
head very low in the first abasing moments of
remorse. But the keen abhorrence of the
evil, which has brought about the anguish,
blunts as time goes on. The bent head is re-lifted,
the sin appears less sinful, and old
habits strive again and again for the mastery.

It was just so with Lord Oakdene. For
weeks, nay, for months, he had accustomed
himself to have Esse in all his thoughts, to
dream of her, in a word, to love her, with

what restrictions and reservations the reader
already knows.

In his first paroxysm of despair, an utter
and absolute renunciation of his delusions, and
fond conceits, concerning her, seemed easy
enough. Its practice was a hundredfold
more difficult than he anticipated.

One blow, heavy although it was, could not
sever the chains, which he had with such persistence
twisted around himself. The twisting
of these fetters was vastly amusing and
pleasant, but when he tried to untwist them,
ah ! then, they galled and fretted him.

It is so easy to do — so difficult to undo —
so easy to deface — so hard to restore.

While over-estimating his strength of will,
Lord Oakdene had forgotten to think upon
these things. His mistake was at an end —
not so his tribulation.

When Esse, shrank away from his touch,
trembling and affrighted, he comprehended
instantaneously, not only his fault, but also

the folly of that fault. The scales fell
suddenly from his eyes. Nevertheless, the
love in his heart could not as instantaneously
be cast out. Shame could not smother it,
despair would not drown it. Bound and tied
by it, he was yet held fast, although he
struggled against it, and despised himself ashe
struggled.

It can scarcely be supposed, therefore,
either that he did not notice the alteration
in the manner of Esse, or that he was not
thereby inexpressibly pained. Made a coward
by his conscience, he saw intentional coldness
in her constraint, and, accordingly, he was,
if possible, more wretched than before.

The knowledge that his woe was of his own
creating did not lessen his suffering.

His actual farewell to Esse was brief. Ashe
held her hand in his, he felt it tremble. The
tremor was very slight ; the small hand very
soft and slender. Nevertheless, from out of
the slight tremor, and the touch of the small

soft hand, his conscience, which unhappily
was so guilty, called up a suspicion which
stung him as the fiery sting of a scorpion.

Esse, so he thought, was afraid of him —
afraid of him, as she had been that night,
when in the madness of his love he had
pressed burning kisses upon the golden ripples
of her hair ; — afraid of him — as he feared she
would be, from henceforth, through all her life.

Thus he read the nervousness she unconsciously
betrayed, and in so reading it, the
bitterness of that parting was to him more
bitter than the bitterness of death.

Letting go her hand suddenly, while his
own dropped powerlessly down, he murmured
a few sentences and withdrew.

Esse thought she understood the reason
of his abrupt leave taking ; but she did so in
part only. With a gentle sigh she returned
to her occupation ; while he, alone and unpitied,
went forth with his grief, to fight it out
as best he might.

AN UNLUCKY INVITATION.

Man proposes, and God disposes."

Trouble had reached Esse Montague, and
it had reached her without that tussle with
the two strong arms of which Arthur Greatorix
had made his boast.

Arthur was still absent, and the heart of
his young lady-love pined sorely for his return,
since in addition to her disturbance of
mind upon this point, his letters had ceased
to arrive. This might mean that he was on
his way home, but she was nervous, and could
scarcely gather rest from the supposition. It
needs not to be told that she received no help
from Flora Grant ; indeed, Esse rarely mentioned
the name of Arthur to her. So the
days grew very long and weary, so long, and
so weary, that sometimes she was tempted to

doubt her own identity. Only one short
month had elapsed since the death of her
uncle, and what a change had already taken
place at Brashleigh !

Familiar faces had one by one disappeared,
until neither among guests nor menials could
Esse find those she knew. For pompous as
were the trappings and external paraphernalia
of woe with which Flora Grant surrounded
herself, she soon declared that the society
of Esse alone was too terribly triste to
be endured, and in accordance with this
declaration she had gathered several friends
and relatives around her. There was nothing
to be urged against this. Once Esse suggested,
that — for a few weeks, at any rate —
perfect solitude, she thought, was better suited
to such early days of bereavement ; but she
was peremptorily silenced. She could do
nothing, therefore, to alter matters. The
strangers came and went. Esse was scarcely
noticed by them, and she soon found that

VOL. II. C

her old home, as a home, was fast slipping
from her. Flora Grant was mistress of it, as
she was before, but she wielded her sceptre
more mercilessly. Absolute power had by no
means tended to soften the peculiarities of
her disposition. As a consequence, Esse
would have been forlorn in the extreme, but for
that oasis in the desert, the ever-present hope
of the arrival of Arthur. Unbounded, therefore,
was her consternation, when one morning
Flora Grant asked suddenly —

What did I hear you saying so impressively
to Lord Oakdene, Esse, a little while
before he left ? "

Esse coloured. To tell the truth, she
had forgotten what it was that she had said,
and for reasons which were really best known
to herself, the sudden question, coupled with
his name, startled her. Hence the tell-tale
colour.

11 I almost forget," she replied, after a
little hesitation.

Perhaps that is rather convenient than
otherwise," was the sarcastic rejoinder;
i( but I think I can assist your memory, if
you will allow me."

Thank you," returned Esse, coldly, inwardly
wondering what was coming next, and
feeling more angry than she knew the occasion
warranted.

Flora Grant drew forth a very broad-hemmed
pocket-handkerchief, which she ostentatiously
applied to her eyes, but as Esse did not
appear to take the hint of falling tears, which
this action was intended to convey, Flora Grant
began to sob. Such was her wont, when,
under pressure of some particularly provoking
nature, Esse allowed a certain amount of
hauteur to escape in her voice.

The sight and sound of weeping generally
mollifies the heart of the hardest individual.

Esse was by no means lacking in tenderness,
besides which, she accredited Flora
Grant with far more mental suffering than

she actually underwent. Consequently it was
with considerable self-reproach that, drawing
closer to her, Esse said affectionately —

I did not mean to vex you, Aunt Flora,
but, at the moment of your enquiry, I could not
recollect what the conversation was about
which I last held with Lord Oakdene."

The services of the pocket-handkerchief

were dispensed with, the sobs subsided with

suspicious rapidity, and Flora Grant replied —

It was not a conversation simply, it was

an invitation."

11 An invitation!" repeated Esse feeling
very much taken aback by the assertion.

That is what I said, Esse. You need
not repeat my words. I spoke distinctly
enough, I am sure. Perhaps, however, I had
better say it over again. It was an invitation,
and it is because it was such that I wish
to speak to you upon the matter. If it had
not been given to a blood relation of my own,
whom I particularly like, it would have been

unpardonable. As it is, I should have reprimanded
you before, if I had not felt myself
to be unequal to the task ; I am so shattered
in mind and body. Do not open your eyes
so wide, and pretend to look so amazed ; it
startles me."

Esse could almost have found it in her
heart to smile at the peevishness of the concluding
sentence, but the sense of desolation
sat upon her too heavily. The accusation
was just. She had opened her eyes very
widely, and she had looked amazed, but both
the opening of her eyes and her betrayed
amazement arose from a very different cause
to that which Flora Grant supposed.

All at once it had dawned upon Esse
that the charge brought against her was
correct.

In the few constrained moments which had
immediately preceded the departure of Lord
Oakdene, Esse remembered that she had, in
an awkward incoherent fashion, mumbled

something to him about coming again when
Arthur returned to England.

The words had escaped her out of kindness,
and were repented of almost as soon as they
were uttered. Lord Oakdene had not appeared
to notice them ; at any rate, he took
no advantage of them.

She was alone with him at the time, and
the whole circumstance had been so casual
and inadvertent, that Esse was lost in
astonishment at two points in connection
with it ; her first wonderment being how anybody
besides Lord Oakdene and herself could
know anything about the matter, and the
second what possible importance could be
attached to her unlucky words ?

So she had involuntarily opened her pretty
eyes, and looked amazed.

They say that "listeners never hear any
good of themselves." It is a homely proverb,
but it would not have been entirely out of
place, upon the present occasion, had Esse

applied it. Very far, however, was it from
her unsuspicious mind, although busy thoughts
kept her silent. Flora Grant fidgeted, and
the ever-available pocket-handkerchief was
very nearly forthcoming again. Impatience,
however, got the better of emotion.

You would sit there staring for the next
twelvemonth, I verily believe, Esse, if I were
to allow it. The slightest shoulders always
have the heaviest burthens to bear ; it is very
hard that you should turn round upon me in
this manner. Ever since the death of your poor
dear uncle, you have been quite different " —

Only because I have been so unhappy,
and I miss him so much," interrupted Esse,
in a soft, low voice.

The pocket-handkerchief came out now
with a tremendous wave of despair.

How unkind — how — how — how cruel —
how — how — dreadfully cru — cruel you are ! '

Here the sobbing became so violent, that
in alarm Esse flew for some sal-volatile, and

pouring some into a wine-glass, which she
half filled with water, she held it to the lips
of Flora Grant, saying meanwhile —

Do not let us talk any more, Aunt Flora ;
I am so unfortunate this morning ; I keep
grieving you when I have no intention of
doing so. I am so very, very sorry."

But her gentle words and ministrations
met with no acceptance.

11 What — what — is — the use — of — of —
being sorry when — when — the thing is done, —
and how — how — can you — you — talk to me —
me about — about — missing — missing your
poor dear — dear uncle — just — just — as if — as
if — I didn't miss — miss him more — more than
you do."

Yes, yes, dear Aunt Flora ; of course
you must. I did not, for one moment, mean
to imply anything to the contrary. My lois
very, very great, but yours, I know, is ten

times greater and harder to bear.

"Ten times! It bears no comparison at

all," interrupted Flora Grant captiously, and
still sobbing noisily.

No," sighed Esse, afraid to say more
lest she should unwittingly give fresh offence.
Sobs are not commonly considered to be
infectious ; nevertheless, she had a hard
matter to choke back sundry convulsive
spasms in her throat, which bore to sobs a
very close resemblance.

They were struggled with, however, and they
were conquered, even as they had more than
once, of late, been fought against and vanquished.
Perhaps there was more of pride
than of heroism in the fact, since Esse would
have submitted to almost any discomfort
rather than run the chance of the misinterpretation,
which she knew her tears would in all
probability meet with, from Flora Grant. All
outward signs of emotion were, therefore,
quickly gulped down, the visible demonstration
thereof being left to Flora Grant.

Violent storms are often soonest over, soin

a little time, Flora Grant was calm again.
Then she renewed her attack.

That invitation was an impertinence upon
your part. I wish you to remember that, in
future, no one is to be asked to come here,
except by my expressed desire, or permission.
Nothing could be more forward, and ridiculous,
than for you to press Lord Oakdene to
repeat his visit, as you did."

By this time, Esse had become too indignant,
either to admit that the fact of this same
invitation had returned to her memory, or to
attempt any self justification with regard to
the wrong statement, that she had been pressing
upon the point. So much, in fact, was
being made of her offence, if such it could be
called, that Esse felt considerably injured.
Mistaking the absence of speech for an acknowledgment
of the justice of her remarks,
Flora Grant continued —

I am glad you see it in the right light,
Esse. Your poor, dear uncle spoilt you

dreadfully, or I should not take it so easily.
You are hardly to blame for not knowing
better."

You do not mean to blame Uncle Ralph,
because I have been thoughtless," interposed
Esse inquiringly, and with a solemn pleading
in her big eyes, which seemed to say " Upbraid
me, if you like, but do not breathe a
hint of reproach against Uncle Ralph."

Did I say so, Esse ? Did I say anything
at all like it ? You are more headstrong and
violent than ever, and since you are so fond
of bringing in your uncle's name, which you
know upsets and distresses me more than
anything else, and which is, I suppose, the
reason why you do it, I should like just to
ask you what you think he would say, if he
knew how unkind you are, and how badly you
behave to me. Some day, perhaps, you will
lose your husband, and then you " —

But Mrs. Grant had apparently exhausted
her ideas, for she stopped abruptly. Her

widow's dress shielded her from anything like
a retort. It rendered her very sacred in the
eyes of Esse. Whatever she felt, she never
reproached Flora Grant, and that lady had
grown very garrulously valiant from the fact.
It was a one-sided battle, therefore, but the
laying down of arms of the attacked, only
whetted the appetite for further onslaught
upon the part of the attacked. Flora Grant
had not done with Esse yet.

While I think of it, Esse, I may as well
tell you that I mean to go abroad next week.
I have made every possible alteration here,
and there is nothing left to interest me. You
generally object to whatever I propose, but, in
this instance, I do not think you can do so. I
am not at all well, and although I am the last
person in the world to think of myself or my
ailments, I must do so now. Change of scene
will help me to recover my lost health and
spirits. You will, of course, come with me.

I have also arranged for some relatives of mine
to accompany us."

Flora Grant paused.

Esse knew that her answer was being
awaited, or rather, perhaps, that she was expected
to say something. When she spoke, it
was so quietly, that it would have been difficult
for anyone to have guessed how great an
effort the words cost her.

I cannot leave Brashleigh, until Arthur
comes back, but perhaps he will be here before
next week."

Esse spoke, as it has been already said,
very quietly, but there was a ring of determination
in her voice, which did not escape
the notice of Flora Grant. She looked up
angrily —

I will not allow any plans of mine to be
interfered with by Arthur Greatorix. I
wonder, Esse, that you have the indelicacy to
mention him. Do you wish to remain here

alone, and to entertain him and Lord Oakdene
aux prince, while I am wandering about
wretched, ill, and lonely?"

The picture thus drawn was neither truthful
nor skilful. It failed, therefore, to produce
an effect, but the heart of Esse was beating
wildly, nevertheless. She essayed another
protest.

There are many papers to be signed by
me, which cannot be signed until Arthur
comes, and the lawyer told me, yesterday, that
they ought to be attended to as quickly
as possible."

Lawyers are uncommonly fond of talking,
particularly when they know they are going
to be well paid for what they say. For my
own part, I never listen to them. I am not
very likely, therefore, to attend to the secondhand
information with which you have just
favoured me, " rejoined Flora Grant, impatiently.


Could you postpone your start for a

week or two?" Esse ventured to enquire
timidly.

Certainly not. Why do you ask ? "

Because of Arthur ; " faltered Esse. It
was the simple truth, and she saw no motive
for its concealment.

"Arthur! — a runaway lover!" ejaculated
Flora Grant, contemptuously.

Oh, Aunt Flora, Aunt Flora !" cried Esse,
in her extremity ; every woman will understand
her distress.

"Yes, a runaway lover! I use the term
advisedly. What else can he be called ? If
you had an atom of proper feeling, you would
have broken off your engagement with him
long ago."

But " — interposed Esse, clasping tightly
together her hands, which trembled violently,
and about to plead the name and sanction
of her uncle, for all that she had done with
regard to Arthur. She was not however
permitted to speak.

<l There is no possible ' but,' in the matter.
You are going, I feel convinced, to mention
your poor uncle. I am quite aware that he
pretended to be perfectly satisfied, when he
found that Arthur Greatorix had gone away
that morning, but it w r as only upon your
account. Your uncle knew that you were
obstinately bent upon being married, so, of
course, he said nothing. We may wait here
Ion or enough, if we wait for the return of Arthur
Greatorix. A man who could slip away like
that, is not very likely to trouble us much with
his society ; only, if I were you Esse, I
should take the initiative, and give him his
cone before he gives you yours. I desire
that you will make your arrangements to come
abroad with me at the time I have named.
Arthur Greatorix is not worth the waiting of
a single hour."

Esse looked up at her aunt, and said
steadily —

You do not understand Arthur; indeed,

you have never done so. It is not right, or
fair, to speak of him in this manner, when he
is absent. I cannot allow even you, to do so,
Aunt Flora."

A sarcastic lausfh greeted these words. It
checked the eloquence of Esse. Ridicule is
very trying to the young, and after all, she
was little more than a child in years ; while,
in the matter of worldly strife and axioms,
she was a very baby.

As the sweet wild rose of our native hedges
puts forth its delicate tendrils and for support
clings closely to the stronger branches, by
which it is surrounded, so Esse had put
forth the treasures of her pure affections, and
clung confidingly to those who loved her. In
her childhood Ralph Grant had stood between
her and all its incidental griefs, and when, as
womanhood dawned, Arthur Greatorix told
her of his love, she accepted it trustfully ;
while the tell-tale blush upon her cheek,
together with her shy whisper, gave him

VOL. II. D

some token, that as his heart had gone
forth to hers, so hers had stolen out to him.

From that hour she had been doubly
shielded, not only from the world and its evil,
but also from all knowledge of the same.

The " trail of the serpent' was made
manifest to her, by Flora Grant.

When Esse heard the sarcastic laugh
with which her temperate defence of her
lover was received, her heart gave a great
throb of indignation. But Flora Grant was
too quick for her. She saw at a glance the
scorn which was written upon the burning
face of Esse, and she was afraid ; so much
afraid, that she ran away. In other words,
she rose from her seat, and rang the bell.
Her maid answered the summons immediately.
Thus the silence of Esse was made a matter
of compulsion, while the cowardice of Flora
Grant was successful.

To most of us there comes, sooner or latera
moment in life, when we feel as if all the

world was against us ; and a very wretched
moment it is. Such an one came to Esse
Montague, as the trim abigail entered the
room, and, at the bidding of her mistress,
commenced an occupation, which must of
necessity keep her there for some time.

Esse understood the ruse perfectly, but it
did not lighten her unhappiness.

Injustice and tyranny are crying evils.
Esse found them very hard to bear patiently,
not only then, but also afterwards, when the
hot flush of indignation, to which they had
given rise, had died out.

THE GAUNTLET PICKED UP.

ESME made one more attempt to arrive at a
better understanding with Flora Grant.

The result was a signal failure. Three
things were fixed upon, with a determination
which threatened to be as unalterable as the
laws of the Modes and Persians.

Flora Grant would not remain at Brashleigh
Manor ; she would leave at the time she had
named ; and she would not say to what place,
or places, she was bound.

This last clause would have been perfectly
overwhelming to Esse, but for the opportune
circumstance that Flora Grant virtually over-did
herself in unkindness, by saying —

11 I can get on just as well without you as
with you, Esse. In fact, I often find that

you rather depress me than otherwise. There
are plenty of people, who would be only too
glad to go with me, if they had the chance, soif
you would like to go to the Wycombes, or
to any of your other gay friends, pray do so.
Do not consider me. I, of course, loathe the
very thought of anything like gaiety or
amusement. But I can see that it is very
different with you. Beyond forbidding you
to remain here, I wish to set no restriction
upon your movements, and, upon second
thoughts, I really think I should prefer to go
abroad without you."

The " second thoughts" were not complimentary
to Esse. Notwithstanding her
tribulation concerning the arrival of Arthur,
she would rather, have felt that she was of
some comfort, or at least some use, to Flora
Grant. It is never pleasant to be easily dispensed
with, and coolly set aside ; and in this
instance, Esse had striven with much patience
to soothe many a fretful hour, hoping thereby

to win in return a little consideration, if not
affection, from Flora Grant.

A good many bitter tears, therefore, fell from
the eyes of Esse, when she found herself
alone, but after awhile she took courage, and
looked her position in the face, with all the
steadiness of which she was mistress.

It was rather a case, perhaps, of Aunt
Flora versus Arthur Greatorix, which Esse
strove to argue out fairly with herself. It
possessed manifold intricacies, and thereby
her mind was considerably exercised. At last,
it resulted in the following letter being written
to Rachel Tritton.

Brashleigh Manor,

October, 18—.
"My Dear Rachel,

You once told me that it is never
very safe to follow where inclination leads.
I remember your precept, perfectly, you see,
but I am afraid I cannot practise it. I must
write to you, and I must ask you to do something

for me, and I am doing, in both these
things, just exactly what my inclination bids
me. But don't give me up as hopeless. I
am so unhappy, so very, very unhappy, dear
Rachel ! I do not think I have been so completely
miserable, since Uncle Ralph went
away, as I am now. I have a great deal to
explain to you, so you must not mind a long
letter. In the first place, Aunt Flora is going
abroad next week. When she first told me
about it, I was dreadfully distressed, because
Arthur has not yet returned, and I felt as if
I could not leave Brashleigh until he came
back. And then, too, it seemed so dreadful
to be going away, when there are so many
things to be done here, which I feel sure
Uncle Ralph would like us to have done !
However, after a little reflection, I saw that,
of course, Aunt Flora ought to be my first
consideration, so I went to her again, and
asked her if she would kindly stay here just
one week longer, by which time, I feel almost

certain, Arthur will be here ; but she would
not listen to me. So then I enquired where
she intended to go, because you know, dear
Rachel, I did wish so very much to be able
to leave instructions, by which Arthur might
be able to follow us without delay. Again,
however, I was disappointed, as Aunt Flora
has not yet settled upon any particular place.
I could not think, at first, what to do, and I
was almost in despair, when Aunt Flora gave
me to understand that, provided I did not
remain here, she would rather I did not accompany
her. This grieved me a good deal,
because I do love her, for the sake of poor
Uncle Ralph, but I have no doubt she will be
happier with her own relations than with me.
I am afraid there are a great many contradictions
in this wonderful epistle of mine, and
no wonder, for my mind is full of them. I
want to be of use to Aunt Flora, and I want
to stay here because of Arthur. I want to
be at home when he returns. Three ' wants,'

you see, almost in a breath, dear Rachel, and

all of them are very pressing, I assure you.

And now I am coming to a very important part

of my letter. If Aunt Flora really goes away,

and should still think that she prefers my

absence to my society, may I come to you?

Pray say * no ' if I should inconvenience you

in the smallest degree ; and forget all about

my request, should Mrs. St. Vincent be more

than usually unwell. With much love, dear

Rachel,

u Your ever affectionate

Esse Montague."

This letter caused no small flutter of excitement
to Rachel Tritton. That the
queenly Esse, in the magnificence of her
beauty and elegance, should become the
inhabitant of the tiny cottage, which formed
the abode of Mrs. St. Vincent and herself,
seemed to Rachel rather like the unreality of
a fairy legend, than the substantiality of an
actually desired fact. Her first business was

to inspect with critical eyes the various
appointments of their diminutive drawing-room,
and the next, leaving her breakfast
untasted, to proceed to that chamber, which
the limited staff of domestics termed the
11 spare bedroom."

There was not anything in the appearance
of either apartment to cause her dismay. They
were fresh and orderly to a faultless degree,
with plenty of books and china, and tasteful
arrangements of various kinds ; the combined
treasures, in point of fact, of both Mrs. St.
Vincent, and Rachel.

Cottages are not expected to vie with
mansions in luxurious appointments, but saving
want of space, there was nothing, in this
cottage home of Rachel Tritton's, to which
the most fastidious of mortals could object.
Satisfied that it was so, Rachel drew a long
breath of relief, and, still without touching
her breakfast, commenced a second perusal

of the epistle, which she had received from
her young friend.

She read it more slowly this time, read, as
it were, between the lines, and she gathered
much additional information by the process.
The character of Mrs. Grant was no enigma
to Rachel. Consequently, Rachel knew that
the letter hid as much as it revealed. She
understood not only the pain which Esse
must be suffering from the violence of her
conflicting emotions, but also the amount of
self-restraint and patience, which were needed
for a close attendance upon Mrs. Grant.

Rachel's heart ached for Esse ; for all that
she had been so suddenly called upon to
encounter, and, with a good deal of astonishment,
she mused over the information, that
Arthur Greatorix had not yet returned.
True, those were not the days when foreign
telegrams sped the news of weal and woe
with lightning-like rapidity to the absent,

but, even to the calm judgment of Rachel,
it seemed that he made long tarrying.
Doubtless she was more impatient for
Esse than she would have been for herself,
and she sighed almost as heavily as if the
absent lover were her own.

Mr. Greatorix had gone to Gibraltar.
Important business matters had unexpectedly
called him suddenly thither."

Such was the dictum, which had been propounded
to the inmates of Brashleigh Manor
by its master, when he made known to them
the departure of Arthur Greatorix.

Rachel received the unexpected announcement
in perfect faith. But, she was beginning
to wonder thereat, now that the event, of
which it told, had become a thing of the past.
From the distance, which was given to it by
time, the view began to change a little, and
the alteration, was scarcely, perhaps, advantageous
to Arthur Greatorix.

The dark side of life, all unknown though

it was to Esse Montague, was no sealed page
to Rachel Tritton. In her ministrations to
the sick, and the sorrow stricken, many a tale
of treachery and falsehood had been poured
into her gentle ear. Thus she knew how closely
good and evil grow together in this changing
world of ours, how impossible it is sometimes,
to tell the wheat from the tares. Compared
with Esse, she was, in one sense, but in
one sense only, a woman of the world. The
knowledge of evils, of which Esse had never
even heard, had by the very goodness of the
charitable works in which Rachel engaged,
been made patent to her. Roses, she knew,
were often blighted ; the fairest fruits unsound
at the core.

Wherefore, notwithstanding her liking for
Arthur Greatorix, there crept, all unbidden, into
her mind a dark shadow of uneasiness respecting
him. This shadow was deepened by the
letter which arrived from Esse.

It was with much tenderness, therefore, and

with a touch of additional anxiety mingled
with the tenderness that Rachel prepared to
answer the letter. The answer read as
follows —

Sunnyside,

— October, 18—.
My Dearest Esse,

If anything could solace me
for knowing that you are troubled, it rests in
the fact of your kind proposal to come and
pay us a visit. Mrs. St. Vincent has had
another marvellous rally, and she, and I, are
both longing to welcome you here. Our
house is the veriest nutshell, as I think I have
often told you, but it is large enough to hold
a vast amount of delight, or it could not contain
me to-day. Indeed, while my heart aches
with thinking of your several causes for
sorrow, I am overjoyed at the prospect of
soon seeing you again. Come to us, dear
child, whenever you like, only, (I feel I must
whisper it) should Mrs. Grant change her

mind even at the eleventh hour, and wish for
your society, put us off, and accompany her.
It will be better so. Mr. Greatorix will find
you, without difficulty, never fear. He runs
no chance, I feel sure, of sharing a fate similar
to that of Longfellow's hapless heroine, Evangeline,
so do not be uneasy.

With earnest prayers for your welfare,
and much true love,

Believe me, always,
Your faithful, loving friend,

11 Rachel Tritton."

This production cost Rachel much consideration.
Her pen was apt to be glib
enough, but in this instance it had lagged
continually. Afraid of saying too much, she
feared that she had fallen into the opposite
error, and accordingly she was exceedingly
dissatisfied with her composition. There was
only one point about it for self congratulation,
she thought, and that was to be found in the
fact that, she had not let slip any of her

newly awakened misgivings, respecting Arthur
Greatorix.

On the other hand, the expressions of
sympathy for the trials which were besetting
Esse, seemed stiff and cold, as words,
especially written words, will often seem,
when the heart which dictates them is
more than ordinarily full of warmth. Then
again, Rachel feared that her advice with
regard to Mrs. Grant would read over prudish
to Esse. Rachel had a great mind to rewrite
her letter, and in so doing, to leave out
the objectionable sentence altogether. Butin
the end her judgment was in favour of that
sentence, and so the letter was sent, advice
and all.

There was no need for so much anxious
consideration about the matter. Esse was
perfectly satisfied with every syllable which
her friend had written.

Armed with these syllables, Esse opened a
conversation with Flora Grant, and Flora Grant,

truth to tell, was nothing loth again to discuss,
the pros and cons for leaving Brashleigh.
She was quite unprepared, however, for the
information which awaited her.

Visiting the " Wycombes," or other " gay
friends," was a gauntlet, which Flora Grant
had thrown down to Esse, without the faintest
conception of its being looked at, much less of
its being picked up. The mere suggestion of
it, she imagined, was enough to cow Esse,
and she had pleased herself, by picturing the
scene which would ensue, when Esse, driven
to subjection, should entreat to be allowed to
form one of the travelling party ; an entreaty
which was of course, to be denied.

Moreover, Flora Grant had been hastening
her preparations, and had settled with those
relatives, who had agreed to accompany her, to
start a good two days earlier than she originally
proposed. So that for more than one reason,
she was particularly gracious, when Esse

VOL. II. E

broached the subject of going away. But,
Flora Grant was not equally gracious when she
discovered, that with the exception of ignoring
the adjective, " gay," Esse had taken her at
her word, and had arranged to sojourn with
11 friends," instead of quitting her native land.

The name of Rachel Tritton was of itself
generally potent enough to call forth
disparaging remarks from the lips of the
prosperous Mrs. Grant. Upon the present
occasion very bitter were the sneers which
it evoked.

11 It is past belief, Esse, that you can dream
of such a thing. I expect Rachel Tritton
lives in some wretched hovel. What do you
think Finette will say, when she finds out that
we are connected with such people? "

I have no intention of taking Finette with
me, " remarked Esse, quietly.

Flora Grant almost screamed, so great washer
dismay.

"Not take Finette! Go without a maid'

You are a positive disgrace, Esse. I will not
allow it. , You must," —

Come with me," she was going to add,
but she checked herself in time. The hope
of the scene, in which Esse was to be so
signally worsted, had given place to a conclusion,
(foregone it is true) that enjoyment
would be much more likely to be attainable
in a tour without Esse, than with her. So
after a slight hesitation, Flora Grant resumed
—

You must have a maid. It is all nonsense,
unless, indeed, you have engaged the
valuable services of Rachel Tritton."

It was no metaphorical blush which these
words occasioned, but a real bond fide roseate
hue, and it dyed the cheek of Esse with its
bright tints. She blushed both for Flora
Grant, and at the insult to her friend, but
most of all for Flora Grant, who, by the way,
had no thought of such a weakness for herself.
Disdaining an actual reply, Esse said —

LIBRARY
UNIVERSE

11 My old nurse, Marie, is willing to go with
me. I shall get on very well with her. She
is the only one left, of all the old servants ; it
would break her heart if she was separated
from me."

Your hair!" gasped Mrs. Grant, really
horror-stricken at the prospect of the coiffures
to which Esse was dooming herself.

Esse could not help smiling, as she replied
—

Never mind my hair, Aunt Flora.
Finette shall give Marie a lesson or two in
hair-dressing, before we start. A French maid,
and I must confess not a particularly useful
specimen of her order, would be terribly in
the way at Rachel's, you know."

Flora Grant vouchsafed no reply. She had
not the smallest desire to keep Esse with her.
On the contrary she now keenly desired her
absence, but she was provoked beyond
measure, that Esse should have found so
pleasant a way out of her difficulties.

Self, however, which invariably predominated
with Flora Grant, warned her not to
interfere with plans which, if set aside, might
clash with her own. Therefore, with a few
more remarks, which were derogatory alike to
Mrs. St. Vincent, Rachel, and Esse, she
entrenched herself in a sulky fit of silence.
Esse took especial care not to arouse her
therefrom. The quiet which it created was
too agreeable an exchange to be trifled with.
Not an unwary word, or sound, therefore,
escaped the lips of Esse.

Flora Grant was the first to grow restless,
under the spell of taciturnity which had
arisen. With a slight prefatory whimper, she
said —

(( Life is very short, Esse, and after the —
the warning we have had, you ought to learn
to be more amiable. You must take your
own course, but some day, I think you will
repent of what you are doing now."

In the indulgence of this unwonted effusion

of sentiment, Flora Grant forgot whither her
speech was leading her. Esse saw it at a
glance. Her voice trembled a little, but she
said earnestly —

I am quite ready to give up everything,
and to go with you, if you wish it, Aunt
Flora."

"And a pretty time I should have, if I took
you at your word. No, thank you, Esse !
you have settled it your own way, and so
let it be."

"It could all be altered quite easily. I
have not yet posted my second letter to
Rachel," murmured poor Esse in sore tribulation.


Nothing is to be altered," cried Flora
Grant sharply, a nervous fear assailing her
that she had pushed matters a trifle too far,
and that by so doing, she had driven Esse to
consider it her bounden duty to give up her
stay with Rachel Tritton.

And the giving up of this visit, Flora Grant

well knew would mean an intention upon the
part of Esse to accompany her whithersoever
she might choose to go.

This must be checked at once. Therefore
she repeated emphatically —

Nothing is to be altered — nothing changed.
I am very tired, Esse, so please do not worry
me any more, either about what you will, or
what you will not, do."

Esse felt that she had been hardly treated.
A few kindly, straightforward words would
have saved her from much pain, but then,
kindly, straightforward words were moral
wares, in which Flora Grant did not deal.

WILL HE RETURN ?

FOR the next two or three days Flora Grant
wore the air of a person, who was deeply
engaged in weighty matters.

Mysterious interviews with her maid, following
closely upon the arrival of numberless
milliner's boxes and baskets, kept her closely
engaged. She did not, therefore, see much
of Esse. During the brief periods that they
were in the society of each other, it was well
for the preservation of harmony, that their
respective reflections were confined to their
own knowledge.

In the bosom of each fair dame the image
of Arthur Greatorix reigned supreme, butin
so different a form that, could it have
been revealed by some fairy's wand, it

scarcely would have been recognised for one
and the same. To Flora Grant, it was a
very bete noire, a Cyclops, an impersonation
of dread and dislike ; while the thoughts,
which, like a motto, ran round it, might be
summed up thus, " Keep back. Do not
return yet. Let me get off first."

Very, very, different were both image and
thoughts to Esse ; different as moonlight to
sunlight, bitter to sweet.

To her, the image was the embodiment of
Adonis, made most glorious by the enchantments
of Cupid ; while the motto, with which
she entwined it, was not only longer, and more
pathetic, than that with which Flora Grant
embellished her image, but it was also oft
repeated. It ran thus —

Come back, Arthur, my own old Arthur,
make haste, come back before we go ; before
the dear old house be deserted, and the grave
of Uncle Ralph left to the care of strangers."

But Arthur did not come.

Fear was groundless, on the one hand ;
hope was unfulfilled, upon the other.

Every morning, the arrival of the post
brought a fresh access of emotion to both
Flora Grant and Esse Montague. The postbag
emptied, the former grew calm again, the
latter, more grave, and dispirited.

The ordeal of those last few days, at
Brashleigh, was inexpressibly trying to Esse.
Approaching carriage wheels, in a word,
sounds of all description, set her heart
throbbing with expectation, while her pale
cheek, and pensive mien, told plainly of oft-repeated
disappointment.

If Arthur only knew," she whispered
again and again to herself, "if he only knew,
he would come to me directly."

Thus whispering, she paid her farewell
visit to many a haunt beloved and dear to
both of them, many a nook and dell, many a
soft slope and woodland thick ; while the
autumn wind, as it gently sighed around her,

seemed in harmony with the care which
enveloped her young spirit. None cared
whither she went, except Nurse Marie. To her,
the sight of the slim, girlish figure, clad in
mourning, stealing softly to and fro, was
heart-breaking ; while to hide her emotion
many were the lectures, upon the dangers of
damp grass, and fallen leaves, with which the
good old nurse would follow and assail her
young mistress.

Of the many who had admired, courted,
and loved Esse, Marie alone was left at
Brashleigh.

Long years before, Marie and Esse had
arrived at Brashleigh together, for it was
Marie who had led Esse from the garden at
Matlock, when, she first attracted the notice
of Ralph Grant, as the little butterfly-chaser.
From that time to the present Marie had been
devoted to Esse. In fact nurse and charge
had never been separated, so that even Flora
Grant, in her ruthless work of change and dismissal,

stayed her hand when she came to
Marie, and passed her by.

Rachel Tritton was by no means sorry,
when she found that Finette was not to
accompany Esse. The importation of a
fashionable French maid into her primitive
abode, was a somewhat alarming idea to
Rachel, although she had scarcely confessed
as much even to herself.

While Flora Grant was busied with travelling
dresses, and foreign Bradshaw ; while
Esse, with sighs for an absent lover, was
wandering dejectedly through bower and
grove, Rachel was busily preparing for the
reception of her guest.

Manifold were the touches of improvement
which her quick fingers effected. Pink ribbons
here, fresh lace and muslin there, now a long
covered piece of needlework to be displayed,
then a china bowl to be moved, from its 
of years, and placed in a more
alluring position.

All was complete at last. Love had
finished its task, and the morrow was to
bring Esse to Sunnyside. The morrow —
ah, what an anticipation it is sometimes,
what a dread at others !

Dreaded by Esse, this particular morrow
found her wide awake, when the first gleam of
the rising sun stole into her chamber. The
beautiful dawn, with its purple lights and rosy
splendour, brought no joy to her restless heart,
but rather, a horrible conviction that the
doom, from which she had been shrinking
with such abject fear, during the past few
days, had overtaken her. It was next to a
miracle that Arthur would arrive before she
left Brashleigh. She had clung to the hope
of meeting him there, how desperately, her
present distress plainly informed her. Not
even the prospect of soon again beholding
Rachel, saved the snowy pillow-case from
receiving a shower of pearly tear drops from
the eyes of Esse, before Marie arrived to see

if all were well with her, upon this, the morning
of their intended journey together.

Rachel Tritton resided in a village, which
was some six miles distant from the ancient
city of Canterbury. Consequently, an early
start was necessary for the travellers. To
London, through London, and then again
from London, to say nothing of the six miles
by carriage, when the railway transit was
over, made altogether a journey of some
length, so far as time went. Moreover, the
days were growing short. So half-past ten
was the hour, at which it had been arranged
over-night, that Esse and Marie should
start.

The appointed moment came soon enough,
to one of them at least. Flora Grant, who
was to remain at Brashleigh two hours longer,
was too much excited, and too much taken
up with her relations, either to weep or to
bestow many parting words upon Esse.
The adieux within the house, therefore, were

soon over. Not so brief, however, were those,
which awaited Esse from without its walls.

The carriage had scarcely proceeded a
quarter of a mile through the park, when a
girl, with a baby in her arms, and which she
held aloft towards the carriage, rushed forward,
crying passionately —

Bless my baby, please miss, afore you go.
I have ruined over two miles to catch a
sight of you, an' I feared I should be too
late."

The figure, and the voice attracted the
notice of Esse. The check-string was
pulled, and, deaf to the remonstrance of
Marie, Esse alighted, and in another moment
had taken the baby from its mother.

God bless you, miss. My baby '11 do now
he will ; he'll carry the touch of you all
through his life — a brave boy it will make my
lad — a good boy — an' he'll show his mother's
shame was no shame — he will — God bless
you, miss. I couldn't rest in my bed, no, nor

I couldn't have rested in my grave, if it had
been the will o' the Almighty to lay me there,
if I hadn't seen you again, miss ; if, oh ! if,
you hadn't blessed my baby."

Hush, hush, Nellie ! you must not talk so
wildly," said Esse, while tears, which she
could not repress, rolled down her cheeks.

Nellie was quick to notice them.

And you've had trouble, too, miss, an' I
never snowed it. When I was laid by, I did
nothing but listen for the fall of your foot,
when I should have been praying to the great
God to help you. I never thought as sorrow
could come nigh you, miss. I never did. I
could as leave think of the birds without a
song as your lip without a smile. I thought
it was only for such as me that tears was
made — me, what has been deceived and disbelieved
— but your's is different, ain't they,
miss — your tears is soft-like, not bitter, like
mine ? No one hasn't been an' deceived you,
miss, has they?" asked the girl, creeping

nearer to Esse, and scanning her face with
indescribable eagerness.

No, no, Nellie ! " returned Esse quickly,
and yet with a sigh. " No, no ! " she
repeated more emphatically, although her
tears dropped down faster than before.

A faint echo of the question, which she
thus negatived, reverberated through her own
mind. By speech, she thought to silence it.
Did she ? Ah ! who can tell ?

By her speech, she had at any rate satisfied
Nellie.

I am glad of that, miss, aye, an' I am
thankful too — not that anyone could harm
you, God wouldn't let 'em. He blesses all
things pure an' beautiful — an' just look at my
boy, miss, he don't cry, my boy don't, an' he's
wide awake, an' looking on you, an' he never
saw you afore, miss, did he ? He knows as
what I'm a saying is true — he's a blessing
you, he is, miss, I know he is, and his good
Angel is a telling of him how."

VOL. II. F

These last words were uttered slowly and
reverently. Nevertheless, Nellie was an outcast.
Not an outcast in the common acceptation
of the term, but she had been mercilessly
thrust from her step-father's roof, as worthless
and undutiful. Her sad story may be
briefly sketched.

Although she had resided for some few
years upon the Brashleigh Manor Estate,
neither she nor her parents were natives of
Leicestershire. Hence the freedom of her
speech from the peculiar provincialisms of the
county. Her own father died in her infancy,
and her mother, who quickly re-married, only
survived her first husband for three years.

Thus the little Nellie was left at a very
early age to the tender mercies of a stepfather.
For a time all went tolerably well
with her. But before long her step-father
contracted a second marriage, and from the
period of that second marriage the troubles
of the child set in. She was regarded as an

interloper by the second wife, and although,
as she grew up, Nellie worked hard for her
daily bread, the pittance which was doled out
to her was as scant as the kindness by which
it was accompanied. So matters continued
until she attained her seventeenth year, when
a change came over her cheerless, unloved
life.

Her step-father was a small farmer.
Amongst those whom he employed was a man
of better education, better address, and better
appearance, than the rest. In an evil hour for
Nellie he cast his eyes upon her. There was a
mystery about him which none could fathom,
but he had presented himself for hire when
hands were short, and although at first the
farmer looked somewhat askance at him, he
proved of so much value in his work that misgivings
were soon forgotten. True, the mystery
had never been cleared away, but what mattered
mystery to inexperienced Nellie ? Nellie, who
had never heard a word of affection breathed

for her, since the voice of her mother had
been silenced by death, and whose warm, loving
nature pined for it as the starving do for food.
Ah ! what mattered mystery to Nellie, when
he told her that he loved her, when he held
her in his arms and swore that he could not
live without her? How joyously her heart
fluttered with its newly-found rapture, how
brightly she blushed beneath the only kisses
which her young lips had ever known !

Nellie was pure and true ; as pure and true
as her false lover, alas ! was vicious and untrue.
It had not taken him long to persuade
her to keep their love a secret. She had, in
fact, none to whom she dared reveal it.
Scorn and derision would have assailed heron
all sides had she but hinted at her joy.
This, she knew only too well, and this, he,
the traitor, knew also, only too well. Thus
surrounding circumstances were in his favour.
But despite them, and despite his arts and
wiles, Nellie preserved her innocence. Foiled

in establishing his power over her, in the
manner in which he had intended, he persuaded
her to marry him secretly. Poor
child ! She had none to counsel, none to
warn, and she went to her fate with blind
confidence, and unbounded happiness. The
rest is soon told. Her marriage once
solemnized, Nellie soon knew herself to be
in the hands of a villain. Robbery had been
the inducement, both for his service to her
step-father, and also of his love-making to
herself. The farmer was known to have a
small hoard of money secreted in the house,
and of this the husband of Nellie was determined
to become possessed. At first he tried
by persuasion, and next by threats, to induce
the girl to aid him in the robbery. Both were
alike powerless. Therefore, he performed
the deed alone, and decamped, leaving Nellie
to bear her agony, and to confess the fact of
her marriage as best she could.

The storm which burst over her unhappy

head was violent in the extreme. Turning a
deaf ear to her piteous protestations of
innocence, the farmer and his wife were
loud in their accusations of dishonesty
against her. Accordingly she was arrested,
tried, and acquitted. But when acquitted
she found herself homeless, a castaway and
despairing.

It was at this crisis that Esse befriended
her. One fine spring morning a young girl
was found, half fainting, upon the threshold
of one of the kitchen doors at Brashleigh. In
answer to a running fire of questions from a
bevy of maidservants of all denominations,
the girl simply said —

11 Maybe the young lady wouldn't let me
die. I've come to see the young lady."

Lor' bless us, if she hadn't a wanting now
to speak to Miss Montague, I do believe.
Well, some people has cheek, to be sure,"
said a pert little kitchen maid, who, to judge
from the toss of her head and the tone of

her voice, had plenty of the commodity to
which she referred.

Fortunately for Nellie, good old Marie was
not far off. The congregated maids attracted
her attention. Wherefore making her way
through them, she confronted the hapless
object of their interest. Marie recognised
the girl, in spite of her draggled garments
and hunger-pinched countenance. Moreover,
Marie knew her history.

What is it that you want here ? " she
asked with a certain dignity of manner, buta
dignity which was by no means destitute
either of charity or of unkindness.
The same answer awaited her.
Maybe the young lady wouldn't let me
die. I've come to see the young lady."

Marie looked at Nellie thoughtfully, and
then withdrew to her young mistress. It
need only be told that both the sympathy of
Esse and the purse of Esse were quickly
opened for Nellie.

There resided, about two miles distant
from the house, the widow of a groom who
had been for some years in the Brashleigh
stables, and it was with this widow that Esse
found a home for her protege. Thus the
forlorn one, who had not only been cast out
to starve by those who stood to her in the
place of parents, but who was also scouted
by her former friends, and taunted by her
neighbours, found shelter and a home. It was
not very wonderful that there should spring up
in her heart an extravagant, but, nevertheless,
a deep affection for Esse. Bruised, battered
and broken, the outraged tenderness of Nellie
was trailing in the dust, its delicate tendrils
were torn from their support, and its fair buds
were blasted. But by slow degrees this tenderness
took fresh life, and twined itself with
growing force and closeness around Esse.

To Nellie, Esse was scarcely human ;
while Nellie was, to Esse, humanity under the
greatest form of suffering her experience had

ever shown her. Compassion on the one
hand, therefore, and gratitude on the other,

had created a bond between the two young

■

girls — so nearly of an age — so widely different
in everything else.

Six months after Nellie had been placed in
the home which the bounty of Esse provided
for her, she gave birth to her boy. This
happened a few days only before the sudden
demise of Ralph Grant, and in the consequent
distress and confusion which ensued,
Esse was not informed of the fact. Meanwhile,
on the part of the unfortunate young
mother, there arose an unutterable longing to
behold the face of her gentle benefactress ;
an ardent desire to place her newly-born infant
in the arms of this same benefactress.
Day after day Nellie looked, longed, and
pined for the gratification of her wish, while
day after day she was doomed to disappointment.


Presently the news was bruited abroad that

the bereaved inmates of Brashleigh Manor
were going away for an indefinite period.
Fortunately, the report did not reach Nellie,
until the very morning upon which it had been
arranged for Esse to set her face towards the
home of Rachel Tritton. By this time,
although still weak, Nellie had, to a great extent,
recovered her strength. She no sooner
heard, therefore, of the probable departure of
one, who was so inexpressibly dear to her,
than she rose up, took her babe, and sallied
forth. It was a very pilgrimage of love, and
happily the pilgrim gained that for which her
soul craved.

When Nellie took her little one back from
Esse, her satisfaction was intense ; so intense,
indeed, that even the sight of the
waiting carriage and pawing steeds failed to
mar it. But to Esse these gave a warning
which could not be disregarded. Holding
out her hand, therefore, to her humble companion,
she said kindly - -

I must now say good-bye, Nellie. I am
very glad that you arrived in time to see me.
I shall not forget either you or your baby."

Good-bye, miss — and may God bless
your bonny face, and bring you back to us,
before the days grow long again, an' the
nights get short."

Esse accorded a very fervent, although a
silent, "Amen," to this parting petition of
Nellie's.

It was November now, not damp, foggy,
and dreary as November often is, but clear,
and bright, and still. Here and there the
autumn tints were even yet beautiful, while
from out of their sheltered nooks the last
wild flowers were still sending forth their
sweetness.

The place had never seemed more fair to
Esse ; to leave it had never seemed so
hard. It was inseparably connected, moreover,
with all which made life dear to her — with
the memory of Uncle Ralph — with Arthur.

Away from thence, she would be farther, she
thought, from them both, albeit that the one
was in the land of the blest, while the other
was — she knew not whither.

Of late, a cold chill of uncertainty had
crept over Esse. Nothing seemed sure to
her ; sure as in the days which had gone by,
those happy days, when to wish and to have
were almost one and the same, so quickly did
fulfilment follow upon desire. Such a state
of things could not, of course, continue in
this world, without interruption ; but of this
Esse had not reasoned. Nevertheless, although
she had failed to attempt anything
like a logical reflection, or, indeed, a reflection
at all, concerning her state of content,
it was different altogether with the chill,
from which she now suffered. In touching,
if not in scholarly language, she could
have told, that as pain is the sharpest when
it is near to the brain, so is disappointment
the keenest when it comes from those who

are dear to the heart. And, in addition to
this, she could have whispered tearfully that
away from Brashleigh, with its familiar scenes,
dear old haunts, and all its loved associations,
the uncertainty looked more uncertain, the
chill seemed more icy, while the disappointment
was more keen.

Like to an April day, therefore, was the fair
face of Esse, with its smiles for Nellie, its
tears for herself, when she uttered her last
farewell word, and once more took her seat
in the carriage.

But there was yet another surprise in store
for Esse. Many more, besides poor Nellie,
wished for a parting glimpse of the bright
young face, which had often been to their
hard lives, as dew to the parched ground.

Wherefore, they had come, old and young,
men and women, to wait for the passing carriage,
to catch, perchance, a farewell smile, the
wave of a small gloved hand. To such a
slender leave-taking, however, Esse was by no

means inclined. She would have alighted and
spoken to each and all of the humble folk,
who were thus assembled to do her honour.
But a remonstrance from the coachman, upon
the score of time, obliged her to abandon her
desire. So the order to drive on was given,
and, amid profound obeisance and audible
blessings from the assembled group, Esse
continued her way.

As the carriage dashed out of sight, a
stranger suddenly appeared upon the scene.
None could tell the precise moment of his
arrival. None had seen from which direction
he came. But there he was, in the midst
of the villagers, looking after the carriage,
with an interest which, in its show, equalled
theirs.

Although somewhat extravagantly attired
after the fashion of the day, he was a 
man, apparently about thirty-five
years of age, with clear-cut features and
dark eyes. He would have been handsome,

but for the sinister expression which had
settled over the former, while the latter were
glittering and cunning. In figure he was
slight, rather tall than otherwise, with remarkably
well-shaped hands and feet.

A stranger amongst rustics is certain to
be regarded with curiosity. In the present
instance this particular stranger was honoured
with a good, stony, stolid, British stare,
which, truth to tell, he repaid with an interest
which was by no means small.

One by one, in turn, he looked the simple
country people out of countenance. His
stare in part achieved this, his fine clothes
and manifest superiority of station the rest.
He was very cool, easy, and self-possessed in
his scrutiny. At last, singling out one old
man, he approached him, as if about to make
him the object of some salutation. The
mood of the stranger, however, appeared to
undergo some sudden change. Without any
apparent reason, he turned abruptly away.

Those about him heard no sound ; nevertheless,
he muttered to himself —

The old chap looks a deuced deal too
honest — too loyal, I expect, to the reigning
power at Brashleigh Manor to stand any
questioning from me."

The " old chap" thus indicated, regarded
with considerable astonishment the erratic
movement which had been made, seemingly
without purpose, towards him. Then, as the
stranger passed through the lodge gates to
the park, the old man gave a grunt of
satisfaction. The matter, apparently, had
become clear to him, and he muttered —

Humph ! Wanted to know his pad, I
suppose. I'd 'ave obliged him. I knows all
the house about."

Perhaps this idea was correct. Anyhow,
after stopping to make enquiries at the lodge,
the stranger pursued his way through the
park.

THE SCENT IS CROSSED.

It was with a light and active step that the
stranger took his way, a step more jaunty,
perhaps, than firm ; nevertheless, it was in
perfect keeping with the scoffing smile which
played around his mouth, and with the quick,
cunning glances of his restless eyes. Ever
and anon he stopped to look craftily around
him. It might have been supposed from his
manner that he was looking for someone,
whom he anxiously desired to meet. On the
other hand, his demeanour might have betokened
an anxiety to avoid being observed
by any person or persons, who might possibly
be thereabouts.

Suddenly, he espied Nellie, who, with head
VOL. II. G

bent over her baby, was slowly coming
towards him.

Poor soul ! She could not face the little
knot of villagers without the park. She knew
they had assembled there to see Esse pass,
and she had not the courage to meet the
shrugs and averted faces, which she knew
would have been accorded to her. Consequently
she loitered until they had gone, each
man to his own home.

Very slowly, therefore, was she slinking
back, talking meanwhile to her child in that
mysterious language, which only a mother's
tongue can master. Thus engrossed, she
neither saw nor heard the approach of the
stranger, who took in at a glance the general
air of dejection which pervaded her appearance,
and which was returning rapidly now
that Esse had really gone.

i( You appear to be in trouble. What is
the matter ? " was the query which startled
Nellie. The tone of the voice in which it

was made was persuasive enough, but there
was no ring in it of either truth or kindness.

Looking up, Nellie sharply scanned the
countenance, with which she so unexpectedly-found
herself confronted. She distrusted it
intuitively. Wherefore, tightening her arms
around her baby, she would have passed on
silently ; but that she should do so formed no
part of the plan of the stranger.

Can I do anything for you? New friends
are often better than old ones," he said, still
in the same persuasive and gently-modulated
tones.

Again the girl looked quickly up at him.
She could not help herself : a fascination was
upon her. She shuddered as the word" friends"
had been pronounced. She shuddered still
more, as she encountered, for the second time,
the cold glitter of the cunning dark eyes
which looked upon her. And yet they were
handsome, only so cruel, ah, so hard and
cruel !

1 have no friends — leastways, only one,"
exclaimed Nellie, her words being as involuntary
as her glance had been.

w Only one ! And you are so young, and
so pretty besides."

Them's the devil's own words ; they
comes straight from him. I knows 'em well
enough, and I hates 'em ; I hates 'em," she
interrupted fiercely.

The stranger laughed lightly, as he returned
—

You are not complimentary, at any rate,
my dear."

He looked at the thin left hand, without
ring of any kind upon its third finger, and he
thought he understood quite well all about
the girl and her infant. He laughed again,
even more lightly than before, as he continued
—

But, you know, they say even the devil is
not so black as he is painted, so you might
be a little more civil to me."

Nellie took no notice of this remark. A
faint wail had proceeded from the lips of her
baby, whereupon, forgetful of the stranger
and all else, she had dropped upon one knee,
and was busily engaged in readjusting her
child's wraps, and in settling it in a more
comfortable position.

It was a pretty picture. The child-mother
partly kneeling upon the grass, her face
irradiated by the holy light of motherhood,
her shabby bonnet pushed back, and a
wealth of curling brown hair escaping therefrom
; while on each side of her, and far as
the eye could range, stood the magnificent
trees of which good Ralph Grant had once
made his boast, and of which he had been so
proud.

The stranger, however, had no love for the
picturesque in his nature. Moreover, at that
particular moment, he had been made far too
wrathful, by the check which the infant had
unconsciously given to the conversation, that

he was striving to establish between Nellie and
himself, to note beauty in any shape or form.

Confound that brat ! — just when I might
have got a lead," he muttered to himself.
Confound the brat ! " he repeated, " I wish
it would choke." While thus muttering, he
leisurely tapped first one boot, and then the
other, with his stick, preserving meanwhile all
his airiness and jauntiness of demeanour.

At last the baby was petted, hushed, and
kissed into silence. Then Nellie rearranged
her head gear, and rose to her feet.

Poor little fellow!" said the stranger
adroitly, and making a lucky venture respecting
the sex of the babe.

The bait was snapped at, caught, and
eagerly swallowed.

How did you know as how it were a boy,
sir?" asked poor, foolish, scouted Nellie,
trembling with pleasure, while a pretty rosy
flush stole over the cheek, upon which sorrow
had already stamped indelible lines.

He is a very fine little fellow," rejoined
the stranger, anxious to follow up his advantage,
but by no means equally anxious to
explain by what particular process of clairvoyance
he had arrived at such a shrewd
conclusion, concerning the little bundle, which
Nellie carried so tenderly.

Only six weeks old, sir ! " said this same
Nellie, her cheeks still aglow, and her tremulous
delight momentarily increasing.

Indeed ! "

No, sir; and is so heavy, and never cries
o' nights."

Wonderful ! "

Each ejaculation was as grave and emphatic
as if the study, of the size, weight, and
disposition, of babies, was of the deepest
interest to the speaker.

Six weeks, sir — that's all," continued
Nellie, drawn by his apparent earnestness to
indulge in an exultation which she had not
known before.

w Hem ! M The subject was becoming exhaustive
; so, clearing his throat, and again
leisurely tapping his boots with his stick, the
stranger paused and pondered.

His faith, in aught beside himself, was
limited. There was one thing, however, in
which he did most strongly believe. That
one thing was bribery. But now, and perhaps
for the first time in his life, he hesitated
before presenting his bribe.

There was something about Nellie which
made him toy with the silver coins within his
pocket, instead of promptly producing them
therefrom. Still so toying, uncertain what
to do, he nodded his head towards the gables
of Brashleigh, and in dulcet tones asked —

w What is going on, up there ? "

"At the house?"

n Yes."

Nellie shook her head sorrowfully —

11 Gone away — some dead — some gone
away."

There was a pause.

Is the house to be shut up?" was the
enquiry which broke the brief silence.

Another mournful shake of the head prefaced
Nellie's answer.

It's the will of God, but it is main hard
for some on us — strangers too!" she went on,
more in soliloquy than to her companion ;
strangers, the 'ouse is to be left in the
'ands of strangers."

By Jove ! " unguardedly exclaimed the
individual to whom Nellie had thus spoken.
In his excitement he ceased fingering the
money in his pocket, and, with the hand which
had been so employed, he raised his hat, so
that, for an instant, the cool breeze might
blow upon his forehead.

Nellie looked puzzled. The expression
upon her face told him his mistake ; nevertheless,
for the life of him, he could not still
the excitement which set his heart beating so
wildly.

11 How sad — how shocking, I mean," he
stammered incoherently. But he could not
set his blunder straight. Nellie regarded
him with renewed distrust, and accordingly,
without another word, she prepared to wend
her way homewards.

One moment," he cried courteously. " I
am sorry to detain you, but will you be good
enough to tell me, who was in the carriage,
which passed out of the park a short time
since ? "

I never tells the names o' those I knows
to those I don't know," replied Nellie sullenly,
setting her lips resolutely, and trying
to meet the eyes of her interlocutor with a
defiant glance. But here she utterly failed.
They were too snake-like, in their hard, cunning
glitter.

You are quite right, my dear. I am
sorry that I troubled you," was the reply, a
reply which was intended to be soothing in its
effect.

11 No trouble, sir." With these words,
Nellie moved away for some three or four
feet. Then she turned back. Coming close
to the stranger, who, without stirring, was
somewhat ruefully watching her retreating
figure, she said in low, passionate tones —

Can you fancy what the spring would belike,
without e'er a violet, or a cuckoo's note ?
Can you fancy what the summer would be like,
without e'er a rose, or a nightingale's song ?
Well, that's just what the world would be like,
if she, as is gone away in that carriage, didn't
tread upon this earth ! "

Poetical, but not enlightening," sneered
the stranger. He spoke to the winds, however.
Nellie had gone. He watched her
until the last flutter of her red petticoat was
lost sight of amid the trees. Then, softly
humming an air from a fashionable opera, he
turned aside into a narrow path, which led
away from, instead of towards, the house.

Nevertheless, when, by-and-by, with much

stir, pomp and ceremony, Flora Grant quitted
her widowed home, he witnessed everything.
Being screened by a shrub, he watched the
proceedings with unflagging interest. When
the ponderous hall door was closed, and all
was once more still, he vanished. But, as the
shades of evening gathered, he again stood
within a few yards of the house.

A smile of intense inward satisfaction
played around the corners of his thin, sarcastic
lips —

Left in the hands of strangers ! That is
the moral of the pretty story, which I am
about to dramatize. So, here goes — act the
first," and as he finished speaking, he rang a
goodly peal at the front door bell.

In answer to the summons, a round-faced,
sleepy-eyed, and somewhat apoplectic looking
specimen of the masculine gender presented
himself.

"Js Mrs. Grant at home?" enquired the
stranger.

Not at home, sir."

Perhaps I can see, Miss Montague."

Not at home, sir, either."

The stranger stood for a moment in simulated
thoughtfulness, before he said —

I will call again tomorrow."

Beg pardon, sir ; but the family's all
gone abroad."

Dear me ! How unfortunate ! " was the
reply which was given quickly and with well
feigned consternation.

The man at the door hesitated. A sudden
thought had illumined his not over bright
intellect.

Beg pardon, sir," he began again, " but
maybe you are the gent as is expected from
foreign parts. It's my wife you see, sir, as is
left to see to the 'ouse while the family's away.
I ain't got nothing to do with it. We comes
from a distance, and I don't know much
about what she's got to do, but I does know
as how she's got a letter, which she was to be

sure an' give to the gent as soon as ever he
arrived. Mrs. Finette, or whatever they
called her, was weary particles about this 'ere.
We ain't settled in yet, you know, sir, my
missis and me, but I thinks I see where the
letter was put, and if I fetch it perhaps you'd
be so good as to read the direction, and
see whether it be for you, or no. My wife's
a scholar, but unfortunately I ain't."

The Lord be praised that you are not,"
impiously ejaculated the stranger, as the man
went in search of the letter. He did not
possess the divining instinct of poor, wretched
Nellie. The well-dressed, and well-spoken
stranger, had inspired him with perfect
confidence. In fact, nothing, but want of
thought, or perhaps a lack of knowledge
how to behave, had prevented him from asking
this same stranger into the house, while
the letter was being procured. As it was,
however, no such hospitality was offered.

It is very probable, however, that it would

have been taken without invitation ; very-possible
too, that the stranger would have
availed himself of that leave, which is popularly
styled " French leave," if the information
respecting the letter had not been imparted to
him.

When he presented himself at the house, he
had fully resolved, that, nolens volens, whoever
opened the door to him should be induced
somehow to admit him considerably beyond the
mere precincts of the entrance. The letter,
however, changed his plan of operation, and
he waited very patiently, until the man, with
letter in hand, reappeared.

I thought I could find it, sir ; here it is."

Thank you."

It is for you, then, sir ? " There was no
anxiety in this question.

Quietly, critically, and composedly, the
stranger had received, examined, and returned
thanks for the letter in question. The interrogation,
therefore, was rather self-laudatory,

upon the part of the interrogator, than anything
else. It was repeated with a slight alteration
only, while a gratified smile at his own acuteness
played over the round face of the sleepy-eyed
speaker.

It is all right, then, sir? "

Quite," was the laconic reply.

By this time, the husband of the care-taker
of the mansion, and the stranger, were not
only ready, but willing to part company.
Both were well pleased with themselves, and
a cordial "good day" was exchanged between
them.

Act the first, a complete success — unprecedented
triumph — skilful dialogue — perfect
dramatic power — house brought down, &c,
&c. But what the deuce is to be made out
of act number two, is more than I can tell,"
muttered the stranger, as he listened to the
locking, bolting, and barring which followed
upon the closing of the door.

M Ta, ta ! " he jeered, as if to the individual

who was thus employed upon the work of
rendering the house secure.

Ta, ta!" he said again, with a mock
salute.

Then he was off and away, away, as fast as
his two fleet feet would carry him, to the nearest
inn. He had marked this inn, as he did
everything else which came in his way, enpassant.
Perhaps he had known it before !
It was quite a mile and a half distant. By
the time he had reached the inn, his plans
were fully matured, and " act number two"
was arranged and settled upon.

Having arrived at the primitive hostel,
where his appearance created no small
amount of excitement, he ordered tea, toast,
and eggs, adding —

But, my good woman, I must make my
own tea. Let me have a kettle. I believe in
no brewing but my own."

The landlady smiled, made her best courtesy,
and promised obedience to his wishes.

VOL. II. H

Such a pleasant-spoken gentleman, too,"
she remarked, when repeating the order, respecting
the kettle, to her rosy-cheeked handmaiden.


So the " pleasant-spoken gentleman " had
his tea, his toast, his eggs, and — his kettle.

But somehow, although all things were
duly prepared for the important ceremony,
the brewing was not commenced.

The fire blazed brightly. The kettle sang
cheerily at first ; and then, spitting and spluttering,
it sent forth clouds of white, hissing
steam.

The stranger listened first to the singing,
and then, with equal complacency, he watched
the clouds of steam.

Meanwhile, his eggs grew cold, and his
toast grew tough.

The charm of the kettle, splutter and steam,
was, evidently, strongly upon him. Eggs and
toast were alike forgotten in its potency.

Presently, he drew a letter slowly from his

pocket, and, grasping it tightly, walked from
the window to the door of the small apartment.


The smart chintz curtains, which were all ,
gorgeous with wondrous imitations of flowers,
and still more wondrous imitations of butterflies
and birds, and which were gay also with
marvellous shades of pink, green, red and
yellow, were closely drawn, while the door
was securely shut.

Having satisfied himself upon these
points, he sat down, and drawing one of
the lighted candles towards him, he laid
a letter carefully upon the table.

It was the selfsame letter, which had come
into his possession at Brashleigh. It was
still unopened.

A peculiar expression came athwart the
cynical countenance of the stranger, as,
scarcely above his breath, he read the superscription
to himself —

Arthur Greatorix Esquire."

Then he took the square, black-edged
envelope between the slender tips of his
well-shaped fingers, and still whispering to
himself in a caressing, chuckling kind of way,
he continued —

They don't hang now-a-days for felony.
Too enlightened, in this nineteenth century !
Besides, if they did, it isn't felony — vive la
reine — mistakes will happen, in the best-regulated
families. Now for the kettle, and
my particular brew of the cup, which cheers,
&c, &c."

He turned the envelope round and round,
read the address a score or so of times, and
as often examined the fastening ; then he
placed the kettle upon a small trivet, which
hung in the front of the fireplace, and, kneeling
before it, applied, with infinite care, the
fastening of the envelope to the spout of the
steaming kettle.

The process was slow but sure. With the
further aid of the blade of a knife, the adhesive

substance, which guarded the letter,
gave way, and, uninjured and unsoiled, the
prey was in the hands of the spoiler.

He gloated over it, with a triumph which
could only be unlawfully born of malice, and
he was in no hurry to shorten the enjoyment
of his satisfaction. He played with the
neatly-folded sheet of paper, as a cat might
play with a mouse, now putting it at arm's
length from him, and then fingering it affectionately.


It was verily a bonne douche, of which he
had not dreamed, but, all the same, it was too
delicious a morsel to be devoured, without due
deliberation and contemplation. At last, its
daintiness overcame him. But before finally
succumbing to it, he once more investigated
the state of both window and door. The
curtains were shaken, until the thin chintz
crackled loudly ; the handle of the door was
submitted to an equally crucial, although
different, test. There was no one secreted

in the folds of the former, while the latter
held firm. The doom of the hapless epistle
was at hand.

He read it slowly from beginning to end,
pondered over it, read it again, again, and yet
again. Finally, taking a note-book from his
pocket, he opened it, and jotted down therein
some of the contents of the letter. This
done, he could no longer restrain himself.
With a jeering laugh, he said, aloud —

Well done, Esse the fair ! You could
not have helped me better, if you had tried todo
so. I understand that, for the moment,
my search is fruitless. I will not follow you
to the land of hops and cherries. Doubtless,
your heavy baggage is safely housed elsewhere.
Therefore, I metaphorically salute
you, and look forward hopefully to our merry
meeting. I only regret that your charming
physiognomy is as yet unknown to me. Your
horses were too swift for me this morning.
By their pace, they destroyed my solitary

chance of becoming acquainted with your
beauty. Once more, I salute your unknown
loveliness. The little fact, concerning ' Gib
which you have so sweetly made manifest in
your perfect love letter, has opened my eyes
wide — I may even add, very wide. For this
opening of my orbs of vision, I bow my humble
thanks. Ended for the present is my purchase.
So far, so good. The game, for
which I started, was an heirloom. Your letter
crossed the scent, but, nevertheless, I am
satisfied ; parfaitement ! The letter to me
is game, and game is gain. Bother this
meal ! " he added, with a sudden change both
of voice and manner. " What in the name of
fortune am I to do with it ? "

After a brief consideration, he threw some
tea into the teapot, and dashed some hot
water after the tea. Then followed the far
more difficult business of reposing the letter.
This was however soon neatly accomplished.
The most suspicious person, as well as the

sharpest sighted, would alike have failed to
discover that it had been tampered with.

Thoroughly satisfied with his handiwork,
the stranger, making a wry face, gulped down
a cup of the beverage, which he had so carelessly
made, hurriedly decapitated and devoured
an egg, thrust a slice of toast into
one of the pockets of his coat, and proceeded
to summon the landlady.

She came obediently, with complacent
countenance, to his call. In a few minutes
his small bill was produced and paid ; after
which, leaving the inn, he retraced his steps
to Brashleigh Manor.

There will be a row — a duo, which will
be neither andante nor pianissimo, if the
old woman comes to the door instead of her
intelligent husband."

Thus muttering, the stranger flung away
the slice of toast, which he had pocketed at
the inn, and nerved himself for what he chose
to call " Scene the second, of act number two."

The first scene of this same " act number
two," he had facetiously told himself was the
kettle scene."

Scoff as lightly as he might, however, he
knew that, it was nothing short of genuine
relief which he experienced, when he again
found himself face to face with the individual,
who, upon the previous occasion, had answered
the door to him. There was not even
the shadow of the " scholar " wife looming
in the background ; and the stranger was
determined to give no time for such an
apparition to appear.

Almost before the door was fully opened
at any rate, before the opener thereof
could either collect his wits or recognise by
whom he was addressed, the stranger, placing
a letter in his hand, upon which rested three
or four of the largest silver coins of the
realm, said —

That letter was not for me, after all. I
did not find out the mistake, until I reached

the inn, and was going to open it. It is all
right, my man. Good night."

The man stared stupidly at the letter, but
more brightly at the silver, and, while he was
so staring, the stranger had disappeared.
There had been no hesitation about the bribe
in this instance as in the case of Nellie.

But for the fear of awakening suspicion in
the breast of the recipient, the stranger would
have trebled his largesse.

He had bagged something, which he considered
worth having, and he did not mind
paying for his sport.

In his satisfaction, he forgot to continue
his metaphor of acts and scenes. When he
had cleared the park, he stopped for a
moment, and, looking towards the darksome
way through which he had just passed, he
chuckled —

Forewarned, by the tender epistle of a
lovely woman : I shake your dust from off my
feet, and flee."

A WET WALK AND A SLOW DRIVE.

FOG, rain, and slush ranked foremost among
the characteristics of great, busy London,
when Arthur Greatorix, after his sojourn
abroad, first set his foot therein.

The fog was not dense, the rain was too
heavy ; consequently, the gas-lamps were not
altogether futile, albeit their glimmer more
nearly resembled that of a patent night-light
than anything else.

Plodding along, and picking his way
through the muddy, thoroughfares, as best he
could, by the feeble street lights, Arthur
Greatorix was making straight for his Club.

He carried no umbrella. The rain dripped
fast from the brim of his hat, and made sport
sometimes with the tip of his nose, while at
others it ran gaily in small streams down the

back of his white mackintosh, but there was
not a cab within either sight or hail — there
never is on a wet night — so, on he pushed.

It was nearly twelve o'clock. He had but
just arrived at Waterloo, from whence he had
despatched his luggage, his servant, and —
Alice.

The downpour had not then been quite
so determined, or, perchance, Arthur's choice
of pedestrianism, when vehicles were abounding,
and in plenty, would not have been made.

Truth to tell, he was sick to death of all
sorts and kinds of locomotion. Wherefore,
the independence of his own walking powers
was almost as sweet to his idea, as the air of
his native land was to his nostrils, for, in spite
of its murkiness, his native air was most undoubtedly
sweet to them.

Resolved, therefore, upon indulging in the
exercise of the one, and tasting, to the full,
the other, he started on foot.

Scarcely, however, had he crossed Waterloo

Bridge before he repented of his rashness. In
fact, his patriotism was soaked well-nigh to
extinguishment, while his athletic pride was
so choked by mud, that it narrowly escaped
suffocation.

Nevertheless, in spite of the attendant
difficulties of fog, rain, and slush, long legs,
together with persistently rapid strides,
speedily diminished the distance, between
starting point, and destination, which Arthur
had set himself to accomplish.

As he came within sight of the Club, the
chimes of midnight reverberated on all sides.
The chimes were as music to his ear — the
sight of the well-known building, was as the
face of a friend, to his eye.

Arthur Greatorix was a John Bull to the
backbone. England was, to him, the country
of the world — London, the place of places.
His admiration for foreigners, in general, was
decidedly small ; while, his liking, for their
habits and customs, was still smaller.

Consequently, his delight was unfeigned,
as, one after another, familiar sights and
sounds greeted him.

Upon entering the Club, he quickly divested
himself of his wet mackintosh, procured his
letters, and passed on.

There is no such thing, nowadays, as going
from one part of the inhabited globe to
another, or, indeed, from any pillar to any
post, without being seen and known. You are
elbowed by your tailor at the stony sides of the
Pyramids, and, you find yourself face to face
with your nearest neighbour, upon the loftiest
pinnacle of the most inaccessible of mountains.
There is no help for it. So far as travelling is
concerned, railways and " Cook" have beaten
privacy out of the field.

And as it is now, so was it, when Arthur
Greatorix made his mysterious little jaunt to
Gibraltar. Therefore, it is not to be supposed
that he managed matters, respecting this
jaunt, quite so privately, either as he intended

to do, or as he imagined that he had done.
Lots of people had met him ; lots of people
knew lots of other people who had seen, or
passed him, en route somewhere — and so on.

There were all sorts of rumours afloat concerning
him ; rumours which contained plenty
of lies in their composition, and a correspondingly
small amount of truth. He was
too well known, too well off, and too popular,
not to be talked about. There was, in fact,
too much about him for the envious to envy ;
and for the coward to fear. And when backs
are turned, who talks so loudly, and so long,
as the envious, and the cowardly ?

Doubtless, the one individual, in all the wide,
wide world, who knew less, and who had heard
less, about Arthur and his jaunt, than anyone
else, was Esse Montague. Gravely important
in all its bearings as the matter was to
her, rumour had not presumed to hazard a
supposition in her presence ; while the
fabulous little bird, proverbially so prone to

betray secrets, had forborne to chirp the
faintest twitter of a hint into her ear.

Flora Grant alone had rushed on, where
others feared to tread.

Neither knowing, nor caring to know, what
had been said and thought of his absence,
Arthur pushed open the door of one of the
luxurious and splendidly-lighted rooms. Looking
around him, his glance fell upon two or
three acquaintances, who came forward at once
to welcome him upon his return. He received
their salutations somewhat absently, and with
that distrait air, which betokens preoccupation
of mind. Shaking hands with one man,
and nodding a hurried " How are you, old
fellow?" to another, he walked hastily towards
a spare table, upon which he deposited his
letters.

They were a goodly budget to behold — a
legion of large, small, long, square, white,
blue, tinted, black-edged, crested, uncreated,
sealed, not sealed, perfumed, perfumed

envelopes ; and the writing, which they bore,
varied from the illegible scrawl of the
patrician, to the neat, stiff, well-formed letters
of the more plebeian correspondent.

The feminine telegraphy was far less
varied. This all bore the same stamp of
refinement, whether the characters were upright,
slanting, round, or pointed.

None of these details escaped the sharp
eye of Arthur Greatorix. Each and all of
them told him he had not yet found that for
which he sought. One by one, he turned the
letters over, handling them eagerly. After a
few moments, his suspense was ended. Two
epistles were singled out from amidst their
brethren. They were torn open eagerly.
Both were from Esse Montague.

In the first letter, which Arthur Greatorix
thus opened, there was an enclosure. This
enclosure was the ill-fated note which Cinderella,
had brought to light, from out of the
depths of a satin-lined work-basket.

VOL. II. I

Arthur Greatorix changed colour when he
saw it ; but, notwithstanding the deepened
hue of his cheek, he made no attempt to
peruse it. Twirling his heavy moustache
with an unnecessary amount of ferocity, he
read the few lines from Esse, which accompanied
the note, many times. As he did soit
was difficult, from the expression of his
face, to hazard a conjecture concerning the
emotions which those few lines had evidently
occasioned. It might have been unfeigned
astonishment. On the other hand, it might
have been extreme vexation. Perhaps, it was
a combination of the two.

But, whatever the expression in question
may have portended, it vanished as his eye
rested upon the commencement of the second
letter from Esse. A smile of relief flitted
across his face, but it was terribly evanescent.
The letter fell suddenly from between his
fingers, his lips moved dumbly, and he staggered,
rather than walked, to the nearest seat.

Arthur Greatorix was not prone to indulge
in any outward manifestation of his feelings,
but, for the moment, he was utterly oblivious
of the fact that he was in the presence of
several of his fellow creatures. Their evident
surprise at his demeanour, together with their
covert glances of ill-concealed curiosity, restored
him to the consciousness of his surroundings.


He rose immediately, swept his letters
together in a heap, thrust them pell mell into
his pockets, and, still staggering, reeled like
a drunken man from the room.

The letter which had wrought his agitation
ran thus —

My own old Arthur,

Come back to Brashleigh as quickly
as possible after you receive this. I have
been ill, or I should have written instead of
Lord Oakdene to tell you about poor Uncle
Ralph. Oh, Arthur dearest, come back. ;
Now that dear Uncle Ralph is dead, you will

come, will you not? Aunt Flora is pretty

well, but we are all so very, very miserable. I

want you to get this as quickly as possible, so

I shall tell Finette to send one of the grooms

with it for the early post tomorrow morning.

Only Lord Oakdene and Rachel Tritton are

here, all the other visitors went away directly

after — after — I cannot make up my mind,

Arthur dear, to write the dreadful words

again ; but you will have heard the terrible

news before you read this, and so will know

what I mean. It has all been so sudden,

that even now I can hardly believe it to be

true. If you were only here, it would not

seem quite so hard.

Ever your own,

"ESME."

There was no date of any kind to this
sorrowful effusion, which had been penned a
few minutes only after the writer had flown,
like a lapwing, from the touch and presence
of Lord Oakdene.

The appeal, which it contained for the
return of Arthur, had been the natural result
of the confusion and dismay, which the unexpected
conduct of the noble earl in question
had brought about in the mind of Esse.
No wonder she had forgotten dates ! No
wonder she wrote of early post and grooms,
as though Gibraltar and London were merged
the one in the other !

But, so far as Arthur was concerned, the
possibility of even a more gigantic geographical
impossibility than this might have
been presupposed. In his hot haste to
possess himself of tidings from Esse, he
had taken no notice of any of his other
letters. Consequently it was from her
that he had received the first intelligence
of the calamity, which had occurred at
Brashleigh.

The shock was very great to Arthur. He
was stunned by it, and for the time bewildered.
Well might those who knew him mark his

sudden change of colour, together with his
mute action of despair.

There is something wrong with Great -
oris," said a tall, aristocratic-looking man,
as Arthur was tumbling his letters together,
and thrusting them anyhow into his pockets.
Dropped a thundering lot of cash, I should
think, by the look of him."

The friend of the speaker, to whom these
remarks were made, was lolling listlessly in
an easy-chair. He looked at Arthur, lifted
his eyebrows with a lazy, well-bred air of
cynicism, and answered —

Backed the wrong horse for the Leger ;
or bank smashed, perhaps. Confoundedly
disagreeable news for a man to find waiting
for him, upon his return from a neat little
excursion across the salt sea — disgusting,
eh?"

Rather ! " returned the other, with a
yawn. "A swarm of bees would be nothing
compared to the way in which my duns would

crop up, if such news as that got wind on my
account. Tick, to the end of eternity, in
fair weather ; bully, to the verge of insanity
or suicide, in foul ; those are the principles
upon which the whole pack of them act. But,
upon my honour," he added more seriously,
I am afraid there really is something amiss
with Greatorix. It must be a tremendous
crippler to make him double up like that.
I don't know him well enough to speak to
him, when he's bothered."

But I do," was the response. " I daresay
he'll swear at me in his heart, but, nevertheless,
I shall go and delicately insinuate
the utility of certain refreshing beverages,
when one is hard hit."

This kindly intention was frustrated by the
sudden exit of Arthur.

Looks bad when a fellow bolts in such a
confounded hurry," remarked the individual,
who had been checked in his contemplated
overture of friendliness.

Uncommonly," was the rejoinder from the

tall man; " he is engaged to be married, and

to an awfully pretty girl, I hear ! not much

blood — but lots of money. Perhaps there is

a row about the matrimonial spec — there's a

tale going, you know, about this Gibraltar
excursion."

A woman?"

Something very like one, I believe. Some
say he went to shake her off, but she
wouldn't stand it."

Off with the old, before he was on with
the new — that sort of thing, I suppose ? '
was the interruption.

I daresay — awful nuisance — for him " —

u Which, the old or the new ? "

V Oh ! the old I should think, shouldn't
you?"

Don't know," was the dubious reply.

Whereupon both men yawned, looked at
their watches, yawned again, and in talking
of something else forgot Arthur.

Meanwhile Arthur had reached the open
air.

During the short time that he had been
within doors, the wind had risen considerably.
It blew the still pelting rain mercilessly into
his face, as he sharply turned the corner of
the street in which the Club was situated.
But he liked the cold drops. They refreshed
him, and he took off his hat so that they
might still further cool his burning brow.
How far he would have proceeded, under this
improvised "douche" bath, it is hard to say.
The rule, no cabs on a wet night, was about
to be proved by the exception.

11 Cab, sir?" sounded suddenly, through
the pattering rain, and howling gust, while,
at the same moment, an enterprising cabby
splashed the wheels of his vehicle close
alongside of the pavement upon which Arthur
was striding.

In the chaotic state of his mind, the idea of
anything so real, so appertaining to comfort,

and to every day life, as a cab, had not presented
itself to Arthur.

Gent's got a little liquor in his upper
story — like's the water better on the outside
on 'im, than in the inside, it seems, "
muttered the cabby, as with poised whip, he
peered into the darkness, and observed the
uncovered head of Arthur.

Cab, sir?" he repeated in louder tones,
finding that no notice was taken of his first
solicitation ; no notice, except the slackened
pace of the individual, whom in cabby's own
words, he had " spotted."

11 Cab, sir?" and this time a scrape against
the kerb-stone accompanied the efforts which
the lungs of the cab driver were sustaining.

Arthur stood still. The significance of
which was plain enough to the vigilant cabby.
With a grim smile of satisfaction upon his
hard, weather-beaten countenance, he stopped
his tired quadruped, slid with marvellous
alacrity from off his box, and, with the handle

of the cab door in his hand, waited expectantly.


Limmer's."

With this brief injunction, Arthur flung
himself into the cold, comfortless " four-wheeler."


'Aunt so weary bad after all ;" soliloquized
the driver, reseating himself, and resuming
the reins after having given the customary
touch of his hat with a brisk, " All right, sir."

11 'Aunt nothing' at all, in fact ;" he continued,
flicking his whip and still meditating
over the particular stage of sobriety which he
supposed his " fare " to have passed.

But, although the whip was flicked, the
pace towards " Limmer's " was not increased.
The distance thereto, from where Arthur had
been picked up, was short. Speed might
have made it seem to be even shorter than it
really was ; shorter, at least, to a partially
inebriated passenger, and shillings were
shillings to the Jehu of the occasion.

Wherefore, he added, to his speculations
concerning the condition of Arthur, this
monetary reflection upon his own behalf ;
which reflection was, perhaps, the " ill wind "
which blew good for his tired horse, if evil
for Arthur.

In one sense, the diplomatic cab driver was
right. His passenger was perfectly facile in
his hands, or rather in his cab. An energetic
snail might have outstripped them as they
crawled along ; but Arthur would have
remained dumb and expostulation. Not a
murmur, therefore, either quickened the
movements of the cabby, or mingled with the
rattle of the jolting vehicle.

But for the cause of this patient endurance,
upon the part of his passenger, the cabby
was as far wrong in his surmise as an astute
London cabby well could be.

Stupefied, perhaps, but most assuredly not
by strong drink, Arthur submitted passively
to his fate.

Ralph Grant was dead — Esse had been

ill — God alone knew how ill ; — and he,
Arthur, had been away ; on a fool's errand,
perchance — anyhow, away, and far away,
too, when he should have been close to Esse,
close to his old friend — to them both.

These were the facts which almost stunned
Arthur Greatorix ; over which his spirit
groaned, and which, for the time being, made
him careless as to what was happening to
him.

A lurch, a jolt, and a horrible creak, caused
him to look up with a start, when an open
cab door, with a drenched, shabby looking
figure on the other side of it, made him aware
that he had reached his destination. He
roused himself, alighted, paid his fare, and
entered the hotel.

His arrival was expected. The night
porter murmured a few words of civility,
in a sleepy tone of voice. Arthur replied
laconically. He had a letter to write which
must be sent by hand. It was late ; so,
without delay, he passed to the coffee room.

If he had not been so intensely preoccupied,
he would have noticed, that the
room in question contained another individual
besides himself. Moreover, he would have
remarked that, by his presence, he had
evidently considerably disturbed the composure
of that other individual.

As it was, however, Arthur noticed neither
the one nor the other. Intent upon the quick
despatch of his letter, he stalked across the
room, rang the bell for his servant (who had
preceded him at the hotel) ordered him to be
in readiness for the conveyance of the letter,
and, without casting a glance around him,
commenced writing.

Meanwhile, the gentleman, who was thus
so completely overlooked, slipped quietly

away.

In the course of a few minutes the letter
was finished. It was brief, and the name,
which it bore above the address, was that of
Mrs. Royston."

A FRUITLESS JOURNEY.

Although the writing of his letter had
occupied but a short space of time, it was
not until long after he had laid aside his pen
that Arthur Greatorix rested his head upon
his pillow. He was worn and weary. Nevertheless,
sleep was far from him. Of all the
wakeful eyes which looked and longed for the
light of morning, none were more wakeful
than his. He longed to be up and doing;
to be up, and on his way to Brashleigh
Manor. Indecision of purpose was not a
failing which could be laid to his charge.
From the moment that he read the letter, in
which Esse called him back to her, his resolution
had been taken. But it could not be
acted upon so promptly as it had been made.
Trains are inexorable. It was Sunday morning,

and Sunday trains are not only inexorable,
but, generally speaking, they are
also inconvenient. Hence, for a certain
number of hours, he was doomed to writhe
beneath his bed-clothes.

Before retiring to his room he had scanned
Bradshaw " until his brain grew dizzy, and
the sight of his eyes almost deserted him.
But his search was fruitless. No train started,
which would help him on his way, until ten
o'clock. It was in vain that he anathematised
directors and railway officials of every
description.

His wrath neither relieved his own predicament,
nor injured those at whose heads it was
launched. It was considerably modified,
however, when, after a make-believe breakfast,
he found himself taking his seat in the train.

Morning and action were pleasant exchanges
for night and inaction, which told
favourably upon his temper. Moreover, a
sweet face was very present to him. In its

smile of youth, life, and love, grim death was
forgotten. The rapture of an anticipated
meeting swallowed up all remembrance of
sorrow ; and now that he was fairly under
weigh for Brashleigh, the meeting grew
nearer every moment. So thought Arthur
Greatorix, and, thus thinking, he lighted his
cigar, leaned comfortably back against the
cushions of the railway carriage, closed his
eyes, and, without a shadow of fear, dreamed
his happy dream.

Ah! " malheur ne ment jamais seul. JJ He
never thought of this. Already, in imagination,
he was clasping Esse to his heart Already,
he was looking into the dreamy depths of her
beautiful eyes, and tasting the sweetness'of her
pure, shy kiss of welcome.

There was, there could be, nothing to
prevent the fulfilment of his anticipation.
She had bidden him return to her with all
speed. The night hours could vouch for the

VOL. II. K

bitterness, with which he had chafed, under
delay to her behest.

There might be " many a slip between the
cup and the lip, but no slip could by any
possibility occur between his eager lip and
the brimming cup, which stood so close at
hand. The bare idea was too far fetched ;
too absurd.

Alas, " ' malheur ne vient jamais seul !'

On reaching the station, at which travellers
for Brashleigh were wont to leave the
train, Arthur experienced considerable difficulty
in obtaining a conveyance for the rest
of his journey.

The station master was away ; the man
who let out hired vehicles was also away ; all
the world — or, at any rate, all the useful part
of it — seemed to Arthur Greatorix to betaking
holiday on that particular Sunday.

By dint of sticking to his purpose, however,
at last a dog-cart was forthcoming. The
face of the driver was unknown to Arthur.

This was disappointing. The death of Ralph
Grant would naturally create much excitement
and consternation for some few miles around
his domain, and Arthur hoped to have heard a
few particulars about it, and of the funeral,
en route. But the man knew nothing. He
had never heard of the name of " Grant" — did
not even know the road to Brashleigh, and was,
as a matter of fact, as strange to the place,
as his features were to Arthur.

Thus it came to pass, that not a warning
whisper of the coming disappointment reached
Arthur. On he went. Esse in his heart.
Esse for his goal.

One by one, the milestones on the way
were reached. One by one, they were passed,
and left behind in the distance. Now a
well-known coppice, and then a long familiar
slope, came and went in like manner. The
goal was very near. Another short half hour
only, and it would be attained.

On he rattled, along highway and past

hedge, until at length the trees of Brashleigh
were in sight.

Then he drew a deep breath of satisfaction.
It was all over now. His pilgrimage was
ended. The memory of sea and rocks faded
away. Steamboat and railway no longer held
him in bondage.

The goal was at hand, the cup almost at
his lips, and his heart throbbed quickly.

Love is ever prone to selfishness. Not even
the knowledge that the warm-hearted old
friend, who had ever before been so ready
with hearty words of welcome, was now lying
stiff and stark beneath the ground, could still
the tumult of joy, which danced within the
breast of Arthur, as he drew nearer and yet
more near to the haven where he would be.

Not a sound escaped his lips, while his
keen eyes travelled restlessly towards the
house. There, in bold outline, it stood at
last ; solemn, majestic, grand, and, as Arthur
thought, gloomy. It was his first chill. The

old turrets and gables had never before worn
such a grim aspect. But now, in the grey-light
of the dull November afternoon, they
seemed to him to bear a frown.

He shivered. The shiver was involuntary.
The stately old mansion, in its absolute stillness,
appeared to reproach him for the glee,
with which he was approaching its portals,
and to remind him that the footsteps, of those
who had carried out the honoured dead to its
burying, had but just ceased to echo through
its walls.

No wreathing, curling smoke, telling of
warmth and hospitality, issued from the
many clustered chimneys, while across the
mullions windows, blinds were either drawn
down, or shutters closed. All was cold, dull,
dreary, and changed.

When the significance of these tokens
struck Arthur with full force, a mist passed
before his eyes ; a blight fell upon his blissful
visions.

Was the house empty ? If so, what had
followed, upon the death of its master ?

Ah, " malheur ne vient jamais seul ! " He
remembered this saying now, only too well.

But he would not allow himself to think.
With a desperate effort he closed his mind
against surmise and speculation of all kinds.

Fortunately, the effort was not of long
duration. The last stage, towards the goal
unto which he had been pressing, was passed.

Springing to the ground, almost before the
dog-cart was brought to a standstill, he rang
the visitor's bell, with a face which went from
white to red, and back again from red to
white every instant, but, nevertheless, with a
firm hand.

The pause which ensued was profoundly
quiet. Not a sound stirred. Arthur could
almost hear himself breathe. He waited,
listened, and then rang again. But this time
his hand shook, and no crimson hue returned
to relieve the pallor of his cheek. He was

growing desperate, when his attentively-strained
ear caught the sound of something,
or of someone, moving inside the door, through
which he so piteously longed to pass.

There was nothing reassuring to him in the
sound, which he soon made out to be that of
a slowly-advancing footstep. On the contrary,
the sense of change, which had stolen
about and over everything, was thereby increased.
Where was the short, sharp click
of the heels of attentive lacqueys over the
tesselated floor ? Where was the deep baying
of dogs in the distant stable yard ? And
where was the hum of busy life and motion ?
Allowing for what he knew to have happened,
since last he crossed that threshold, the difference
between the past and the present were
alike portentous, and significant of evil.

Sickening with apprehension, he waited
despairingly for that which the next moments
should reveal. His fate, in the shape of the
advancing footsteps, came leisurely enough

towards him. But it came at last, and when
it came, he could but stare at it, with a dull,
and stupid astonishment.

Slowly and deliberately, as slowly and
deliberately as the footsteps had been taken
previously, the door was opened, and he
found himself looking blankly upon a respectable
dame of portly dimensions, but no words
came from his parched mouth. He was
dumb from sheer amazement.

In its principal details, however, the old
hall, of which he could just catch a glimpse,
looked the same. Its familiar aspect was of
unspeakable comfort at the moment, barren
although that comfort might afterwards prove
itself to be.

He hailed the well-known spot as a traveller
might a landmark, and he passed quickly
thereto, as one who had found a lost road.

The door opener looked at Arthur with
surprise, but not with alarm. His entrance
was made so naturally, and involuntarily, that

she felt assured he was well accustomed to
the place.

Moreover, she had been looking for such
an arrival, ever since she had been entrusted
with the keys of the residence. She was the
wife of the individual, who had so indiscreetly
given the letter to the mysterious stranger,
and she was, to all intents and purposes,
undoubtedly her husband's better half. In
virtue of this, he had kept his own counsel
and had not confessed to her the story of his
mistake. Great would have been both her
horror, and her wrath, had she guessed at the
delinquency of her good man.

Proud of her invincibility, as a virtuous
matron, she was equally, and perhaps
more so, of the inflexibility of her trustworthiness.


It was with a scorn, therefore, which closely
bordered upon amusement, that she had
received the voluble injunctions of Finette,
respecting the safe delivery of the letter.

But the wisest trip sometimes ; the most
vigilant are caught napping, and household
gods are precious to the hearts of most
women. In this instance, they proved
dangerous rivals to the prudence which, heretofore,
had marked the conduct of the caretaker,
or rather, housekeeper, for so she
styled herself. In her zeal, concerning the
safe deposit of her own especial pots and
pans in her new abode, she had been thrown
off her guard, and, in a moment of connubial
confidence, had both shewn the letter to her
husband, and told him for whom it was
intended. In so far as the breach of matrimonial
faith, which ensued, is concerned, the
sequel is known to the reader.

Mr. Greatorix, sir?" asked the housekeeper,
after a second astute survey of the
herculean figure, who, uninvited, had betaken
himself within doors. The question was
accompanied by a courtesy, which, the bran
new black gown upon her back enabled the

wearer to drop, with more than her ordinary
amount of dignity.

Irrespective of age and station, it is
astonishing, what a marvellous effect the consciousness
of being suitably attired has upon
the mind and deportment of most of the fair
daughters of Eve.

Given a good gown, well made, of the
right description, and a woman will face the
world. The order of this reversed, and her
courage is lost in an inane shamefacedness.

In her mourning habiliments, so glossy, so
stiff, and so new, the housekeeper felt herself
to be equal to any emergency. By her garments,
she had been made part and parcel
of the Brashleigh gloom and grandeur.
Wherefore, bristling with importance, and
settling her features with becoming solemnity,
she awaited Arthur's answer. It might have
been made by a newly imported son of the
Sister Isle. It was no answer at all. Nothing
but another question.

What is the matter ? "

Housekeeper, black gown, dignity, and
everything else, were completely taken aback
by this query. The matter ! Did not the
gentleman know ? Did not everybody know
that Mr. Grant had dropped down dead from
his horse? Was she, the housekeeper,
expected to break such a dreadful piece of
news, and to one of the family too, for anything
that she could tell ? This was a vast
deal more than she had bargained for, when
she engaged to keep house, goods, and
chattels, safe, sound, and in order during the
absence of their owner. Thus reflecting, the
good woman took refuge in equivocation.

The matter, sir?"

Arthur noticed the tremor which pervaded
her portly dimensions. Of course, he mistook
its cause, and, in so doing, piled up fresh
agony for himself.

Are any of the old servants about ? ' he
enquired in desperation.

He felt sure now that some awful blow was
impending, and he preferred to have it
levelled at him by a hand which he knew.

"No, sir."

The dignity was brought back, and the black
dress was rustled with pristine importance, as
these monosyllables were coldly uttered.
The housekeeper might have thought her
position both awkward and painful ; nevertheless,
she had no notion of being set aside
for any " old servants," whoever or whatsoever
they might be.

Then perhaps, you — you will be good
enough to inform me, where — whether Miss
Montague is here ? " gasped Arthur, ghastly
white, the while, from brow to chin.

The self complacency of the housekeeper
was restored. Her voice was less chilling, as
she returned —

11 Went away the day afore yesterday — I
beg your pardon, sir, I meant on Thursday.
I was a forgetting that to-day is Sunday.

Mrs. Grant have gone abroad, Miss Montague,
sir, 'ave gone into Kent."

Thank God ! " burst from Arthur with
irrepressible fervour.

Well, if I ever," said the housekeeper to
herself ; " then I supposes it 'aunt Mr.
Greatorix after all, for if that chatterton of a
French gal didn't go and make me believe ashe
were the young lady's regular lover, as
were going to marry 'er as soon as ever he
come from furred parts, and here, if he 'aunt
been a thanking the Almighty like anything,
only because I told 'im she be gone away."

The housekeeper's English was less well
chosen, and her sentences were more involved,
when she held a colloquy with herself instead
of with her superiors. In the present
instance, not a syllable of her consternation
was audible ; not even a hint of it twinkled
in her small black eyes. Twirling her wedding
ring round and round, and stopping
its progression, every now and then, to bestow

an unnecessary polish upon it with her thumb
and finger, she curtsied again, and sententiously
repeated, —

Kent, sir."

But by this time, the outer man of her
companion had undergone a complete transformation.
He had cast aside his hat, and
with his hands in his trouser's pockets, and
his great coat thrown back, as if for air, he was
rapidly striding to and fro. The former
corpse-like hue of his face had given place to
the flesh and blood tints, which are usually to
be found upon the cheek of a living man ;
his breathing was less short and hard ; his
eye less wild. Some wondrous relief had
evidently relaxed the painful tension of his
nerves. But for the fillip, which curiosity
gave to the interview, the housekeeper would
have begun to think it wearisome. Since no
notice had been vouchsafed to the second
utterance of the geographical fact, which she
had volunteered concerning the whereabouts

of Esse, it was awkward to speak again
unsolicited. So, for the space of a few
seconds, Arthur continued his striding
uninterruptedly.

Suddenly he stopped and said abruptly —

So they have all gone, servants and all —
have they?"

The housekeeper started as if a gun had
been fired in unpleasantly close proximity to
her rotund person.

I nearly jumped out of my shoes, Jim,
stockings and all ! " she said, later on in the
day, when she gave her spouse a graphic
account of all which had passed between
Arthur and herself —

I did indeed, he were walking up an' down
like a wild animal, and he stopped all of a
sudden, and spoke that sharp I didn't know
where I was. I 'aunt sure now that he's nota
bit gone in his head, and I can't abide
lunatics. They frightens me more, I can tell
you, than nothing at all."

But she need not have been alarmed.
Arthur Greatorix was not mad. In his
restless pacing he was in truth striving, withall
his might and main, to pull himself
together ; to give coherency to his ideas —
distinctness to his speech.

His abruptness was simply intense anxiety;
his sharpness of interrogation was only a
keen desire to clear away the mystery by
which he found himself surrounded.

The utter desolateness of the place, which
he thought to have found peopled with
familiar forms and faces, had not yet completely
manifested itself to him. Hence his
question. It was answered with ready volubility.


Yes, sir, none of the old servants isn't
left. The suppers went away directly after
Mrs. Grant. The under went a little time
afore she did. None of the old servants isn't
left nowhere. Mrs. Grant sent them all away

VOL. II. L

directly after the funeral, leastways so I've
been informed, sir ; all, excepting Miss
Montague's old nurse. Mrs. Grant, poor
lady, couldn't abide to see any of them about,
she fretted that dreadful, poor lady, after her
husband, and no wonder, when she was left a
widow all of a sudden, and the poor gentleman
dropped down dead in that horful way, so
like a direct visitation, and after he were took
like that, Mrs. Grant couldn't bear to look at
no one as reminded her of 'im."

Thus the housekeeper ran on. Arthur
made no attempt to check her. He was
beginning to understand a little, both of that
which he saw and also of that which he
heard. Something tangible was slowly arising
from out of the chaos.

As yet, he had not had time to groan over
his immediate disappointment. His recollection
was still misty. He was but vaguely
conscious that his previous rapture had given
way before a shapeless, undefined, awful,

hideous dread. This dread had gone ; he
hardly knew how, or whither. But it had
gone. The ground no longer rocked to and
fro beneath his feet. His tongue no longer
refused its office. Once more he breathed
with freedom. Once more his step was firm.

And, for the present, he asked no more.

Mrs. Grant was tolerably well, I hope,
when she left home' he managed to rejoin
in a tolerably natural voice, when the housekeeper
had ceased speaking.

Yes, sir; I believe so, thank you; and
may I make bold, if you please, sir, to ask if
you is the gentleman as the family was
expecting afore they left ? "

The form of the question, which was to
provoke the answer whereby his identity
should be revealed, had been judiciously
altered when put this second time. It met
with a ready reply.

Yes ; I think so, certainly. My name is
Greatorix. I only arrived in England yesterday.

I expected to find Mrs. Grant and
Miss Montague here."

It was all right, then ! He was Mr. Great -
oris ! The housekeeper was bubbling over
with excitement. If it had not been for his
unfortunate ejaculation, she would have looked
upon him with especial favour.

She had a good deal of romance still left
in her capacious bosom, and the big, broad-shouldered,
bronzed man before her, came
very nearly up to her preconceived notions
concerning the appearance of heroes in
general. Nevertheless, she was much exercised
in mind about him. She could not
forget that " Thank God," which Arthur had
uttered, and which had seemed to her so
strangely out of time and tune.

He looked strong, and brave, and true, a
worthy recipient, in fact, for the letter which
she had in trust for him.

But, somehow, she could not help feeling
sorry for the beautiful (of course Finette had

fully descanted upon the loveliness of Esse)
young lady who had written it.

Glad or sorry, however, the housekeeper
knew that the moment had arrived when the
document must be delivered up. Moving
across the hall, therefore, with a stately step,
and still mentally debating upon Arthur's
worthiness or unworthiness to fill the post of
an affianced husband, she threw open the
door of one of the rooms, saying respectfully
—

I am sorry there is no fire, sir, but one
shall be lighted directly, if you wish it.
Please to take a seat while I fetch something
as was left, for you, by one of the ladies."

HOW TWO LETTERS FOUND RESTING-places.


The room, into which Arthur Greatorix was
thus ushered, was one in which Esse and he
had spent many happy hours ; but, like
everything else around him, it was so altered
that he scarcely recognised it to be the same.
Independently of the transforming power of
the wand which had been waved by Flora
Grant over Brashleigh, the apartment looked
miserably cold and forlorn in the suit of
brown holland which enveloped its appointments.
Indeed, brown holland seemed to
have been sown broadcast in every direction.
There was not a nook or a corner free from
it. Sprouting into rank luxuriance, it hugged
the pictures on the walls in a close and tight

embrace, swathed every chair and couch, and
it hung in lugubrious flaps over mirrors and
sundry other articles.

Of course, Arthur did not stop to note all
this in detail. He was only conscious that,
as a barren waste is to a rich parterre so
was the present condition of the apartment
in comparison to the bright, cheerful morning-room
which he had heretofore known.

He looked disconsolately around him. He
could not sit down ; brown holland forbade
the proceeding, even if he had been in a
frame of mind befitting such a position of
quietude. Neither could he look out of the
window ; the shutters, saving and excepting
one small portion at their very top, which had
been opened in his honour, being closed and
fastened. So he did that which his restlessness
dictated.

Putting his hat, with an unnecessary amount
of vigour upon the only available table, and
dashing his gloves down into his hat with an

equal amount of force, he turned upon his heel,
and attempted to effect an entrance into some
of the other rooms.

Notwithstanding the untoward aspect of
things in general, he experienced a certain
dismal sort of pleasure in exploring the old
place. He almost caught himself listening
for the rustle of silken garments, for the soft
patter of light feet, for the gentle voice of
Esse — the woman who had promised to become
his wife — the woman whom he had
left there so short a time before when all
was mirth, and light, and joy — the woman
whom he had left without a farewell kiss,
or, spoken word of love.

One after another, he tried the handles of the
doors of the various sitting-rooms. But always
with the same result. They were all safely
locked. Then he passed up the broad old
staircase ; but only to be foiled again. Not
even the gallery could be entered.

Darkness, death, silence, change and

absence were manifest over everything, and
he beat an ignominious retreat to his starting-point,
feeling, if possible, even more dejected
and miserable than before.

But the echo of his impatient tread upon
the uncarpeted floor was not without some
benefit to him, inasmuch as it quickened the
movements of the housekeeper on his behalf.
That particular part of the establishment,
which had been made over to her, was situated
at some little distance from where she had
left Arthur.

In going to, and returning from, this especial
kingdom over which she reigned, she had a
perfect network of lobbies, with many an
intricate underground passage to traverse,
and she had also the difficulties of many a
stone stair to surmount.

Consequently, she was very panting and
palpitating when next she appeared ; while
the red, podgy hand, which extended towards
Arthur a tray bearing a letter, trembled from

an exertion which had been brought about by-unusual
speed.

If the mysterious stranger could have been
an eyewitness of the eagerness with which
Arthur first clutched the letter, and then tore
open the envelope, he would have deemed
the excessive care, which he had bestowed
upon the re-fastening of this identical envelope,
a most decided work of supererogation.

At all times, Arthur Greatorix was of a
pre-eminently unsuspicious nature. At this
particular time, his delight at the writing of
his fiancee overmastered every other sentiment
and emotion.

It would seem to have been a wonderful
letter which the fair Esse had composed,
penned, and entrusted to the care of her
maid, Finette. Wonderful, since it possessed
the power of affording unmitigated satisfaction
to two individuals : to the man for
whom it was not intended ; and to the man,
also, for whom it was intended.

Pending its perusal by Arthur, the breathless
housekeeper remained within eye and
ear range ; otherwise, various passionate
eccentricities would doubtless have been
performed upon its mute surface. As it was,
it was simply re-folded tenderly, and placed
with due care in the breast pocket of his coat.

Having done this, Arthur communed
anxiously with himself, upon the best and
quickest manner of making a retrograde
movement towards the great Metropolis.
When he departed therefrom, it had never
entered his mind that such a course of action
would be needful. In consequence, he had
taken no precautions whatever against such
an eventuality. He had dismissed his hired
dog-cart ; or, at any rate, he had given no
order for it to be kept waiting, which, in the
result, amounted to the same thing. Moreover,
in his over-night study of " Bradshaw "'
and time tables, he had completely ignored all
facts relating to the details of " up " trains.

Now, however, that he was, to a certain
extent, stranded, he repented of this lack of
foresight.

But, au courant with the plans, wishes,
and whereabouts of Esse, he was a new man.
His present difficulty was as nothing.

Moreover, her letter, with its explanations,
had afforded him untold comfort, apart altogether
from plans, wishes, and localities.

In the midst of his weird terror — of his
fear of he knew not what coming disaster, a
speck of surprise, which was so like to sorrow
that he knew not whether it were surprise or
sorrow, had mingled with his suspense. It
floated through his mind, so soon as he found
Esse gone.

It was only a speck. Not big enough to
be called a cloud. But, small as it was, it
added a considerable iota to his tribulation.

It came, in part, from out of a gloomy
astonishment, that, at all risks, under all
circumstances, his betrothed had not waited

at Brashleigh for him — waited, tender, true,
and unflinching. It came also, in part, from
out of an incipient jealousy, which whispered
to him that naught should have been to her
of such vast importance as his return ; in a
word, as — himself.

Thus following in the wake of other lords
of the creation, Arthur Greatorix proved himself
to be but a very ordinary flesh and blood
nineteenth-century lover, and by no means, a
hero.

Perhaps, he scarcely deserved that a
panacea should have come to him so quickly,
but having got it, he accepted it fully, without
moralizing, or mental discussion, of any kind
whatsoever.

Ascertaining, for certain, that his dog-cart
had really gone, he prepared, without delay,
to make for the nearest station on foot. He
did not mind the walk. It was the time, that
such a proceeding took, which he begrudged.
But he knew many a short cut, as well as

many a by-path and the station reached, he
could, at least, telegraph to Esse.

It would be a satisfaction to tell her of his
arrival in England, and also, that he would be
with her, as early as possible, on the morrow.
Besides which, he had a hazy recollection
that on a certain Sunday evening, long
ago, he had seen a train stop at the station
in question to take up passengers. He was
passing accidentally, and paid little attention,
at the time, to the fact. But now, it assumed
a vast importance for him. As nearly as he
could remember, it was about six o'clock,
when the train had come in sight.

There was a faint hope that such a
desideratum might occur again. In the
event of this, he found he had but little time
to lose. Therefore, with a caressing pat on
the breast pocket which contained his paper
treasure, he bade adieu to the housekeeper,
and left Brashleigh Manor to its gloom, and
to its silence.

It cost him a sharp pang, thus to turn his
back upon the old place. But the future
beckoned him. And he went.

By a stroke of good fortune he caught the
train. His memory had not played him false.
Just as he arrived at the end of the short
route, which he had taken, and emerged upon
the high road, he saw the smoke from the
engine rising above the tops of the distant
trees. A smart run, of some four or five
minutes, resulted in the simultaneous arrival
of himself and the train at the station ; he atone
end of it, the train at the other He had
only just time to procure a ticket and jump
in. The telegram to Esse could not, therefore
be despatched.

Once seated, for the second time that day,
in a railway carriage, Arthur became aware
that his matutinal meal had been the merest
pretence. Moreover, that from the time of
his scant repast, until that present moment,
no bit or sup had passed his lips.

His wrath, to say nothing of his spin, had
uncomfortably sharpened his appetite. But
such articles de luxe as " Julian " and
refreshment cars had not then been so much
as dreamed of, wherefore hungry passengers
were forced to take refuge either in sleep
or in literature. Arthur sought the former.
But it proved a vain delusion, in spite
of the wide-open, staring eyes with which
he had passed the previous night. He
had no companion in the flesh, with whom to
beguile the tedium of the journey by desultory
conversation, but he had, within his
breast, that worst of all spirit-companions
under such circumstances, and that was impatience.


Thankful without measure, therefore, was
he, when his journeying came to an end — still
more thankful, perhaps, when "Limmer's'
was reached and food obtained.

Hotel managers and those about them are
never surprised at anything in the shape of

arrivals and departures. The reappearance
of Arthur, that night, astonished no one. But,
although it was thus with the members of the
hotel staff, it was very different with one
individual who in no way belonged to them.
This individual was the same, who, upon the
previous night, had stealthily withdrawn from
the coffee-room, and who, by so doing, left
Arthur Greatorix its sole occupant. It was
not in the coffee-room, however, where Arthur
and he next met, but face to face in a somewhat
narrow passage.

There was plenty of light and not much
space, as they so met; therefore it was next
to a miracle that, Arthur should have passed
anyone, without some sort of scrutiny. But,
hungry and tired, and with his thoughts resting
upon Esse, it is certain that he never
once cast his eyes upon the man, with whom,
for an instant, he was in such close juxtaposition.
This fact drew a soft "whew" of
gratification, from the individual, who had

VOL. II. M

thus escaped observation, and who was on his
way upstairs to seek an early couch.

The reappearance of Arthur, however, caused
him not only to change his intention, but also
to turn his footsteps in an entirely different
direction. He, too, like Arthur Greatorix,
had passed the previous night without
slumber ; he, too, like Arthur Greatorix, had
tossed restlessly within his bed, now giving
sturdy compelling to his pillows, and then
fiercely anathematizing his unknown bed-maker.
But neither pillows nor bed-maker
belonged to " Limmer's."

The bed upon which he had chosen to lie
was elsewhere. The reason for this choice
can be briefly explained.

When he stole from the coffee-room, it was
for two reasons. One was to avoid being seen
by Arthur Greatorix ; the other was to watch
the result of the order, which he had overheard
Arthur give to his servant, Picard,
with reference to the letter.

After awhile, Pickard was duly sent for.
After awhile, Pickard retired from the presence
of his master, letter in hand, and shortly
afterwards quitted the hotel.

The individual, who had thus far watched
both Arthur and his servant, also left the
hotel. Dashing lightly into the street, he
shrugged his shoulders deprecatingly at the
heavily-falling rain, and peered sharply about
for the retreating figure of Pickard.

Objects were scarcely distinguishable in
the murky atmosphere ; nevertheless, a pair
of sharp eyes soon espied the figure in question,
and a quick pursuit was at once commenced.


On they went, the pursued and the pursuer,
up one street and down another,
through gutters, across roads, round corners,
now splashing into mud-heaps, and then
stumbling against kerbstones.

When one stopped, the other also stopped.
But the pursuer never failed to take care that

a discreet distance was maintained between

them.

With his coat collar turned up to keep off
the rain, and with a pipe in his mouth for company,
honest John Pickard had not the
faintest conception that his footsteps were
thus being dogged.

He had lived with Arthur for many years,
and had travelled half round the world with
him.

The midnight errand, upon which he was
engaged, had been commenced with sore
reluctance ; but he was too faithful, to rebel
against it, even in thought.

Presently he made straight for the Regent's
Park. Once or twice he hesitated, as if his
bearing was unknown or forgotten.

At such moments, he who gave chase to
Pickard, paused also, checking meanwhile the
low whistle in which from time to time he
had been indulging.

His espionage was ended at last. Pickard

stopped suddenly before a house, and rang
the bell. There was light streaming from
one of the windows ; nevertheless, he had
to ring again before the door was opened.
A very brief colloquy ensued. This ended,
Pickard yawned and shivered. Then he
rebuttoned his coat, which had been unfastened
so that he might produce, from an
inside pocket, the letter which he had been
sent to deliver, and began to retrace his steps
to the hotel.

But he was no longer followed. His pursuer
was satisfied. A discovery had been
made. There was nothing more to be accomplished.


Therefore, pursued and pursuer went each
his own way. And thus it came to pass, that
the latter went not back to sleep, that night,
at " Limmer's."

The reasons for his change of plan were
cogent. Neither, after finding himself, face
to face, in the passage with Arthur Greatorix,

did he pass the following night at " Limmer's."



Suive qui pent he said to himself, as
for the second time he betook himself to his
changed quarters. " Such a sudden return,
from the wilds of Leicestershire, is almost as
astounding 'as the midnight despatch to
Alice Royston."

BETTER THAN ANY VALENTINE.

ALTHOUGH, in exchanging the companionship
of Flora Grant for that of Rachel Tritton,
Esse had escaped from much rending of
heart and bruising of spirit, time lagged
somewhat heavily for her at Sunnyside.

Her departure from Brashleigh Manor had
been an uprooting of her keenest interests,
and a tearing away of her dearest associations.


Therefore, she could not plunge all at once
into the placid stream of life which ebbed and
flowed around her, in the home of Rachel
Tritton. Clear, good, and wholesome,
although that stream was, Esse did but dip
therein the tips of her dainty feet. She
stood, as it were, upon its banks, watching
the gliding of its pure crystal depths, but she

was pre-occupied, absorbed, love-lorn, waiting
; ever waiting, and listening for some
token of the coming of Arthur.

Ah, come when he might, his arms would
never again enfold the same joyous child
whom once they held ! A child, too completely
happy to know that she was happy —
a child, who could not tell of ill, because, for
her, all things had been so good.

For ever, and for aye, the child-life of
Esse Montague had drifted from her — its
rosy morn had fled — its sunny day had set.
In the mist of dawning womanhood, by which
it was succeeded, Esse looked around her,
trembling and amazed.

She was even more lovely than before. So
Rachel Tritton told herself, when first she
looked upon Esse after her arrival at Sunny-side.
So, good old Nurse Marie thought, as
each day she nervously performed those
duties of maid to which she had been promoted.
And so, both Rachel Tritton and

Nurse Marie felt assured would Mr. Arthur
Greatorix think, so soon as the sea, or his
own will and whim, should return him to the
presence of his young lady-love.

But although thus they both thought, sofar
as Arthur Greatorix was concerned, no
utterance was given to their reflections.
They spoke of Esse to each other, of her
well-being, of matters relating to her personal
comfort, and even of her marvellous beauty,
but they never mentioned Arthur.

Rachel's heart failed her more and more
about him. She was uneasy, with a growing
uneasiness, which was very different, in cause
and character, from that which was experienced
by Nurse Marie, who had long since
convinced herself, either that his bones were
whitening upon some desolate mountain top,
or that he had been devoured by fishes both
great and small.

Nothing short of one or other of these impediments
to his return, could have kept him

so long away from her beloved young mistress,
Marie felt more than positive.

Horrors grow apace, in the ignorance
which is commonly to be found in housekeeper's
rooms, and servant's halls. Both
places are often perfect hot-beds of superstition.
They teem with ghostly warnings,
presentiments of ill luck, forebodings, death,
and the like.

So, at any rate, it had been at Brashleigh
Manor. Dreams, visions, weird omens, and
supernatural signs of divers natures, were said
to have preceded the sudden demise of its
master. It mattered nothing, that the wisdom
of the augurs was only made manifest after
the dread event had actually taken place.
There were plenty of open-mouthed, white
checked, shivering believers to be found,
who gloated, while they trembled, over the
statements which were poured into their
terror-stricken ears. Wherefore, letting their
fancies run rampant, the prophets of evil grew

still bolder, and muttered of terrible things
which were yet to come.

Marie had been amongst the listeners. It
would not be quite fair to class her with the
believers. But the loss of her old master had
tried her as she had never before been tried ;
while, her affection for Esse, made her
nervously on the alert, when additional disasters
were foreboded. She had given ear to
these forebodings, against her better judgment.
The listening to them had been to her
own undoing. She could not free herself
from their dismal impression. And at last,
they reached a culminating point, around
the unfortunate head of Arthur, and turned
Esse into an embryo widow, broken-hearted
and despairing.

Fortunately, Marie kept her tongue and
her eyes in a better state of subjection than
she did her ideas. No doleful words were
spoken in the presence of Esse. No pitying
looks were allowed to stray over her fair face.

Marie was invariably bright and cheerful ;
therefore, Esse little guessed at the agony,
which rent the bosom of her faithful serving
woman, when she would sometimes speak to
her, of this or that plan, which should be
carried out, " when Mr. Greatorix came
back."

With this weight upon her spirits, it will be
understood, very easily, that the minutes,
the hours, and the days, at Sunnyside, did
not pass much more lightly for maid, then
they did for mistress.

They had arrived there on Thursday. It
was now Monday morning. Sunday had
passed somewhat drearily. The strange
place, the strange church, the merely outside
interest in parson and people, the want of
usual occupation, lowering skies, and wet
footpaths, had combined together, in a depressing
force, against the two late inmates
of Brashleigh.

Esse was listless, she scarce knew wherefore,

and she reproached herself heartily for
her listlessness. The fault, she knew, lay with
herself. But such a knowledge was not
curative. She was not sorry, therefore, when
night, and with it bed-time, came. To feel
ashamed of herself was such a thoroughly new
and unpleasant experience, that she was glad to
hide herself and her shortcomings in the seclusion
of her own chamber. She was afraid that
she had been very thankless, and very wicked.
She longed to lift up her hands in prayer for
pardon. So Marie was quickly dismissed.
After she had gone, Esse, bent meekly down
upon her knees and sued for pardon, with all
the fervour of a pure and simple faith. Then,
she laid her head upon her pillow and slept
a sweet, peaceful sleep.

Her repose was long as well as sweet.
It was already past her usual hour for rising
when she awoke to find Rachel Tritton, as
well as Marie, in her room. Their presence
did not surprise Esse. Rachel often paid

her an early visit, while it was the business
of Marie to be there.

Are you awake, Esse dear, quite
awake ? " asked Rachel, coming very close
to the bed on tip-toe, and speaking in a voice
which sent the sound of joy-bells through
her words, " because, if you are, I have something
for you. It is not the fourteenth of
February, or I should say I had a valentine
for you."

11 For me ! " said Esse, lifting her head
from her pillow, and tossing back the hair
which clustered over her forehead ; while her
smiles broke in dimples over her cheeks which
were yet flushed with her warm, peaceful
slumber. " What is it? " and she stretched
out a little hand, upon which sparkled
Arthur's diamond pledge of betrothal, towards
Rachel.

11 A telegram. Do not be startled. I
have had one too, and it is all good news —
ah, so good ! " cried Rachel, the joy-bells

sounding out more loudly, than before, as she
spoke, " and I am so glad for you, my brave,
patient, little Esse."

Rachel might have spared herself the
trouble of expressing her delight. It showed
itself distinctly enough, in her face and voice,
without words. By this time, Marie had also
approached the bed, and, in order that she
might place a soft pink wrap around the
shoulders of her mistress, was gently lifting
coil after coil of the refractory hair, which
Esse had tossed back.

Marie had not heard the words of Rachel
Tritton, and Marie disliked telegrams. They
were inventions upon which she looked with
extreme suspicion. It was no favourable eye,
therefore, that she cast upon the one, which,
upon the present occasion, Rachel produced
from out of the depths of the pocket of her
dress.

"Oh, Rachel! Oh, Marie!" exclaimed
Esse, as she scanned the message, with

marvellous rapidity, " he " — then she stopped
suddenly, and covered her face with her
hands.

Yes, dear, I know all about it," said
Rachel, affectionately, (( God has been very
good to you."

Esse thought of her unprofitably spent Sunday,
and she felt more than ever contrite, as
she heard what Rachel said. But her happiness
was irrepressible. Flinging her arms
around her old nurse, she cried —

Marie, dear old nurse ; dress me quickly.
Mr. Greatorix is in England, and will be here
to-day — this morning."

Marie's stolid countenance, wore an expression
of intense incredulity, for a few
seconds. Then the incredulity gave place t )
pleasure. The ghostly predictions were foresworn,
and she said, heartily —

That's the blessedness bit of news you
could have told me, miss."

It was quite evident that Esse fully concurred

in this opinion, so lightly did she
spring from her couch, and so blithely did
she commence the preparations for her
toilette.

il Breakfast is ready, when you are, Erne,
so make haste ; or Mr. Greatorix will arrive
before our tea cups and saucers have disappeared."


And, leaving Esse with this delightful
possibility upon which to reflect, Rachel
withdrew.

Nurse Marie found the duties, which had
devolved upon her from Finette, considerably
more arduous than heretofore, upon that
particular Monday morning. She wished her
darling mistress to look her loveliest, but,
between a lack of confidence in her own
powers, and sundry manifestations of an impatience
which had never before been manifested
by that beloved mistress, poor Marie
grew hopelessly troubled and flustered.

Her old hands, trembled with excitement,

VOL. II. N

as she again and again strove to arrange the
long tresses around the small classic head
of Esse. Marie was foiled by the very
luxuriance of the material with which she
had to work. By no effort could she reduce
the bright masses to order. Flora Grant
would have enjoyed an indubitable triumph,
if she could have witnessed Mane's ineffectual
struggle.

At last Esse started up, and shaking out
her wondrous locks, which fell literally below
her knees with flecks of gold gleaming amid
their rich waves, she said, with restored archness
of look and manner —

11 It won't do, Marie, we must give it up.
I am sorry to shake down all your handiwork,
but, with your trembling fingers, and my
restless head, no hair could be done up
properly. So get me a dress, and I will go
down to breakfast with this dreadful mane
loose. I cannot keep Miss Tritton waiting
any longer. It is very unfortunate that

I should have been so sleepy this morning.
Do not look so serious, Marie ; Mr. Greatorix
cannot possibly arrive just yet ; it is only a
quarter past nine, and you know he has to
drive from Canterbury. Directly after breakfast,
I will come to you again."

Marie did as she was bidden. The dress
was brought, and a few minutes afterwards
Esse was opening the door of the diningroom.


I hope I do not scandalize you, Rachel,
by appearing thus dishevelled. I have quite
horrified Marie, by the proceeding;" said
Esse gaily, seating herself, as she spoke, by
the round breakfast table, at which Rachel
was presiding over an array of " Spoke," that
would have set the mouth watering of the
most lukewarm china-maniac.

Rachel laughingly declared her ability to
sustain the shock which had thus been given
to her nerves, and amid pleasant comments
upon their respective telegrams, she and

Esse quickly dispatched their morning meal.
After which, Rachel went upstairs to Mrs.
St. Vincent, and Esse withdrew to keep her
faith with Marie.

It was well that Esse did so without loss
of time.

Although lovers are not gifted with wings,
similar to those which flaunt so jauntily from
the round shoulders of Cupid, they are
generally tolerably expeditious in their movements,
when distance lies between them and
the object of their passion.

Before Marie had given the finishing
touches to the hair dressing, which, upon a
second trial, she was able to perform far more
satisfactorily, a fly had driven up to the
house, through which the sharp ring of a
bell quickly resounded. A slight stir followed.


Esse knew intuitively that Arthur had
arrived. And it was even so. While she
stood, with clasped hands and a beating

heart, in the centre of her chamber, Marie
had passed to its door, and was speaking to
someone without.

If you please, Mrs. Simmonds," such was
Marie's surname, " Miss Tritton said I was
to tell you, to let Miss Montague know, that
Mr. Greatorix was here."

The cherry-cheeked damsel, who delivered
this message, was in considerable awe of
Marie, otherwise she could not have
restrained her excitement from bubbling forth
in words.

The riches of Esse, the beauty of Esse,
and the absent lover of Esse, had, between
them, converted her into a heroine of fairy
romance, in the estimation of the domestics
at Sunnyside.

The actual arrival of the absentee lover,
therefore, caused a perfect flutter of sympathy
and curiosity amongst them, which the lucky
parlour-maid (lucky, because she caught the
first glimpse of Arthur) by no means allayed,

as she described his personal appearance.
In her opinion, at least, Arthur was quite
worthy of the heroine of fairy-land.

There was no haste in the actions of Esse,
when Marie gently repeated the substance of
the message to her. She only said —

Thank you, Marie, " very quietly, and by
her manner Marie knew that she wished to
be left alone.

Marie closed the door very softly after her,
so softly indeed that Esse scarcely knew
she had gone. Looking around her, however,,
Esse found herself alone.

Then, on the same spot whereon the night
before she had knelt in humble supplication
for pardon, she again lifted up her hands.
No words came from between her parted lips.
In the tumult of her rapture, she could not put
her thankfulness into syllables. She could only
kneel lowly down and offer the dumb joy of
her heart. Surely, He, the Loving Father,
sanctified it.

Then she arose, took one glance in her
mirror, Esse was only a woman (be it remembered)
and forgetful of anxious moments,
of waiting and of doubts, she went forth to
meet her lover.

Rachel was wont, in after days, to aver
that she was present when Esse and Arthur
met. But to this statement they were neither
of them ever known to give credence. Not
even, would they accord their belief, when
Rachel told them circumstantially of certain
erratic actions, which were performed by
Arthur, while he waited for the coming of
Esse.

It was a very short time," Rachel would
say, il you were not long in making your
appearance, Esse ; but, I am sure, Mr.
Greatorix shook hands half-a-dozen times
with me, and that he walked round and round
the room like a poor panther at the Zoo.
He kept forgetting me, you see, Esse, and
then, when his politeness put in a reminder of

my presence, he gave me another shake of
the hand, as if he had only just been
announced. Of course, I understood it all,
and went through the pantomime quite demurely
; but, I am afraid if you had not come
when you did, I must have laughed outright.
Another ' How d'ye do Miss Tritton, I am so
glad to see you,' would have been too much
for my gravity."

A peal of laughter, coupled with a
vehement denial, generally followed the narrative
of these, and the like facts. Nevertheless,
Rachel was present, when Esse, radiant and
blushing, was folded to the breast of her
lover. But Rachel quickly saw that she was
totally unperceived. Whereupon, with a soft
laugh, she stole away ; happy, because her
friends were happy. By reason of unselfishness,
she was, perhaps, as glad as they.

It would be difficult to describe the intense
happiness of the few days, which succeeded
to the arrival of Arthur.

After the first tumultuous rapture of reunion
had passed, the joy of Esse and her
betrothed settled into a bliss which, the
loved memory of their dead, chastened,
without clouding.

Of couse, Arthur gave a graphic account
of his useless journey to Brashleigh, beginning
with his impatience to get there so soon as he
had read the letters which he found at the
Club, and ending with his return, cold, hungry
and tired, to " Limmer's ; " on Sunday night.
Arrived at this point, the description, which
he gave of his disasters, became infinitely
more cheerful. He could make very merry,
now, over the haste with which he had devoured
his late repast, dispatched Pickard
with telegrams (those telegrams, which
Esse thought so much better than valentines,
but which were not, after all, delivered
the night they were sent off) and settled
upon taking the very first train to Canterbury.


(( I thought, darling, you and Miss Tritton
would certainly have got my telegrams on
Sunday night, or I do not know that, I should
have dared to present myself, at such an unearthly
time as a little after ten," Arthur said
more than once to Esse, and each time that
he had so said, she made answer, like the
little hypocrite which her words proved her to
be —

Yes, Arthur, it was much too early for
you to arrive ! It was a dreadful bore altogether,
and it disturbed me before I was half
awake."

But, somehow, although his fiancee thus
spoke, and with much show of displeasure,
Arthur did not seem to think any further
apology necessary, and the descriptions, of the
how, when, and where that had taken place
during his absence, went on with uninterrupted
harmony. There were two points in his
conversation which were deserving of notice.
And they attracted the attention of Esse.

The first was that Arthur never, by the
slightest word, revealed aught respecting his
going to, his stay at, or his return from,
Gibraltar. The course of conversation, however,
one day, led him so directly into the
matter that he could not help observing upon
it —

I miss your uncle more and more everyday,
my dear Esse. I never thought he
would have been taken, before I could tell him
all about the business which took me to
'Gib'"

No," returned Esse sadly. She did
not know what else to say, and she waited,
expecting that, perhaps, Arthur would take
her into his confidence ; since, that other
confidence was denied to him by death.

But he did not. He was silent for a short
time, and when next he spoke it was upon an
entirely different subject.

The other point, upon which Esse often
pondered, was this. Arthur did not seem to

have any knowledge respecting the roll of
papers with which, Ralph Grant had charged
her to possess herself, in the event of his
death, whensoever this should happen. And,
thereby, she was perplexed exceedingly.

It had seemed to Esse that it would be
right to tell her affianced husband of the
interview which had taken place between
Lord Oakdene and herself. She watched
anxiously, therefore, for some allusion to the
papers which would enable her to tell of her
fruitless search for them, and, from telling
of this search, to speak of that event to
which it ultimately led. No such allusion,
however, came to her help. It was evident,
she thought in consequence, that Arthur was
quite ignorant upon the matter. The secret
rested, therefore, between Esse and her dead
uncle, and she resolved that not even her
affection for Arthur should tempt her to
betray it.

And, with this secret of a charge from the

dead to be kept inviolate, another secret had
perforce to be kept inviolate also. The one,
in a manner, hinged upon the other.

So it came to pass that Esse hid from
Arthur the love which Lord Oakdene had
betrayed for her.

Thus as Arthur Greatorix had, a secret,
from Esse Montague — the secret of his
journey — so had Esse Montague, a secret,
from Arthur Greatorix — the secret of a roll
of unfound papers, and, coupled with the
secret of that roll of unfound papers, there
was the secret of a man's love.

And these secrets were kept, alike by Esse
and Arthur, the one from the other.

Whether wisely, or otherwise, who may
tell?

ON THE PIER.

41 That is the handsomest girl in Brighton."
The speaker in question was none other
than the individual who had watched the
carriage which conveyed Esse Montague
from the precincts of Brashleigh Manor — who
had afterwards accosted Nellie, and who had
subsequently possessed himself of the letter,
which he opened, read, closed, refastened,
and returned — it was the same individual, in
fact, who had successfully eluded the notice
of Arthur Greatorix at " Limmer's," and who
had followed John Pickard to the house in
the Regent's Park.

That is the handsomest girl in Brighton."
At the repetition of this remark, the fair-haired,
gentlemanly-looking stripling, to whom

it was addressed, looked about him in surprise.
He and his companion were standing
upon the pier at Brighton. The " queen of
watering places " was full to overflowing. At
the time of this story, it was in the zenith of
its popularity. The best teams were driven,
and the best horses ridden, then, by gentlemen,
rather than by their tradesmen. Farmers
could pay their rents, therefore, landowners
enjoyed not only prestige, but also full
pockets.

Moreover, in those days, professional
beauties had not been heard of. The lovely
faces, of those whom society admitted within
her charmed pale, could not be purchased for
little more than a few pence at the nearest
photographers.

But then, as it is now, and as it always
has been, and as it always will be, a beautiful
woman attracted universal attention, if not
universal admiration.

The pier was crowded. The sun shone,

the band played, while the sea sparkled and
danced in the sunlight, and the gloom of
winter was forgotten.

To and fro, chattering gaily, moved the
throng of fashionables. And, to and fro,
moved the lady who had excited the eulogy
with which this chapter opened.

Bertie Hope (such was the name of the
stripling to whom the eulogy had been addressed)
had no time to frame an answer,
before his companion continued —

By Jove, she's lovely ! "

Who, or what, are you talking about,
Max?" asked Bertie absently.

Who, or what, am I talking about, you
insensate child," echoed his companion, impatiently
; " when will you be out of swaddling
clothes ? I perpetrated the expression
of an opinion upon an unparalleled specimen
of feminine loveliness, under the imbecile
idea that your juvenile faculties would be able
to appreciate such a marvellous amount of

beauty. But I see your baby mind is incapable
and feeble to a hopeless degree."

Don't be cross, Max," interrupted Bertie
penitently; "I didn't see the lady; a fellow
can't help that, I suppose ! "

You never do see anything, mon g argon,
that is worth looking at. In the present
instance, your want of observation is provoking,
as you might have been able, perhaps,
to tell me the name of the beautiful
unknown. For the love of Plutus, open your
eyes a little wider, and do not keep them forever
stuck fast upon an image, which is as
round as a dumpling and as red as a peony."

That is a hit at Laura," interrupted the
boy. (Bertie was only seventeen.)

Of course it is," sneered his companion ;
who ever heard of any fact, in either ancient
or modern history, so preposterous, as ten
thousand a year falling in love with fat hands,
and flat feet."

VOL. II. O

Bertie crimsoned, as he retorted angrily —
It's thundering gentlemanlike, Max, I
call it, to speak of any lady of my acquaintance
in that manner, and if you think that
I am going to stand it just because I happen
to be — to be — well — just not quite so old as
you are," Bertie was too wrathful to articulate
as fast as he wished, "you make an
awful mistake. I am sick of this stupid pier.
I shall go and see if my mother cares to
drive, and if she does not, I shall have out
the tandem."

Bravo, Bertie!" was the sarcastic retort,

thank the fates, for allowing you to get so

much excitement out of so small a measure

of provocation. Cause, by no means equal

to effect, I assure you, mon crier ! Decline

to grow old, my sweet youth, or, you will lose

this delightfully explosive emotion, along with

a few other specialities which are by no means

to be lightly esteemed. Confess now, that

you are dying to pitch me over into that uncommonly

damp ocean, and all for the love
of Laura, whose ancestors grew rich by making
jam tarts, and who, with her widowed
maternal progenitor, lives at that addenda/mto
Brighton, called Hove. No, Bertie, under no
pretence whatever can I consent to your
immediate retirement from this festive pier.
If I were so weak, it goes without saying,
that you would rush straight to the lovely
Laura, and pour out to her a touching recital,
both of your injuries and of my delinquencies.
Madame voice mere and the tandem are
myths, my dear boy, in which, with candour
unimpeachable, I frankly confess I have no
faith ! "

Bertie Hope did not reply. He was not
sulky in disposition, but the jeering jargon of
his companion annoyed him. Bertie could
give and take chaff as well, or better, perhaps,
than most youngsters of his age. But he
was dumb before sarcasm. And then, he had
a very sincere admiration, for the confectioner's

fair descendant. In fact, he
considered himself to be very much in love
with her flaxen locks and big blue eyes, and,
being by nature honest and true, he felt it to
be his bounden duty to protect her from all
disparaging remarks. But, he was no match
in the matter of words, for his companion.
So, he remained silent, with folded arms,
looking irresolutely towards the exit from the
pier.

Come, Bertie!" said his companion presently,
with mimic pathos and mock concern,
tell me that you are going to give me up —
cut my acquaintance — cast our friendship to
the winds of Heaven — mangle your own
tender throat — sever my mature windpipe ;
in fact, do anything you like, except marry
Laura of the tarts and puffs. But, for pity's
sake, wear a more agreeable expression upon
your interesting physiognomy. ,,

Bertie laughed. He couldn't help himself.
Encouraged by this sign of restored good

humour, George Maxwell, or as Bertie called
him, " Max," continued his harangue.

Come along; let us go and cement our
broken hearts, heal our wounded affection,
and calm our perturbed spirits, over a game of
pyramids. Wait a moment though' he
added, " I am hanged if that piece of resplendent
loveliness is not coming our way
again, and I should like to convince myself,
that her face, figure, and complexion, are as
perfect as they appeared to be at first sight.
She, or rather, perhaps, I ought to say, they,
are under pretty strong escort anyhow."

Bertie looked up, and doffed his hat, the
moment that he did so, to the lady whose
personal attractions had been under the surveillance
of George Maxwell. Then, with a
look of considerable astonishment upon his
frank, boyish face, Bertie said in an undertone,
as she passed along —

Why, Max, where on earth can you have
been hanging out, that you don't know who

Miss Montague is, when you see her? There
is a perfect furore about her, and there has
been ever since she arrived last week. None
of the other women can hold a candle to her.
I thought that everybody in Brighton knew
her by sight."

George Maxwell coloured slightly, and
shrugging his shoulders, replied carelessly
—

Gout ; hereditary gout ! I have been
held fast to my room by it for the last few
days. I hate this detestable hole, and, should
have cut it long ago, but for my still more
detestable complaint."

Perhaps you will like it better ; Brighton,
I mean, not the gout, now that you have seen
the beautiful Miss Montague," suggested
Bertie.

You are a most delightful innocent, mon
petit,' returned George Maxwell, " do you
suppose that loveliness, howsoever superlative
it might be, could divert the bent of my inclination

? Deduce the difference of this by
seventeen from seven-and-thirty."

I don't know how," answered Bertie
naively ; ll but, I do know, that all the world
seems to be perfectly infatuated with Miss
Montague, and that, wherever you go, people
are talking about her. She is engaged to be
married, though, to Greatorix. He is a
Cornwall man, with lots of tin, and as she has
money enough to buy up most of us, I should
say it must be very jolly for them, take it all
round."

George Maxwell whistled softly to himself.
Then he said —

Cornwall is famous for tin, mon enfant.
Are you jumbling up your knowledge of
geography, and of society together, I wonder
! "

Bertie, by this time, had quite let go his
wrath against the asperse of the charms of
the fair Laura, and he answered with perfect
good-humour —

I am not quite such a duffer as that. I
didn't learn much at Eton, perhaps, but I
got on all right with my slang, you know ! If
you don't believe that what I have said about
Miss Montague is all right, just stop here a
little longer, and I bet you a sov. that we
shall see Greatorix bearing down after her.
They call them the ( fairy-yacht ' and the
4 iron-clad.' He is such a splendid looking
fellow ! I should just like you to see him —
such a chest ! " exclaimed the slight stripling,
enthusiastically.

What, of tin ? " was the teasing rejoinder.


Yes ; if you like. I don't care. You
are too sharp for me, Max. Oakdene is my
cousin, you see, and he is a sort of connection
of the widow lady with whom Miss Montague
lives, so, of course, I know all about them."

You are a clever child," answered George
Maxwell, looking furtively about him with his
cunning, glittering eyes, " but I must deny

myself the benefit of your delightful precocity,
if you are bent upon remaining upon
this confounded pier."

The sun is quite hot," said Bertie.

He and his companion seemed to have
changed places, with regard to their wish concerning
the pier. A short time previously,
Bertie had been impatient to depart from its
region, whereas now, he desired to stay.
With his companion, it was also vice versa.

The sun is quite hot," repeated Bertie,
41 won't you stay, Max, and inspect the ' ironclad
' ? "

"Hang the ' iron-clad !' " was the retort.
Come, Bertie ! you promised me a sight of
your new leader. I am at your disposal for
the next half-hour, if you are inclined for the
stables."

Bertie hesitated. He saw many friends,
among the fashionable idlers, with whom he
would like to have exchanged greetings. But
what boy is proof against showing off a new

possession in horseflesh, or, indeed, what man
either? So he wavered, and, so far as the
pier, the " fairy-yacht," the " iron-clad," and
his friends were concerned, Bertie was
lost.

He put his arm through that of his companion,
and they turned away together. For
one who had but just recovered from an attack
of gout, the footsteps of George Maxwell
were quick and light in the extreme. They
had, in reality, lost none of their jaunty
sprightliness since they carried him so airily
along the paths and roads surrounding
Brashleigh Manor ; while, even by the side
of the youthful Bertie, George Maxwell's
figure lost nothing by comparison on the
score of littleness and activity. But, notwithstanding
his freedom of gait, and easy
bearing, he no sooner emerged from the pier,
than he hailed a passing fly, into which he
promptly jumped.

Going to drive, Max?" asked Bertie,

with unfeigned astonishment ; " why, it is
not ten minutes ' walk to the stables ! "

Yes, I know ; but get in Bertie, there's a
good fellow, and shut the door. This east
wind is enough to cut one in two."

George Maxwell pulled up the collar of his
coat, cowered into a corner of the vehicle,
and spoke with such unusual earnestness that,
Bertie Hope was fain, to follow his injunction.
So into the fly he got, and they were soon
rattling down a side street in the direction of
the stables.

But George Maxwell was ill at ease.
His restless eyes were ever on the lookout
from the carriage window, while a hard,
and unpleasant smile played around the
corners of his mouth. He was an odd person,
to be coupled in the bonds of friendship with
Bertie Hope. And yet Bertie Hope rather
liked him, and felt flattered by the preference
which he openly showed for him. They had
met accidentally in Paris, where Bertie, who

had just been emancipated from the espionage
of a tutor, was waiting for his mother
to arrive from Italy.

Mrs. Hope was a widow, and Bertie, her
only child, was as nearly perfect, in her
estimation, as any human being could possibly
be ; while Bertie was almost as devoted
to her as she was to him.

He was a frank, open-hearted, gentlemanly
boy ; not particularly clever, perhaps, but he
was plentifully blessed with the riches of this
world, and so he did not need brains to earn
the butter wherewith to spread his bread.

Probably the maternal instincts of Mrs.
Hope might have caused her to look with
some doubtfulness upon the fitness, as
companion to her son, of George Maxwell.
But she never saw him. By some slight
alteration of her plans, she did not meet her
son in Paris. Therefore, he journeyed to
England without her. But, in so journeying,
he was accompanied by George Maxwell.

From that time, however, until they met by-chance
at Brighton, there had been an interregnum
in their intimacy ; an intimacy
which possessed few advantages, perhaps, to
Bertie Hope, but which George Maxwell was
right well pleased should be renewed.

Although Bertie was young in years, he
constantly formed the escort of his mother.
Consequently his acquaintance with a goodly
portion of society was by no means limited ;
a fact which rendered him of infinite service
to George Maxwell. It was the attraction,
perhaps, which drew the elder man to the
side of the younger.

Through Bertie Hope, George Maxwell had
discovered that Esse Montague and her
affianced husband were at Brighton.

But who was George Maxwell ?

A THUNDER-CLAP.

The information, which Bertie Hope had
given to George Maxwell concerning our
hero and heroine, was strictly true.

Esse and Arthur were at Brighton. Flora
Grant was also there.

To explain this, it will be necessary to go
back to Sunnyside, the home of Rachel
Tritton, and to a few days after the arrival of
Arthur Greatorix beneath its roof. Pleasantly
enough, as we know, had those days drifted
by. But they were suddenly broken up. A
clap of thunder, a sudden down-pour, and they
were gone !

Mrs. St. Vincent never appeared downstairs.
Leading from her bed-chamber was a
sitting-room, into which, when her health

permitted, she could be wheeled in her invalid
chair.

This particular apartment was the especial
care of Rachel, who loved to keep it bright
and cheery for the sufferer.

Throughout the year, fresh flowers in abundance
were always to be found there, so that
with its sunny windows, its picture-covered
walls and pretty furniture, it was as cheerful
in its aspect as even the affectionate heart of
Rachel could desire.

Esse had been a source of great pleasure
to Mrs. St. Vincent. Indeed, no event, fora
very long time past, had so completely
aroused her interest, and drawn her, so to
speak, out of herself, as the coming of Esse
to Sunnyside.

"A thing of beauty is a joy for ever;"
but, over and above the gratification which
Mrs. St. Vincent experienced from looking
upon the fresh, fair face of Esse, there was,
a loneliness, in the position of the young girl,

which drew forth from her aged friend much
tenderness upon her behalf.

Wealth cannot purchase the sting from out
of bereavement ; the possession of beauty
cannot free its possessor from blinding tears
and an aching heart. Thus reflected Mrs.
St. Vincent, who knew right well that the
first experience of grief, which had come to
Esse, was both sharp and deep.

There was no lack of sympathy, therefore,
in the heart of Mrs. St. Vincent, when she
was apprised of the fact that Arthur Great-oris
had returned to the side of his betrothed.
And when, shortly afterwards, beaming, blushing,
and sweetly shy, Esse brought him to
be presented in due form to her hostess, the
old lady was still further contented that he
should have arrived.

Peering keenly up into his face through
her gold-rimmed spectacles, she steadily
regarded him for a few seconds. Then she
turned away with a sigh of unmistakable

relief. The inspection had been, without
doubt, favourable to Arthur.

11 May God spare him to her," she said to
Rachel, when the lovers withdrew from her
presence ; " his heart is in the right place,
unless my old eyes deceive me sadly."

After their first visit there together, Esse
and Arthur went often to the pretty upstairs
room.

One day, Arthur had then been rather more
than a week at Sunnyside, Rachel, Esse and
he were with the invalid when a maid-servant,
appeared, who brought the information that
someone desired to see " Miss Montague."
Esse looked half-frightened as well as surprised
—

Who can it be?" she said, speaking
partly to Rachel and partly to Arthur.

It is a gentleman, if you please, miss,"
said the servant, supposing herself to have
been addressed.

VOL. II. P

Esse looked still more astonished, as she
returned —

u Will you be good enough to ask his
name?"

The maid retired, and Esse, looking at
her lover, said to him —

It must be someone from Brashleigh, I
think, Arthur. Surely, there is nothing the
matter ! "

Before any more words could be spoken,
the servant returned, and, with rather an
abashed countenance, began a half apology
for herself.

I am very sorry, miss ; but I am sure I
thought he was a gentleman ; he's dressed
just like one — a high hat and a hatband, and
all. I am sure I'm very sorry, miss. He
says I am to tell you, please, that he is the
butler from Brighton, and that he has brought
a letter for you from Mrs. Grant, and that his
orders was very particular not to give it on no
account into anybody's hands but your own."

The butler, from Brighton ! " ejaculated
Esse and Arthur in a breath, while a little
murmur of " Brighton ! " in a low tone of
amazement broke from Rachel.

Esse had heard once, and only once, from
Flora Grant since they parted. The letter
was from Calais, and, at the time it was
written, Flora Grant was en route for the
French capital. Esse answered this letter,
and, according to the instructions contained
therein, she addressed it to Paris. She
had likewise written subsequently to give
due information concerning the return of
Arthur.

Once more, therefore, the daily post had
become of moment to Esse. Not, as when
she waited for the coming of Arthur, of paramount
importance, but still, of sufficient
interest to keep her anxious.

Will Aunt Flora wish me to go to her
directly, and, will she be kind to Arthur, when
I do go?"

These were the two questions which Esse
constantly asked herself.

The answer to the first of these questions
could come only through the post ; while
time alone could reply to the second.

Waiting, therefore, to hear from Flora
Grant, and with the firm conviction that this
same individual was in Paris, the announcement
that a butler, from Brighton — "the
butler, from Brighton" — was below, utterly
bewildered Esse. Turning to Arthur, with a
pretty little gesture of entreaty, she said —

Come with me, the man may be an impostor."


I had no thought of letting you interview
him alone, my darling," was the reply.

And they left the room together.

But there was no imposition in the matter.
Esse needed no protector.

The man, so like unto a gentleman, high
hat, hat-band and all, proved to be a veritable
butler ; moreover, a butler of no small importance,

at any rate, in his own estimation.
Esse recognised him immediately, as the one
whom Flora Grant had engaged when she
made her changes, at Brashleigh, in the
domestic staff. He was, as a matter of
course, a complete stranger to Arthur
Greatorix, whose countenance, wore an expression
of considerable perplexity, during the
utterance of the first few sentences which
were spoken by Esse.

The letter from Flora Grant was to the
following effect —

King's Road,

Brighton,

M Wednesday.
Dear Esse,

"I am sending Parkins to deliver

this note to you in person, and he will also

arrange for your journey to me. I wish you to

leave Sunnyside at once. France did not

agree with me, so I came here the day before

yesterday. I shall probably return to Paris

next month. Everybody tells me that I am

looking wretchedly ill and thin. I do not

wonder at this, since I cannot sleep, nor have

I the smallest appetite. If you had made

Brashleigh more cheerful for me we might

have spent the winter there, which, after all,

Would have been less disagreeable, I think,

than staying about at hotels. I hate them all

so much that I have taken a house here for a

month. Of course, therefore, I require you

directly. I have sent for Finette, and some

of the other servants have already arrived.

Parkins knew their addresses, and those, who

had not found situations, were glad enough

to come. Perhaps you might get Miss

Tritton to let you leave Cinderella with her,

until we are really settled. Countess is very

well, but one dog is enough for us at present.

With love,

Your affectionate Aunt,

Flora Grant."
Such was the thunder-clap — such the

sudden down-pour, which eventually dispersed
the happy party at Sunnyside !

When it burst over them, Esse and Arthur
looked at each other, for a few seconds, in
silence. Then they dismissed Parkins to the
quarters of the Sunnyside domestics, and
looked again in silence at each other.

Little by little, now a word, then a sigh.
Arthur had arrived at a certain conception of
the want of consideration which, Esse had
sustained, during his absence, at the hands
of " Aunt Flora."

But the selfishness of this letter far exceeded
all that he had previously imagined.

His wrath was stirred, and his indignation
excited, as neither the one, nor the other, had
ever before been stirred, or excited, against a
woman.

Taking the heavily black bordered sheet of
paper, whereon the letter was transcribed,
from the hands of Esse, he tossed it upon
the table. Then, as the sweet, wistful eyes

of his betrothed travelled slowly upwards to
his own, his words broke forth —

You shall go to Brighton, darling, just
when you like. You must not be hurried.
If you prefer to remain here a little longer,
write to Mrs. Grant, and say so. Parkins
can take back your letter."
" Oh, Arthur ! "

11 Yes, darling! Tell me what your wishes
are, and I — I will write," he concluded hotly.

Esse gave a little gasp. It was all
different now that Arthur, her own old Arthur,
was there to take care of her. She remembered
how forlorn she had felt without him.
She thought how miserable that letter would
have made her, if he had not been present.
So the gasp was one of delight, not of
horror; and, she stole confidingly to him, with
that sweet sense of trust and protection,
which in itself is happiness to a woman.

"What do you wish, darling?" he whispered

with a kiss, as he felt the soft little
hands steal so clingingly into his.

But Esse did not answer. She was thinking
of the studied manner in which Flora
Grant had ignored Arthur throughout the
letter, and it pained her exceedingly.

There is nothing said about you," at last,
she murmured timidly.

Arthur laughed.

No, darling, but that does not matter.
When you go, I shall be your escort, all the
same."

Esse was growing more content each
moment. It was so happy — so like old times,
thus to be appropriated. The masterful words
of Arthur were sweet as the sweetest music
to her ear. They awoke a depth of love,
within her breast, which was all unknown to
her before. A thrill of purest passion swept
through her veins, as she said, falteringly —

I could not go without you, Arthur. I

cannot suffer again, as I suffered when you
were away from me."

Then half ashamed both of her confession
and of the warmth with which it had been
made, she hid her blushes upon her lover's
shoulder. Gently raising her pretty head, he
gazed fondly down upon her face. And, as
so he gazed, he read something written thereon,
which made his heart beat fast — his
breath come short. After awhile, he slowly
put the sweet face a little further from him,
and, as he put it from him, his gaze was
even more gentle, and more tender, than
before.

The blue-veined eyelids, with their long
lashes, drooped and quivered, the rosy lips
trembled, the pink cheeks paled. But still
he gazed fixedly upon them — too supremely
happy to speak — almost to breathe. Then
he rained kisses, fast and loving, upon
eyelid, lip and cheek, knowing full well the
while that, henceforth and for ever, there

lived for him, to guard and to cherish, the
tender, passionate love, of a fond, truehearted
woman.

Then Arthur Greatorix knew also, and, he
rejoiced, as he knew, that the child-life of
Esse Montague was dead — her full, perfect
womanhood was born.

Is anything the matter? "

This question was prefaced by a vast
amount of shaking and rattling of the door
handle.

"May I come in?" continued Rachel,
moving slowly into the room, her kind little
face wearing a look of grave concern.

The spell was broken. For a few brief
moments, Esse and Arthur had been conscious
only of each other. Earth, air, sky,
the whole world had been forgotten in their
speechless rapture. Rachel's voice recalled
them from the bliss in which their spirits had
been bound.

Esse was the first to recover herself :

looking somewhat vacantly at Rachel, she
said —

Oh, no, Rachel dear, thank you ; there is
nothing the matter, at least, I think not —
there is nothing the matter, is there, Arthur?"
she added, addressing her lover but without
looking at him.

Esse found it very difficult, to recall anything
distinctly, to her memory, at that
particular moment, therefore, in despair, she
had appealed to Arthur. In point of fact,
she was not at all certain whether there was
or there was not anything the matter. She
had a hazy idea of an unpleasant letter from
Flora Grant, but, the idea was too dim, for
an explanation thereof to be attempted.

Rachel was wondrously discreet. She did
not take so much as one furtive glance at
either of her companions. Possibly, had she
been less considerate, a peep at Arthur's tall
figure would have afforded her some slight
amusement. He was so evidently enthralled,

so utterly powerless to escape from the bondage
of his deep emotion, so abashed, in fact,
by his sudden recall from the groves of
Elysium into which he had wandered, that,
he was by no means master, either of his
position, or of his surrounding circumstances.

Women are proverbially quicker of wit than
men. While Arthur was dumb and something
very like shame-faced, Esse found her
tongue, and to a certain extent, although
coherency of idea was far from her, her presence
of mind.

Finding that Arthur continued silent, she
continued hurriedly —

The truth is, Rachel, I believe Aunt Flora
has returned to England, and I think she has
written to say something about my going
back to her. The letter is on the table, so I
will read it again, for I am not quite sure
what its contents really are."

Whereupon, Esse took up the letter and
commenced its perusal. The words danced

a little before her eyes, turned topsy-turvy,
performed somersaults and otherwise rendered
themselves as unintelligible as possible ;
nevertheless, they were of considerable service
to Esse, who, with bent head, converted them
into an opportunity for recovering her composure.


Rachel was aghast at the prospect of losing
her friends. She waited, however, with her
usual amount of patient consideration, until
Esse should tell her something more definite ;
now stirring the fire as she thus waited, and
then tripping hither and thither, fully intent,
apparently, upon putting either a book
straight, or a piece of bric-a-brac.

u Have you made it all out ? " asked Arthur
coming at last to the rescue of Esse, and
putting his arm softly around her slight waist.

He had recovered himself, and was feeling
a little ashamed of the manner in which,
alone, he had left Esse to bear the brunt
of the conversation with Rachel. So, he

wanted to atone for his fault, as lovingly
as possible.

I think so' replied Esse in answer to
his question ; " but, I do not at all know,
what to do."

11 Miss Tritton will help you, I am sure,"
he said promptly.

Then placing a chair for Rachel, and drawing
Esse to the sofa, he added gaily —

We will hold a council of war."

So they all three sat down, and a grave
discussion ensued, concerning the flitting of
Esse from Sunnyside to Brighton.

It is the last place in all the world to goto,
so soon after the death of poor Uncle
Ralph," she said, in the midst of the debate
relative to the summons from Flora Grant.

Rachel and Arthur fully agreed in the
opinion which Esse thus expressed ; but
what was to be done ?

Esse did not show Rachel the letter itself;
she was too much vexed at its whole tone.

Moreover, Esse did not wish Rachel to know,
after all her kind hospitality, how recklessly
Flora Grant, was disposed to make a convenience
of Sunnyside, with regard to Cinderella.


Esse never forgot that " Aunt Flora" had
been wife to " Uncle Ralph," and that so, it
was her bounden duty to hide the faults of
this self-same " Aunt Flora," as much as
might be. Arthur also entertained the same
feeling of esprit de corps with regard to the
widow of his dear old friend, and, as a consequence,
he fully understood the reticence of
Esse upon the matter.

With each other, Esse and Arthur had, of
course, nothing to hide — nothing to hide — at
least — upon this point.

It was some time before the conclave of
three which sat upon the Brighton document
arrived at a conclusion. When arrived at, it
resolved itself thus : Esse was forthwith
to write a letter, in which she should declare

her willingness to proceed to Brighton, on the
morrow, under the escort of Mr. Arthur Great-oris
and her old nurse, Marie.

Moreover, it w r as decided that this same
letter should be dispatched at once by the
hand of the gentlemanlike-looking butler, who
should be admonished to depart with all
speed, and to lose no time in reaching his
destination.

It is a relief to have things settled, even if
the settlement thereof be not in accordance
with our desires.

Anyhow, it was so now, although the necessity
for parting hung heavily over Rachel and
Esse.

For Arthur it was different. He was too
much absorbed in the contemplation of his
joy, and too busy with his thoughts of the hour
when Esse should be his own, his wife, to be
very much disturbed by the prospect of a removal
from Kent to Sussex.

He regretted that the visit should be

VOL. II. Q

brought to such a sudden termination. He
was sorry to quit the pretty cottage, with the
kind inmates who had given him such a hearty
welcome. But, so long as he was close to
Esse, he could afford to view matters very
philosophically ; and close to Esse, he was
determined to keep, albeit a hundred Mrs.
Grant's should be arrayed against him. He
foresaw some difficulties and, perchance, much
opposition. He called to mind the various
instances in which Flora Grant had openly
evidenced her dislike, both to himself and
to his engagement with Esse. But what
had it mattered then? And if of such
small moment then, how much less would
it be now that, he had that one sweet, telltale
glance from Esse, for ever rivetted
upon his memory ?

So he was nothing daunted by the knowledge
of the coming change of whereabouts,
but set himself busily to make all necessary
arrangements for the comfort of his lady-love

upon their journey. At the appointed time,
therefore, all things were in readiness and
duly prepared.

The leave-taking between Esse and her
friends was affectionate, but not sorrowful,
for, as Rachel remarked, with characteristic
kindliness —

"I would rather say ( Good-bye ' to you,
dear Esse, knowing that Mr. Greatorix is
with you, than ' How d'ye do ' to you without
him."

Perhaps, as Rachel spoke, Esse mentally
contrasted her arrival at Sunnyside with her
departure therefrom. Perhaps, also, the contrast
which was thus drawn, and which was so
much in favour of the latter, was answerable
for the loving glance of satisfaction which
Esse bestowed upon Arthur.

There is " a silver lining to every cloud, "
and, the sun had already begun to shine, after
the thunder-clap.

A SHORT Half-hour.

When Esse reached Brighton, the reception
which she received from Flora Grant was
tolerably cordial.

But upon no account would Flora Grant
see Arthur. She could not feign ignorance
concerning him, since Esse had taken especial
care, in her letter, to state that he
would be her escort. But so strong a plea of
ill-health and shattered nerves was unhesitatingly
put forth by Flora Grant, that Esse
had nothing for it but to explain to her lover,
as well as she was able, how matters stood.

He was considerably chagrined. He saw
how great a bar was thus raised between himself
and the enjoyment of the society of his
betrothed. Indeed, he knew Flora Grant too
well, not to be perfectly aware that she would

be exigences to the last degree, in the amount
of companionship which she would exact from
Esse.

True to his determination, however, to keep
close to Esse under any circumstances, he
sent for Pickard, and established himself at
an hotel close to the furnished house in which
she was located.

He had a good deal of business to attend
to which took him occasionally to London.
The lawyers were at work for Esse, besides
which, his own estate matters required supervision,
after his absence from England. The
time, therefore, scarcely hung heavily upon
his hands, more especially as he was constantly
occupied in snatching interviews with
Esse, and, as Bertie Hope expressed it, in
11 bearing down" after her, when she walked
abroad.

The bright hopes, which filled his future,
stripped, of half its sting, the annoyance of
the present for Arthur Greatorix. Moreover,

there was no help for it, and he had long
since learned to endure that which he could
not cure.

The whims of Flora Grant, for the time
being, were the barometer by which both
Esse and he were compelled to be guided.

These whims rose and fell in such quick
succession that a beneficial change might
occur at any moment.

Taking comfort from this reflection, Arthur
bided his time, but not contentedly. There
were days and moments when he chafed like
a caged lion ; and, such a day and moment it
had been, when George Maxwell had remarked
that Esse was under " pretty strong escort."

It was not in the nature of Flora Grant to
trouble herself, either about the consistency
of her own actions or the feelings of other
people in connection with those actions. She
did that which she liked best — that for which,
at the moment, she was most inclined, and
this she considered to be enough.

Consequently, although she rigidly excluded
Arthur from her presence upon the pleas which
have been aforesaid, she had no compunction
whatever, in admitting others to privileges
which she denied to him.

Upon the particular day in question, therefore,
the escort of Esse had been composed
of those who, by the express invitation of
Flora Grant, had spent two days beneath her
roof. They were four in number, namely, one
lady and three gentlemen ; that is to say, a
married couple and two bachelors.

The feelings of Arthur, at this flagrant injustice
to Esse and himself, may be better
imagined than described. If George Maxwell
and Bertie Hope had waited only one
short minute longer upon the pier, they
might have seen, what amount of speed
indignation could lend to the long legs of
Arthur Greatorix as he strode after his
fiancee.

When things come to the worst, however,

they often begin to mend. Soon after this,
signs of fair weather appeared.

By the time that the month, for which
Flora Grant had taken her house, expired,
the signs became certainties. Soft breezes
blew, and winds, which were propitious to
Arthur, set in. The cause for this may be
briefly explained.

Flora Grant was becoming heartily sick of
seclusion. She had resolved to remain
another month at Brighton ; but, she had by
no means resolved, that she would spend the
second month as she had the first.

Casting about in her mind, therefore, how
best she might find an opportunity to emerge
from her isolation and once more join the gay
and giddy world, she alighted upon Esse
and Arthur. They should be her steppingstones.


No wonder the sky cleared for them and
gentle zephyrs blew !

Arthur constantly admitted — allowed to

attend Esse abroad as well as at home, and
it would follow that Esse must, of course,
have a chaperon ; while that chaperone, it
would also follow, must of course, be Flora
Grant.

Thus reasoned that lady to her own heart.
And, before long, she acted upon that reasoning.


Too glad to mark from whence, or from
what quarter, the auspicious change had
arisen, Esse and Arthur hailed it with delight,
while soon a new, and, to them, a far
more satisfactory season commenced.

Since, Brighton is a particularly convenient
resort, for those who reside in London,
it was not an extraordinary circumstance,
perhaps, that the very day after Flora Grant
had taken her house for a fresh term, Alice
Royston also engaged a furnished house at
Brighton ; which house, was situated only a
stone's throw, from the residence of Flora
Grant.

But it was somewhat extraordinary that,
before the very next day had passed, Esse
should say, apropos de rien } to Arthur —

By-the-by, Arthur, who is Alice?"

The pretty lips of Esse could scarcely
have framed a more awkward question.

It was evening. Flora Grant had been ina
particularly amiable mood all day. After
dinner, she had so far foresworn her past tactics
as to suggest that, Esse and Arthur might
possibly like to retire to the drawing-room,
while she rested in her boudoir.

You will not be long, Esse. I shall
want you to give me my coffee in half-an-hour,"
she said, as the lovers were preparing
to avail themselves of her permission.

Flora Grant spoke captiously. The sight of
Arthur's pleased face had so far overthrown
her transient good humour, that she repented
of having given him such good cause for delight
; so, she determined, to cut his satisfaction
as short as possible.

Esse demurely took out her watch, glanced
at it, and gave the desired promise that, she
would appear in proper time, to administer the
beverage in question.

It was during the precious half-hour, which
had been thus begrudgingly allotted to them,
that Esse asked her question of Arthur.

The reply halted by the way.

Finding that it did so, Esse looked
merrily up into her lover's face, and repeated
—

Who is, Alice? "

What Alice?" he replied, a shadow of
embarrassment visible in his manner.

Ah ! " exclaimed Esse, running her
fingers lightly through his short, thick hair
as he knelt beside her. " Ah ! " she repeated,
that is exactly what I do not know, and
what I want you to tell me."

"But, why?" he asked, rather by way of
gaining time for consideration than from any
other motive.

Because I am jealous," she cried, with a
merry laugh which utterly belied her words.

Jealous!" he echoed, a certain shamefacedness
stealing over him.

"Yes; Arthur, jealous!" she resumed.
It is quite true, I assure you, so do not look
so astonished. I am actually jealous of my
own, great, big, old Arthur."

As she made this protestation, her small
fingers lingered coaxingly about his head, and
travelled from time to time gently over his
face, and forehead. Then she put her own
face temptingly close to his, and looking
archly into his eyes which somehow, wore an
unusual expression of abstraction, considering
the circumstances of the case, she enquired
gaily —

Were you ever jealous, Arthur ? "

u Often, my darling! " he replied earnestly.

<( Did you like it — and what was it
about? "

It was all about you, my sweet one ! and

it was far from agreeable, I assure you," was
the grave reply.

About me — nonsense!" she said with a
happy smile, and with a soft, lingering pressure
of her lips upon his forehead.

It seemed awful sense to me, at the time ;
but you are right, darling, jealousy is nonsense
arrant nonsense — and worse than that, it is
infernally mean and detestable. I hate it
more than " —

Just when I have taken it up," she interrupted,
with such an irresistible contraction of
her rosebud mouth that, Arthur left the pouting
lips no chance, of letting the rest of the
sentence escape their velvety portals.

No wonder that I was jealous of you,
dearest," he continued presently, as he exchanged
his kneeling posture for a seat upon
the couch beside her.

11 But you need not use bad words about
it," she protested gaily.

u Did I use bad words?" he asked, "you

must forgive me, if I did ; for, upon my soul,
I suffered martyrdom. The very memory of
it is torture. I was madly jealous of everybody
and everything ; of your Uncle Ralph,
Miss Tritton, and Cinderella included. I had
a fiendish hatred, for whoever and whatever I
fancied had power to engross your attention
more completely than I could myself. But I
have never been quite such a fool, since" —

Another pause here prevented the completion
of his statement ; during which pause
the pink colour upon the cheeks of Esse
grew a brilliant crimson. By-and-by, she
murmured reproachfully —

(( You have made my face burn so, Arthur.
I wish you would go on talking, instead

of" —

She checked herself suddenly at this point,
and was silent.

"Instead of what?" he whispered, his
lips close upon a hot little ear.

Esse, shook her head free from his touch,

somewhat disdainfully, and tried to rise. Buta
strong arm and a loving force detained her.
So, assuming an injured air which became
her vastly, she cried —

You are really growing most horribly
impertinent, Arthur. I shall not stay with
you any longer. We have spent Aunt Flora's
generous allowance of half-an-hour, I am

sure."

Then we'll have another upon our own
account. I have not finished my confession
about jealousy."

That is nothing but a mean excuse to
keep me here," laughed Esse.

On my honour, no darling ! "

Well, then, you must really make haste.
The coffee will positively be taken up soon,
and then, you know, I must go."

There is no ' must ' about it, darling," he
returned in a tone of defiance.

The defiance was meant, it is needless to
explain, for Flora Grant, and not for Esse.

M You are growing imprudent as well as
impertinent," broke in the latter, " but tell me
how long ago it is since you were : let me
see — what did you call it — oh, I remember
now — mean and detestable."

Can't you guess, Esse, my darling ? "

No."

Then I must tell you. I have never been
actually jealous about you since you promised
to love me, all your life long, better than anybody
else."

Arthur spoke earnestly. But Esse, with a
saucy smile, rejoined —

"That was a very rash proceeding upon
my part."

Don't say so, darling, even in joke. No,
Esse," Arthur continued, going back to the
old subject, w I have never been jealous since
that happy moment, and I do not believe that
anything could make me so again."

i( Is that a compliment, to me, or not ? '
asked Esse, thoughtfully.

My darling ! I do not understand you.
Surely, compliments are all nonsense between
us, now."

Yes— I know— but " —

"But what, dearest?" he enquired anxiously.


There was a little shadow on the fair face
beside him. He would have kissed the
shadow away, but Esse would not have it so.
She was bent upon making herself understood.


But," she continued, " if — if you were so
anxious to monopolize me — to — to have the
whole of my attention before we were engaged,
why are you less so now ? "

Less so ! " he exclaimed, in consternation,
what a complete mess I must have made of
what I have been saying, to make you ask
such a question as that. Listen, Esse dear,
give me another chance. I must make you
thoroughly understand, what I mean, before
we part."

VOL. II. R

Esse said nothing, so, taking her silence
for consent, Arthur went on —

Do you remember that swell dinner Mrs.
Grant gave in honour of Colonel the Honourable
Sir somebody something, and his wife
Lady somebody something?"

No ! " interposed Esse decidedly, " I do
not recollect anything at all about it."

11 I wonder whether Monte Howard, and
one or two others whom I could name, have
also forgotten all about it."

Of course they have," cried Esse, trying
hard not to laugh.

Well, dear, if you have, and if they have,
I have not. I was out in the cold then, you
know, darling ; horribly out in the cold, and
you looked so lovely, I was half angry with
you for being so pretty. I felt that I didn't
care what you were, so long as I could get
you all to myself."

11 Very kind of you, I am sure ! " said Esse
ironically.

Don't laugh at me, Esse, don't," he
pleaded. " I was utterly hopeless, that night,
and do what I would, those confounded men
made such fools of themselves, I couldn't get
within half a mile of you. I was half mad, I
do believe. I had been about as miserable,
for days, as a man well could be, and yet
not behave like an ass ; and, my misery
reached its climax, while you were smiling
upon those chattering apes. Oakdene was
there too " —

Lord Oakdene!" said Esse inconsequently
; a dim resolve, shaping itself somewhere
in the recesses of her mind that, before
the conversation ended, she would endeavour
somehow to make a partial confession about
him ; at least, if it could be done without
betraying aught else.

Arthur was too full of his reminiscences
and of the explanation he was trying to make,
either to notice this slight interruption, or to
attach any importance to it.

So golden opportunities are ofttimes lost !

Yes, Oakdene was there ; of course, anyone
could see that he was desperately smitten
with you, and you would have been a countess
and all that sort of thing, so there was nothing
for it but for me to stand aside and let him
have fair play. Besides, I wanted you, my
darling, to make a full and a free choice.
I did not wish to take advantage of my
old intimacy with you ; or that my position
as your guardian, in fact, should have any
weight with you. But I nearly went off my
head in my attempt to do all this properly,
and, upon my word, on that particular night,
I felt as bloodthirsty as an ogre."

It is a very good thing that I did not
know it," said Esse ; but, although she spoke
lightly, there was a tinge of nervousness in
her voice which was quite uncalled for by
Arthur's confession of devotion.

M Would it have made any difference —
wouldn't you have loved me, faults and all ? '
he asked quickly.

I don't know," she said; (( an ogre, might
one day turn into a Blue-beard, perhaps."
Again the words and the voice in which they
were uttered were scarcely in accordance
with each other ; while, again Arthur was too
self-absorbed to remark, that so it was.

Faults and all," he repeated gravely;
V God knows they are many enough, but
amongst them, darling, I have vowed that
jealousy shall never have a place. It is a
deadly snare and a curse. I would rather die
than doubt a single look of yours, dearest.
Indeed I should not deserve to live, if I were
such a cur as to distrust the sweetest and
purest of God's creatures. No, darling ; I
scattered all my jealousy to the winds, to
be blown for ever far away, so soon as you
deigned to accept my poor, unworthy love.
A hundred men might dance attendance upon
you, but I know that my own darling would
allow no word or action of theirs which, even,
an ogre or a Blue-beard, might resent."

Esse winced a little, a very little. This

was clearly not the time to tell her secret,
about Lord Oakdene, to her lover.

My foolish remark has brought us into
quite a grave discussion," she said after a
moment of thoughtfulness, which, of course,
Arthur imagined was bestowed exclusively
upon himself. " I do not think the green-eyed
monster is very likely to attack either of
us in sober earnest, although I suppose we
have very antiquated notions respecting it.
In novels, you know, the hero and the heroine
generally indulge largely in jealousy, and
either commit suicide in a perfect torpedo
of anguish, or else, by way of revenge,
marry the wrong husband, or the wrong wife,
or the wrong someone."

That is because, there are no heroines, in
story books, like the good, straightforward
little darling whom I have watched grow up
from a lisping baby to a woman."

Do not call me good, Arthur," interposed
Esse, her resolve, or rather its ghost, stealing

into her mental recesses again ; " you must
not, indeed ; for, I was anything but good,
while you were away. I was always wishing
for you to come back, and Aunt Flora used
to say such unkind things about your having
gone away so suddenly, I did not know what
to do, or what to think. It was rather trying,
was it not, for me ? And then — then Lord
Oakdene was so kind, and so cheerful" —

Hang Oakdene ! " interrupted Arthur impatiently.
" What had he to do with it,
darling? "

"Oh, nothing!" And the shadowy resolve
precipitately decamped.

Meanwhile, an ominous flicker in the dark-grey
eyes of Arthur Greatorix, as he pitilessly
condemned the neck of Lord Oakdene to the
rope, scarcely corroborated his profession of
an absolute renunciation, of all Ago-like tendencies,
where Esse was concerned. The
flicker had scarcely subsided, as he resumed —

By-the-way, Oakdene has gone to Russia.

I can't think, what on earth can have put it
into his head to go so far away."

Esse was silent. She did not care now to
go on talking about Lord Oakdene. Flora
Grant had already told her about the Russian
tour, so the news was not startling. There
was an awkwardness altogether about the
subject, so she went back to another ; to one
which was, perhaps, of equal, if not of more,
awkwardness to Arthur.

You have not yet answered my question,
about Alice."

Have I not ? " was the Jesuitical response.

No, really not," was the careless reply.

Arthur saw that it was careless, and he
breathed more freely in consequence.

I shall have to read you a fresh homily
upon the green-eyed monster, if you ask me
such absurd questions, Esse, " he said with
a forced laugh.

"I suppose it is absurd;" she returned,
very quietly, " there is really nothing for you

to answer. I only spoke in fun. After you
left the other day, I found a handkerchief
amongst my music, and it was marked,
1 Alice.' I don't know what made me remember
it this evening."

Esse was busy with her conscience ;
and she was thinking far more of its affairs,
than of either the handkerchief or of Alice.

And Arthur ! Well, he too was busy with
his reflections. Hence, they were both, to a
certain extent, pre-occupied. Yet, neither
noticed, that this was so with the other.

Arthur ! " at last said Esse, with a touch
of solemnity in her girlish voice, " when weare
married, I shall have something very, very
particular to tell you."

11 Lady-love, " whispered Arthur, drawing
her fondly to his heart, " when we are
married, I, also, shall have something very important
to relate to you."

Was it in joke, or was it in earnest, that
thus he spoke ?

Esse did not pause to enquire. She had
relieved her mind of a burthen, by her short
utterance ; and, in listening afterwards to
loving words, she forgot all else.

Coffee is served in the boudoir, if you
please, miss."

This announcement brought loving words
to a conclusion, and which, by the pompous
manner in which it was delivered, made both
Esse and Arthur laugh heartily.

Now, Arthur dear, I must fly immediately
to Aunt Flora," said Esse, so soon as Parkins
had withdrawn from earshot.

Of course, a few lingering sentences had to
be exchanged — a few things to be said which
had been entirely forgotten until the arrival of
the very last of all those precious moments of
that short half-hour, and which could not, by
any manner of means, be left unsaid.

Of course, also, sundry bright, waving locks
had to be smoothed and restored to their
proper position ; while, of course, too, these

same lovely locks were no sooner arranged
than they were disarranged. Thus, inexorable
time sped on, and when the last word had
been duly spoken, and the last kiss given,
Flora Grant had poured out, sipped and
finished her cup of coffee, in solitary
dudgeon.

This was unwise on the part of Esse and
Arthur ; but when are men and women wise
under such circumstances ? Fortunately, a
liberal amount of kindly excuse is generally
made, for their want of wisdom.

But no such amiable forbearance lurked in
the bosom of Flora Grant. When the culprits
entered the boudoir, there she sat, cold
and injured, with the empty coffee cup placed
ostentatiously at her side ; her heavy crape
spread out around her, and a broad-hemmed
cambric pocket-handkerchief in her hand.
She took the initiative at once. She had prepared
her little whip for the transgressors,
but, she used it with such crafty regard for

politeness, they could not so much as murmur
at the lashings which it inflicted.

"1 am so sorry, Mr. Greatorix" — Flora
Grant often addressed Arthur thus punctiliously,
and she always did so when she considered
herself to have been offended by him
- — " but I know you will not mind my asking
you to bid us ' good-night ' at once. I like
to be perfectly candid, and I am feeling very
depressed and tired to night. I am sorry I
cannot offer you any coffee — it is quite cold."

She could not resist the last cut.

Arthur looked helplessly at Esse, who,
although disappointed and vexed herself,
could scarcely forbear smiling at the crestfallen
visage of her knight. He was clearly
out-flanked ; wherefore, he beat a retreat,
leaving his victorious enemy in undisturbed
possession of the field, and of that which was
of infinitely more importance to him than the
field, namely, the society of Esse.

It was in rather a sulky manner, therefore,

that he spoke to the servant, who opened the
door for him, as he quitted the house. The
overthrow had been so sudden, that,
Arthur found himself in the open air, almost
before he understood how his defeat had
come about ; and certainly, before he quite
comprehended, that, in future, it would be
wiser to attend more scrupulously to the mandates
of the widow of his old friend, Ralph
Grant.

Looking disconsolately around him, after
he found himself really shut out from Esse,
a sudden idea flashed upon Arthur. Thereupon,
he approached the house, in which
Alice Royston had taken up a temporary
residence, rang the door-bell and obtained
• admittance.

The next day, the blinds of this same house
were all drawn down ; and it was once more,
"to let."

A QUIET MUSICAL PARTY.

Another month at Brighton, with two more,
which were subsequently passed at Nice,
brought the dramatis persona? of this story,
through the short days and long nights of
winter, into the bright spring-tide.

Who does not love the spring with its marvellous
and manifold beauties — its opening
flowers, bursting trees and budding hedgerows?


Arthur Greatorix was no cynic ; the
beauties of nature met with no cold conventional
admiration at his hands. Nevertheless,
it was not because of flower, and bud, and
blossom, that his heart rejoiced within him,
as, one after another, those sweet heralds of
the coming season more plainly shewed themselves.


It was because of Esse. Because, she
had promised that, ere April showers had
ceased to fall, she would become his wife.
Hence, to him, spring was in very truth, the
gladdest time of " all the glad new year."

A quiet wedding is a very easy thing to
propose, but a very difficult matter to accomplish.
Setting aside the difficulties of choosing
between those whose presence is desirable asa
matter of inclination, and those who, must
be invited, as a point of etiquette, there are a
hundred and one other things to be considered.
Much heart-burning, and weariness
of spirit, together with endless discussions,
take place before a satisfactory programme of
the details, which shall attend the important
event, can be drawn up.

It was so in the present instance. Arthur,
of course, was utterly subservient. The
difference of opinion rested between Flora
Grant and Esse. It is not in accordance
with the ordinary rules of romance, that the

bride-elect should have anything to do with
the arrangements for her own wedding. She
should be nothing more than a lay figure, presently
to be robed in white satin, crowned with
orange blossoms, and carried unresisting,
whether for weal or for woe, to the hymeneal
altar. But such lay figures are blessed, as a
rule, with abundance of relatives. Not so,
Esse Montague. Therefore, since the
memory of her childhood's friend — her childhood's
love — her ever indulgent Uncle Ralph
was still fresh in her heart, and all the more
fresh, perhaps, because of her coming marriage,
she would in no way lend herself to
plans for a gay wedding.

Display was dear, very dear, to Flora
Grant. Of what use, she argued to herself,
were her diamonds, and her carriages, as well
as her gold and silver plate, if, for displaying
them, such an opportunity as a wedding, was
to be lost ? And then she pictured herself
unselfishly renouncing her woe and her weeds

for the occasion, and doing violence to her
feelings in satin and interesting dejection.

But Esse would have none of it. She
stood her ground resolutely for a long time,
fighting for her position, inch by inch, with
gentlest words, and sweetest persuasions.

As a matter of course, a compromise was
at last effected. In one way, however, Flora
Grant had the best of the difference. She
carried her point with regard to the place in
which the ceremony should be performed.
Esse, pleaded hard for Brashleigh, almost
with tears in her eyes. The old unanswerable
argument awaited her.

11 How can you be so cruel, Esse, when
everything would remind me of your poor, dear
uncle ? I should be wretched. How painfully
inconsiderate you are ! "

So London was settled upon, and, from the
time that it was so settled, Flora Grant became
less aggressively demonstrative against
the wishes which were expressed by Esse.

VOL. II. S

Notwithstanding this, however, when, in
"gloss of satin and glimmer of pearls'
Esse, pale and trembling, stood by Arthur,
repeating with a faltering tongue, those never
to be gainsay words, " till death ns do
part' a full and fashionable assemblage surrounded
her. It mattered little to her then.
In this Flora Grant had, with craftiness,
argued rightly. Esse was rapt in thoughts
of which Arthur Greatorix and her own soul
alone might know ; too fully rapt, to be conscious
either of the presence of others, or
that she was the admired of all beholders.

There was one, missing from amongst the
guests, whose absence sorely disquieted Flora
Grant. This was Lord Oakdene. He had
been one of the first to receive an invitation —
one of the first also to send a regretful excuse.
He had returned from Russia, but was
on the eve of starting to spend Easter in
Rome, and from thence, had engagements,
he said, which would take him to Spain.

Truly, there seemed small rest for the sole of
his foot !

Flora Grant wrote again, but the bird had
already taken wing. It was a case, in one
sense, of the ostrich and the sand. Lord
Oakdene buried his head in flight. But,
although he would not witness the wedding,
he was destined to know by the papers that it
was a fait accompli. He tried hard to escape
seeing in black and white that, from henceforth,
Esse Montague would be nowhere
found. But fate would not abet his desire.
His orders were mistaken, and the " Times "
of April the 23rd, instead of being banished
from his breakfast table, was carefully placed
thereon by his well meaning, but upon this
point decidedly obtuse, servant.

The newspaper once there, it is needless to
say what followed. With fatal fascination,
his eye glanced immediately over the list of
marriages, and singled out, with inconceivable
rapidity, that particular advertisement which

he did not want to perceive. It contained
little with which he was not already an
courant. The date of the wedding, the name
of the church at which the ceremony was to
be solemnised, the parentage of * the bride
and bridegroom, together with many other
details, were well known to him beforehand ;
but still, he spelled over the announcement,
as though he were striving to understand some
abstruse question or profound doctrine.

While, however, Lord Oakdene was harassing
himself with vain repining and unwise
meditations, all went both well and merrily
for Esse Greatorix and her husband.

Few bridegrooms, perhaps, ever stepped
into a travelling carriage with such unfeigned
joy as did Arthur, when he took his place
beside his beautiful bride, who, enveloped ina
charming confection of soft grey cashmere
and silk, looked, indeed, a dainty morsel
wherewith, henceforth, to travel through life.

But it was not for this alone that Arthur rejoiced.

He knew that he was conveying Esse
from a companionship which had sorely tried
her, although she would not confess that it was
so, and he thought — ah ! do not men ever so
think? — that he was taking her to certain
happiness, perfect peace, and lasting bliss.

And the beautiful eyes, all lighted by love,
which sparkled beneath the grey ostrich-plumed,
plush hat, would have flashed with
hot scorn, had a doubt been raised of his
power to fulfil his thought. Wherefore, who
may blame Arthur ?

Mr. and Mrs. Greatorix spent their honeymoon
at a small seat in Dorsetshire, which
had been placed at their disposal by a mutual
friend. From thence they journeyed to their
Cornwall home, where, amid the liveliest
demonstrations of joy and affection, Arthur
and his young wife were welcomed. They
had both passed so many of their days
abroad, that a foreign tour was at once voted
against by mutual consent. But, before

many weeks had flown over their heads,
Arthur began to wish that they had decided
otherwise. Flora Grant would by no means
leave them at peace, and very piteous were
the wails of entreaty for their return to her
which she whined through the post.
■ Arthur listened to them with natural impatience.
But Esse was more tenderhearted.
As seen by the light of her new
happiness, the dark shadow of widowhood
looked darker and blacker than before. In
this light also the memory of all past grievances
was absorbed. So the plaints of Flora
Grant not only disquieted Esse ; but, they
made her feel half ashamed and contrite, for
the keen enjoyment of her present life. No
little bashful whispers to this effect, however,
prevented Arthur from keeping his sweet wife
where she was. The London season was not
yet over. Flora Grant was still in Eaton
Place, and both Esse and Arthur especially
desired to keep clear of London for that year.

So he hardened his heart, and kissed away
the qualms of his wife.

Arthur had not forgotten the trials of other
days ; in fact, do what he would, the idea of
the society of Flora Grant was pre-eminently
distasteful to him. True, all would naturally
be on a totally different footing now : still, he
dreaded her presence, and this dread was even
more for Esse than for himself.

With the exception of these ever-complaining
letters, the days flew by in perfect happiness
to the newly-wedded pair. But, when the
end of July arrived, Flora Grant, according to
her own account, was suffering severely. The
first intelligence of her illness was conveyed
to Esse by telegram, which telegram was
quickly followed by a second. The malady
was reported to be of the nerves, and
Esse was conjured to proceed with all possible
speed to the sufferer. But Esse had a
husband now, to whom she was far more
precious than all the rest of the world put

together. Moreover, the old distrust was
with him ; he had no faith in the exigency
of the case. Consequently, he would not
permit Esse to be agitated by undue haste.
It was late in the afternoon before the second
telegram arrived, and, if the journey from
Cornwall had been commenced that day, it
would have necessitated travelling by night.
Very lovingly was all this put before Esse,
and it was soon a settled matter that she
and Arthur should start early on the morrow
settled, but settled with reluctance.

Esse and Arthur Greatorix were very loth
to go. They could not, without a sigh, close
this bright page of their life's history ; the
happiness, which was inserted thereon, was so
perfect, that they had no desire to turn over
the leaf and begin the next. But, earth rings
ever, with changes from which none may
escape.

It was nearly five o'clock when they
reached London, although their journey had

been commenced at a very early hour. On
the way, Arthur unfolded certain plans to
Esse. He was a trifle nervous at propounding
them, or at least the most important item
in them, which was that, during their stay in
the great metropolis, the home of Flora Grant
should not be their home. They would establish
themselves at an adjacent hotel.

"Will it not seem unkind?" asked Esse,
when her lord and master had fully explained
that which he desired to effect.

Unkind, no darling ! It will relieve Mrs.
Grant from the incubus of my perpetual
presence, you know, if it deprives her of some
of yours. I am not going to have my little
wife shut up for hours, while I am sent about
my business like a naughty boy. I have had
my cone given me too relentlessly and too
often not to avoid running the like risk
again. There is no getting out of those polite
requests to move off, and make one's self
scarce " —

"But if Aunt Flora should be very ill P * >
interrupted Esse.

Then, you shall do whatever you think
best, dear."

Esse said no more. She could not help
thinking that her husband was right. Anyhow,
it would be much nicer to be at the hotel.
Accordingly thither they drove, master, mistress,
Pickard, maid, Cinderella, and baggage
ad infinitum.

Having arrived at the hotel, Esse lost no
time in preparing to proceed to Flora Grant.
She would not stay either for rest, or to change
her travelling dress ; indeed, it was with difficulty
that Arthur persuaded her to swallow
some tea.

I must go at once, dear Arthur. I know
Aunt Flora does not expect me to-day, but it
will be almost six o'clock when I arrive, and,
as I said before, if she is ill" —

Which I don't believe," laughed Arthur;
nervous attacks, go as quickly as they come,
sometimes, little wife."

Notwithstanding, however, that Arthur Great-oris
thus laughed and spoke, he was forced to
admit that a certain degree of uncertainty
hung over the condition in which the nerves
of Mrs. Grant might be found ; wherefore, it
behoved him, he thought, to allow his wife to
pioneer the way ; in a word, to pay a preliminary
visit to the invalid without him. As
soon as the tea was finished, therefore, he
made no objection to an immediate start for
Eaton Place, the arrangement being that he
should escort Esse to the house, leave her
there, and return at the expiration of an hour.

With the full persuasion that she was going
to be ushered into a darkened chamber,
wherein would be discovered a weeping figure
surrounded with all the paraphernalia of
psuedo-invalidism, Esse bade her husband
adieu, and passed quickly through the hall
door, which had been opened to his knock.
Then she tripped lightly up the well-known
stairs towards the drawing-room. Here she
paused in mute amazement. Strains of music

were floating around her; while the hum of
voices rose and fell. She started, and, would
have retraced her steps, under the full impression
that she had mistaken the house, or mistaken
something, somehow. But unfortunately
for her purpose of retreating, the servants
knew her. She heard her name given from
one to another, and she mechanically followed
its echo, until at length it died out within a
room, which, to the dazed eyes of Esse,
looked at first sight more like a kaleidoscope
than anything else.

Sunshine, which streamed through rose-coloured
curtains, gorgeous flowers, gay
dresses, music, and the buzz of many
voices, together with a general air of festivity,
presented altogether so violent a contrast
to the scene which Esse had been
picturing throughout the day that, for an
instant, she looked around her as if spellbound.
But she quickly recovered herself,
although her heart beat fast with mingled

indignation and vexation. Threading her
way, with quiet dignity and easy self-possession,
through the assembled groups of individuals,
who in various attitudes were either
talking or listening to the instrumental music
which was being performed, she approached
Flora Grant, who was seated at the upper
end of the apartment with her back to its
entrance, and who had failed to perceive the
entree of Esse. The music had prevented
the announcement of her name from being
heard, save by those who were close to the
door.

In spite of her keen annoyance, Esse
could scarcely refrain from smiling at the
perfect sang-froid with which she was received.


Ah, Esse, so you really have arrived at
last ! I thought that you and your husband
intended to live, die, and be buried, in that
Land's-end place of his. How horribly sick
you must be of it ! I was awfully ill yester-the

ROLL CALL.

day, but, anyhow, I was determined not to
be left alone any longer, so I gave up letter-writing
and tried telegrams. I did not expect
you to-day, but I am enchanted to see you.
The doctors ordered me to be amused, so I
got up a little afternoon music in a quiet way.
Am I not lucky to get so many people together
so late in the season? I wish you
had been earlier ; some of the best things are

over."

Thus calmly rattling on, Flora Grant made
a great show of delight at the arrival of her
young relative, making her sit close beside
her, and otherwise bestowing marked attentions
upon her.

If, in her heart of hearts, Flora Grant felt
somewhat taken aback by the unexpected
arrival which had occurred, she was equal to
the emergency ; not a word or gesture betrayed
her perturbation.

But, however it may in truth have been
with Flora Grant, there were two individuals,

in her drawing-room, to whom the entrance of
Esse afforded the most profound excitement.

These individuals were, respectively, Lord
Oakdene and George Maxwell.

They were as far from each other as the
dimensions of the apartment permitted ; nevertheless,
they simultaneously observed the fair
face and graceful figure of Esse Greatorix,
and were, for the moment, as simultaneously
startled into silence.

Lord Oakdene was near the door — the
skirt of the dark travelling dress worn by Esse
almost touched him. George Maxwell, on
the other hand, hovered near his hostess at
the upper end of the room. Thus, as Esse
passed by Lord Oakdene, she advanced towards
George Maxwell.

This was well for the former, seeing that
all the colour had fled from off his cheek, and
that to have spoken to her, had she seen him,
would have been well nigh a physical impossibility.
With an inane attempt at coherency,

he turned to the old gentleman with
whom in a fragmentary drawing-room fashion
he had been discussing politics; and, with his
eyes fixed upon the moving form of the
woman, who was still to him so peerlessly
above all other women, he endeavoured to
pursue the conversation. Perhaps, he failed
in his endeavour, for after an emphatic grunt
or two of disapproval, the old gentleman in
question espied another acquaintance, and to
the great relief of Lord Oakdene, moved
away. Then, Lord Oakdene drew stealthily
back a pace or two, until he was nearly hidden
by the voluminous folds of the rose coloured
silk curtains, in order that he might undisturbed
feast his eyes upon that beauty,
which had been for so long withdrawn from
his sight.

He saw Flora Grant's dexterous assumption
of pleasure, as well as the assiduity with
which she arranged a seat for Esse upon
the couch beside her, and he understood

something of the little pantomime which had
been improvised.

A bitter smile, bitter at least for Lord
Oakdene, played around his mouth. He was
wondering what could have become of Arthur,
and he was debating within himself whether
or not he should approach Esse. The bitterness
of this smile was for the folly, which
caused him, Lord Oakdene, thus to hesitate
that folly which set his heart thumping
so madly, and which cast such a tremor
over his limbs. But circumstances soon
dispelled his hesitation. Still gazing towards
Esse, he saw Flora Grant present
George Maxwell to her for introduction.
Without waiting to mark the coldness with
which Esse permitted this introduction,
Lord Oakdene quickly approached her,
and caused thereby, an immediate stop, to
the conversation, which George Maxwell was
assiduously endeavouring to commence.
Lord Oakdene did not put himself through
VOL. II. T

the peril of many words with Esse. One
touch of her gloved hand, one glance upon
her sweet, ingenuous face, a kindly enquiry for
her husband — that was all. And yet. he had
effected a purpose with which he was strongly
possessed, although, he was forced to confess
to himself, that he had no reason to give for
such a possession. He had, however, effectually
routed George Maxwell. Almost before
the syllables had died away bv which Esse
informed her old acquaintance that she was
expecting her husband to join her before
long, George Maxwell had made his exit from
the quiet musical party.

Lord Oakdene marked this with surprise.
He had not expected to obtain such a complete
success, and his satisfaction equalled
his astonishment. In a few minutes, he also
withdrew from the scene of the afternoon
festivity.

When, in due course of time, Arthur
made his appearance, the room was empty

of guests ; but, he discerned, at a glance,
what had been going on.

There was a good deal of polite fencing
with words between Flora Grant and Arthur
before he carried Esse away ; as, carry her
away he did, so soon as the sound of the
dressing bell gave him a pretext for departure.


It is all right, you see, little wife, about
the hotel," he whispered, with a laugh, as they
ran downstairs, after bidding Flora Grant
adieu; " you didn't find much going on in
the sackcloth and ashes line, I think, did you,
and we needn't be alarmed about the nervous
attack, need we? "

Then they got into their cab and drove
away.

END OF VOL. II.

MF

ZZfL

Vim.

■

4?ziw

mm

m

■

•lllillP

a iaobeL

IN THREE VOLUMES.

BY

MRS. ARTHUR TRISTRAM Jervis.

Author of " Holding Fast and Letting Go."

VOL. III.

REMINGTON AND CO.,
New Bond Street, W.

1884.

All Rights Reserved.

MEPHISTOPHELES.

A DAY or two after Esse and Arthur Great-oris
reached town, Lord Oakdene had a very-narrow
escape from being knocked down by
the horses of their brougham. But he was
quite unaware either of his peril or of his
close proximity to the two persons who possessed
so especial an interest for him, and with
one of whom rested the primary cause for
the hurry with which he was crossing the
crowded thoroughfare.

*' Hang the fellow ! " exclaimed Arthur, ashe
saw, from the window of his carriage, not
the closeness of his horses' noses to the
shoulders of Lord Oakdene, but his well-known
figure, now diving dexterously beneath
champed bits, and then dodging quickly

VOL. III. B

round the backs of omnibuses, carts, and
sundry other vehicles.

'who are you talking about, dear? " asked
Esse, in a composed, matrimonial manner.

** Oakdene. I never saw a fellow in such a
deuce of a hurry. I wanted to speak to him."

He couldn't be expected to stand stock
still in the middle of the road to be looked
at," was the rejoinder, but somehow, the
manner of the fair speaker, as she made it,
was scarcely so composed and calmly matrimonial
as before, while her soft cheeks
became a shade more deeply pink.

*' Well, no, I suppose not," laughed Arthur.
/* What a wise little wife it is," he continued
in loving banter; "but it was provoking of
him not to look up. I have not spoken to
him since we were at Brashleigh together
last year."

No," said Esse, fixing her large eyes on
the face of her husband, and wondering, as
she did so, how it had come to pass that, she

had never yet mentioned the Httle episode
concerning Lord Oakdene and herself, to her
liege lord. Her monosyllable might have
been taken either as an assent or as a query.
Arthur evidently accepted it as the former.
Without comment upon it, he exclaimed
eagerly —

'^ There, he is safely landed on the pavement
; he has just collared Bertie Hope. Do
you see them, Esse ? They are just turning
down St. James' Street."

Esse, gave a pretty little start, as she said
*' Where?" and then dutifully following the
directions of her husband, she looked from
her carriage window, and managed to see
two sets of coat tails, which she was given
to understand belonged respectively to Lord
Oakdene and Bertie Hope, swiftly vanishing
in the distance.

By a coincidence, which a mesmerist, a
biologist, or someone belonging to the race
of scientific individuals, would doubtless

satisfactorily explain, at the very moment
when Esse was both looking after and
thinking of Lord Oakdene, his mind was
filled by thoughts of her.

At the indirect Instigation of these thoughts
he had made a neck-or-nothlnor dash across
the road, In order to overtake Bertie Hope ;
while, as a preliminary to the still further
carrying out of the before-named Instigation,
he had put his arm through that of his young
friend, exclaiming —

'await a minute, Bertie! I have been
wishing after you until I am quite pumped."

Bertie Hope, thus adjured, promptly
slackened his speed, and for a short time
nothing but a few commonplace greetings
passed between the two.

Meanwhile, the instigation, which heretofore
had indirectly actuated Lord Oakdene,
assumed a positive and direct form.

^' I say, old fellow," he began, his ideas

settled and his speech shaped, " what on
earth induced you to take that man Maxwell
to Mrs. Gwant's the other afternoon ? He is
more like ' Mephistopheles ' than anyone I
ever came worse. You should be awfully
cautious, you know, who you introduce to
ladies."

Lord Oakdene, as he thus spoke, was
thinking vastly more of the particular introduction
which he had witnessed between
Esse and George Maxwell, than of the admittance
of the latter into Mrs. Grant's
Eaton Place drawing-room.

Of this, however, none but a clairvoyant
c ould tell ; and certainly not Bertie Hope,
who, a little indignant at the remonstrance
of which he had been made the subject,
retorted sharply —

' Of course, I know all about that, as well
as most" — he was going to say ** men,"
but remembering that his years were still

tender, a point upon which he was remarkably-sensitive,
he stopped abruptly, and added,
as well as most people."

*' Come, come, Bertie, don't be cross.
I don't suppose that * Mephistopheles ' is
much of a friend of yours. If I did, I should
not have made any remark about him."

This appeased Bertie, who nodded an "all
right," and Lord Oakdene continued —

Everybody must see that there is something
mysterious about Maxwell — things not
altogether above board; so don't be offended,
old boy, if I say that the sooner you shake
him off the better. Acquaintances are easy
to make, and hard to break, I know, but " —

Who the deuce are you that you should
take a fellow up and preach at him like
this?" interrupted Bertie, with a spice of the
wrathful excitement which, it may be remembered,
had once manifested itself in his intercourse
with George Maxwell upon the pier at
Brighton.

*' Well," returned Lord Oakdene good-humouredly,
'^ I am called Oakdene, generally,
by my relations and friends. I think,
taking me all wound, that I may be considered
tolerably respectable. I have not,
at any water, had occasion, as yet, to set up
an alias."

I didn't suppose you had," muttered
Bertie rather sulkily, '' but I hate being taken
up for nothing."

Never mind, so long as you are not
taken down," laughed Lord Oakdene, after
which he resumed the original point of his
conversation. " I'm quite in earnest, about
Maxwell. I have thought seriously of speaking
to you about him ever since — since I saw
him at Mrs. Gwant's."

For a moment, Bertie Hope looked irresolute
; he was half determined to maintain an
attitude of injured dignity — half resolved to
yield to his own better nature, and the good
nature of his friend. Then, according to his

characteristic candour and truthfulness, he
spoke out.

I believe you are right, Oakdene. In
fact, I know you are. Maxwell is queerish ;
and, then, he is so confoundedly inquisitive.
Do I know this person ? Do I know
that? Am I going here? Am I going there?
Whose great-grandmother married whose
uncle-inlaw ? Who cut off his own entail,
and then died and left it to his widow? or
some such bosh. It goes on for everlasting.
I am getting bored to death with his questions,
I can tell you. He takes me for rather
younger than I really am, I think. I know
my wisdom teeth are not cut yet, but for all
that, I am not quite in long clothes. What
on earth made you think that I took him to
Mrs. Grant's? I did no such thing. He
got to know her in a backhanded sort of a
way, and I suppose he has managed to cultivate
her acquaintance. One day, I was at
Muche's asking for some books for my

mother, when Maxwell spotted me from outside,
and came in. While we were loafing about
I was waiting to know about the books —
Mrs. Grant appeared. I don't exactly know
how it all began, but suddenly I saw that
Maxwell had no end of a handsome bracelet
in his hand, and he said, in a voice which
was loud enough for Mrs. Grant to hear — she
was only a little way off from us, you know —
This bracelet belongs to that lady, Hope.
Will you restore it to her ? ' Before I
could quite take it all in — I mean, before I
could make out what Maxwell meant, or how
he came to be possessed of Mrs. Grant's
bracelet — she advanced towards us, and
with a lot of smiles and thanks, took it
from him. The bracelet, it seems, was
worth pots of money, and she would not
have lost it for anything ; it was a black-looking
thing, with a lot of diamonds studded
about it. As Mrs. Grant was thanking Maxwell,
she put on the bracelet, and tried to

fasten it, but she couldn't ; so, although I
had not spoken to her very often, as a
matter of course I offered my services. I
often fasten my mother's bracelets for her
all right, but this one of Mrs. Grant's had the
most awkwardly contrived snap I ever had
anything to do with, and while I was fumbling
away at it with all my might, and getting as
red in the face as a turkey cock, Mrs. Grant
requested me to introduce her to my friend,
who had so kindly restored her treasure to
her. There was no help for it, now, was
there ? " asked Bertie, pausing abruptly in
his narrative, and looking anxiously at his
companion.

*' It was very awkward " —

'' Awkward ! " interrupted Bertie, before
Lord Oakdene could finish his sentence ; '' I
should just think that it was awkward. There
stood Maxwell, within earshot, showing plainly
by his looks that he had heard every word, and
there stood Mrs. Grant, waiting with a grande

duchesse sort of air for me to obey her. So
I pulled myself together, click went the snap
of the bracelet, so that was one relief, and I
did obey her; but I'm blowed if it was my
fault — now was it ? " he cried, with fast increasing
excitement.

*' No, I do not think it was. But I want to
hear the end of the story," replied Lord
Oakdene, his quiet tone of voice in strong
contrast to the eager speech of Bertie.

There is not very much more to tell.
Maxwell is an awful fellow to talk, when he
likes. You should have heard the way in
which he began at once to yarn about the
peculiar workmanship of that precious bracelet
Upon my word, it was worth something
to listen to him ; such a lot out of nothing !
But it seemed to be the right thing, for it
went down splendidly with Mrs. Grant, and
when we took her to her carriage she offered
us seats, which Maxwell accepted like a shot,
so I, like a fool, must needs follow his

example. We had a beastly drive for about
a quarter of an hour, and then I cut it altogether.
Mrs. Grant had some grumpy old
woman with her, who would have all the
windows of the carriage shut, and who kept
mumbling some awful rot about young men of
the present day having no consideration for
the infirmities of old age, which was rather a
joke, when we were being more than half
stifled to please her. All her grumbling and
mumbling, however, was lost upon Maxwell,
who, did nothing but keep up an incessant
chatter with Mrs. Grant, leaving me to sit
opposite to the old lady and to do the best
that I could with her. I bore it as long as
possible, and then, as I have said before, I cut
it altogether."

Do you mean that you got out of the carriage
and left Maxwell with the ladies — alone
with them?" asked Lord Oakdene.

*' No ; but all the same, it was not my fault
that I didn't," returned Bertie, frankly. *' I

was SO hot, the old woman was so cross, and
so ugly into the bargain, that in sheer desperation
I invented a spontaneous cracker,
and bounced out something about keeping an
appointment with my mother — I always find
that, if I mention my mother, people attend
directly to what I am saying. Mrs. Grant was
most kind when my cracker banged in her
ear, and she offered at once to drive me to my
supposed place of rendezvous. Of course,
under the peculiar circumstances of the case,
that was not exactly what I wanted, therefore
I made the best excuse I could think of at the
moment, and asked to be set down in Bond
Street. Maxwell got out of the carriage with
me, and when, how, or where, he next met
Mrs. Grant is more than I can pretend to say.
He swears that Mrs. Greatorix is the most
beautiful girl in the world, and sometimes I
think it had something to do in some way
with her, which made him so jolly glad to
scrape acquaintance with Mrs. Grant ; for, I

could see that he was most awfully glad,
although he did not say so. Then again,
whenever he has the chance, he always asks
me such a heap of questions about both
Greatorix and his wife."

Toots you though an exam., eh?" interrupted
Lord Oakdene, affecting a carelessness
which he by no means felt.

'' Something rather like it, I must confess.
Do you know, Oakdene, I do believe that I
have hit upon the right solution of all that
humbug and civility to Mrs. Grant about her
bracelet ? I wonder I never thought of it before
! I do believe I'm right, upon my word,
I do."

Very likely," responded Lord Oakdene,
and again the quiet constraint of his voice and
manner contrasted markedly with the boyish
impetuosity of his companion. " Very likely,"
he repeated, '' Maxwell is a remarkable, a
very remarkable person — a sort of \\'ill-o'-
the-Wisp. I have never been able to make

him out ; he always fights very shy of me.
And then, he comes and goes, in such trapdoor
fashion."

'' He does rather," laughed Bertie, '' in town
to-day, at the Antipodes tomorrow, and the
oddest part of the whole business is that he
never by any chance mentions his belongings.
He seems to have lived abroad the greater
part of his life, but, I suppose, even that
would not prevent him from having some sort
of relations."

'* Does he know many men?" enquired
Lord Oakdene somewhat irrelevantly, perhaps.


'' Thundering few," returned Bertie emphatically.


'' Very odd."

*' Yes ; it is odd. But, if he does not know
many of the men about, he seems to have
heaps of spare cash."

'does he?" replied Lord Oakdene, abstractedly.


Yes, there is no doubt upon that point.
But I shall not bother myself any more about
him, for my mother leaves town tomorrow, so
I shall be quit of him. You are on the move
too, I suppose, Oakdene?"

Not just yet. Not before the twelfth of
next month, when I go to Scotland."

Are you going to stick here until you are
tempted away by the grouse — you'll be
awfully hot," cried Bertie in surprise.

'' I have not quite decided what I shall do
yet," answered Lord Oakdene wearily, and if
Bertie Hope had been listening sharply, he
would have heard that a very melancholy sigh
accompanied the words.

But Bertie Hope was in the hey-day of
youth, and fun, and enjoyment. His passing
love for Laura had faded away, amidst a heap
of other sweet things which he had tasted
without harm either to himself or to others.
Life was as yet to him very much made up of
bon-bons and flowers, with horses, dogs, and

guns, by way of preventing it from being utter
frivolity, and of giving to it a solidity worthy
of himself as a lord of creation. Wherefore,
he had no ears for sighs. For the time being,
all his senses, as well as his ideas, were concentrated
upon grouse. In eager imagination
he trod the heather — saw the birds — fingered
the gun — heard the crack of the well-aimed
shot — and he could restrain himself no
longer.

'^ I shall speak to my mother about renting
a moor. My uncle would manage it all for me,
I know. It would be awful fun, wouldn't it ?
And if I can get one, you'll come for a few
days, won't you ? " he asked.

Lord Oakdene shook his head. The exuberance
of the spirits of his companion was
just then distasteful to him, therefore the
kindly meant invitation lost all attraction in
his sight.

*' Can't come, eh ?" said Bertie. '' Of course,
you have made up your engagements. What

VOL. III. C

an ass I have been, not to arrange this with
my mother before. But, if anyone, or anything
should throw you over, you'll think of
me, won't you, old fellow ? I'll send you a line,
if I get what I want."

Lord Oakdene smiled in spite of himself.
He knew quite well, that Bertie would get
what he wanted, if what he wanted was to be
had.

Love and money when combined together
are powerful adjuncts. Mrs. Hope denied
nothing to her son which bore the shape of
lawful enjoyment. Her heart was full of love
for her only born, and, fortunately for them
both, her purse was correspondingly full of
the wherewithal to carry out her loving desires
on his behalf.

So the betting was very much in favour of
Bertie's wish, with regard to the moor, being
granted in some form or other. Burning to
lay his freshly conceived plans before his
mother, and far too impatient to trust to the

speed of his own legs, Bertie hailed a cab and
bade his friend a hasty farewell.

Thus Lord Oakdene was left alone. He
had accomplished the purpose for which he
had overtaken Bertie Hope ; he had warned
Bertie against what he considered an unadvisable
acquaintance, and he had elicited some
particulars from Bertie concerning this same
acquaintance.

Nevertheless, Lord Oakdene was far from
satisfied. In reality, he had heard very little
with which he was not previously acquainted ;
and yet, after Bertie's rendering of certain
facts in connection with George Maxwell,
these facts annoyed Lord Oakdene with a
fresher and sharper annoyance than heretofore.

Ah, and, something besides this annoyed
him, although he would not probe his heart
deep enough to own it !

Why, had it not been given unto him to protect
Esm.e, from the profanation of speaking
to such a man as George Maxwell ?

This was the ground-swell which tossed his
spirit and tumbled his thoughts about so
roughly, which pitched his habitual commonsense
to the mercy of the waves of folly, and
which left him sick, dizzy, and helpless upon
the ship of life.

But, like many another land-lubber, he
knew nothing of ground-swells. He, only,,
felt their results.

Heart-whole.

Bertie Hope got his moor. In consequence
whereof he went his way rejoicing.

Lord Oakdene, on the other hand, had an
unusual fit of military ardour, which for two
or three weeks kept him closely to ^' duty,"
and to the immediate scene of his calling ;
while, Esse and her husband, making a virtue
of necessity, spent the greater part of those
same two or three weeks in attendance upon
Flora Grant.

Then came the universal break up — the
scattering of the gay world — the desertion
from London — the rush to green fields
and fresh air.

While this was coming to pass for others,
Esse had more than once remarked to
Arthur —

'' We shall be left all alone like three pelicans
in a wilderness, or owls in a desert, if we
do not get off soon. The season was really
over, when Aunt Flora sent for us. What a
shame it was of her to make me believe that
she was so ill. I really do think that she
deserves to be left to shut up her house, and
get off to Warwickshire, alone."

But, in spite of this apparent hard hearted-ness,
Arthur understood perfectly that his
wife possessed no such stern notions in
reality ; consequently, he patiently awaited
the whim and pleasure of Flora Grant, going
with his wife industriously to and fro between
Eaton Place and their hotel.

One day, contrary to her usual custom,
Esse arrived at the former place soon after
two o'clock. Arthur had an engagement at
Tattersall's, wherefore, Esse was alone.

As her carriage drove up to the house of
Flora Grant, Esse was surprised to see
George Maxwell emerge quickly from the

hall door. He did not appear to recognise
her ; an escape for which she was duly
thankful.

She made no mention of the circumstance
to Flora Grant, but, when she was again alone
with Arthur, she spoke warmly of the unaccountable
aversion with which George
Maxwell had inspired her.

Arthur listened attentively, and then he
said —

'' I can't make out, for the life of me, who
the plague the man can be. Is he very tall,
with a particularly long, yellow moustache?"

Oh ! no," laughed Esse, ^' at least, he is
not short, but he is dark, shaved, clipped, and
curled, with a short, thick, well-arranged
black moustache ; not like my shaggy, tawny,
monument of a husband."

** I don't know who he can be," returned
Arthur, thinking much more of his wife's
dimples, and coral lips, than of a stranger in
whom he took but scant interest.

And so, having decided that he knew
nothing of George Maxwell, the tall, tawny
husband, kissed his wife, pulled Cinderella's
white locks until she squeaked, and indulged
in a variety of other small manifestations of
thorough happiness, and lazy-going contentment.


In all happiness, and in all contentment,
however, there generally lurks a thorn somewhere.
A thorn against which, hapless
mortality must, sooner or later, to borrow an
idea, prick its nose.

The thorn, which sorely troubled Arthur
Greatorix, was Flora Grant.

So it had been before she was a widow.
So it was now.

It came to pass, therefore, that not only
then, but also in the ensuing weeks and
months, many a pleasant plan was overthrown
by the intruding thorn — many a prick experienced,
when otherwise all would have
been smooth, and sweet, and lovely.

Nevertheless, among men and women, it is
given but to few, to pass through twelve such
happy months as those which succeeded to
the wedding day of Esse and Arthur Great-oris.
They were busy months for them
also, as well as happy ones. A town house
had been bought and furnished ; the loved
Cornwall house had been beautified well-nigh
unto perfection ; while their residence in
north Lincolnshire, which heretofore had
been simply a bachelor's abode, had been so
enlarged, and so twisted and turned about, as
to be completely unrecognisable. When
finished, it was christened '' Thorndyke."

It is here, that, early in the month of June,
nearly fourteen months after their marriage,
we find our hero and heroine.

Their voices are blending merrily near the
open window of a well appointed breakfast
room.

Flora Grant is also there. The silver urn
is hissing forth a cloud of steam, while a

pleasant aroma of coffee pervades the apartment.


Esse and Arthur appear to be equally oblivious
that these significant tokens indicate a
waiting meal ; while at the same time, equally
oblivious are they, of the fact, that the unopened
letter bag rests upon the sideboard.


They were still too much engrossed with
each other to be very keen about anything
else, and neither of them had near relations.
Hence the post had no power, now,
to stir emotion in their breasts.

But although the arrival of letters was so
unexciting an event to Esse and to Arthur, it
was far otherwise with Flora Grant, who had
a host of private interests and excitements
upon the tapis, and who, almost in the same
breath with her morning salutation, cried impatiently
—

You and your husband are like a couple
of children, Esse ! How much longer are

you going to chatter nonsense to each other,
and play with that stupid dog ? I am dying
to get my letters."

It is all Arthur's fault," laughed Esse,
*' but we will punish him, and make him pour
out the tea, as well as the coffee, this warm
morning, while I do the light work, and open
the letter bag. It will keep him quiet."

So saying, Esse walked to the sideboard,
while Arthur peeped into the teapot, and prepared
in a very professional manner, to commence
the pouring-out business, according to
the request of his wife.

There was a budget of papers and letters,
as usual, for Flora Grant, some half dozen
notes for Esse, and one letter, only, for
Arthur.

*' Well, little wife," he exclaimed, after
waiting patiently while the two ladies examined
their respective dispatches, ** have
you nothing for me ? I have scalded my
fingers, and upset the milk, so it is time I had

something to keep me out of further mischief."


'* I beg your pardon," answered Esse, '* I
was so taken up with my own epistles that I
forgot all about yours. Yes — there is one for
you — only one — rather a queer-looking affair
the writing is so thick — too large for a
lady — and yet not large enough for a man —
it is quite strange to me. I wonder who the
letter can be from ! "

While uttering these disjointed remarks,
Esse held the letter lightly between her
fingers, turning it over and over. Then, she
examined first the post mark, and next, the
monogram, which fastened the envelope.
Finally, with a joyous laugh, she continued —

'' I believe, Arthur, that it is a love letter for
you — and — and I declare, the monogram
looks like ' Ag.' in convulsions ! But it cannot
be ' Ag.' those are your own initials — 'A*
certainly, one letter is ' A ' — and the other
does as certainly look uncommonly like " —

'* Never mind, dear ; give the letter to me,'^
said Arthur, hastily.

Esse tossed it carelessly within his reach
and, entirely forgetful of her passing curiosity,
turned her attention to Flora Grant.

'' What news have you, Aunt Flora ? "

'* Some good, some bad, and some in-^
different," was the reply.

Esse laughed and spoke again. Indeed,
since the distribution of the letter bag, she
was by far the most loquacious of the party.

'' I have a milliner's bill which is too big to
read at all — a solicitation to hold a stall at a
fancy fair — an invitation from the Long's for
dinner on the 30th — and an enquiry about the
character of the fat housekeeper who, Arthur
declares, liked his best brandy better than
anything else."

At the mention of his name Arthur looked
up with a start. The letter, which he had received,
lay torn to atoms in a little heap by
the side of his plate.

'' Did you speak to me, darling? " he asked
absently, as he looked rather vacantly towards
Esse.

'' No. I am not always talking to you,
Arthur dear, although Aunt Flora says I
am," answered Esse playfully. Then she
continued, 'rit so happens, husband mine,
that I was talking to Aunt Flora herself this
time. I was telling her about my wonderful
and deeply important notes. But is anything
the matter?" she asked, stopping herself
suddenly, as she noticed that Arthur looked
grave and abstracted.

'' Nothing, dearest, except that I shall have
to go to London to-day, and I am afraid it
will be late before I can return. There is no
train between six o'clock and the mail, and I
shall hardly be able to catch the six o'clock."

"Oh, Arthur, how provoking, and we had
arranged for such a lovely drive ! "

*' It is more than provoking to me, darling.
A hot, dusty train is a bad exchange for your

comfortable carriage, and jolly going ponies,
I assure you."

'can't you put off going to London?"
suggested Esse.

Arthur shook his head.

'' I will go and get it over, dear, I think. It
is better for me to leave you for a day now,
than it will be later on. If I can get back in
the early part of the evening, you may be quite
sure that I shall be only too glad to do so."

For a short time after this, Esse appeared
to be entirely engrossed by the contemplation
of the toast upon her plate ; while Arthur
seemed equally devoted to the operation of
decapitating an egg.

What takes you away so suddenly,
Arthur ? " Esse asked presently.

That letter," was the brief reply.

'what, the love letter!" she cried, her
previous thoughtfulness giving place to
genuine merriment. "Is the fair lady very
importunate for an interview ? " she added.

'' Don't talk such nonsense, Esse dear! It
Is the wrong sort of love letter, since it takes
me away from my love instead of to her," replied
Arthur.

'' From one love to another, you mean, you
naughty old husband," interrupted Esse, who,
rising from her seat at the opposite end of
the table as she spoke, passed to Arthur,
and, standing behind him, wove her slender
arms around his neck. Then looking saucily
over his shoulder, she continued, " I hope
you did not destroy the letters, which I wrote
to you before we were married, as remorselessly
as you have this one."

'silly child," he said fondly, " those, with
which you condescended to honour me, are
still laid up in lavender, which means, that
they are in a tin case, with a Chubb lock, and
no end of contrivances to secure them against
thieves, fire, air and water. I was very far
gone in those days, you see ! "

Are you better now ? " asked a low, joyous
voice, very close to his ear.

'' Not much, I'm bound to confess," he answered,
kissing one of the soft little hands
which lay so temptingly close to his lips.

'' What a perfect morning it Is," observed
Esse, after she had administered a gentle
chastisement, upon the ear of her husband,
with the fingers which he had just caressed.

'' Lovely ! " he echoed, '^ which makes it
all the more provoking that I have to go
away. I suppose I had better order the dogcart.
I shall catch the eleven o'clock express,
easily."

'' This reminds me of the unaccountable
and sudden manner in which you went off,
from Brashleigh, to Gibraltar," said Flora
Grant in a carping voice, and breaking in
upon the conversation which the husband
and wife were holding together.

Truth to tell, they had forgotten her

VOL. HI. D

presence, and their blank countenances of
astonishment, when she thus spoke, plainly
proclaimed the fact.

There was nothing, in the present circumstance,
which bore any resemblance to that
of which Flora Grant made mention. Esse
and Arthur each thought this, and while so
thinking, they remained silent, which gave
Flora Grant an opportunity for further speech.

I should not like such mysterious fittings,
if I were you, Esse. Indeed, I would not
permit them. If you were either older, or
wiser, you would not take them so passively."

This was the first direct attack upon which
Flora Grant had ventured, since Arthur and
Esse had become man and wife.

Nevertheless, Flora Grant had been biding
her time. Her love for Arthur had not increased,
fair as her words to him had hitherto
been.

There is always a smouldered string, upon
which selfishness may harp melodiously.

The string, which Flora Grant had chosen
to strike of late, vibrated with dissatisfaction
at the separations, which, by reason of the
laws of marriage, necessarily took place
between Esse and herself.

And, of course, Arthur was the chief culprit
in this marriage. If the wedded pair had
been a little, ever so little, unhappy. Flora
Grant would have been mollified.

But that they should be sporting along the
highway of life like two joyous children, was
more, after all her weird prognostications concerning
their union, than she could possibly
.stand with anything like continued amiability.

So she was very glad of the present chance
for saying something disagreeable. It was
an opportunity not to be lost, and she availed
herself of it with promptitude.

At the mention of that far away rocky promontory
which, seemed destined to bear
tribulation, in its very name for Esse, Arthur
felt the arms, which still rested lovingly upon

his broad shoulders, slightly relax their pressure,
as if they were about to be removed,
but a sweet, firm, young voice, said clearly —

*' There are no mysteries, between Arthur
and myself, Aunt Flora."

Flora Grant shrugged her shoulders contemptuously
; while Arthur looking tenderly at
his wife, whom he had drawn to his knee
said —

'' Thank you, dearest."

Then addressing himself to Flora Grant,
he remarked, coldly —

'' You must not try to teach Esse to be
suspicious."

With an affected simper, and a feeble
attempt at pleasantry. Flora Grant replied —

*' Really, I beg pardon. I did not know
that you set up for being a model couple.
Such a phenomenon is so rare in this nineteenth
century. However, I will be careful
not to offend your fastidiousness again."

'' I don't think that my little wife and I

set ourselves up for anything, except for
being awfully happy," responded Arthur,
making a desperate endeavour to turn his
rising wrath into good-humour.

Flora Grant treated this remark with silent
contempt ; and, with various shrugs and gestures,
she endeavoured to convey to Esse
unbounded sympathy for her present pitiable
condition.

But Esse was a very heart-whole little wife.
As a consequence, it would have taken far
more than shrugs and sighs and elevated
eyebrows to make her understand, that she
was in any way needing compassion.

One result, however, emanated from the
words of Flora Grant. It was this. At a
little before eleven o'clock, Esse went gently
into her husband's sanctum, carrying with
her a strip of paper, upon which was inscribed
the various commissions which she desired
him to execute for her in London. Hand in
hand, and with heads bent close to one

another, the husband and wife read through
the Hst together; the weaker vessel giving
directions, while the stronger promised
obedience. When all was satisfactorily-settled,
Esse, nestling still closer to her
liege lord, said shyly —

'' You have never told me yet, Arthur dear,,
all about that journey of yours to Gibraltar ;
and, I have never yet spoken, about something
which I always meant to have told you
so soon as we were married. If you do not
mind, I should like to hear all about — about
Gibraltar ; and — I should also like to tell you
about — about, what I have to tell you. It is
only a very little thing, but I want to explain
it before " — she stopped in her sweet, hesitating,
simple speech, and drooping her head
a little, added in a shy whisper, '' before baby
IS born."

'* My darling, and so you shall ! To-morrow,
we will make our mutual confessions.
Meanwhile, my pet, take care of yourself, and

do not let Mrs. Grant worry you with anymore
of her nonsense while I am away. Dr.
Wyldham thought it better that she should
be here for a few weeks, but, upon my soul, I
think it was a bad move. However, it cannot
be altered now. Were I not going to help a
friend who is in great trouble, I would n3t
leave you at all to-day. I can tell you all
about this tomorrow though. If you walk
in the grounds this morning, take Marie with
you, dear, and do not overture yourself, there's
a darling ! The sun will be very hot in the
middle of the day, so be careful."

With these, and similarly affectionate injunctions,
Arthur Greatorix mingled his parting
caresses.

When he was fairly gone, Esse murmured
softly to herself —

'' What a long, happy talk we shall have
tomorrow — but, somehow, I wish that it could
have been to-day, instead of tomorrow."

THE GREEN-LANE TRYST.

■*' You have actually consented, then, to the
departure of your husband," said Flora Grant,
coming suddenly into the room, and thereby
destroying the soliloquy into which Esse had
fallen. '' I heard the rattle of wheels, or I
.should not have thought it possible."

Why not? " asked Esse, carelessly.

A point-blank question is often difficult to
answer. In the present instance, at all
events. Flora Grant appeared to find It so,
for It was some little time before she said —

Because it is so very odd that he should
rush off to Town like this. He was making
all sorts of plans, only last night, for this
afternoon."

'' ' What may tomorrow bring — who can

tell ? ' " sang Esse, in her rich contralto
voice, by way of answer.

"Singing does not mend the matter, Esse.
Suppose anything were to happen ? I have
not the least idea where he is to be found."

"My dear Aunt Flora! nothing is at all
likely to happen. Do you imagine that the
house is going to catch fire, or that we run
any risk of being swallowed up by an earthquake,
all because the master of the mansion
is absent for a few hours ? My poor husband
! " continued Esse merrily, " surely you
would not have him turned into a sort of
domestic coast-guard, who, must be always at
his post, in case some calamity should attack
his household ? "

Flora Grant looked injured, and she took
refuge again in shrugs, and their accessories.
There was a little whimper in her tone, as
well as a little affectation of faltering speech,
as she returned —

"You are not very grateful to me, for all

my perfectly disinterested solicitude upon
your behalf. For my part, I do not care
where your husband chooses to go ; but I
cannot help feeling — In fact, It Is only natural
I should do so — that if he shared a little
of my anxiety about you, It would be not only
kinder, but also better."

Of course, I am very much obliged to
you, Aunt Flora, for all your Interest In me,
but, no one can possibly be either kinder or
better, than Arthur," said Esse stoutly.

'' Most women would think differently; but
you are dreadfully supine."

'ram I ? — or rather, what does that mean ?
I declare, I hardly know," laughed Esse;
** but if It means ' a contented mind,' and ' a
continual feast,' and all that sort of thing,
I suppose, I must own that you are right."

'rit would be better, perhaps, under the
circumstances, if you gave up that absurd
sort of feasting. I only know that if I were
you, Esse, I should be so wretched this

morning, I should not be able to hold up my
head. You would not find me laughing and
singing as you are."

'' Then, it is a very fortunate arrangement,
that you are Aunt Flora and that I am Esse
Greatorix," was the merry rejoinder.

But although Esse thus brightly parried
the attacks which were levelled against
Arthur, she was none the less annoyed by
them. Hostilities, however, between herself
and a guest, and that guest the widow of
"Uncle Ralph," could not be thought of ;
wherefore, Esse curbed her longing to insist
upon a cessation of all discussion upon the
movements of her husband, as best she could,
and strove to appear careless and unconcerned.


*' Shall we go into the drawing-room, and
look over the new music which arrived yesterday?"
she asked, casting about in her mind
for some suitable diversion from a conversation
which was irksome to her. " I think we

have been in possession of Arthur's room
long enough."

The mention of Arthur was both inadvertent
and unfortunate. It seemed to inspire
Flora Grant with fresh zest for the
continuance of a subject which, for the time
being, appeared to possess a paramount interest
for her.

'' Speaking of your husband," she began,
reminds me, Esse, that, only a short time
ago, a friend of mine told me, of a man who
one morning suddenly left his wife and home,
and who never returned. They could not
discover anything at all about him for more
than two years, and then it turned out that he
was a bigamist, and that he had decamped
because his first wife, who was, of course, his
lawful wife, threatened him with an exposure
which he dared not face."

'' To decamp was the best thing that he
could do, I should think," rejoined Esse, a
superb disdain at the innuendo, which she

scorned to notice, flashing from her beautiful
eyes.

The day came when she remembered these
words of hers, and when, calling them to
mind, she marvelled at herself for having
spoken them.

'^ Perhaps it was ; but these sort of things
make me nervous," returned Flora Grant, with
a pretended shudder.

*' They make me sorry for the sufferers —
not nervous," said Esse, her bright young
spirit as free from apprehension of any sort
or kind of unhappiness, as a bird is free from
care.

Ha ! but then you have no nerves ; no
sensitiveness," replied Flora Grant peevishly,
as if the fact were deserving of rebuke.

I soon shall have, if we stay much longer
in this warm atmosphere," returned Esse,
moving with determination towards the
drawing-room, whither she was followed, in
silence, by Flora Grant, who, as she marked

the flush upon the cheek of her young companion,
felt a momentary pang of compunction.


It was in rather a subdued state of mind,
therefore, that, having seated herself before
a writing-table. Flora Grant unfolded her
writing-case, and made sundry demonstrations
of commencing to answer her letters.

Meanwhile Esse busied herself with an
inspection of the new music.

'' Try it, if you wish, Esse, it will not
interrupt me," said Flora Grant presently,
with an amiability which had been brought
about by fear.

'' Are you quite sure ? " asked Esse.

A prompt assurance was given, and in a
few moments harmony literally took the place
of discord.

But Esse was not herself. Try as she
might to enjoy the sweet sounds which filled
the room, as her fingers swept over the
keys of her piano, she could not do so. Her

temples throbbed painfully, while the soft
summer air seemed to her to be warm to
suffocation. She made no mention of her
discomfort. Anything, she thought, was
better, than a repetition of remarks which
either directly or indirectly pointed to Arthur,
so she kept her post at the piano.

Great, therefore, was her relief, when a
slight stir and rustle proclaimed the welcome
fact that Flora Grant was about to transfer
the scene of her letter-writing to another
apartment.

So soon as the door closed upon the last
of Flora Grant's trailing black silk flounces,
the music ceased, and Esse, clasping her
hands tightly across her forehead, rose from
the instrument, and passed slowly to the
open French window. Then seating herself
in an easy-chair, she leant her head against
its well-cushioned back, and remained motionless.


The summer breeze, laden with the scent

of mignonette and a hundred sweet perfumes,
stole gently through the broad verandah
which shaded the window ; while the
song of birds rang out softly from the distant
trees.

Esse was a novice to bodily pain. Throbbing
temples had so rarely been her portion
that she wondered, with a simple wonder,
why the breeze, which kissed them so lovingly,
did not cure them as it kissed.

She waited with closed eyes, patient, but
still wondering.

Then a footstep in the verandah startled
her, and she fled to her old nurse Marie.

The verandah, which has thus been twice
mentioned, almost encircled the house. It
was a great feature, in the bungalow-like
edifice to which the whim of Arthur had
altered his Lincolnshire abode.

This whim had resulted in an undoubted
success. Esse was enchanted with the lofty
and spacious rooms which led so charmingly

from one to the other, and her admiration
reached its climax, when she was introduced
to her own particular suite of apartments.

These consisted of boudoir, bed and .
The former terminated, in that
sanctum of Arthur's with which the reader
has already been made slightly acquainted.

In addition to the somewhat original attractions
of the house, parqueterie floors made
gorgeous by Indian rugs and matting, 
panels to doors and shutters, china,
bronzes, chandeliers, pictures, bright coloured
satin hangings (the '' sage and onion " tints
were as yet unborn), with a profusion of
flowers, both within and without, combined to
give to it a general gala-like aspect of
festivity, which was at once charming and
inspiriting.

It was the very antipodes, in appearance, of
the stately, solemn, grand old home, by the
rugged rocks, and wild sea waves in Cornwall.
There was nothing in *' Thorndyke " to hold

VOL. in. E

the heart as that did — to fill the imagination
with thoughts of days gone by — of fair
women and brave men long since mouldering
in the dust — nothing to fire the heart
with noble longing to do and to dare as they
had dared and done.

Thorndyke told nothing of the buried past,
and nothing of the dim future. On the contrary,
it was a present, tangible, luxurious
dwelling-place, replete with all that money
could command and a loving heart devise.
No wonder Esse was delighted with it,
although with altogether a different delight
from that with which she regarded her other

home.

By comparison to each other, the places
were as a summer-house to a castle. Esse
liked the summer-house immensely, but she
loved the castle dearly.

The footstep, which frightened her into the
presence of the faithful Marie, proceeded from
Flora Granted

need not have been either alarming or
disturbing, since it trod the extreme end of
the verandah and in the opposite direction
from where Esse was sitting.

Moreover, the footstep in question passed
quickly beyond the precincts of the house.

But, without knowing whose the footfall
was, Esse fled upon an impulse, an Impulse
which was brought about by a horror of a renewed
conversation with '' Aunt Flora."

The alarm, as we have before stated, was
needless.

Flora Grant was bent upon a very different
errand — far other projects filled her mind.
Wherefore, contrary to her usual habits of indolence,
and notwithstanding that the sun,
hot and scorching, was still high In the
heavens, she tripped briskly across the lawn —
passed through a shrubbery — crossed a plank
which gave a footway to a hah — skirted a
meadow all aglow with buttercups — and finally
emerged into a shady lane, along one side of

ywiVERsmr or nirMnv*

which for nearly half a mile there ran a wood
or thicket.

She was quite alone — without even the
escort of Countess, a fact which was by no
means free from significance.

Professedly Flora Grant was afraid of the
country — afraid of tramps — of toads, of frogs,
of snakes, of cows, of everything in fact,
which it was possible, as well as probable,
might be met with in a rural ramble. Yet,
here she was, full half a mile from even the
stables, with no shadow of fear upon her face,
and no hint of terror in her gait !

Everybody knows how a nervous woman
skims over the ground — how her small feet
come and go in quick succession in and out
from beneath her pretty skirts, and what timid
glances she casts from side to side of the way
she has to traverse. Then there Is the slightly
dilated nostril, the quickly panting bosom,
with the red lips just parted by the shortly
drawn breath.

But, each and all of these signs were missing
from Flora Grant, as she paced, with
slackened speed, beneath the shade of the
trees which bounded the lane she had reached.

She was looking remarkably well, nay !
handsome, with her crape and silk dress carefully
gathered up and adjusted, a coquettish
little black hat upon her well arranged hair ;
bien gantee^nd hen ckaiissee.The heightened
colour of her cheek, while it gave brilliancy
to her brunette complexion, told also of expectation:
an expectation which, from the
sparkle of her glances, was evidently pleasurable.


And from between the leafy screen of
the branches of the trees by which she
strolled, all this was noted by a man, upon
whose countenance sat a smile — a smile
which was so repulsive to behold, that it
scarcely could lay claim to its cognomen.
It was, perhaps, rather a wreathing or contortion
of a handsome mouth into a shape

denoting sarcastic triumph, while the gutter
of the dark eyes above matched it right well.

Not far from the individual in question, stood
a little blood mare, fastened to the post of a
gate ; she had evidently been ridden hard,
for the white foam hung about her mouth
and nostrils, while her slender sides and
quarters still showed unmistakeable signs of
heat and distance.

A good man, we are told, is merciful to his
beast. There was little enough of such mercy
in the heart of the master who owned this
one ; little enough of mercy, for man, woman,
or beast, only so far as his pleasure and his
pocket were concerned.

While the patience of Flora Grant, therefore,
was being sorely taxed by waiting, and
while the thoroughbred still panted from exertion,
George Maxwell (for it was he) took a
certain, spiteful, savage, vindictive pleasure,
in contemplating first the trim figure in mourning
and then the tired steed. Both were his

tools. And George Maxwell liked tools ; moreover,
he could use them deftly. When once
selected by him they were perforce obliged todo
his will — and — to do it well. The work
ended ; then — ah, then, God only knew what
was their fate !

In the present instance, it amused him
vastly to see the fashionable, fanciful, indolent
Flora Grant, thus awaiting his coming in a
green lane. He thoroughly understood the
woman with whom he had to deal. His
vanity was not, therefore, allowed to run him
into error. He made no mistake. Not to a
scrap of affection for himself, did he, for one
moment, attribute the cause of her thus
coming. Vanity and self were too much
concomitant parts of his own nature, for him
not to recognise them at a glance in another.
It was a clean case of, 'set a thief to catch
a thief."

By arts and speech, which were little short
of devilish, he had contrived to enlist a certain

amount of interest for himself in the
thoughts of Flora Grant. As the victim of
heart-rending sorrows, the innocent dupe of
damnable plots and cruel devices, she had
bestowed scant enough attention upon the
sufferer. But when, with cunning tact, he
changed the story ; when she herself became
the heroine of his woe, when her beauty was
the blight which shut out even Heaven itself
from his view, when she, and she alone, had
wrought, it was said, confusion so dire, that
but one word from her lips was as water to
the parched, one glance from her eye as
reprieve to the condemned ; then, the scant
measure of her attention filled rapidly.

During the time which had elapsed since
Esse had seen George Maxwell emerge from
the house in Eaton Place, he had crossed the
sea to Australia. Not upon this account,
however, had he relaxed his hold upon the
acquaintanceship of Flora Grant. While he
was absent from England, he wrote to her as

frequently as possible. Since his return to
his native land, which had taken place some
six or seven weeks before we find him in
the region of Thorndyke, the correspondence
between them had gone on briskly.

Truth to tell, Flora Grant found Thorndyke,
to use her own words, '' most awfully slow."

There was some slight excuse, perhaps, to
be found for this, in the '' all in all" state of
affairs which existed between her host and
hostess.

Rachel Tritton would have derived unalloyed
satisfaction from the contemplation of
their happiness. But, alas ! for Flora Grant,
she and Rachel Tritton were not like-minded.

Letters, therefore, which re-inflated the
collapsing vanity of Flora Grant — collapsing
from want of that adulation upon which it
fed — were very welcome to her.

With written words of despair, passion and
entreaty, safely stowed away in her dressing-case,
she could look a trifle less impatiently

upon the felicity of Arthur and Esse ; but, it
was only a trifling improvement of patience,
as we know. And, when the writer of these
fulsome epistles petitioned for an interview,
the idea, of the excitement of such an event,
came to Flora Grant in the guise of a charming
respite from the ennui to which she was
reduced.

So, in a roundabout fashion, she sat herself
to sound Esse respecting the admission of
George Maxwell, as a visitor, within the gates
of Thorndyke ; and so sounding, found that
the way for his entrance through those same
gates was as strongly barred as the gentle
force of Esse could bar them.

Therefore, upon a small, perfumed sheet of
paper. Flora Grant wrote him a skirmishing
little note ; answering nothing, proposing
nothing, disavowing compliments, doubting
devotion, and so forth.

The recipient of this note was perfectly
satisfied. The skirmish was just what he

wanted. It threw him Into a despair which
he vowed was too wild, too overpowering and
too masterful for him to venture, whither other
orbs, save her own, might read his maddening
misery. Another skirmishing reply ensued.
Whereupon the strategy upon the other side
developed itself.

There was a green and shady lane, wherein
sweet wild flowers budded, bloomed and died ;
where birds sang their love songs to each
other, and carolled hymns of praise high
in the blue heavens ; where grass-hoppers
chirped merrily, and all nature was blithe —
all blithe and gay, save the one crushed,
bleeding, faithful heart which, in the midst of
all this glad rejoicing, would day by day,
weary, sad and lonely, watch and gaze, until
in answer to oft-repeated orisons, Flora Grant
should, by her gracious presence, relieve a
torture which otherwise must end in the cruel
agonies of a lingering death.

It was a highly garnished dish — a well

seasoned, well spiced, full flavoured preparation,
but it suited the taste of the dainty
dame for whom it was served.

The smile, with which she surveyed it, was
scarcely less agreeable to behold, than that
which played over the face of George Maxwell,
when he looked from out of his lurking-place
of leaves. In point of fact. Flora Grant
saw her way to a small amount of excitement
to which the aforesaid dish was decidedly
appetissa7it.

One day — some day, perhaps, she would
illumine by her presence both the green lane,
and also the dark wretchedness of the man,
in question. She had by no means decided,
when she would condescend so to act.
George Maxwell must, and should, await her
will and pleasure. Consideration for him was
not to be found in its minutest form, amidst
her reflections. He was quite right. Flora
Grant, in reality, cared no more for him, than
she did for her boots or her fan ; perhaps, not

as much when the one fitted well, and the
other matched her dress satisfactorily.

From 'twelve to one o'clock" had been
the time named in humble language, by
George Maxwell, as the hour at which he
would be looklnor and lonorlnor for the arrival
of the object of his adoration.

Twice, he had already looked and longed
*in vain.

The third time is lucky, they say. Anyhow,
the third time brought him the fulfilment
of his desire, and this fulfilment was
so delightful to him that the mere distant
contemplation of it filled his soul with glee.

All unlike, therefore, to honest, fond, and
fooHsh lovers, he was in no haste, hot and
eager, to drain, or even to taste, his cup of
bliss.

He, the rather refrained from touch and
drop, and looked calmly on, until an impatient
gesture from his divinity reminded him with
whom he had to deal.

They were both splendid actors — well up
in their respective parts ; perfect in look,
trick, sigh and smile.

With an affected start of supreme surprise,
Flora Grant coyly extended the points of her
black eyelashes, and the tips only of her
gloved fingers, in greeting to her worshipper ;
while he, with dumb show, signified a rapture
which was too profound for utterance.

The conversation, which ensued, need not
be repeated. Suffice it to say that, before
the termination of the interview, a permission
to visit Thorndyke later on in the day had
been both asked for and granted.

How far the knowledge of the absence of

Arthur Greatorix acted upon the desire of the

petitioner, or to what extent the petitioned

was guided by this same absence, it would be

.somewhat difficult to explain.

MOONLIGHT AND ALONE.

Upon returning from her morning rendezvous,
Flora Grant partook of a solitary luncheon.

Marie held Esse in captivity, and utterly
refused to relax the order, for solitary confinement,
which she had issued against her
prisoner. Absolute freedom from excitement
of all kind, was the treatment, to
which, in her capacity of gaoler, Marie
resolutely adhered.

And Esse was very thankful thus to betaken
possession of and held in bondage.

By slow degrees her flushed cheek grew

cool, her throbbing temples ceased their rapid

beating, and, by the time that the dinner hour

arrived, she was able to join Flora Grant in

the drawing-room.

As Esse wended her way thither she was

assailed by a slight anxiety. Flora Grant was-wont
to resent, rather than to pity, anything
like bodily suffering in others. Delicacy of
health was an interesting prerogative which-she
established for herself. Of this, Esse
was fully aware. She was a little nervous,.
therefore, as to the consequences of her
own inadvertent usurpation of this self-constituted
right.

Flora Grant, however, was radiant with
good-humour. She could not refrain from
a small amount of scoffing at Marie's old
fashioned and unnecessary precautions, but
on the whole, the reception, which Esse
received, was far more agreeable than she
anticipated.

Conversation must needs be of a desultory
nondescript nature, during dinner. Attentive
flunkies have ears, as well as eyes and hands ;
the former of which, are often quite as industriously
used as the latter.

The two ladies, who dined tete-astute that

evening at Thorndyke, understood all about
this. Very discreet were their tongues inconsequence.


But when the labours of the chef culminated
in the small pats of white and pink ice
over which each fair dame poised her spoon,
Esse dismissed her servants ; and then the
time arrived for confidential communications.

Flora Grant began at once.

*' Guess who has been here to-day, Esse."

'' Here ! " exclaimed Esse, '' I was not
told of any visitors'*

^' How could you be told anything, with
that old griffin Marie keeping guard over
you? " was the retort. ** Someone has been,
though, and he stayed a long time too ! "

*' He ! " rejoined Esse.

'eyes; he, Mr. Maxwell ! '*
- " Mr. Maxwell ! " echoed Esse, with a
good deal of disapprobation mingled in her
accents of surprise.

'* You seem astonished," returned Flora

VOL. IlL F

Grant, lightly, " but, why you should be, I
cannot imagine. This is not a convent ; I
took no vows, when I came here, that I would
eschew all my masculine friends. There is
nothing very remarkable in the proceeding of
a gentleman, who happens to be in the neighbourhood,
coming to pay an old friend an
afternoon visit. Anyone would suppose, sometimes,
Esse, that you had been brought up
in the back woods of America, you appear
to understand so little of the ways and doings
of society."

'' I did not know that Mr. Maxwell was in
the neighbourhood," returned Esse coldly,
and ignoring, as she always did from force of
habit, the more personal points of the remarks
which had been made by Flora Grant.

Neither did I, until " — here Flora Grant
stopped, having very nearly committed herself
by an allusion to the meeting which she
had held before luncheon.

'with whom is he staying?" enquired

Esse, too much vexed with the whole affair
to notice the confusion which was depicted
upon the countenance at the other end of
the table.

^' I really don't know. I did ask him, but
I quite forget what answer he made me. He
was enraptured with this place. Lots of
people had told him about it, he said, but he
did not expect to find it so completely metamorphosed.
He stayed here once when he
was a boy " —

'with my husband's parents?" interrupted
Esse.

I cannot say. Of course I did not
trouble myself to cross question him, in the
same disagreeable manner that you do me.
I saw that he was very much interested in the
house, therefore without worrying either him,
or myself, about reasons, and so forth, I offered
to shew him some of the principal rooms.
He was delighted, and I really thought I
should never have got him out of the study,

snuggery, or whatever it is which you call
that room next to your boudoir."

'^ Arthur would be very much annoyed, if
he knew that a stranger had been taken there.
He hates anything like a show place," said
Esse, indignantly.

Better to leave him in a state of blissful
ignorance then," laughed Flora Grant ; " but
it is an awfully ' dog-in-the-manger ' idea.
Why should he want to live in such a 
sort of manner? He ought to be
very glad to have his alterations so much
appreciated. As I said before, Mr. Maxwell
was quite delighted with that particular room.
He wanted to take the dimensions of it — he
thought them so admirable ; but I could not
find him a foot-rule, so he was reduced to his
riding whip. He was particularly charmed,
also, with the manner in which the door that
leads into your boudoir looks as if it formed
part of the bookshelves on either side of it.
I assure you, my description of the blue

satin portiere, with its embroidered border of
moss rose buds, which covers this same door
upon what I call your side of the hedge, was
most eloquent. I was only afraid that Marie
would hear our voices. I knew that, if she
did so, we should be warned off as if wee were
either poachers, or trespassers, or both.
Marie is not the best mannered domestic in
the world."

'' Marie is an old and well-tried servant'*
returned Esse.

'rand, if anything, she is rather more unpleasantly
officious, ill-tempered, and disagreeable,
than even that odious race of beings
generally contrive to make themselves. I hate
servants, as a tribe."

'' We are very much at their mercy, it
always seems to me," answered Esse,
wearily, for by this time the hot flush, betokening
pain, had once more mounted to her
cheek.

Young housewives are tenacious of their

rights. The Liberty of taking a stranger over
her house and of showing him its hallowed
nooks and corners, was keenly resented by
Esse ; while the fact that this stranger was
a man whom she particularly disliked, and
wished in every way to avoid, by no means
lessened her annoyance.

Pure minded, and free from all suspicious
tendencies, as the fair young wife of Arthur
Greatorix most surely was, the thought, that
the absence of her husband, together with her
own indisposition, had been taken a mean
advantage of, would obtrude itself upon her
mind.

Flora Grant saw that Esse was chagrined,
but it did not in the least check her satisfaction.
She chattered gaily on ; her theme,
was herself, with a small admixture of George
Maxwell.

When at length she with Esse returned to
the drawing-room, they were soon followed by
Marie, whose sharp eyes looked suspiciously

from the brilliantly pink cheeks of her mistress
to the careless, unconcerned face of
Flora Grant ; and as she looked, Marie quickly
traced cause and effect.

Whereupon Marie once more usurped her
privilege of nurse and raised her voice of
warning.

Most of us know the swiftness with which a
recently cured nervous headache will sometimes
return, and how fatal, to the chance of
escape from such a return, is an unpleasant
conversation.

Such a fatality had overtaken Esse. Accordingly
she listened to the warning of Marie,
and acting upon it, bade Flora Grant, early
although it still was, adieu for the night.

Then Marie, with an anxiety which knew
no bounds, and with a devotion which never
flagged, led her young mistress away to the
boudoir. When there, Marie exchanged the
evening dress which Esse wore for a more
comfortable attire. Then, unbinding the long

tresses of her mistress, Marie placed her
upon a couch, and threw a large quilted satin
couvre-pied lightly over her. After having
done this, she retired.

Before long, Esse sank into a profound
sleep.

The last rosy streak of daylight faded
slowly away. But still she slept on. By
and by a flood of moonlight streamed through
the broad window. The silvery rays fell
athwart the small hands of the slumberer,
which, softly clasped together, lay out upon
the satin coiivre-pied. Anon, the sweet pale
light stole lovingly upwards to her face —
played over her full red lips — bathed her
hair In Its effulgent splendour — and then,
with its luminous glory, tipped her couch until
it resembled a fairy car of triumph.

Presently the blue satin portiere at the far
end of the room, was gently moved, and then
noiselessly drawn aside.

A moment passed. All remained still ;

while, fairer than a dream of beauty, Esse
still calmly slumbered on.

Again the thick folds of the curtains of
the portiere stirred, and, from between their
rose-bud borders, the face of a man peered
cautiously into the moon-lighted chamber.
For one short moment, the face looked with
wonder at the beauty of the scene upon which
it had thus dared to intrude. Then a figure
stepped stealthily forward. Crossing through
the moonbeams which were cast upon the
carpet, the figure, halted by the couch of
Esse, as if arrested by the loveliness which
it bore. Thus another instant arrived and fled.
At its departure, the figure passed on tiptoe
to the fireplace, and with ready fingers
dexterously cut in twain the flat silken bell
rope which hung from the ceiling. As the
severed piece fell noiselessly to the floor,
the figure recrossed the room, passed stealthily
as before through the portiere and was
lost to sight.

There had been no sound, during either the
ingress or the egress of the figure — not a
rustle, creak, or cock. All had been silent,
weird and shadowy, as the work of enchantment.
Nevertheless, scarcely was the pretty
boudoir freed from the incubus of the presence
of the dark form, than Marie, who had
grown anxious at the prolonged slumber of
her mistress, appeared with gentle tread to
assure herself that all was well ; while, almost
simultaneously with the arrival of Marie, Esse
opened her eyes and inquired the hour.

*' Ten o'clock, ma'am, the master will be
back in two hours ; he will scold, I am afraid,
when he knows that we have let you get the
headache. Will you go to bed now ? "

'* No thank you, Marie, I have had sleep
enough for the present, and I really feel quite
well again. Please let me have my reading
lamp and coffee here. No one, need stay up
for Mr. Greatorix, but Pickard. Do you know

whether Mrs. Grant has gone to her room
yet ? "

*' Just gone, I think, madam. I passed by
the drawing-room door a minute or two ago,
and then there was no one in the room."

While thus replying to the interrogations,
and receiving the orders of her mistress,.
Marie, closed the plate-glass windows, and
drew down the Venetian blinds.

Before long the shaded lamp and the coffee
were brought, and Esse, in a trousseau dressing
gown which was resplendent with lace and
pink bows, still reclining upon her sofa, leisurely
sipped her coffee, while at intervals,,
she amused herself with the book which had
been handed to her by Marie. Fain would
that faithful abigail have kept at her post
until the actual return of Arthur, but Esse
resolutely refused to allow her to do so.

** It is of no use, Marie," said Esse merrily,
*' I will not let you sit up any longer. I have

been watching you for a long time. You are
making things to do, so that you may sit
up with me. But it is all nonsense. I really
want to read, so wish me * good-night ' and
go away."

Poor Marie did as she was commanded,
but her " good-night" was fully as reluctantly
given as that of a child who has been urgently
petitioning for *just ten minutes longer."

Left alone at last, Esse closed her book,
and laid it down upon the small table which
had been wheeled to her side ; then rising, she
went to one of the windows and drew up the
blinds.

It was a lovely night, calm, and still. The
queen of the heavens, in her majesty of light,
looked down upon the sleeping flowers and
bathed them in a beauty of her own ; while
here and there, the 'forget me not of the
angels" shone out, in the dark clear skies.

'' Arthur is coming by the mail, after all,"
said Esse to herself; 'what a lovely drive he

will have from the station ! I wish I could
have gone with him to-day."

The sweet face of the speaker grew wistful,
with the wish.

'' Moonlight is very lovely, but it makes
one melancholy," she murmured. *' I am half
inclined to follow the advice of good old
nurse Marie, and go to bed."

With this partly formed resolve, Esse passed
through the dressing-room to her bedchamber
; but, when there, she felt so disinclined
for repose, that she quickly altered
her mind and returned to her boudoir.

Suddenly an idea, which at the moment
seemed to her in very truth to be a ^' happy
thought," occurred to her.

Amongst the many bequests which had
been made to her by Ralph Grant, there
was a small, inlaid cabinet. This cabinet
had remained, until quite lately, at Brashleigh
Manor. In fact, it had only been brought to
Thorndyke after the arrival thither of Flora

Grant upon her present visit, some few days
previously. The key of it, which was small and
golden, had been mislaid, and it had only been
discovered that very day, in some mysterious
pocket of some equally mysterious travelling
bag belonging to her maid.

The key in question had been promptly
handed over to Esse, who, between vexation
and headache, received it so mechanically as
to forget the instant after receiving it, that it
had ever come into her possession.

The recollection of the circumstance, however,
was vivid enough, now that a remembrance
of the cabinet, together with a desire
to investigate its contents, had entered her
mind. But not so vivid, or, at any rate, not
so clear, was the calling to mind of the place
in which she had deposited the key. Step
by step she recalled the few incidents of the
day. First came the leave-taking with
Arthur, next the unpleasant tetc-a-tete with
Flora Grant, then the withdrawal to the

drawing-room, the music — ha! she was at
the piano when the maid came in to speak
to her mistress, and — yes — then it was that the
key had been given to her. What had she
done with it ? Esse thought a moment ; then
she went to her wardrobe, found her morning-dress
hanging therein, and, to her great
■dehght, the key within the watch-pocket. It
was so tiny that, she remembered to have
decided, it would be safer there than elsewhere.
The finding of the wherewithal, to unlock the
mysteries of the cabinet, was a great joy
to Esse, who proceeded without delay to
open its small, richly-wrought doors.

At first, she found nothing of peculiar interest
amidst its contents. The tiny drawers
were filled with old coins, a few seals,
and some half-a-dozen miniatures, concerning
the originals of which Esse was completely
ignorant. Somewhat disappointed,
she was growing listless in her investigation,
when upon opening a drawer, which was

considerably larger and deeper than any of
the others into which she had looked, she
saw a sealed packet, addressed to herself
in the well-known handwriting ot *' Uncle
Ralph."

Trembling with excitement, she broke the
seals.

The '' message from the dead," she thought,
had reached her at last. That message
which had called her forth to her fruitless
midnight search.

Thus concluding, she looked with intense
interest and profound awe upon an envelope,
which envelope was securely tied round with
pink tape, and which, by the breaking of the
seals with the removal of the outer covering
of the packet, was disclosed to her view.

Upon this inner envelope, in large, bold
characters, Esse saw three short words
transcribed.

These three short words were '^ The Roll-call
! "

'' THE ROLL CALL."

The envelope in question contained several
sheets of closely-written manuscript paper.
Regarding these with some degree of surprise,
Esse laid them aside, and again
examined the address of the envelope. There
could be no mistake, the writing was most
undoubtedly that of Ralph Grant, and it was
evident, therefore, that the written pages
before her were intended for her perusal.

Thus assured, she closed the cabinet, and
seating herself near to her reading - lamp,
spread out the papers before her.

Her attention was immediately arrested
by the following words —

^' I believe that a curse, from which there
is no escape, hangs like a heavy pall over

VOL. HL G

those who have brought the hoary head of a
parent with sorrow to the grave.

*' Such a curse cHngs to me. Its woful
weight hides brightness from my sight, and
stifles all my joy.

Penitence scarce could lighten the weary,
suffocating load, even if I could lave my soul
therein ; but I cannot. Penitence, for those
deeds which may never be undone, seems tome
but as the dressing of a dead body in the
flaunting garb of earthly pride ; that by so
dressing, the rigidity of the shrunken limbs
may be concealed, while the gay robes may
give a false show of life. Aye, and methinks it
is not only a craven endeavour to cancel actions
of which we blush to think, but it is also a
grovelling: delusion — a delusion which kindles
a hope that, by wails and tears, the dead ashes
of our ruined happiness may be gathered up,
.and by and by rekindled. We cannot bow
our heads and bear the doom which we have
so eagerly brought about. We cannot eat of

the bitter fruit which we have planted and
cultured for ourselves ! - ■ . , \

'' Ah ! me, torture has wrung my heart, as
the consequences of my sin have hunted me
down — grief has well-nigh killed me, as, one
after another, they have turned to gall and
wormwood in my mouth — remorse, with maddening
sting, has goaded me to ghastly deeds
of desperation — but penitence — such as the
holy preach, and such as the good and the
gentle practise to the healing of their souls —
I know not. I may not lie. I know only too
surely that, if by a miracle God would renew
for me my life., I should once more sacrifice
the fair gift to one of His frail creatures, and
that I should once more cast it recklessly
into the same fierce fire of passionately idolatrous
worship.

*' How, then, may I speak of penitence,
save, indeed, as of a blessing, which I choose
to doubt, because my perverse lips care not
to taste its sweetness ?

I make no such plea, therefore, as I write
thus to you, Ralph Grant. With a curse
over me — with all my error clinging as closely
to me, as the sea-devil clings to the human
victim of its embrace, and without plea of
any sort or kind, I hold forth my hands to
you for justice. My hope Is faint — my cry is
strong. Would God they could be reversed !
J have wronged others, and I know not how
to cheat the whirlwind unto which I have
sown.

'' But you are brave and merciful ; you will
listen, if you cannot aid.

^' I have been told that ere stout-hearted
men go forth to battle the ' muster ' echoes
from rank to rank. In the grand array of
martial pomp, eager in heart, and strong
in limb, none pause in dread to ask, how it
will be with them, when the strife Is over,
and the ' Roll-call ' sounds. All honour to
those dauntless warriors, as thus fearlessly
they stand upon the threshold of their doom !

'' With a thoughtlessness, which, in its faulty
degree, matched the entirety of a fearlessness
such as that of those dauntless ones, I stood
before, and faced, the coming perils of my
life. Dreaming neither of failure nor of woe
in the yet unborn years, I pressed proudly to
my life-march. Ere I took my way, youth
and beauty, with love, joy, health, and riches,
answered stoutly to the ' muster.'

'' The ' Roll-call ' of my existence is
sounding now, and where are those ready
answerers to the ' muster ' ? Ah ! where am
T ? And how ?

Pleasure has been my battle-field — a
couch of flowers the perishable prize for
which I fought — the possession of a lawless
love the cause in which I bled — the transient
joy of an unholy victory, my only triumph.

'the 'Roll-call' sounds — listen, while I
.answer to its summons."

^' What can it all mean ? " murmured Esse,
when she had read thus f ar ; "I suppose, I

shall come to something presently which is
more definite and easy to understand."

With this reflection, she again bent her
eyes upon the pages before her. They continued
thus —

'' Did anyone ever whisper to you, Ralph
Grant, that he, for whom in after years I
sacrificed my home and honour, had been my
accepted lover, before I was wedded to the
man from whom I fled ? I betrothed myself
clandestinely, and as wickedly and wilfully as
clandestinely. Ah, well, my sin has found
me out ! My obstinate refusal to break off
my engagement at the command of my
father broke his loving heart. I was his
favourite child, and rebellion from me robbed
him of life. I wept for his death, and
mourned for his loss, with all sincerity ; but
close as ever to my heart did I hug that
affection of which he had so sternly disapproved.


'' Circumstances, however, brought to pass,

results which the wise counsels of an affectionate
parent had failed to effect.

'the 'curse' went swiftly out against me.

He, for whom I had braved the wrath and
reproaches of my father, rudely snapped

asunder the bond which held me to him. A

woman, whose affection is worth possessing,

cannot love a traitor !

I bend low my head in anguish, as I
make this indirect acknowledgment of my
lover's treachery.

Schoolgirls may chatter with impunity
of their innocent, short-lived conquests ;
schoolboys may rave of their fleeting admiration
for eyes black or blue, locks dark or
golden ; but not so lightly may those of riper
years babble forth their tales of love.

Happy love is sacred — true love is silent.
Both dwell in heart, deed and eye, rather than
in speech, even between those whom they
hold so close to one another. It is a shallow
passion, not love, which lives in words, and

loves to boast. And, if this be so when all is
well — when no un-faith has been given back
to faith — low as the lowest may fall in this
fallen world, surely honour should refuse to
repeat the story of a love which is no longer
prized !

'' May God forgive the men and the
women, who do not thus think and act.
May He forgive, also, the puling vanity which
tempts, either the one or the other, to whine
forth a miserable boasting for the gratification
or amusement of stranger ears.

'' But, before wearying you further, I will
pass on to my own immediate history. In
one dire moment the idol, to whom with blind
persistence I had dedicated myself, fell,
shivered to atoms, at my feet.

Madwoman that I was, to stoop and lift
the shattered fragments from the ground !

'' Madwoman that I am, still to bow me
down before that defaced, patched up, broken
idol!

■^' Thrice more insane must I be — yea — •
thrice more maniacal, and more miserably
mad, than either they who sacrifice to monstrous
blocks of stone and carven images, or,
those who gnash their flesh in a fancied propitiation
of senseless deities ! And, but for
the curse, this madness, perchance, would not
have fallen upon me."

When Esse had perused thus far of the
wild and mysterious pages, she gave a slight
shiver and looked nervously around her.
She had good nerves and a light conscience,
but that, which she had read, somewhat
terrified her. She glanced timidly around
the silent chamber, therefore, as though, to
rally her courage, she would assure herself,
that neither the spirit nor the substance of
the unknown writer were lurking in any hidden
corner.

Then, looking at her watch, and sending
an earnest longing wish for the return of
Arthur, she once more took up the manuscript.

*' A few months after the decease of my
father, fate, or perhaps my nemesis, took me
to visit some family connections residing near
to the home of my lover. I was aware that
a youthful flirtation had once existed between
him and the eldest daughter of my host and
hostess, and also that, after a sojourn of two
years in Italy, she had recently returned to
England.

'' My trust, however, was absolute, in the
man to whom I had plighted my troth ; while
I looked upon the bold and handsome face of
my new friend, without either fear, or misgiving.
Alas, I was soon taught the folly of
my credulity !

*' God help me! Standing one day in a
woodland walk, with sunshine overhead, and
happiness in my young heart, I accidentally
became an eaves-dropper. Through the sweet
summer air, there floated to me, the deep
passionate murmur of a voice I knew right
.well, and in one short moment my happiness

was turned to woe — the bright sunshine about
me to the blackness of night. I could not flee
away — I could not stop my ears — the ' curse '
would not so spare me. I could only gnash
my teeth in silent agony, as I heard the deep,
rich voice speak words of love, which I, like
a fool, had dreamed were never uttered save
to me alone. And then another voice, soft
and low, was uplifted in upbraiding ; in tender
chiding for forgetfulness during absence,
in taunting words of me. No criminal on
the rack can ever have endured more torture
than I did, as I heard my lover blacken his
truth, and blast his honour, by pleading, in
answer to upbraiding, chiding and taunts,,
my openly evinced love for himself, as an
excuse for a faithlessness, which he protested,
was more feigned than real.

'' And then he told, In scorn, of trusting
and of meetings, of yielding from me, of
tears and of kisses. Again and again I would
have fled, but horror chained me to the spot.

At last, a woman's mocking laugh rose high,
and clear, and shrill. I could endure no
more. Regardless of every consequence,
I appeared suddenly before those workers of
my woe — ah, me — six short weeks afterwards,
I was wedded to another !

'rit is an oft-told story; an oft-enacted
tragedy.

'' He, who became my husband, had proposed
to me In the heat of a frenzied jealousy
against the woman whom he loved; which
jealousy, was as violent In its nature, as the indignation
which tempted me to accept his
proposal.

After our wedding, a dim consciousness
came over me of the wrong I had done.
My angry passion died out almost before the
marriage bells had ceased to peal ; died out,
and left me crouching in despair before the
misery of the future.

But I resolved to play my part well before
the world, and not only to deal truly by my

husband, but, so far as in me lay, to forget
the past.

*' Again, however, the curse fell over me.
The intended nuptials of my faithless lover
with my rival were suddenly postponed.
There was no reason publicly assigned for
this.

*' Not long after the intelligence reached
me, he and I once more stood face to face.
The charm of his presence was my undoing.

'' There are others, in this world, besides
myself, who have proved an agony, such as
that, which I then endured. Some strong
hearts, may be, have borne the bitter pangs
of separation to the end ; but feebler souls
cower beneath those pangs, and beg for any
other pain in Heu of that of parting. Hands,
which have once clasped theirs, must clasp
them yet again ; while estrangement is a
death so torturing, that every hope and principle
flees before the dread which it inspires.

'* Thus was it with me ; while of such was

the misery which benumbed my conscience,
and paralyzed my judgment.

'' Nevertheless, I cannot say by what
mental process I blinded myself to the cuts,
the dents, the flaws and the imperfections of
the image, which once more I was setting up to
worship. I cannot tell, by what subtle means
the old miserable infatuation enthralled me.
I only know, that, I raised anew and re-built
my broken idol, with a tenderness which
covered every blemish and which concealed
every disfigurement.

Then I bowed down before it and once
more gave it faith and love ; not the calm,
trustful faith, the pure, unquestioning love of
other days, but a restless craving — a passionate
excitement.

*' Thus, I yielded homage to my idol ; thus,
I subscribed to tenets which were hollow,
false and selfish, until, deluded by them, I
fled from husband, home and country.

Ruined, and an outcast, the scales fell all

too soon from off my eyes. My dull perceptions
grew more keen. Day by day, the flaws
in my idol showed out more plainly — the cuts
gaped wider — the imperfections stood forth
more boldly.

I tried not to see them — I tried — God
alone knows how I tried, to think they were
not there. But self-deception was not
possible.

'' Wider, deeper, broader, grew the cuts,
the dents, and the flaws, until at length,
they were as chasms, over which passion
-could not leap, and before which infatuation
halted in disdain.

Once again, it was my terrible doom, to
listen to the perfidy of the man I loved, proclaimed
by the honeyed accents of his own
false tongue.

*' It was another arrow from the bow of a
just vengeance, and it struck me down with a
.sure and deadly aim.

You would weary, Ralph Grant, were I to

give you, In minute detail, a description of
the stages of unhappiness, through which I
painfully journeyed before I reached this
depth of woe. Suffice it to say, that accident,
or retribution, call it what you will,
brought a stranger to reside close to the
distant home whither my lover had carried
me.

'* This stranger was young and very fair to-look
upon. Ere long, the heart upon which
I leaned, forsook me, and went forth to her
She was not to blame, this girl, this golden-headed,
pink and white nonentity. I cast no
stone at her. My idol fell — too rotten at the
core to hold for long together — too falsely
false to hide its falseness. In this, she had
Two hand.

The crash, with which my idol fell, was
even mightier, and heavier, than heretofore ;
while my desolation was correspondingly
vaster and more complete.

'' From the interior of a tent, in which I

sat, I heard that being, for whom I had cast
aside every tie upon earth, and every hope of
rest hereafter, implore this stranger girl to
elope with him from the small American settlement
in which we dwelt, to the more civilized
shores of sunny France. I listened breathlessly.
Not, as once before, with shaking
limbs and heart-sickening horror, at my inadvertent
position of a spy, but, with a firm
resolution to take advantage of that position,
and to hold it to the end. Thus, again, I
caught the passion-wrought syllables which
were breathed for other ears — not mine — and
thus, again, I heard myself denounced a
temptress, — oh, God, and I had been so
tempted !

*' This time, however, no impotent desire
for wild upbraiding filled my soul. I was not
only an exile from my native land, but I was
also an orphan, and a disgraced wife. Revenge,
fierce and undying, alone could compensate
for wrongs so great as mine.

VOL. in. H

Entreaties, tears and remonstrances were, as
the pastimes of a child, in comparison to
the stern resolves upon which my heart was
fixed.

Mute, motionless and resolute, I kept my
post within the tent. The voices without, rose
and fell. I listened intently — listened to persuasions,
protestations, and vows, until my
woman's nature was transformed into that of
a fiend. The interview lasted for long, at
least, so it appeared to me. But at length
the voices, to which I had been listening,
grew fainter, while the sound of retreating
footsteps told me that I should hear no more.
*' For some minutes, after both voices and
footsteps had died away, I remained where I
was, without stirring. I was neither stunned,
nor frenzied, by the bitter blow which had
been dealt me. I was only striving to shape
my plans ; my plans for vengeance. To this
had my love been turned — my wild, unholy,
unblessed love.

*' In a short time, I had collected my ideas
and arranged my course of action. Whereupon,
leaving the tent, I returned to my
dwelling, and passed, unperceived, to my bedroom.
Closing the door, I walked mechanically
to the mirror, and contemplated with
wondering eyes the reflection of my ghostly
countenance. After which I took a solemn
farewell of all that had once formed myself
my identity. As I did so, a flush of
exultation, at my self-possession, ran through
my bosom and kept it throbbing. Then I
opened a drawer softly, like a thief, and
took therefrom a bottle — a bottle, which bore
a label — a label upon which was written,
Poison.'

'* I handled the bottle, spelled over the

grim label, letter by letter, with starting eyes
and chattering teeth ; and then I laughed at it,
stroked it, played with it, smoothed it round
and round upon the bottle — such a small
bottle — so little in it ! Yet, small though
it was, and meagre its contents, it was both
large enough, and full enough, for my
purpose !

'^ But time began to press. I conjectured
from the growing darkness, coupled with the
lateness of the hour, that the love scene, to
part of which I had been an ear witness,
must soon be terminated. Moreover, that, at
its conclusion, my betrayer would seek the
privacy of an apartment which opened into a
garden, and which by our mutual consent had
been set apart for his exclusive use. Thither
I repaired, with some of the poisonous grains,
from out of the bottle, in my hand. The
latter, I had restored to its original position,
before I quitted my bedchamber.

*' I crept, cat-like, down the stairs, and

through the passages, and opened the door of
the room noiselessly with a firm hand ; then
I stepped quickly forward, and secreted
myself behind a large bamboo couch, the
full draperies of which completely hid me.
There, I waited, in death-like silence, my
purpose hardening, not melting, as moments
gHded on.

** How could my purpose melt, with those
words which I had heard ever sounding in my
ears ? Should I be left alone, ruined, forsaken,
castaway, while my seducer sought
fresh fields of happiness ? Should he rove
on, gathering, as he roved, fair flowers of
love and joy, while I was left to reap, in
bitterness, the blighted harvest of withered
hopes and blasted truth ? Should I lie down,
mute, despairing, while, with foul lies from
off his dulcet tongue, he wooed and won
another, as I, to my destruction, had been
wooed and won ?

^' With questions such as these surging

through my riven heart, I ask again, how
could my purpose melt? And yet, I loved
him all the time — would have died for him, if
only, I could have known him true.

'' Presently, I heard him coming. The
vows, the tears, the kisses then were over, I
thought, and I repeated the word ' over '
many times to myself. I liked the word ; it
told me so much. I was too wretched for
comfort, else it would have comforted me.

'* Yes, they were all over, those caresses of
the golden head, those vows of devotion to
cheeks which had never been washed white
by the bleaching tears of misery — over — and,
for ever !

'* It was the custom of the man, for whom I
thus waited, to partake freely of the beverages
of the country. Even now the bottles, containing
his favourite wines, rested upon the
table. I knew that, after partaking of some
of these, he would in all probability fling himself
into his easy chair, and sink into a heavy

THE ROLL CALL." 103

sleep. A hundred times, I had seen him thus,
with his half-filled goblet, ready to be quaffed
when he awoke, at his side.

*' It was for this half-filled goblet, that I
watched, and waited.

'' When at length my intended victim
entered the room, I could see from my
lurking-place that his face was as ghastly as
I knew my own to be. Leaning his elbow
upon the back of his chair, he groaned aloud.
The groan touched my foolish heart with a
throb of pity, and I crept involuntarily a few
inches nearer to where he stood. My dress
rustled slightly. There was very little light
in the room, but I did not need the darkness
to screen me from his observation. His own
pre-occupation of thought rendered him insensible,
to a sound so slight as that which I
had caused. After a short time, he poured
some wine into the goblet — that goblet which
I had determined should be the means whereby
the poison should be carried to his false

lips. I waited, only, until his slumber gave mean
opportunity for drugging the draught
with which I knew he would refresh himself
when he awoke.

*' My brain reels and my heart grows faint,
as I write of these particulars.

'the goblet, which I have already mentioned,
was filled and re-filled, but only to be
drained again and again.

Then came a horrible pause. From the
stillness I thought he slept. My mouth became
dry — my throat parched — my breath was
short and thick — a blackness came over my
vision — a horrible hissing in my ears deafened
me.

'' The moment for vengeance had come. I
lifted myself from my crouching position, and
halted upon my cramped knees. The caution
was well. I was mistaken. My time was not
yet at hand. With a desperate effort to preserve
my calmness, I looked from out of my
hiding-place, when, to my intensified horror,

THE ROLL CALL." 105

I saw the object of my complex passion of
love and revenge, rise feebly from his seat,
totter to the table, grasp the goblet, and deliberately
drop into it some grains of the selfsame
drug with which I had armed myself,
and which I was even then holding in my
hand.

'' It was as the phantom, of my own conception,
taking shape and rising up before
me, in a dread rehearsal of my contemplated
deed.

*' ' Murder and suicide both,' I shrieked
wildly, springing forward, and dashing the
goblet to the ground."

'' What a horrible, cruel, dreadful woman'*
exclaimed Esse, aloud. '' I never read anything
so wicked and shocking, in all my life.
What can she have meant by writing all this
miserable history of her shame to dear, good,
Uncle Ralph — and why — I wonder, did headdress
it to me, as if he intended me to read
it ? I do wish Arthur would come. I shall

get what he calls the 'jumps,' if he does
not make haste. I am so frightened now, I
hardly dare to look behind me, and I am sure
I could not go to bed. I suppose, after all,
I might as well ascertain the end of this
doleful story."

Turning up her lamp by way of making her
surroundings look as cheerful as possible,
Esse began again to peruse the mysterious
document.

'* It can never be the packet of papers
which Uncle Ralph charged me to find,"
she murmured.

After this decision, her attention was again
bestowed upon the manuscript, which continued
thus —

*' I remember nothing more, after dashing
to the ground the goblet which was already
touching the lips of him, whom thus I saved ;
and yet, but a moment before, would have
killed. I believe that I fell senseless at his feet.
A long and dangerous illness followed. For

weeks, I burned and tossed in the delirium of
fever. Bad men, however, are not wholly inhuman,
and, through all my weary sickness, I
was carefully nursed. Before I recovered my
strength, news of the death of my husband
came from England. He and I must have
been lain upon sick beds, at the same time ;
but he had gone to the stillness of the grave,
while, I lived on to struggle through the weary
world, as best I might.

'' The ' curse,' again, methinks !

*' For a while, a calm succeeded to the
tempest of passion upon which I had been
tossed.

'' The girl, to whom my betrayer had so
willingly offered me in sacrifice, would not
hearken to his prayers. Hence his desire to
end his wicked Hfe. She left our shores, and
then, touched it would seem with compassion
for my woes ; a compassion which was born
to him from out of his own disappointed love,
he offered me the only reparation in his

power. We were married, after some delay
and much difficulty, by an English clergyman
who chanced to pass our way. I enclose you
the certificate of our marriage ; it is for this
reason, that I have written to you.

'* After our marriage, so soon, at least, as I
was strong enough to bear the fatigue of
travelling, we journeyed to another country.
There, I mixed a little with the outside world
again ; but we always passed under the
feigned name of 'Royston.' I would have had
it otherwise, but, alas. Influence departs with
virtue ! Of that one terrible evening in our
lives, we never spoke together but once.
Then, my husband expressed his gratitude tome,
as his saviour from the death of a suicide.
I took his thanks ; and, I kept my own counsel
respecting my thirst for vengeance, thinking
grimly the while how well I also had learned
to dissemble.

'^ Such a state of things could not bring
peace. I had no idol now. It was shattered,

broken, gone ; and, I ground the fragments
into powder, stamping them down with cold
contempt and mocking smiles. I tried no
tender renewals — no patient setting up again
no rebuilding.

*' Perhaps, my husband felt, without comprehending
it, the change which had come
over me. Perhaps, he resented it. I know not.
Those, who give nothing, are apt to be exacting.
Those, who barter rubbish, try hard
to win pure gold in exchange.

Anyhow, he wanted that, from me, for
which he had no thought of making a fair
return. After a while, he brutally confessed,
that he was the victim of an all-absorbing
affection (if such it could be termed) for her
to whom I had last heard him whisper his
tale of love. Angry words ensued. Nay !
from that time they became frequent. Bitter
were his taunts, and equally bitter were my
retorts, until one day, in savage rage, he
struck me, and, adding insult to injury, sneeringly

defied me to prove my marriage. I could
bear no more. I turned from his presence,
and a few hours afterwards took my way to
England, determined to tell my miserable
tale to the friends of my youth, in the hope,
that by them, my husband might be induced
to acknowledge our union. And, I had yet
another motive, beside this one.

When once away from him, I thought that
perchance some lingering touch of affection
for me : some memory of by-gone days
might soften him, and induce him to proclaim
our marriage, at any rate to you.

But, in leaving my husband, I greatly
erred. I only gave, by so doing, my rival
an advantage over me which was shortsighted
unto blindness, while the old heartsickness
to look upon his face — the old
yearning to lie yet again upon his breast —
comes back to me, even now, with redoubled
force. I struggle against it, but, as well mayan

infant strive to free itself from the grasp
of a giant, as I to overcome my re-awakened
love for my husband.

*' It is ' the curse ' and I am powerless.

This is how the pall is well-nigh suffocating
me. It may press closer and closer,
until I sink beneath its weight. But I will
not perish with the brand of ' impostor ' upon
my brow. I cannot die thus further dishonoured.
My coffin plate must bear the
name to which I have a right. I have written
to warn my husband, that I am sending this
to you.

Whether he will, or whether he will not,
he, too, must hear this ' Roll-call.'

Once, I stood, in the presence of one who
had loved me in the days of my spotless
girlhood. I told her my story as I have told
it to you. She did not believe it. Her
sympathy, in consequence, was as scant asher
credence in my protestations. I do not

seek to present myself before you, Ralph
Grant — I would not so pain you — but — listen
to me !

'' Upon this paper I protest, before God,
and those Holy Angels whose help I dare not
ask, that I, who, in my fallen misery, am
known to men and women but as * Alice
Royston,' am in very truth, the lawfully
wedded wife of — Arthur Greatorix."

The manuscript fell from the hands of
Esse, while a wail of despair broke from her
trembling lips. Before it died away and
almost as if in answer to its cry, the portiere
was thrown suddenly back, and George Maxwell
entered the room.

A DARING INTRUDER.

With ashen cheek, and with horror-dilated
eyes, Esse turned a startled, pitiful, wondering
gaze upon the intruder.

George Maxwell answered the gaze by an
easy, off-hand apology, for the liberty of his
intrusion.

The sound of his voice roused her to a
more immediate comprehension of her position.
Re-possessIng herself of the leaves of
the *' Roll-call, '^ she rose slowly from her
seat, staggered to the fire-place, and instinctively
stretched out her hand towards the
bell. The rope was gone. For a moment
she looked vacantly at the piece which still
lay upon the floor ; and then her eyes wandered
upwards to the fragment hanging

VOL. III. I

from the ceiling. But although she thus
regarded the riven pieces, and although an
instant before she had fixed her gaze upon
the face of George Maxwell, neither the one,
nor the other, of these objects, chased, for
one short second from her brain, those terrible
words which had called that stricken cry of
despair from out of her agonized lips.

Dashed with fearful suddenness from a
summit of bliss to an abyss of untold woe —
with her only means for raising an alarm
broken at her feet ; and with the man, whom
of all others she most disliked, thus impertinently
before her, Esse realised nothing with
distinctness save that most awful protestation,
which coupled, as wife, the name of another
woman with that of Arthur Greatorix. The
words seemed to dance in letters of fire, above,
below, and around her ; she could not escape
from their flaming horror — they scorched, they
burned her fair young brow, and as if to ward
them off, she lifted up her hands which held

the fatal manuscript, then shrank back, and
hid her face.

Utterly misunderstanding these unequivocal
manifestations of terror, George Maxwell drew
closer to her trembling figure.

'^ Do not be alarmed, Mrs. Greatorix ! I
am neither a burglar, nor a ruffian. Permit
me to repeat my apology, for my intrusion at
this late hour, and allow me also to add to it
another, which is equally sincere, for my
wanton destruction of that gorgeous work of
art, your beautiful bell-rope. For the first
breach of etiquette, the intricacies of your
country lanes must bear the blame, since,
had they proved less bewildering to my
limited faculty for understanding localities, I
should have presented myself before you
some hours earlier. Your lamp, however,
revealed your shadow to me as I passed the
window of this charming apartment, or I
should have abandoned all hope of an interview
with you to-night. For my second

offence, I would simply urge In extenuation
thereof, that I have sojourned in wild countries,
among men and beasts as wild as their
land, but the one atom in creation which I
fear and abhor above all others, is the tongue
of that particular animal which, in civilized
England, you call your domestic servant. I
have already discovered that your numerous
servitors are by no means slack in their use
of this unpleasantly dangerous member, and
that they, according to the role of their
species, do but look upon speech as a means
whereby the private affairs of their rulers maybe
discussed. Moreover, with intuitive knowledge
of feminine timidity, I felt assured that
your first impulse, upon witnessing my unexpected
entree, would be to ring your bell. It
is imperatively necessary that our interview
should be of a strictly private nature ; therefore
was it, that I ventured, to immolate your
bell-rope, upon the shrine of caution. Permit
me, once again, to apologise for the deed. I

pledge myself that in colour, fabric, and
beauty, it shall be restored in all its pristine
magnificence."

This impertinent harangue was partially, if
not entirely, lost upon Esse. In the din of
contending emotions which rent her bosom,
she heard, but only, as though she did not
hear.

She still held the '' Roll-Call,'^ that terrible
witness to perfidy and shame — that slayer of
all joy in the present — that annihilate of all
innocent hopes for the future — firmly clutched
between her clenched fingers, while with
starting eyes she still looked shudderingly
around her.

But she did not speak, and her silence
slightly abashed her unwelcome visitor. Consequently,
his manner was somewhat constrained,
as he continued —

'' I had better, perhaps, proceed to business
at once, Mrs. Greatorix. You will easily conceive
that none but matters of urgent import-would

have brought me here, In such a
manner and at such a time. Without further
circumlocution, therefore, I wish you to understand,
that my purpose is to make a bargain
with you. Your husband is " —

^' My — husband ! " interrupted Esse, intones
so low, so husky, and so full of concentrated
agony, that, George Maxwell's face
lost its sneer, in sheer amazement, '' my
husband — is" — she paused, shivering from
head to foot like a tender blossom in an
angry gust, and with a faint cry, moaned out,
*' I know all that you have come to say.
There is nothing left, for you to tell."

For once, in his untrue life, George Maxwell
was no actor. The piteous words, so
piteously uttered, perplexed him, even more
than the comparative indifference with which
Esse had seemed to regard his presence. It
was not in his nature, however, to be taken
aback, to any considerable degree, whatsoever
the circumstances of his position might be.

Pardon me," he began, '^ we are, I think,
playing at cross purposes. Will you buy a
secret of me? "

He waited for an answer ; but, no sound
came, from the lips of Esse.

*' Listen, Mrs. Greatorix," he continued, " I
have " —

But before he could proceed further a
sudden passion of indignation swept over
Esse. With her white lips quivering painfully,
she exclaimed —

'' No ; Mr. Maxwell, I will not listen to
you. I request that you will leave this room
immediately — this house."

This a deuced deal better," muttered
George Maxwell to himself, '^ I can stand a
rowing, but that stony stare, from those big
orbs, was getting too much for me. The
game wasn't worth a rush light, to say nothing
of the proverbial chandelier with that beautiful
girl looking like a lovely statue."

Then, he said aloud to Esse, while his.

usual easy effrontery returned to his
manner —

*' I am sorry to disobey your commands,
which, at any other time, would, I assure you,
meet with my unhesitating obedience. But,
will you not be seated, while I unfold the
nature of the errand upon which I have
come ? I perfectly understand that you consider
my visit to be both an outrage upon
conventionality, and an impertinence to yourselves


Esse made no reply ; her bosom rose and
fell with her panting breath, while, every now
and then, she pressed her hand across her
throat, as though she were trying to prevent
the escape, therefrom, of all sounds of distress.
She would have spoken, but she could not.

George Maxwell kept silence for a few
moments, and then continued —

** That, which I have to say, concerns you,
as well as your husband ; I may add, it concerns
me also. Come, Mrs. Greatorix ! will

you not hear what the bargain Is, which I wish
to propose to you ? I pledge my honour '* —

But to what extent, or upon what account,
George Maxwell proposed to pledge that
commodity which he was pleased to dignify
with the name of '' honour," Esse did not
wait to hear. Again Interrupting him, she
said, although with momentarily Increasing
difficulty —

*' I am surprised that you should presume
to remain here. I desire once more that you
will leave me."

'' You will not be friends — tant pis^^ he
returned, affectedly. '^ Mrs. Grant must
answer for this. I asked to see you this
afternoon, but, she assured me, that my
request could not possibly be granted. There
was nothing left for me, therefore, but to
make minute enquiries respecting the precise
locality of your boudoir, and to take the
matter into my own hands. Moreover, I was
armed with the knowledge, through Mrs

Grant, of the absence of your husband ; and
here, I am reminded that it is growing late.
Another quart-d' heure and I must away.
There are skeletons in every house. Have a
care, Mrs. Greatorix, lest, in refusing to hearken
to me, the spectre, which lurks in your own
home, becomes a show, and a wonder, to a
gaping world. I am not generally considered
to be a fool, but it remains for you to decide,
whether I have made the errand of one, incoming
to you, to-night."

*' Most assuredly you have," replied Esse,
with all the firmness which she could assume.

He looked surprised again, surprised at the
want of effect which his words of innuendo
produced. He hoped, at least, to have
kindled a curiosity which should have occasioned
her to put some interrogation to him.
Simple and dignified objection to his presence
and conversation disconcerted his plans of
operation. Something different must be
hazarded. Therefore, with an affectation of

friendly counsel upon his tongue, but with
the glitter of a deadly malice in his dark,
cunning eyes, he said —

'' Think calmly, before you decide to reject
my offer. I would serve you, if you would
have it so. Young and superlatively lovely as
you are, would it not touch your pride, and
quench some of that disdain with which you
have thought fit to treat me to-night, if it
were blazed abroad — yelled forth from the
very housetops — that other charms, which
have proved more potent than your own, have
for long enslaved your husband ; and " —

The cruel words carried meaning sure and
dire to her half-paralyzed understanding, and
drew from her a cry so shrill, that the
audacity of George Maxwell was checked,
and making ready for escape, he moved
with terrified haste towards the portiere.
Finding, however, that all remained quiet,
and that the sorrowful expression of dismay
from Esse produced no result from either

the outer world, or from any member of the
household, he retraced his steps, and with
renewed effrontery again addressed her —

^' I travel upon the low level, as, perhaps,
you have discovered. We are not likely to
journey for long together, but, we have met at
a junction" in our lives, to-night. Before we
branch therefrom, it is for you to determine
whether we push forward in comparative
safety, or come to a collision which may
destroy one, if not both of us. And, remember,
others besides ourselves would be involved
in the catastrophe. A piece of useless
paper given from out of your keeping
into mine will avert all mischief. I have
no chivalry, in my nature. I have hung out
the danger signals. Henceforth, I shall look
only to my own safety. You, and the foolhardy,
alone disregard warnings'*

** My safety can never, in any way, depend
upon you, Mr. Maxwell," gasped Esse, resolutely.


A low, sarcastic laugh prefaced an intended
reply ; but, before it could be framed into
speech, the window was burst violently open,
and, amid the crash of falling glass, Arthur
Greatorix sprang into the room.

The moment which ensued was such an
one as comes but to few in life.

When once within the apartment, Arthur
stood as if transfixed, his head thrown back,
his broad chest heaving with excitement ;
while the livid hue of cowardice overspread the
downcast face of George Maxwell. He was
the first, however, to move. Determined, at
all hazards, to brave out the turn which circumstances
had thus unexpectedly taken, he
thrust his hands into his pockets, and flung
himself carelessly into a chair.

'' Hound, coward, vagabond, impostor,
liar ! Have I found you at last ? What are
you doing here's thundered Arthur Great-oris,
in ungovernable fury ; and striding
across the room, he lifted the intruder from

his seat, and. then, dropped him down again,
as though he were picking a caterpillar from
off a leaf.

*' You shall pay dearly for this," George
Maxwell hissed, recovering his feet, and
striving to look unconcerned.

Silence ! " shouted Arthur sternly, moving
at the same time towards Esse, and standing
before her as she cowered trembling and
afraid in the farthest corner of the room.
But, somehow, she shrank strangely from the
shelter which he thus strove to render to her
from George Maxwell.

'' Silence ! " repeated Arthur again, as once
more George Maxwell essayed to speak.
Then, turning to Esse, Arthur said to her

gently —

*' Go into the next room, my darling ; I
will be with you directly."

Esse, however, did not stir, and before
Arthur could reiterate his request George
Maxwell said, insolently —

'' You are drunk, and your wife's boudoir
is no place for a drunken brawl. You have
bestowed a few complimentary epithets upon
me, with which I feel honoured ; but " —

'^ Go, Esse darling," urged Arthur imploringly.


*' You need not trouble Mrs. Greatorix to
go away," broke in George Maxwell, '' I am
about to take my departure. Look well to
yourself, Arthur Greatorix. Your wife and I
might have made a satisfactory compact
to-night, but you did not give us time to
come to terms. I have not so disturbed you,
in your love-making to AHce. A little more
generosity upon your part, therefore, towards
me would have been but fair. Au revoir

What was it which stayed the already
uplifted arm of Arthur Greatorix from taking
summary vengeance upon the sneering utterer
of these words, who, with a swaggering and
jaunty gait, daintily picked his way through
the pieces of glass which strewed the carpet,

and with a slight gesture of farewell towards
Esse, stepped lightly through the burst-open
window into the night air ?

What meant that low moan, followed by
that hushed sob ?

Arthur Greatorix heard it, and knew not its
meaning, although, his arm fell powerlessly to
his side, when it smote upon his ear.

George Maxwell heard it also, and George
Maxwell, as he heard, believed that he comprehended
its wail.

Anyhow, he took advantage of the temporary
diversion which it created. Looking
back into the lighted room, which he had just
quitted, the figures of Esse and Arthur were
plainly visible. For a second, George Maxwell
regarded them intently. Then, as he
saw Esse withdraw herself from the arm
which was cast around her, he muttered
scoffingly —

A fiver upon the outsider yet. I have
given a straight tip for a tolerably heavy

matrimonial row, at all events. The field
against the favourite, for any amount of
odds," he went on, ruthlessly trampling down
flowers, and speeding over trimly-kept borders,
as he continued his muttering. His
speed, however, did not appear to interfere
with his self-complacency, since a low chuckle
of fiendish delight mingled often with his
spoken reflections. But his self-complacency,
together with his reflections, was cut short
by the unmistakeable tokens of a pursuing
footstep. He was both quick of thought,
and swift of foot. Without a moment lost
in hesitation, he jumped over a moderately
low iron fence which divided the immediate
grounds of the house from their more park-like
surroundings, and, after a smart run of
about a quarter of a mile, gained the lane
in which some hours before he had met Flora
Grant. Crossing this, he dived swiftly into
the wood, and made for an opening on the
VOL. III. K

other side of It, near to which, as before, he
had secured his mare. Gaining her side, he
vaulted Into his saddle.

Trespassers beware," he cried mockingly,
as he pointed with his riding whip to a
board, which, nailed to a tree close by, bore
the Inscription. " Trespassers beware," he
repeated, looking up again at the large white
letters which the moonlight made visible.
'' I should advise Greatorix, the colossal, to
place a duplicate of this warning over the
entrance to his wife's charmingly got up
boudoir. By Jove ! I can hear his heavy
step breaking down the small bushes In his
way ; thanks to their dry condition for letting
me know, by their crackling, which way mine
adversary cometh. Yolks, my little mare ;
we are pretty fast, I think ! We must be
caught, before we can be ' prosecuted as the
law directs.' Steer clear of the jaws of the
law, and bolt when they open to swallow you.
Such Is my heraldic motto." And with

another gay '' Yoicks, my little mare ! " the
speaker vanished in the distance.

George Maxwell had been correct in his
surmise concerning the pursuing footstep.
Hot and angered, Arthur Greatorix was pushing
his way through briar and bramble as fast
as his legs could carry him. But he was too
late. The clatter of a horse's hoofs told him
that his pursuit was vain. He had but
waited, after the departure of George Maxwell,
to summon assistance for Esse ; but
those few minutes, which had elapsed while
he so waited, had lost him an advantage,
which he could not recover.

'^ Hound and coward!" he roared, furiously.
^' Poltroon and deceiver!"

But the silence which followed his angry
shouts showed him the present impotency of
his wrath.

He paused. The quiet night seemed to
reproach him for the indulgence of his ungovernable
passion, while the night air cooled

the angry heat of his brow. For a moment
uncertain what to do, he meditated making a
fresh start after the horseman. But even
while he so meditated, the image of Esse, of
her terror-stricken face, and her shrinking
form, together with her wild, imploring and
incoherent words, rose up before him, and he
dashed homewards with headlong speed.

We all know how swift thought is. As
Arthur sped along, a thousand questions
and conjectures tormented him. What had
brought George Maxwell to Thorndyke ?
How did he know Esse ? Why did she
moan so piteously ? What made her look
so frightened when he, Arthur, had stooped

to kiss her ?

These, and the like queries, with many

others to take their place, as they rose up

and were dismissed, kept pace with his flying

feet. Legion, perhaps, would best describe

his manifold surmises.

That pitiful cry, which the taunting words

of George Maxwell had wrung from Esse,
had been heard by Arthur. As he neared
his home, somewhat earlier than he could
have been expected to arrive, the sound of
the voice of Esse, as if in distress, reached
him. He thought it must be fancy, nevertheless
it quickened his movements. Driving
rapidly into his stable-yard, and without waiting
to come round by the hall door, near to
which Pickard was in waiting, Arthur crossed
the lawn towards the apartments of his wife.
The sound of a man speaking within them
arrested his attention immediately. Without
waiting for consideration he smashed the window,
and effected the entrance which has been
already described.

He remembered all this, as once more
drawing close to his home, he observed lights
gleaming from many of its windows. The
household was evidently astir. He pressed
forward, and gained an entrance by a side or
garden door.

The first person whom he encountered,,
after his entrance, was Flora Grant, whose
anxiety, for once, was not set exclusively
upon herself. As soon as she beheld Arthur,
she cried —

'* What in the world is the matter? The
window in the boudoir is all broken to pieces ;
Esse is as white as a ghost, and no one can
tell me what has happened. I have heard
such strange noises ever since I went to bed,
but I did not know you had come home, or I
should not have been so much alarmed.
Marie is keeping a most absurd watch over
Esse ; she waved me off, when I tried to go
into her room, as if I had the small-pox or
scarlet fever."

*' Where is Esse ?" asked Arthur quickly.

'' Why, in her room, of course ! How
very odd I " continued Flora Grant, reflectively
; '' I don't believe that Marie knows
you have returned, for she asked me to tell
you, when you came back ; yes, I am sure

she said, when you came back, not to disturb
Esme.^'

^' Marie knows that I have returned home.
I left her with Esse only a few minutes
back," interrupted Arthur, impatiently.

'how very peculiar! Well, I can't make
it all out ; but, at any rate, you are not to go
near Esse. She is to be kept perfectly
quiet, and, according to Marie, she is half
asleep already."

'' Not to go to Esse ! " repeated Arthur, in
dismay.

*' No ; not upon any account. She won't
even admit me. It is very odd, certainly, but
so it is. Esse is never very considerate, sofar
as I am concerned."

Arthur was silent. He was not surprised
that his little wife should desire to hide her
agitation from Flora Grant. He too, was
anxious that it, together with the cause of it,
should be kept a secret from that lady, at
any rate until he himself should better understand

all the bearings of this same agitation.
But that the prohibition, which affected Flora
Grant, should include himself also, was a
vastly different matter. Hence his silence.
He had pictured, but a moment before, Esse
clinging to him while he soothed away all
traces of her recent perturbation, and, with
this picture, he had dreamed of a full explanation
from her of the mysterious conversation,
which he found her holding with the
equally mysterious George Maxwell. But
none of this would he have Flora Grant to
know. Wherefore, rallying his self-command,
he said with well assumed carelessness —

*' The train was marvellously punctual tonight,
and I came along at no end of a pace
from the station. I was full half an hour
earlier than I expected to be. I didn't want
to awake every soul in the house, by ringing
the hall door bell, so I got in by the boudoir
window, and, like a clumsy fool, I managed
somehow to make a pretty considerable smash
of it."

'' Oh ! " returned Flora Grant, with a yawn,
^' then I suppose I might as well return to my
room."

"I think so," replied Arthur, sunless, indeed,
you intend to make me answerable for
the loss of some of that bloom which has
made you look so charming lately. The hour
for beauty sleep is nearly over, you know."

It was a grand coup. Flora Grant retired
upon the best possible terms with herself,
and, marvel of marvels, with her host also !

After Flora Grant had really gone, notwithstanding
the message from Marie which he
had received, Arthur stole to the door of the
chamber of his wife, and softly knocked
upon its polished panels. In answer to his
cautious summons, Marie stealthily turned
the handle from the inside, and opening the
door just wide enough to permit the extreme
tip of her nose to become visible, she obtruded
a warning finger, by way of enforcing silence,
through the remarkably small aperture.
Arthur held his breath. He had not spoken.

therefore it was the only way in which he could
obey the warning, and become more silent
than heretofore. Presently, the finger disappeared,
and then, as if mollified by the perfect
quiescence of her master, Marie squeezed
her somewhat portly person through the still
but very partially opened doorway, and stood
at his side. He was very submissive in her
hands. Gathering from her demeanour that
she intended to allow of no conversation
within the immediate precincts of the room
which she had just left, he, treading softly
and slowly as she did, followed her.

Thus they proceeded in " follow-my-leader"
like fashion, until they reached a hall table
at some distance from their starting point.
Here Marie halted, and, turning to Arthur,
she said gravely and respectfully —

My mistress is very tired ; she particularly
wishes not to be disturbed, if you please, sir."

But, I should like to speak to her, just
for one moment," rejoined Arthur.

'' Indeed, sir ; it will be better not," urged
Marie ; " my mistress is, I hope, already
asleep. She has requested me to remain in
her dressing-room to-night."

What could Arthur do? His brow contracted
gloomily. With as good a grace ashe
could command, however, he yielded to
the necessity of the case. But when Marie
turned to leave him, he made one more
• appeal to her. Tip-toying after her, as she
was about to disappear, he said —

If Mrs. Greatorix should wish to seeme,
you know, Marie — should be awake, I
mean, please let me know. I shall be in the
library. Of course, I shall not go to bed."

Marie listened attentively, and, after having
given the required reply to the injunctions of
her master, was about to proceed on her way.
But she was stopped again.

'you quite understand, Marie. I should like
very much to see Mrs. Greatorix — not to disturb
her — but — but if she's awake, you know""

'' Yes, sir," answered Marie, as demurely
as before.

Arthur would have spoken again, but, made
wise by experience, Marie was too quick for
him, and she disappeared like magic. When
left alone, he was once more assailed by a
host of reflections.

What a fool I have been," he thought
aloud, ^'to attend to these chattering women,
and their confounded rubbish. Perhaps, after
all, Esse would rather see me. I'm hanged
if I don't make another attempt."

Fired with this idea, he once more applied
his knuckles gently to the door which barred
him from the presence of his wife.

Marie appeared as before.

Asleep, sir," she whispered so softly,
that none but anxious ears would have caught
the syllables, and again the door was tightly
closed.

NEWS AND SCANDAL.

'ris your friend Mr. Greatorix disappointed
that, he has a daughter, instead of a son and
heir ? " asked Mrs. Hope, Bertie's mother, of
Lord Oakdene, who, while balancing himself
upon the step of her carriage at Lord's, was
dividing his attention between its occupants,
and the two last wickets of the final innings
of the Etonians.

It was the last day of the Eton and Harrow
match ; consequently, excitement was at its
highest pitch, and a deafening shout, such as
only the lungs of public school men and boys
can produce, drowned whatever more, the
curiosity of the lady might have induced her
to enquire, respecting the baby which had
been born at Thorndyke.

'' Wasn't that awfully good ? " roared
Bertie, who, resplendent in the glory of a
prodigious light-blue neck-tie, was perched in
some incomprehensible fashion upon the
crowded coach box.

*' Splendid ! " he continued, enthusiastically,
growing hoarser every moment, and
more crimson in the face, '' fifty runs, and
not out yet. Harrow, will be licked, to a
moral certainty."

Bravo," shouted Lord Oakdene, as a
fresh crack, told that another all-conquering
hit had succeeded to the last ; while, the next
instant, in spite of the feet Harrow legs which
sped after it, the ball was spinning far away.

''Bwavo, bravo, well wun ! " he bellowed,
in concert with Bertie and the other men of
their party, as the runs, sure and fast, were
being scored for the light blues.

So again and again went on the roaring,
the shouting, and the bellowing, until, amid a
clapping of hands, and the sparkle of eyes,

which were sometimes as blue as the bonnets
and feathers above them, the victors accepted
their noisy triumph, with cheers, which were
equally noisy, for the defeated.

Everyone looks forward with a certain
degree of interest to the Eton and Harrow
cricket match ! It has been well called the
'' Goodwood " of cricket for ladies. Anyhow,
those who want to witness good, honest,
English excitement, and how it is testified by
the smiling faces of pretty women, and by'
the voices and hands of their husbands,
fathers, brothers and lovers, should go to the
Eton and Harrow cricket match at Lord's,
and look well around them.

There is, perhaps, no esprit de corps more
genuine, and more lasting, than that which
binds together the members of our far-famed
and world-renowned public schools.

To Bertie Hope this esprit de corps was
a very part of his being, permeating all his
thoughts, actions, and interests ; while to

Lord Oakdene, It was hardly less potent.
Nevertheless, from the time when Mrs.
Hope put to him the very natural interrogation
respecting the feelings of Arthur
Greatorix with regard to his newly born babe,
Lord Oakdene was conscious that the enthusiasm,
which heretofore had glowed in his
breast, concerning the result of the match,
had become suddenly cooler.

By pure accident, he was in ignorance that
a child had been given unto Esse and Arthur.
The announcements had been manifold, concerning
the interesting event, but they had escaped
the notice altogether of Lord Oakdene.

All at once, when Mrs. Hope, amid cheers
and jests, spoke those few words which enlightened
him upon the point in question,
there arose to his memory, a shivering girlish
form in robes of white with flowing locks
dimly lighted room — the rash venture of a
never-to-be-forgotten touch — and, so arising,
each remembrance, in its turn, cast a spell of

loneliness over his spirit which no surrounding
festivity could dispel.

Truly ! men and women, as well as things,
are not always ^' what they seem."

Lord Oakdene, to the world around him,
seemed gay.

Lord Oakdene, to himself, was inexpressibly
sad.

He had fought many a sturdy battle with
his inner man since he had parted with Esse
long months before at Brashleigh, and to a
certain extent, he had fought them well, and
conquered. Nevertheless, even conquerors
may be weary, and woeful, at times.

Taking all things into consideration, therefore,
he was not sorry when Mrs. Hope's
equipage started for "home," and when he
could take his leave, both of her and of the
scene which had become distasteful to him.

As he was preparing to walk to his Club,
he was overtaken by Bertie.

'' Going to walk, Oakdene, eh? I should

VOL. in. L

like to stretch my legs a little, so, I will come
with you, if you will let me."

Such were Bertie's first words. Lord Oak-done
did not gainsay his young companion,
much as he would have rejoiced in a little
solitude ; for solitude, after all, may, in one
sense, be enjoyed, even in a crowded
thoroughfare.

Since, however, fate had doomed Lord
Oakdene, upon the present occasion, to companionship,
he could scarcely have been
burdened with a lighter weight, than that
which, had been laid upon him, in the shape
of young Bertie Hope.

The boy was not only light hearted, but
he was lively, and glib of tongue, and by
no means given to be persistent in his requirements
for answers and comments to
those questions and subjects, which, in
quick succession, he put and touched upon.

Lord Oakdene might talk, or not, as he
chose. It mattered little. Bertie would

rattle on with equal good-humour, in either
case. Indeed, like many much older, and
infinitely wiser individuals than himself,
Bertie was very fond of the sound of his own
voice. So, with a little shrug of resignation,
Lord Oakdene indicated his intended route,
and the two stepped out together.

There was plenty, en passant, for Bertie to
amuse himself with, by way of discussion.
The match, the girls in dark-blue bonnets,
the girls in light-blue bonnets, the horses of
So-and-so's drag, the champagne somebody
hung out, the champagne which somebody
else failed to hang out, and so on. To all
of which Lord Oakdene gave a half-amused,
half-pitying, and half-envying attention, while
sometimes, when the dark spirit of the past
enshrouded his perceptions, he gave no attention
at all.

Through every phase, however, Bertie was
imperturbably loquacious and animated.

At last, apropos to nothing about that of

which he had before been speaking, he exclaimed
—

'' Did my mother say that Mrs. Greatorix
has a Httle boy?"

''No."

The answer came promptly. Moreover, in
its nature, as well as In the tone of its
delivery, it was positive enough to have
silenced most persons.

But it was not so with Bertie Hope, who
rejoined persistently —

'rare you sure, Oakdene? I could swear
that I heard my mother tell you so."

I don't think you did."

"But I am certain that I did," cried
Bertie, growing more and more convinced,
by assertion, of the accuracy of his statement.

Never be certain about anything in this
world, old fellow," returned Lord Oakdene.

Well, if I am not to believe either my
own mother, or my own ears, I should rather
think that I had better chuck certainty to the

antipodes' exclaimed Bertie impetuously ;
'but," he continued, ''if you are so certain
that I did not hear that which I am so certain
that I did hear, pray what was it that I did,
or that I did not, hear ? There's a bit of impromptu
logic for you, that licks Epaminondas
and the Thebes into a cocked hat,"
he concluded, laughing immoderately.

Steady, steady, Bertie," said Lord Oak-done,
as he doffed his hat to a bevy of fair
ladies who drove past at the moment.

Grave as a judge, and steady as a
lord," answered Bertie, putting a considerable
amount of humorous emphasis upon the last
word.

At almost any other time Lord Oakdene
would have been infinitely amused by the
absurdity of his companion. But, as it was,
he could only force a somewhat grim smile to
his lips, devoutly hoping meanwhile that
Esse and her baby had been forgotten by
Bertie.

For the space of ten short minutes this
hope appeared to have met with fulfilment.
Bertie had gone back to cricket, to Eton,
to feats of his own schooldays, and to feats
of those of others. But, all at once, he veered
round to the subject which Lord Oakdene so
dreaded.

'' Mrs. Greatorix looks jolly young to be
married and have a baby," he said.

'does she?" returned Lord Oakdene
very quietly.

'' Doesn't she just, and isn't she awfully
pretty, that's all? Now, she has a pair of
eyes, if you like ! They are as big as — as —
upon my word, I don't know how big to say
they are," said Bertie, so utterly at a loss fora
comparison, that he was compelled to bring
his sentence to an abrupt conclusion.

Lord Oakdene, at this juncture, gave signs
of being afflicted by dumbness. Bertie,
therefore, had the monopoly of the conversation
; a monopoly of which he was by no
means backward to make the most.

'they are such wonderful coloured eyes,
besides ! Why, they look as blue, as blue
can be, by daylight, and I'm bothered if they
don't look as black as shoes by night ! I
should think Greatorix must like it awfully
to go about with such a handsome wife,
shouldn't you ? "

Lord Oakdene gravely assented, to all the
opinions which Bertie thus propounded.

'' And, then, she's so awfully nice, you
know ! " continued Bertie.

'' Yes."

*' And she's a friend of yours, isn't she ? '^

'' Yes."

'' And you like Greatorix too, don't you ? "

Another quiet assent was forthcoming, but
as this was the third or fourth which Lord
Oakdene had been called upon to give in
rapid succession, his interest was quickened,
and he looked inquiringly at Bertie. For a
wonder, that young gentleman appeared to
be lost in profound reflection. Presently he
said, thoughtfully —

There are not many women, who are nice
as well as beautiful."

'' That is a very wonderful discovery upon
your part, Bertie," returned Lord Oakdene,
laughing in spite of his melancholy.

'' Mrs. Greatorix is both," replied Bertie
sententiously, without deigning to notice
either the irony or the laughter of his friend.

There was a short silence, and then Lord
Oakdene asked —

'' What is it, Bertie, that makes Mrs.
Gweatowix wun so much in your imagination
this afternoon ? "

** Well ! " answered Bertie mysteriously,
*' to tell the truth, I heard a most extraordinary
bit of news the other day about
Greatorix. It almost took the breath out of
my body ; knocked all the wind out of me,
you know ! I don't believe it — at least, I
don't think I do — and, I had nearly forgotten
all about it, until I heard my mother mention
his name to you. It really was the most
astounding thing I ever heard."

^' All lies, very likely ! " interrupted Lord
Oakdene.

'' I don't know. I'm not so sure about
that. I had it upon pretty good authority."

Opposition, to his statements, from others,
like a reassertion of them upon his own part,
generally strengthened the stoutness with
which Bertie stuck to them. In this respect
he was not, perhaps, singular ! Taking the
arm of Lord Oakdene with unwonted importance
of demeanour, Bertie spoke again —

''If you were not really a real friend of
both Mr. and Mrs. Greatorix, I should not
mention what I am going to say. That is the
reason why I have been asking you such a
lot of questions about them. Of course, it's
nothing bad about Mrs. Greatorix."

Lord Oakdene looked aghast.

'' Not Mrs. Greatorix, you know," repeated
Bertie with emphasis.

'bad, about Mrs. Gweatowix!" echoed
Lord Oakdene in blank amazement.

^' No," returned Bertie decidedly.

'' Then, if It is anything bad about — about
Gweatowix, you'd better shut up at once,
Bertie. There is not a better fellow breathing
than Gweatowix, so don't make any
mistakes ; I know him well, and so can speak
quite positively."

'' Ye-es," returned Bertie. It was a very
dubious assent. He was dying to impart his
information to Lord Oakdene, but then Lord
Oakdene did not appear by any means equally
anxious to receive it, wherefore Bertie Hope
was somewhat nonplused.

Perhaps the champagne luncheon at Lord's
had something to do with his present obstinate
communicativeness, since, with all his
glibness of speech and love of chattering, he
was no talebearer of scandal and wrontr-doinors
as a rule.

'' Have you seen Mrs. Greatorix lately?"
he began, taking up the assault afresh, after
finding that his lukewarm " Yes" drew forth
no remark.

'' Not very lately," was the reply.

^' Did she look miserable, or happy, when
you did see her ? " asked Bertie, lowering his
voice to a significant whisper.

'^ Miserable — happy ! '' echoed Lord Oak-done,
his usual tone of voice rather raised
than otherwise by astonishment.

'^ Hush ! " said Bertie, still speaking in low,
and sepulchral notes. '' Yes, miserable, or
happy. I mean, did she look awfully jolly,
and all that sort of thing ? "

Lord Oakdene fairly lost patience.

'' Good gracious, Bertie, what in the devil's
name are you driving at ? " he asked.

'' I shall keep that to myself, if you are so
deucedly cross about it," returned Bertie
wrathfully.

I should, my boy, if I were you," laughed
Lord Oakdene.

Bertie's anger was always, like a flash of
summer lightning, gone almost as soon as it
appeared.

** But I'm bothered if I will keep it to
myself," he cried, letting go his wrath with
his change of mind. '' No, I'm bothered if I
will ; it's such a thundering shame."

'what is a thundering shame?" asked
Lord Oakdene.

'what I have heard — of course!" answered
Bertie.

Lord Oakdene was growing uneasy. Was
any scandal, afloat in the busy world concerning
Esse, of which Bertie was aware, and if
so, what could it possibly be ?

Concealing his uneasiness, Lord Oakdene
said cheerfully —

Come, Bertie ! out with it, old man'*

Well, it is about Greatorix," replied
Bertie, deliberately, and whispering again.

All rubbish, I have no doubt," returned
Lord Oakdene.

I don't know," said Bertie, with a solemn
shake of his youthful head.

Then he peered cautiously around him,

glared with suspicious ferocity at an elderly
female, who, in the chances of the pavement,
was jostled to within ear shot of him, and
finally cleared his throat portentously. Whatever
his communication might prove to be,
it was quite evident to Lord Oakdene, that
Bertie desired to make it as secretly as possible,
wherefore, catching the caution of his
companion, Lord Oakdene also peered suspiciously
around him ; to the right, to the left,
backwards, and forwards.

The coast was clear, even the elderly
female had shuffled well past them ; but, still,
Bertie hung fire.

Whereupon Lord Oakdene, mistaking the
cause of delay, turned his aristocratic,
pleasant-looking face, once more from east
to west, and from north to south. Then,
assured that all was safe for the coming confidence,
he looked, expectantly, at Bertie.

*' All right! I'm only pulling myself together,"
cried Bertie, thoroughly understanding

the glance which was cast upon him.
*' Wait a second, though, Oakdene ! It
stumps a fellow to walk along at such a confounded
pace when he's got anything particular
to say."

• Lord Oakdene reduced his speed to a
minimum rate of progression. After which,
Bertie, lowering his voice until it was almost
inaudible, said —

'' Do you know, they say that Greatorix
drinks ? "

*' Gweatowix drinks ! " exclaimed Lord
Oakdene, vehemently. " What the deuce
are you talking about, Bertie — what do you
mean f

'' Hush ! don't make such a row," said
Bertie, ''do be quiet. I mean what I have
said."

Bertie was not at all taken aback by the
excitement which his companion exhibited.
On the contrary, Bertie considered that such
excitement was fully justified by the importance

of the information of which he had just
delivered himself. He was rather pleased at
it than otherwise ; pleased that at last he had
awakened Lord Oakdene to a proper amount
of interest. There was no doubt about this
latter fact. Lord Oakdene was on the alert
now, and keenly alive to the point of the conversation.
He was about to speak again, but
he was interrupted by Bertie, who said —

*' I have been told it as a positive fact'*

'' Then you have been told about as black
a lie as the inventor of lies ever framed," returned
Lord Oakdene, hotly.

'^ I am sure I hope it is so, for the sake of
that awfully pretty girl " —

Of course it is," interrupted Lord Oak-done
sharply, and then he added — 'where
did you get it from ? "

I don't know whether I ought to split,"
hesitated Bertie, '' but — but Clifton swears
that he saw Greatorix stagger out of the Club
one night, and Maxwell says that Greatorix

is well known to be one of the hardest
drinkers going."

'' Tell both Clifton and Maxwell, they area
couple of liars for their pains, and that I
say so," broke in Lord Oakdene, impetuously.
^' If they want me, after they get my message,
they can find me at my Club — the
Guards."

And without trusting himself to give
further vent to his anger, Lord Oakdene
shook Bertie by the hand, wished him
'' Good-bye " and left him.

'* He doesn't like the news at all, I can
see ! " said Bertie, in soliloquy, upon the
retreating figure of his friend. '' I wonder,
whether he really ever was awfully gone
upon Mrs. Greatorix ? "

BANISHMENT.

Arthur Greatorix certainly gave no outward
token that he was addicted to the hard
drinking of which, Bertie Hope said, two individuals
had accused him.

Three weeks after the birth of his child
found him changed indeed — changed by sorrow
— his strong frame bent as if by the
weight of years — the comeliness of his face
marred by sleeplessness and misery — his
voice hoarse and hollow from long pent-up
emotion.

Those three weeks had been one long
agony to him ; and one long peril to Esse.

The days had come and gone — sunrise,
sunset, morning, noon and night, and yet

VOL. HI. M

the agony did not lighten ; still the peril did
not lessen.

O God ! spare my darling — O God !
let me keep her just a little longer — let me
see her — hold her in my arms once more —
O God ! in pity, hear me'*

Such had been the prayer, which burst
again and again from Arthur, as, pausing in
his restless pacing of the room In which he
watched and waited, he cast himself upon his
knees, and stretched forth his hands to
Heaven.

And such is the prayer which he utters
now. Esse has been — is — dying. Already
the Angel of Death seems to have her in
his grasp, and Arthur is waiting alone and
broken-hearted, while doctors and nurses
watch a sleep from which they fear, there
will be no awakening, upon this earth.

Marie has taken the wee, unconscious babe
to her own apartment ; Flora Grant is
hysterically sobbing under the hands of her

maid ; the house servants are quiet, pale, and
paralyzed — all wait, with the momentarily
increasing dread of an awful expectancy.

Well may Arthur pray, as he has never
prayed before. Presently, he hears a slight
noise — a softly opened door In the distance ;
a softly falling foot. He cannot stir — he
dares not go forth and learn his doom — his
knees knock together, hot tears rain from his
swollen eyelids — the strong man Is weaker
than a little child — more pitifully nervous
than a timid woman.

'' O God ! help me," he murmurs,
earnestly, as the handle of his room door Is
touched, then turned, and he hears his name
gently whispered.

The whisper is from Marie, who, with a
little bundle of white robes in her arms, steals
to the side of her master and sinking to her
knees murmurs some scarcely intelligible
words of thanksgiving. There is a brief
mingling of sobs — the gentle sobs of a

woman, the hard choking sobs of a man.
Then Arthur, as he took the Httle bundle
from Marie and hid his face thereon, turned
away to the window, overpowered by the
sudden transition from despair to hope.

Ere long, he learned more distinctly, that
the sleep, from which so much had been
feared, had not been a sleep unto death.
Nay — rather — it had been a sleep unto life ;
and a vision of home, wife and child, once
more crept into his heart.

But still, as before, he was banished utterly
and entirely from the sick chamber. In this,
had lain the very essence of his misery. In
this, still lay the essence of his anxiety.

To be up and doing is a relief to most
natures. Inaction and uselessness, in the
present instance, were sheer torture to
Arthur. Was Esse, his beautiful Esse,
his girl-wife, to drift from the shores of
life and to cross the dark ocean of eternity
to that unknown land, from which there is

no return, without one kiss, or touch of
his, to hold her back ? Could any smooth
her pillow so tenderly as he? Were any
arms so strong, as his, to lift her fainting
form ? Was any eye so tireless, any foot
so noiseless, as his own ?

These, and the like, questions, he asked of
himself over and over again through dreary
days, and, if possible, more dreary nights, of
suspense ; while, such were the questions
which drove him, more than once, to beg
for a remission of that sentence of banishment
which had been pronounced against
him.

But it could not be. Such an indulgence
to him would have been at the imminent risk
of the life of Esse.

The distant sound of his voice, the faintest
echo of his footstep, in fact, the slightest
indication of his presence was invariably
followed by a fresh access of fever and
delirium, to which a prostration, almost approaching

to dissolution, as invariably succeeded.
Therefore, his absence, from even
the region of the chamber in which Esse
lay, was imperatively necessary.

There was nothing peculiar in all this, at
least, so he was assured. Doctors and
nurses alike affirmed, that such cases were of
frequent occurrence. Arthur listened, with a
dull credence which brought him but scanty
comfort.

Not once, since he resigned his wife to the
care of her attendants, while he, in hot haste,
started in pursuit of George Maxwell, had he
looked upon her sweet face. The mystery of
that evening had never been solved. It
rested with Esse, who, excepting at rare and
short Intervals since the birth of her baby,
(which took place some four-and-twenty hours
after her perusal of the terrible '' Roll-call ")
had not been possessed of reason.

Arthur knew nothing of the finding of the
** Roll-call." He merely felt assured that,

the severity of his wife's illness was, In someway,
connected with the excitement which
had been occasioned by the unexplained visit
of George Maxwell.

The more Arthur pondered over the matter,
the more convinced he became that his conjecture
was correct. But sorrow is not a time
for vengeance. For the present, therefore,
George Maxwell had a respite.

Watching and waiting — waiting and watching
for a word, from those who were in immediate
attendance upon Esse, Arthur let
go his wrath ; the moments were too heavily
freighted with fear, for anger to keep afloat
in his breast.

And this watching, and this waiting, absorbed
everything else — swallowed up every
interest.

Unopened papers and letters lay piled upon
the writing table — earthquakes might have
riven the earth — news of battle rung through
our streets, nothing would, could, or did

arrest his attention ; nothing which did not
bear directly upon Esse.

It is ever thus, when the hand of Death is
hovering close to our loved ones. Then,
earthly gods dwarf, dwindle, and finally disappear.
The politician forgets his daily
paper — the sportsman hound and horse, dog
and gun — the speculator his money-making
the lawyer his briefs — the tradesman his
shop — the beauty her conquests, and so on.

We see only one Rock, in our threatened
shipwreck — one Hope — one Help.

Alas, that danger and sorrow, should teach
us our impotence, so much more quickly than
safety and joy !

Alas, that the want of succour should bring
us so much more swiftly to our knees than
thankfulness for rescue !

After that one long sleep which brought the
crisis of the illness of Esse to a favourable
issue, no immediate fear for her life was entertained.
But still she gave no sign of consciousness

; and no recognition of those about
her. While her extreme prostration lasted,
this created no especial anxiety. By-and-by,
however, came prolonged and increasingly
grave professional consultations, fresh opinions
were called in, nurses looked mysterious and
would answer no questions, while Marie, wept
and moaned in private, as she rocked the
baby in her arms.

As long as possible, Arthur was kept incomplete
ignorance of the fresh cause for
terror which had arisen. At last it could be
no longer hidden from him. Esse might,
and in all probability would be spared to him,
her youth, together with her good constitution
had won the battle of Hfe ; but reason,
with its delicate chain, its subtle sway, its
intricate web, was threatened, and none could
predict the result.

There were certain peculiarities in her case
which baffled the skill of the most learned.
By no stratagem, or effort, could they, when

the ravings of delirium had ceased, win either
a word from her tongue, or a glance from her
eye. To every attempt, there followed the
same result, the same low moan, and the
same piteous hiding of the wan face upon its
pillow.

There was one hope left ; one remedy untried.
But, to this, none dared to flee, until
a certain amount of bodily strength had been
obtained. This hope, this remedy, was the
baby. By its *' waxen touches " what miracles
might not be effected ?

And thus it came to pass that Arthur
learned to look upon this tiny atom as his
earthly deliverer from that sorrow which, even
in thought, he could not nerve himself to face.

So, once again, in watching and in waiting,
the days dragged slowly by, until at
length, a morning broke upon which the
great trial was to be made — the crucial
remedy tested.

Softly stole the sun through the carefully

shaded chamber windows, while, with the bed
curtains looped back so that the summer air
might reach her, lay Esse, propped upon her
lace-trimmed pillows, her long eye-lashes
sweeping her marble-hued cheek.

A profound silence reigned. With his face
buried in his hands, sat Arthur in the boudoir
beyond. Physicians, with anxious countenances,
filled the dressing-room ; without,
nurses waited breathlessly.

At a preconceived signal, pale and trembling
with the babe in her arms, Marie entered
the dressing-room. Some brief directions
were given to her by the doctors, and then,
paler, and still more trembling than before,
she carried the infant into the sick room.

There was a moment of intense anxiety
and profound suspense. Esse, continued
passive and motionless, with closed eyes, as
Marie cautiously approached the bed. Suddenly,
a little sound stirred in the silent
chamber — a little babble of baby-voice — a

little coo of baby-content ; that baby-noise
which is so utterly, and so hopelessly, indescribable.


It came very low and sweet, from out of
the soft white wraps which Marie bore. But
low as it was, it smote upon the mother's
ear ; its sweetness touched the mother's
heart.

*' Oh, Marie ! my baby, my baby ; give my
baby to me."

It was enough ! The large, beautiful eyes
were opened wide — the thin arms stretched
forth — the white hands held out imploringly
to Marie, who, as she placed the little one
reverently within the clasp which was so
yearningly extended for it, knew that her beloved
mistress was saved from a living death
which would have been scarcely less terrible
than the tomb.

For a few minutes, Esse, with infinite delight,
stroked and caressed her child, while a
faint streak of colour mounted to her cheek.

Then, with the little one nestling in her
bosom, she sank exhausted into a profound
repose.

From that hour her recovery, although
slow, and often retarded by fits of alarming
mental depression and disquietude, was sure.
Nevertheless, the pernicious effect of any
allusion to Arthur continued undiminished.
It was only when she slept, therefore, that
the cruel hunger of his soul, to look upon
her, could be appeased. It was still a time
of supreme trial to him. He tried hard to be
patient. But it was sorry work, and the strain
told grievously upon him.

Then it was that a circumstance arose,
which those about him hailed with joy. He
was suddenly summoned into Cornwall. A
lawsuit, concerning some land, had taken a
sudden turn, which rendered it absolutely
necessary that his counsel should be provided
with certain deeds and papers. These papers,
were securely stowed away in an iron closet

in Arthur's library in Cornwall, and could only
be obtained by Arthur himself.

At first, he wrote word that the papers
must be done without. The case progressed;
and the necessity became more urgent ; yet,
how, could he leave Thorndyke, at such a
time ?

The want of the deeds went far to imperil
the possession of a great part of his property,
but what was that in comparison with
his anxiety for Esse.

Thus thinking, and acting in accordance
with such thoughts, a telegram was brought
to him, it so chanced, while Dr. Wyldham,
the old Brashleigh medical attendant, was in
the room.

A few words soon made Dr. Wyldham
master of the facts, and then, ensued a discussion,
wherein Arthur was worsted.

The journey, together with the change of
scene, and the short respite from incessant
watchfulness were matters slight, perhaps,

when taken separately ; but when, combined
together, the good medico affirmed would be
of infinite benefit to Arthur.

And, truly, to feel assured of this, it needed
but one glance at his haggard face !

Go, my dear sir ; by all means, go. Mrs.
Greatorix is progressing satisfactorily — I may
say, most' satisfactorily. Entire freedom from
excitement is all that we require for her now.
Her nervous organization is delicate — peculiarly
delicate, always — and at this particular
time her sensitiveness to sound is marvellous
— quite marvellous. Perfect quiet, my
dear sir ! is the best prescription which can
be devised for her, and time, we may fairly
hope, will do the rest. I learn from my partner
that all is going well with my patients in
my home district, therefore I will gladly remain
here while you are away, and, with Mrs.
Grant and Marie to assist me, surely I maybe
trusted with the care of Mrs. Greatorix."

The doctor spoke cheerfully, rubbing meanwhile,

two fat, white hands, complacently
together. Moreover, he spoke with seeming
candour. Yet, his thoughts scarcely ran incomplete
harmony with his speech. Had the
former been presented to Arthur in a perfectly
plain and unvarnished state, they would
have appeared something after the fashion of
the following —

*' Nothing could be more lucky — the best
thing that could happen for them both — he
must be persuaded, somehow, to go — he will
be ill, to a moral certainty, unless something
is done, and his wife won't get well — I can't
make out why this antipathy to his presence
should remain — but there it is, and while it
lasts, the best thing for them both will be,
that he should go — those starts and tremors,
which always signify that Mrs. Greatorix has
heard her husband about somewhere, will be
done away with by his absence, and she will
get on as fast again."

But nothing of this, as we have seen, was

allowed to slip out in the bland syllables
which, were so innocently spoken, while the
fat white hands caressed each other.

*' If I did go," said Arthur, after a pause,
of course, I could see Mrs. Greatorix before
I left home — if I did go ; " he concluded,
pointedly.

** Certainly, my dear sir ! — certainly. We
must of course be guided by circumstances —
circumstances, you know ! The new mixture
will, doubtless, ensure a good night — and
then — why then — yes ; — of course, for a few
moments, my dear sir — a few moments.
Mrs. Greatorix must on no account be
either fatigued, or excited. In either case,
we should lose ground, and lost ground, my
dear sir ! — lost ground, is riot easy to be
recovered."

Arthur Greatorix looked at the bald head,
gold spectacles, and ruddy face, before him.
'J^hey had been familiar to him from childhood
; all of them, even the bald head, as

VOL. III. N

well as the spectacles ; while the face was
but very little changed. They could not play
him false, Arthur thought. Wherefore, he
believed in that partial promise of a short
interview with Esse ; a promise, which, by
the way, the doctor had not the faintest intention
of fulfilling.

And yet, his kindly nature was full of the
best intentions, towards both Arthur and
Esse. It could hardly be otherwise. Years,
long years before, the days had been evil for
Dr. Wyldham and then the parents of Arthur
Greatorix had stood by him ; befriending him
substantially, and finally doing much towards
his establishment in the practice which he
still carried on a few miles distant from
Brashleigh Manor.

Hospital students are not, indeed, it may
even be said, never were, renowned for either
wisdom or prudence. As one of their ranks
Dr. Wyldham by no means proved himself
either a brilliant or a singular exception. He

fell in love, when anatomy and physic alone
should have been his deities. Moreover, his
lady-love was rich, and, alas for her, she was
true as she was rich ! Little wonder that
worldly guardians scoffed at the proposal of
the embryo doctor to make her his wife !
Secure in the affection of each other, however,
the young lovers resolved to be patient
and to wait. Obstacles looked small to their
ardent eyes ; and opposition plastic. But, as
time went on, obstacles were not only multiplied,
but opposition was made more aggressive.
Therefore, they took the law into their
own hands and eloped. Gretna Green was
then in existence, and to this haven, the runaways
made their way. On the journey thither-wards,
the girl was smitten with a mortal
sickness ; smitten, and died. Died, with a
stain upon her name, which was as unjust, as
it was cruel.

Then it was, when the bereaved lover was
smarting, battered, bruised and brokenhearted,

that the mother of Arthur Great-oris,
with gentle, womanly counsel, had
bidden the stricken one take heart, and apply
himself once more to the work, which his
profession opened out to him.

No woman had ever again stolen into the
heart of Dr. Wyldham ; no ears had ever
again listened to softly breathed syllables of
love from his lips. True to the memory of
his one, early love, he lived a lonely bachelor

life.

The slander, which sorely hindered his advancement
for some years, had died out. He
had lived it down. Prosperity and success
were his. Nevertheless, his gratitude still
burned steadily for those, who had held out
helping hands, and spoken kindly words, when
the days were '' dark and dreary."

Those friends in need, had long since gone
to a higher Hfe, but their son lived, and the
gratitude of Dr. Wyldham was but transferred
from them to him.

With all his faith, however, both in the
words, and the promises of Dr. Wyldham, it
must not be supposed that Arthur was
brought without much difficulty to an actual
departure from Thorndyke.

There were many backsliding, and many
vacillations to be overcome ; much dislike,
with varied objections, to be combated.

Dr. Wyldham never wavered. Inch by
inch, he fought his way through them all.
A great good, he felt assured, was to be
gained, and he did not flinch before the
barriers which, one after another, had to be
overthrown ere it could be attained.

I shall not go all the way to Cornwall.
I shall stop short in town, give my keys to
my solicitor, and instruct him where to find
the deeds. He will do just as well as myself,
and in this manner, I shall be within easy
distance from here, should it be necessary forme
to get back, to my wife, in a hurry."

This idea of remaining in town was a great

sop to Arthur's disquietude. Dr. Wyldham
made no attempt to frustrate its beneficial
properties. The last argument had been
gone through, and the last evening, before
the long talked of departure, had come,
when Arthur Greatorix thus provided himself
with his sop.

On the morrow morn, he was to see Esse,
and afterwards to take his way to Lincoln's
Inn.

But when the morrow came, and with it the
hour when once again he fondly hoped to
fold his wife to his heart, a grievous disappointment
fell upon him. Esse slept. It
grew late, and still she gave no sign of
waking ; while still Arthur lingered, hoping,
waiting, and longing.

Then, with professional phrase and skilful
diplomacy, Dr. Wyldham set himself the
difficult task of persuading Arthur to leave
his farewell kiss upon a sleeping, unconscious
cheek.

\

The task was accomplished. Diplomacy
prevailed. Weary with disappointment, Arthur
bent over the white face of his wife, pressed
his Hps with a long, soft kiss to her brow, and
left a small bouquet of her favourite blossoms
upon her pillow.

When she recovered from the effects of the
sleeping draught, which it had been the especial
care of Dr. Wyldham should hold her
senses in the bondage of slumber until Arthur
had gone, she saw the flowers, and understood
at once by whom they had been placed so
close within her reach.

Waiting until she was alone, she took them
up, and kissed them passionately, then she
plucked them leaf by leaf to atoms, and cast
them from her.

MOTHER AND CHILD.

'' Gone to London to his solicitor, and, I
hope, on to Cornwall," mused Dr. Wyldham,
as he returned to the house after witnessing
the reluctant departure of Arthur from his
own gates. '' I never thought I should have
got him off," continued the good M.D. still
In soliloquy, " and now for my patient ! "

Meanwhile Arthur was calculating to a
nicety, in how short a time he could reckon
upon a return to Thorndyke. The farther he
travelled from his home, the more determined
he became that London should be his terminus
in a complete sense. Not one yard
further would he budge. Upon this he was,
or thought he was, immovably resolved.
But when he reached London, and when he

\

gained the office of his solicitor, a very unpleasant
discovery was made to him.

The solicitor in question, who was the old
family lawyer, and the only person, in point of
fact, who could by any possibility be entrusted
with the delicate mission of searching amid
private papers for an important deed, was so
seriously indisposed, as to be quite unable to
attend to business, and, as a matter of course,
was utterly prevented from undertaking a
journey.

With a feeling, which, it must be confessed,
was closely allied to irritation, against the unfortunate
invalid for his inopportune malady,
Arthur turned upon his heel and sought the
other discreet and learned members of the
law with whom his case connected him.

Each interview was antagonistic to his
wishes. The deed was urgently required —
the cause was at stake — the reputation of
the counsel. Hence, perhaps, their inflexibility.
Arthur listened, thought of Esse, suggested

expedients, and proposed postponements. But
all in vain. The wise men were pressing. The
case must come on at the time appointed.
Technicalities, which were worse to listen to
than the professional dictum of Dr. Waltham,
were profusely hurled forth, niceties
discussed, property pronounced to be upon
the balance, and even entail to be in danger.

Then Arthur bethought him not only of
Esse, but of his child.

Pencil and paper were again in requisition,
while another reckoning of minutes and hours
went eagerly forward. At the completion of
his calculations, Arthur shook his head despondingly.


The journey was too long: the time which
it would take was too great.

Nevertheless, the thin end of the wedge
had been inserted. A possibility had been
suggested, and not only suggested, but entertained.


So, those wise ones, the wily, hair-spitting
barristers, held their peace. They left the

wedge to work. Their time for silence had
arrived.

And so it came to pass, that, when left to
himself, Arthur began to cast about in his
mind and to reflect again over that advice
which he had so curtly rejected. Anon, he
asked a question respecting it. The query-was
fully and gravely answered.

Then, his will began to waver.

Perhaps, upon second thoughts, he might
find that the journey to fetch the important
document would not take so long as he at
first imagined.

The-diplomatic men of law agreed most
cordially with this second thought, as propounded
by their client, in antagonism to
that of his first.

Another parley ensued, during which the
client became less firm — the counsel firmer —
more politely positive.

Then, wilfulness losing its will, Arthur gave
in.

With head and heart both striving, it

seemed to him, which could ache the most,
he signified, his change of plan, by telegram,
to Dr. Wyldham.

Upon the answer to this telegram rested
either the journeying, or the not journeying,
into Cornwall.

The state of Esse, as reported by her
doctor, would after all give the casting vote.

Nothing could be more favourable to the
journey than the answer to the telegram.

The day had witnessed a decided improvement
in Esse. And, in addition to this
satisfactory announcement, the cunning, old
doctor added the information, that 'Arthur
would find a fresh bulletin awaiting him when
he reached Cornwall. This gave the finishing
stroke.

Away, sped Arthur Greatorix, from wife
and child for many a long and weary mile, as
fast as steam could carry him.

As so he sped there was a strange, tearing
pain in his limbs, and a strange, darting, burning

pain in his head ; an unusual weariness,
a dismal sense of heaviness and depression
over him.

From time to time he roused himself —
shook himself, as it were, free from the dull
sense of pain — the creeping, numbing torpor
which stole from head to foot — from shoulder
to wrist — from knee to ankle. But the effort
was useless. To shake off torpor was but
to fall into the arms of pain. Wherefore,
worsted again, Arthur gave up the endeavour.

There comes an hour to most of us when
to creep to the shelter of bed, in the quiet of
our chamber, seems to be the one, and the
only one, desirable thing, which is left to us
in life. Such an hour came to Arthur
Greatorix, when, his journey ended, he found
himself crossing the threshold of his old
Cornish home. In vain were food and wine
set before him. He turned with equal loathing
from them both.

Rallying the small amount of strength

which was left to him, his first care was to
despatch a telegram to Thorndyke ; his next,
to start a trusty messenger with the deed for
which he had journeyed so wearily in mind
and so painfully in body. No newly-captured,
untamed lion, ever chafed more impatiently
behind the iron bars of its cage, than did
Arthur under the physical impossibility which
held him fast, and prevented that speedy replacement
of his steps upon which he had so
surely calculated.

But sickness held him in a pitiless grip.
As we have said before, repose was his only
refuge. Even when seeking it, he scoffed at
himself for the craven shrinking from pain
to which he had succumbed, while his belief
was firm that, in a few hours he would be up
and on his way to Esse again, as lusty and
strong as ever.

But as the long night hours rolled on, the
couch, which he had sought with ready faith
in its curative powers, became as a rack, upon

which every quivering joint and sinew was
behoof stretched to the utmost. He tried to
rise, but his stiffened limbs refused their office
and he sank back exhausted with the futile
effort.

Those long, long hours, those weary days
and weeks of ceaseless painful watchings,
those untouched meals, and unclosed eyes,
had done their work at last. Mortal endurance
had reached its limit. The strength of
the strong man went suddenly from him,
while all the torture of rheumatic fever took
its place.

Meanwhile, affairs at Thorndyke, so far as
the health of Esse was concerned, were
steadily improving.

The news of Arthur's illness was a great
shock to Dr. Wyldham, who not only reproached
himself for a certain want of foresight
in the matter, but who was also terribly
exercised in his mind as to the effect which
it might have upon Esse.

It was with extreme caution that the
urgent nature of the business, which had
taken her husband to Cornwall, was duly explained
to her. She had received the intelligence
with a sweet, mournful smile,
which Dr. Wyldham interpreted into one of
resignation ; but which, by a skilled physiognomist,
might have been suspected to be
rather one of relief. Now, however, that the
absence must of necessity be prolonged, and,
moreover, be prolonged upon the score of illness,
Dr. Wyldham, gathering his experience
from the affection which he had known to
exist between Esse and her husband before
her illness, and counting, as nothing but a
wild hallucination of sickness, her late aversion
to his presence, felt grievously tormented
as to the best way of bringing the matter
before her.

He had no faith that the resignation,
which he understood her to have manifested
by that sweet smile upon a previous occasion,

would hold good through the new ordeal
which had arisen.

It was with much circumlocution, therefore,
that he gently represented the facts of the
case, modifying them, perhaps, more in accordance
with the necessity of his patient,
than with the strictest principles of truth.

To his relief, she simply bowed her head
over her baby, but, whether it was to hide
her tears or not, he could not tell.

His next care was to warn Flora Grant
against any further allusion whatsoever to
the matter.

Flora Grant promised implicit obedience.
She had been most wondrously subdued,
during the whole period of the illness of
Esse.

In truth, certain uncomfortable qualms of
conscience frequently assailed Flora Grant,
with regard to that day upon which she
had been left, by Arthur, in charge of his
fair young wile.

VOL. in. o

These qualms would not be silenced. And
then there was the head-ache, from which
Marie persisted in dating the commencement
of all the mischief which had afterwards
accrued to Esse. Unfortunately, this headache
was one of which Flora Grant knew
herself to be by no means guiltless. Altogether,
therefore, she was in a very unenviable
frame of mind, and when, in the agony of his
keen distress, Arthur upbraided her for her
neglect of Esse, she shed real, genuine tears
of penitence, as much, perhaps, to her own
wonder as to that of his.

While the life and reason — first one and
then the other — of Esse seemed to be honor.
ing upon a thread. Flora Grant's penitential
frame of mind continued. But now that the
dread suspense was ended ; when everybody
once more breathed freely, and with a deep
sense of relief. Flora Grant began to weary,
just a little only, at first, of the monotony of
her life at Thorndyke. We know how it had

been with her before. George Maxwell had
then done something towards relieving her
ennui. But to her chagrin, as well as to her
unbounded surprise, not one billet-doux had
arrived from him, since the day upon which
she had first granted him an interview, and
then lionized him over Thorndyke.

Wherefore, when Dr. Wyldham informed
her of the cruel fate which had overtaken
Arthur, and, with the information, enforced a
certain code of caution upon her attention,
she promised to observe it faithfully.

Her promise was born of complex reasons.
Mingling with her remorse, which was not as
yet completely extinguished, there ran a vein
of terror lest the prolonged absence of Arthur,
from Thorndyke, might necessitate a correspondingly
protracted stay thither upon her
own part.

The world would perhaps cry shame upon
her, were she to desert her post before the
return of Arthur Greatorix. But, the world

would certainly cry louder and more long
were she to leave Thorndyke when his wife
was not only solitary but also suffering.

Therefore, at all cost, a relapse upon the
part of this same wife must be guarded
against.

Consequently, taking in with one sharp,
rapid glance, all that was involved in the
precise and particular injunctions of Dr. Waltham,
Flora Grant pledged herself thereto.
If Esse only continued better, and grew
stronger, it was just possible that, by some
as yet unknown circumstance, Flora Grant —
no matter what became of Arthur — might
slip cable and steer for other shores. The
world might then cry its cry of shame, but
she would stop her ears and face the criers.

And yet. Flora Grant, as a rule, cared
vastly for what the world thought and what
the world said — that short-sighted, blundering
world of ours ! She cared immensely, for
its praise, and she winced a good deal at its

blame, forgetful altogether, of how often it
indulges in the one, when it should be bestowing
the other.

And then, while making these mistakes,
this glib-tongued, loud-voiced world, believes
itself to be so wise ! According to its wont,
therefore, it babbled of Esse and Arthur,
with unmitigated complacency.

Could anything be more truly dreadful —
the lovely Mrs. Greatorix, who had only just
recovered from a most awful illness, and who
idolized her husband (though he was of
course a good deal too old for her) as a
husband had never before been idolized by
wife, was reduced again to the verge of the
grave — or of insanity — or of both" — the world
confessed to not being perfectly informed upon
this point — '' by the sudden illness of her
husband — could anything be more shocking ?
He had gone to his place in Cornwall to
fetch some deed, without which he would
have lost a tremendous law-suit and would

have been reduced to absolute beggary — and
now, after catching cold upon his journey, he
was dying in Cornwall, while his wife was
dying at Thorndyke ; and they were both
raving to see each other."

So said the world ! Since, however, falsehood
and truth are ofttimes curiously interwoven,
it would have been hard, perchance, to
have set the tangled web straight.

For neither the world, nor Arthur, nor Flora
Grant, nor Dr. Wyldham, nor any of those
who had watched so closely beside the sick
couch of Esse, guessed at the torture which
racked her gentle bosom.

The secret of the visit of George Maxwell
had not oozed out. The skeleton, of which
he had spoken, had not become a show and a
wonder to a gaping world ; while the equally
terrible — the equally hideous skeleton — the
'' RoU-Call," was likewise hidden and unsuspected.


But together — secrets and skeletons between

them — they had all but destroyed her
young life — together, they still sapped her
strength — together kept back the roseate hue
of health from remounting to her cheek.

From the stroll-Call" to George Maxwell;
and back again from George Maxwell
to the " Roll Call," travelled the miserable
thoughts of Esse.

Dimly and confusedly did their memory at
first return to her. Dimly and confusedly did
she connect the one with the other. But, by-and-by,
as her consciousness strengthened,
she was able to reason more clearly. Then
she saw, and understood, that a frightful harmony
existed between the written words of
the one, and the spoken words of the other.

And further, what meant that instantaneous
and undisguised recognition, which Arthur
manifested towards George Maxwell ? Alas,
Esse knew only too well !

Then, as she lay, passive, motionless, and
speechless, step by step, link by link, a chain

of circumstances was forged by her memory ;
a chain, which would have galled her into
madness, but that she believed herself to be
dying — passing away from its grievous fetters
from shame, from Arthur. One by one
had the links been forged — one by one they
gripped, they encircled her — and yet, she did
not die !

Back travelled her young heart with fond
remembrance to the early days of her
betrothal, when, save for the passing clouds
of Flora Grant's ill-natured taunts, all was
clear and bright as summer skies ; back
travelled her young heart to Uncle Ralph
ah ! and back, back, to that hasty departure
of her lover to Gibraltar — that never
explained, that mysterious departure. And
then, in retrospect, arose the walk with Lord
Oakdene to the grass path between the yew
hedges — the hint of a woman's voice, mingled
with Arthur's, which had been heard in that
same grass path — the discovery of the little

child therein — the pale lady — the letter — the
handkerchief, which had been found at Brighton
amidst the music — that other letter, which
arrived at Thorndyke, bearing the monogram
which Esse could understand only all too
well now — and then ! the subsequent journey
which was made by Arthur, so suddenly, to
London. Back, back, this way and that, over
and over again, went her torn, agonized heart,
from one to the other of these damning proofs
of the truth of the '' Roll Call ''—of the guilt
of Arthur.

And all the while she lay so still — so still —
ah, only because she thought that she must
die!

'' Her husband, not her husband — a wife,
yet not a wife —-god would not, could not, let
her live."

Poor child ! she meant no impiety, by the
thought. It was the cry of her soul under
grievous wrong — the wailing, as it were, of an
infant in the dark.

Yet, all this time, she made no sign of
woe ; only now and then a little moan, only
now and then a shiver and a burying of her
closed eyes and ashen face upon her pillow.
She thought her heart must surely break —
she thought her stifled sobs must surely choke
her — those agonized throes of misery slay her
but they did not; they were not so merciful.

Alive and quivering, they left her to wear
through hopeless days and waking nights,
with a fierce fire ever burnings and beating —
beating and burning upon bosom and brain.
A fire which even the holy joy of motherhood
failed to slake. To slake ! Nay, did it
not rather fan the stifling flames, until, by
their lurid glare, she read dishonour and foul
disgrace for her child, as well as for herself ?

And yet, for a brief space, the soft, wee
thing would sometimes, ease the ache and
smart of the torture, which the " Roll-called
had brought upon its mother ; while, the tears
which fell over its unconscious brow rained

down less passionately, by reason of its pure
influence.

^* Why did we not die — baby, why did we
not die, in the hour of peril — then, no one
would have known — only One — oh ! baby,
why did we not die ? "

So would Esse often whisper to her little
one, and once, while so whispering, a ray of
hope darted into her mind.

The stroll-Call!" Did it really exist—
had not some fiend cast the spell of its
foul imagination over her ?

Was it not all some horrible dream — a
phantasy born of a disordered brain ?

A tremulous light sparkled in her dim eyes ;
her heart, with unrestrained love, went out to
Arthur ; once more she looked upon his face — •
once more entwined her hand in his — lay upon.
his breast — felt his strong arm around her —
showed her child and '' made her boast." A
smile of intense joy played over her lips, while
a thrill of ecstasy swept through her veins.

Letting go her misery, she yielded herself to
the hope of the doubtfulness and delusion of
that misery, then called fondly upon her husband
— ah ! — yes — her husband — her own —
her very own — in truth, in honour, in all
manliness — called upon him, although she
knew he could not hear, in shy, joyous
whispers, bidding him come to her — kiss
her — mingle his tears with hers.

Alas, it was but a vain conceit ! With limbs
which shook now with joy, now with hope,
and now with fear, she crept to the drawer
wherein, when Arthur left her to give chase
to George Maxwell, she had hastily thrust
the '' Roll-call."

Perchance, she thought, in God's good
mercy, she was about to prove the fallacy of
her woe — the truth of her new-born hope.

Might she but find the drawer empty, no
wrapper addressed to her by her uncle — no
hideous "Roll-call" within that wrapper,
and the whole vile fabric of infamy and

wretchedness, which had risen above Arthur
and herself, would crumble into dust.

Such was the ray of light, which, for a few
short minutes, hope beamed upon Esse. A
ray which, by its very brightness, made the
succeeding darkness darker than all darkness
that had gone before.

With trembling fingers the drawer was
slowly opened. One terrified glance — one
agonized cry to Heaven and Esse Greatorix
had both looked upon her doom and uttered
her despair.

Leaf upon leaf, folded and smooth, hard
and uncompromising, lay the dreaded " Roll-call."


Crushed, desolate, hopeless and betrayed,
crept Esse back to her child and to her
pillow.

Then followed hours of anguish, and of wild
despair, of wilder resolves, and of fearful, pitiful
reflections. She would destroy the hated
'' RoU-Call " — hold her peace — lie quiet and

safe and still upon the heart of Arthur, albeit
that she knew his heart to be false and perjured
— she loved him so — ah ! did she not
love him ? — his secret should be safe, should
be kept, and she, with all her might, would
keep it. She would defy that other woman,
whoever she might be, that unknown writer of
the '' Roll-call "defy her— ah !— and not
only her, but George Maxwell also — George
Maxwell, with his taunts and sneers.

And then, as she tossed from side to side
of her couch, the mood of Esse would
change. Perjured vows, outraged faith,
purity betrayed, her child a by-word — was it
through these, and such as these, that she
would yet cling to Arthur ? — herself untrue, if
so she hid untruth — herself impure, if so she
cloaked impurity — a heritage of double
shame, by her, brought down upon her little
one. Ah, no ; — it could not be ! They must
away from Thorndyke, she and her baby.
The^Httle one must pillow its head upon a

breast, from which the pitying angels would
not turn away ; at which the finger of scorn
could not point.

Baby and she must leave Thorndyke before
Arthur could return. One glance at him, and
Esse felt that her resolution might fail her.
She would flee, and leave the '' Roll-call "
to tell, in mute language, the reason of her
flight.

Thus resolved, she bent her mind to shape
her plans. Ere long, circumstances aided her.
Dr. Wyldham proposed to transfer his attendance,
from Esse, to Arthur. The former was
quickly travelling towards a state of convalescence
; while the accounts of the latter were
not so satisfactory as Dr. Wyldham wished
them to be. It is needless to say, that Esse
furthered the departure of the doctor as much
as in her lay.

He had not been gone many days, before
Flora Grant gave sundry signs and tokens
-that she was only waiting for some decent

pretext whereby she could also leave Thorn-dyke.


Too heart-sick to feel either surprise or
grief at such a manifestation of a want of
affection for herself, Esse replied, to a yawn
of ill-humour and ennui by suggesting that,
change of air must be needful to Flora Grant,
after so long a sojourn amid the rules and
regulations of a house of sickness.

This suggestion was received with a faint
show of resistance, but, before a quarter of
an hour had elapsed, it was decided that Esse
was quite strong enough to be left to the sole
charge of Marie ; moreover, that change of
air and scene were positively necessary to the
well-being of Flora Grant. An early day,
therefore, was fixed upon for the exodus of the
latter. Both ladies were well satisfied with the
result of their conversation ; and Esse was all
the more so, because on that day Dr. Waltham
had written word that he confidently
hoped to return with his patient in five days,.

at latest, from the date upon which he wrote.
The fingers of Arthur, from the nature of
his malady, had been, and still were, unable
to wield a pen ; while writing was an exercise
of the brain, which Dr. Wyldham peremptorily
forbid to Esse. For her, this restriction
had been fortunate.

The early day, upon which Flora Grant had
fixed for her departure when first the subject
was discussed between Esse and herself, was
soon changed. Impatience suggested a more
agreeable time to Flora Grant, and that time
was the morrow. She was a little constrained,
when she made her alteration of plan known
to Esse ; but Esse thereto made no objection
of any kind.

Therefore, on the morrow, as with her baby
on her lap Esse sat in her dressing-room (by
no persuasion could she be induced to enter
the boudoir) Flora Grant, fully equipped for
traveling, presented herself at the doorway.


VOL. in. p

'what an Intolerable nuisance you will
find that child, when your husband returns,
and you want to be out riding or driving all
day with him. She cries now, if she is away
from you for long."

And as she spoke, Flora Grant, pointing
somewhat scornfully at the baby, moved
across the room to Esse.

'' Poor little creature ! "

Why do you pity her in that melancholy
tone of voice ? " interrupted Flora Grant,
rather sharply. '' I consider that she is a particularly
lucky baby — anything, in fact, but a
poor little creature.' Why, she is a regular
Kilmansegg baby ! I don't believe that you
can count the presents which have already
been showered upon her."

I hope her fate will be vastly different
from that of Miss Kilmansegg," said Esse,
shuddering involuntarily.

*' Well, she is not very likely, I suppose,
either to have a bigamist Count for her husband,

or to get her brains knocked out with
her own leg," laughed Flora Grant.

Esse made no comment upon the woful
fate of Miss Kilmansegg, and Flora Grant
continued —

'' Dr. Wyldham will scarcely know either
you or your baby when he returns, you have
both Improved so much. I am very glad he
can send good news of your husband."

'thank you," returned Esse wearily, to
this unusually amiable speech from Flora
Grant.

Then a slight bustle ensued ; the carriage
was announced, and with the semblance of a
kiss upon the tip of the baby's forehead,
which, by the way, was the only visible part
of her, and with a few meaningless words of
caution to Esse not to over exert herself,
Flora Grant, with her dog, maid, and baggage,
took her way from Thorndyke.

A CONSULTATION.

When doors were all closed, and quiet
once more reigned, Esse looked wistfully
around upon the walls, which had wlt-^
nessed her previous happiness and which had
borne for her the hallowed name of home.
Then, covering her face, she wept bitterly.
But although Flora Grant had gone, Esse
knew that she must not indulge In unrestrained
grief. There were still the sharp
eyes of Marie to be eluded. Indeed, but for
that threatened loss of reason, which had
been apprehended for Esse, she could not
have hidden, so successfully as she had done,
her mental disquietude. After that terrible
time, however, her subsequent nervous depression
appeared but the natural result of illness.

Thus, it came to pass, that she was enabled to
keep her secret from the watchful vigilance of
both doctor and nurse. But caution was still
necessary. Therefore, she checked her tears
and waited until all trace of weeping had disappeared
from off her face, before she rang
for the removal of her child. This having
been done, Esse found herself alone. The
time for action had arrived, but, where washer
courage ?

We are all brave enough, before a distant
foe. It is the hand-to-hand grapple,
which tests our courage, as well as our
strength.

Esse faltered in her determination, now
that its accomplishment was a possibility.
She did but halt, however, not turn back.

Once more, with aching and bleeding feet,
she plodded painfully, step by step, through all
the evidences which so sternly corroborated
the fiat of the '' Roll-call." They were all
there — those unwelcome witnesses. Not one

could be missed — not one found wanting.
Frowning and dire, as heretofore, they grimly
confronted her. Each time, as fainting and
sick, she trod the weary road of their examination,
they assumed a harder and more
solid shape. There was no by-way, no
devious path, by which she could either avoid
or overlook them, and, while so doing, keep
close to Arthur — travel still the same flowery
highway of life with him — cling to their home,
safe in her honour and his love.

After sending her baby away, Esse sat,
for long, pondering anxiously. But time was
speeding on. Arthur, with Dr. Wyldham,
would soon return. That which she would
do, must be done, or at any rate It must be
begun. Immediately.

Presently, casting a frightened glance
around her, as though afraid lest the very
pictures upon the walls should spy out what
she was doing, she took pen and paper and
wrote the following note.

Thorndyke,

''— ^''&

August, 18-

'dear Lord Oakdene,

^' I have a great favour to ask of
you. Will you come, if possible, to Thorn-dyke
tomorrow ? Baby is growing wonderfully.
With kind regards,

'' Very truly yours,

Esse Greatorix."

Her faced was dyed crimson, while her
hand shook painfully as she added her
signature.

'' It must be my name — please God to let
it be mine, if only for .the sake of my baby,"
Esse whispered to herself, as she bent over
the note-paper, and looked wistfully upon the
name which she had written.

Then she directed, sealed and despatched
the short, but important epistle.

Astonishment is but a feeble substantive,,
wherewith to describe the sensation with

which this note was received by Lord Oak-done.


Fortunately, he was In town, a fact concerning
which Esse had gone through
several fears and misgivings.

There were other reasons also, reasons
which the reader will be at no loss to comprehend,
which had made her hesitate before
writing to him.

In her great strait and dire necessity, however,
that episode in her life, wherein he
had played so memorable a part, was cast
into the shade. It was as a gentle breeze,
as a pale flash of distant summer lightning,
before the wild and furious tempest which
now so pitilessly howled around her.

So she decided upon her note, wrote and
sent it ; sent it, nothing doubting but that, if
it reached its destination without let or
hindrance it would bring her a prompt compliance
with the request which she had
deigned that it should bear.

So pretty women are apt to look upon the
commands with which they honour the opposite
sex.

And, in this instance, Esse made no false
estimate of her power. Lord Oakdene was
fully prepared to obey her bidding, with the
loyal fidelity of a faithful subject to an august
sovereign.

No furious tempest had swept, from off the
tablets of his memory, the image of Esse.
No after storms of passion had paled or
marred that image. She was still to him
the one woman in the world to whom he had
given worship ; the one woman whose voice
could stir the inner current of his being ; the
one woman whose will could sway his — whose
word was law. For her he had suffered shame
in his own eyes ; for her he was ready to do
aught but this again. He had loved her once
for himself — his own sake ; he loved her now
for her own — as a woman — apart altogether
from himself. Such was the victory which,

honour and chivalry had won, at last, over
self and passion.

Wherefore, without a moment either of
doubt or delay, he prepared, so soon as he
had read her note, to start for Thorndyke.

He had no time to pro and con before starting.
But, when once on his way, he pondered
much and long over the errand upon which
he was bent, or rather, perhaps, It would be
more true to say, upon the reasons which
could have actuated his fair commander.

Lord Oakdene knew that Arthur Greatorix
was 111 and away from Lincolnshire. All
the world knew thus far. Some emergency
might possibly have arisen for Esse,
whereby the presence of a friend might be
rendered desirable during the absence of her
husband. Possibly, also, she might desire
to send some trusty messenger upon some
weighty matter to her lord. And here Lord
Oakdene could but remember the slander,
which Bertie Hope had made known to

him, concerning Arthur Greatorix. He had
no wish to remember it — no wish now to
give it more credence than he did at the time
when he so stoutly protested against its
truth to Bertie.

But, somehow, it seemed a shade more
probable now ; more probable, that is, simply
because it gave a clue to a fresh supposition
concerning the unexpected note from Esse.

In such a manner as this rests one of the
great evils of slander. At one moment,
generosity may trample down, defy, and cast
it out ; at another, by reason of fresh circumstances
which are unfavourable, perchance, to
the slandered, the slander takes fresh life, it
rises Phoenix-like from its ashes, is remembered,
half believed in, and welcomed.

The reckoning, for this, must one day be
paid by the slanderer.

Never, perhaps, did a short feminine epistle
evoke more amazement and more speculation
upon the part of its recipient, than did the

note which Esse Greatorix had penned to
Lord Oakdene. Even the concluding clause
respecting the baby, which, with a vague,
indistinct sense of matronly propriety, Esse
had Inserted, met with a considerable amount
of cogitation. Could that tiny atom of
humanity, which was reported so positively
to be making marvellous and rapid strides in
growth, have anything to do with the
request that Lord Oakdene should present
himself at Thorndyke ? Lord Oakdene
thought not. His acquaintance with babies
was decidedly of a slender, a very slender
description ; his knowledge of their various
stages of progression towards the estate of
-either manhood or womanhood — nil. No ;
the baby, was not, could not be the point
upon which the case hinged. Of this, Lord
Oakdene speedily convinced himself. The
mention of it was simply as that of an interesting
fact, in which, with the pride of a young
mother, Esse imagined all the world must

take delight. So reasoned Lord Oakdene.
And his reasoning, it must be owned, was
fairly sound. At all events, it whiled away
the time until he found himself in the drawing-room
at Thorndyke.

Esse did not keep him waiting for her.
She was prepared and ready to receive him.
No nervous tremors made her hesitate to
seek his presence. No false shame restrained
her steps from seeking it at once.

She needed help, and simple and dignified
in sorrow, as in joy, she went straight to ask
that help.

In a pretty morning dress, soft and cool,
with her glorious beauty enhanced rather
than otherwise by the delicate waxen hues
which her illness had left upon her complexion
— with a world of deep emotion in her
lovely eyes, and with a world of pathos in her
sweet voice, she entered the room and gave
him gentle greeting.

So, and yet not so, had Lord Oakdene

pictured her on his way — so, and yet not so.
had her voice sounded to his Imaginings.

But he had Httle time for reflection. Without
an atom of circumlocution, amid a
breathless silence, Esse, averting her eyes
from his face, said slowly, and without faltering—


'you are very good, thus to answer my
note."

Lord Oakdene bowed, by way of disclaiming
all thanks upon the matter.
■ If Esse were not nervous, the same could
scarcely be said of her companion, who was
painfully conscious that the particular organ
in his body, which he had been educated to
consider his heart, was indulging at that
precise moment in a variety of evolutions,
bounds, and throbs, which were as unpleasant
as they were novel.

Esse took no notice, of the disclaiming
bow. Clasping her hands very tightly together,
she spoke again in the same slow,
calm, and forced manner —

'' Can you take a furnished house for mea
very long way from here, and can you
arrange for it to be ready on Monday next ?
I shall be so much obliged to you, if you will
do this for me. I am very sorry to trouble
you."

Then, she paused, turning towards him
with grave expectancy. There was nothing
melo-dramatic in her manner — not a betrayal
of the maddening grief under which she
was smarting — nothing which could lead her
listener to form the faintest guess at the
motives Which had actuated her request.

Nevertheless, the request in itself was so
different from anything of which he had
thought, that he was dumb from pure surprise.
Esse read in his face that it was so,
and with her large mournful eyes wistfully
scanning his countenance, she added —

'' You will think it strange, perhaps, but the
truth is, I must find a house before my —
before Mr. Greatorix returns from Cornwall.
Will you please help me ? I have no relations,

none but Mrs. Grant, and she would
not understand me. I did not know who to
ask, and so I wrote to you."

Again, Esse paused in the utterance of her
plain, unvarnished petition. Again, Lord
Oakdene was silent. He was perfectly at
sea upon the question of houses in general,
whether furnished or unfurnished. But it was
not upon this account that he was speechless.
If he had been requested by Esse to build
her an abode in the same short space of time
in which she had required him to find one ready
for her to inhabit, or to perform any other
equally impracticable impossibility, doubtless,
he would have promised compliance with her
desire.

His hesitation and his silence, arose from
no distrust in his own powers to meet the
required demand. They were brought about
bv distress at the unspoken woe which, he
detected, in every cadence of the sweet
womanly voice which addressed him. At

last, he spoke. His words were commonplace
when he spoke, as words, in times of
great emotion, often are. Asking no questions
; seeking for no confidence, other than
that which the gentle being before him might
wish to repose in him, he said quietly —

*' I will do whatever you wish, Mrs. Sweats
and I will do it as well as I can. There
must be lots of houses to let. I shall soon be
able to get what you require. Don't trouble
yourself any more about it. I know of
several house agents — only" — he stopped
in some perplexity, 'only, would you kindly
tell me, give me some idea, I mean, of the
locality in which you would prefer the house
to be."

"Oh! I do not mind — anywhere — I have
no choice — anywhere, so that it is a long,
long way from here — and — never mind what
sort of a house it is, so that I can go into it
upon the day I have named," interrupted

VOL. in. g

Esse, speaking more quickly than heretofore,
but still in the same indescribably
pathetic tone of voice.

Lord Oakdene glanced at her with uneasiness.
Could her recent indisposition
have left her reason in any way affected ?
Hints, of the twofold danger to which she
had been exposed, had reached him. remembering:
these now, he looked with a new
alarm upon her face. But there was nothing
in its sorrowful expression to verify his
freshly-aroused suspicion. On the contrary,
her eyes were fixed upon him with a sweet,
and grave steadfastness, which utterly refuted
the notion of a disordered mind.

Suddenly, while still he earnestly regarded
her, she gave a convulsive shudder. It shook
her slight form from head to foot. Once
more tightly clasping her small hands together,
she bowed her head, and gasped
rather than said —

' I — am — going — to — run — away — from —

my — I mean — from — Mr. Greatorix. I — am
■ — too — wretched — to — stop — here. I cannot
see — him — any — more. I — wish — I —
could — go — to — day" —

As this wail proceeded from Esse, Lord
Oakdene started to his feet. Esse took no
notice of his change of position, but continued
slowly speaking as if she were repeating
some laboriously acquired lesson, which
she was momentarily in fear of forgetting.

''I — must — apologise — for — bringing — you
• — so — far — upon — such — unpleasant — business
— but — oh ! — ^I — could — not — help —it —
and — please — you — must— not — blame — Mr.
Greatorix — for — for — what — perhaps — you —
think — rather — strange " —

Rather strange ! The blood rushed to the
very roots of the short, thick locks which
clustered above the forehead of Lord Oak-done.


Rather strange ! Yes ; so had Esse said.
But, to Lord Oakdene, it was strange beyond

all bounds, that she, the woman of his dreams,
the lost love of his life, should be there before
him, deliberately unfolding her purpose to runaway
from her husband — never to see him
more.

Stammering, not because from paucity of
ideas he had so little to say, but rather that
from out of the chaos of their numbers he
knew not from which to pick his speech, he
said —

I can only thank you, Mrs. Gweatowix, for
considering me to be worthy of your confidence."
Then a flush of generous emotion,
towards the man whom he ever lamented to
have wronged, and whom he regarded as the
most highly favoured mortal in the universe,
overpowering every other consideration, he
added earnestly, *' But Gweatowix will break
his heart."

Esse drooped her head with a negative
shake, and returning evasively to the subject
of the required house, she said —

Do you think one could be found in some

remote village In North Wales, or on the
west coast of Ireland, for Instance ? '*

** North Wales ! — west coast of " —

*' Yes," Interrupted Esse, " don't you think
they would be good places for baby and me
to hide In ?"

'' Yes — no," replied Lord Oakdene. He
was beginning to think that the exigency of
the case demanded something more from him
than a mere acquiescence to the request which
he had received.

Surely this resolution, which had been made
known to him by Esse, should be combated •
The ofhce of mentor, towards her, was one
which Lord Oakdene scarcely knew how to
usurp. Sorely puzzled, and as sorely distressed,
he was about to begin a gentle remonstrance,
but, as if she read his thoughts,
and would combat what he was about to say
before he had time to urge It, Esse — putting
her hand lightly upon his arm and looking up
Into his face with a pitiful pleading In her
eyes — whispered —

'^ Do not try to keep me here. I am running
away from a great temptation. I should
like to stay ; but I must not. I could never
again look upon my baby's face with joy, if I
were not to go. You will not stop me, will you'*

With the touch of those thin, trembling
little fingers upon him ; with those innocent,
sorrow-laden eyes fixed upon his face in
anxious waiting for his answer, what could he
say — what do — but scatter prudence to the
winds, and, come what might, promise help ?

And Esse was satisfied. The hard lesson
of treachery, which had been suddenly put
before her, had not yet destroyed her ready
faith in others.

But, although having promised his assistance,
Lord Oakdene set himself to gather
particulars from Esse, which should guide
him in his raid upon the London house agents,
yet he was by no means pleased with himself
at the part which, so far, he had played in his
present strait. Wherefore, while listening to
the few listless injunctions which fell from the

lips of Esse, he still cast about in his mind
for some suggestion, some idea of a restraining
influence, which should tempt her to a
reconsideration of the decision upon which
she was about to act. It came at last.

'' Miss Twitton ? Where is Miss Twitton ? '^
he enquired eagerly.

'' Miss Tritton," echoed Esse, with a slight
ring of pleasure in the tones of her voice, as
though the very mention of Rachel's name
brought a sensation of comfort.

*' Yes ; Miss Twitton," repeated Lord Oak-done
emphatically, his eagerness increasing.

'' She is at home with Mrs. St. Vincent. You
know they live near Canterbury. I have not
written to Miss Tritton for a long time. Dr.
Wyldham would not allow me, indeed will not
allow me to write to anyone," returned Esse.

'* But you might write now, just to her," was
the quick response. Lord Oakdene was far too
anxious for ceremony.

'' Now, to Miss Tritton !" exclaimed Esse
musingly, and as though pleased with the idea.

^* I think so really, Mrs. Gweatowix ; if it
would not tire you too much. It is very
remarkable ! " and, for the first time that
afternoon, the manner of Lord Oakdene was
as that of the Lord Oakdene of other days.
^' It is very remarkable," he repeated, " but
Miss Twitton is the very person of all others
to come to you just now. She is such a very
good woman. She will be every thing," he
concluded, enthusiastically.

So surely do people turn to the salt of the
earth, when trouble overtakes them !

'rand I never thought of Rachel," sighed
Esse to herself, as pen in hand she wrote a
letter, under the partial dictation of Lord
Oakdene, to her friend Rachel Tritton. Then
the interview, between Esse Greatorix and the
Earl of Oakdene, terminated.

Monday was to find him again at Thorn-dyke.
Meanwhile, during the three intervening
days, she must be patient ; he — busy.

NOT ONE AND THE SAME.

Lord Oakdene did not allow the grass to
grow under his feet. When the Monday,
which Esse anticipated, and yet so dreaded,
arrived, she had already received from him
an innumerable quantity of catalogues, containing
descriptions of an endless variety of
^' desirable residences."

The Monday in question was at the latter
end of the month of August, and just two
years after the date of the commencement
of this story. The weather was unusually
warm, and the heat of the atmosphere,
together with the restlessness of her mind,
rendered confinement to the house irksome
to Esse. She was not yet strong enough,
for exercise or fatigue of any kind, therefore

rugs and a soft carpet for her feet, with a
couch, some chairs and a small table, had
been placed for her, beneath the wide-spreading
branches of a tree, within sight of the
house. To the sylvan retreat, which had
been thus improvised, Esse gladly repaired ;
and, with her child in her arms, and her
papers on the table at her side, she prepared
to pass the time until the arrival, not only of
Lord Oakdene, but also of Rachel Tritton.

The letter, which had been written to the
latter at the instigation of Lord Oakdene,
had brought back a loving promise from
Rachel to arrive at Thorndyke on that day.
For those two friends, therefore, Esse waited.
As she waited, the tears dropped often from
off her face to that of her baby. Home and
husband were slipping fast from her. The
fair scene around her would soon know her
presence no more. And, she wept right sore,
that so it must be.

Presently, she heard a coming footstep.

Pushing back her disordered hair from off her
brow, and bending low over her child to hide
her tear-stained face, she did not look up
at the servant, who, lifting the branch of the
tree so that he might pass beneath it, announced
the arrival of a lady.

Feeling sure that it must be Rachel, and
too pleased, therefore, to enquire for any
name, Esse hurriedly desired that the lady
might be brought to her.

The man disappeared, and Esse, desirous,
even in the depth of her woe, that the beauty
of her little one should make a favourable
impression on Rachel, busied herself in an
anxious supervision of lace, hood, and robe.

While thus employed, Esse suddenly
became aware that the entrance to her
bower was darkened. So short a time had
elapsed, since the disappearance of the manservant,
that she looked up with considerable
surprise ; which surprise was immensely increased
when, instead of the tiny form of

Rachel Tritton, she beheld the unknown
figure of a remarkably tall woman.

In answer to the mute enquiry with which
she was regarded, the stranger, bending
beneath the leafy portals, approached Esse,
and said —

'' I told your footman that I could find my
way to you alone. I need not enquire whether
you are Esse Greatorix. I see that you are
none other."

Esse slightly bowed her head, in acknowledgment
of her identity. She had not yet
learned to deny the familiar name. Then,
with as much composure as her quickly
beating heart would allow, she returned
coldly —

*' And, may I ask, to whom I have the
pleasure of speaking ? "

The stranger made no reply ; therefore
Esse, clasping her child more closely to
her heart, and desperately rallying her fast
expiring courage, while her upturned face

was as white as winter's snow, repeated her
question —

** May I ask, to whom I have the pleasure
of speaking ? "

The answer came fiercely and quickly now.

*' To whom you have the pleasure of
speaking, Esse Greatorix — ah ! — it is long
years, since last I stood face to face with
kith and kin of yours. Those, with whom I
so stood, are dead, and I have been far away.
An avenging scourge drove me forth. I
have frozen with misery beneath the cutting
blasts of northern winds — shivered with despair
under the biting, nipping influence of
eastern gales — pined with impatience when
balmy breezes blew from western shores, and
sickened, with the nauseous loathing of deceit,
when southern skies were fair, and southern
suns were bright, but — through misery, despair,
impatience, and loathing, none cared
what I suffered — who I was — whither I went,,
or whether I returned."

Growing every instant more terrified and
more agitated, Esse said, faintly —

** Will you kindly tell me your name, and
your reason for coming here ? "

The hollow cheeks of the stranger flushed
deeply, while, her sunken eyes gleamed with a
wild defiance, as she answered vehemently —

*' My name is — Alice Greatorix — and — I
seek my husband."

''Ahce Greatorix," wailed Esse; '^ oh !
hush, hush — do not say it, before my baby
• — ah ! do not say it, before her ! Wait only,
until I have taken her away — oh ! do not say
it before my baby — my little one."

The stranger essayed to speak, but Esse
prevented her with the same passionate,
and piteous entreaty —

Oh ! do not say it before my baby — do
not let her hear it."

** Do not say it before your baby," returned
the stranger, in hollow, mournful accents ;
*' I was told, before I came hither, that you

were generous as well as beautiful. I was
but mocked, It seems. Did any, I wonder,
ever speak the truth to me ? And do you
seek to make me feel my sin to be so great
that, even my voice, you fear, will sully the
purity of your newly-born infant ? Ah ! Esse
Greatorix ! when just now, you strove to hide
me from her, with your small white hands,
you dealt me a deadlier blow than the
mightiest giant has it in his power to deal ;
while the heaviest curses, could not bow me
down so low, with shame, as did those few
words which your trembling, girlish lips
uttered but a short moment since. Do not
take your child away ; I will not harm her.
Remember, that I once laid In Innocence
upon my mother's breast ; as your baby Is
now, so, In that blest time, was I."

The voice of the speaker faltered. In the
pause which ensued Esse staggered to her
feet, but sank powerlessly back again upon
her sofa.

'' Is compassion altogether foreign to your
nature?" the stranger asked, interpreting the
movement made by Esse Into a denial of
the request that the baby should not be removed.


'' You misunderstand me. I did not
mean — " Esse began, but she was not
allowed to proceed.

Did not mean ! A murderer means to
kill, I suppose, when he takes his fatal aim —
fires his fatal shot ; a thief means to steal, I
suppose, when he despoils his neighbour of
his goods. Just so, have you, in your self-righteousness,
ground your heel upon the
fallen neck of one, who is desolate, when
you are blessed — poor, when you are rich.
Did not mean to kill — did not mean to steal
did not mean to crush. Bah ! — do not
stoop to talk such nonsense."

How can you call me, either rich or
blessed?" moaned Esse, in tones which,
in their despairing sadness, formed a marked

contrast to the alternate scorn and excitement
that stirred in the voice of her companion.


'' Listen, child, and I will tell you. All
women, are blessed, who are strong in the love
of husband, relative, and friend. All women,
are rich, who are safe and honoured in their
homes. Thank the great God above for
these mercies, and as you thank Him for the
good gifts which He has granted to yourself,
pray Him for His mercy upon those who have
forfeited the like blessings. Yes ; pray all
the more earnestly, because they may not —
dare not — pray themselves."

Again the lip of the speaker quivered with
uncontrollable emotion, while, Esse looked
with speechless wonder, upon the tall figure
which towered like an avenging spirit above
her.

At last, with a stifled sob in her sweet, low
voice, Esse said —

I have been very ill. My baby is only a

VOL. III. R

few weeks old. I have been troubled, as well
as ill, so — so — I am afraid that I cannot talk
to you any more now. I am very sorry,
but " —

You do not come of a chicken-hearted
race, or I should fear that you were going to
faint," interrupted the stranger. '' Give your
baby to me ; you will be better soon."

But, motioning her away with horror, Esse
shrank back to the farthest extremity of her
couch.

I understand. You will not let me touch
your child, and you wish me to leave you,"
was the quick reply to the gesture made by
Esse. " But I cannot go yet. I cannot go
from you, until you have given me some information
respecting my husband. I have
travelled far with the hope of obtaining some
intelligence, however vague, about him. You
can have no motive, save that which is dictated
by a harsh, relentless cruelty, for withholding
from me what you know of him.

With a woman's grief, I plead to you for a
woman's mercy. Oh! Hasten to me, while I cry
aloud and ask, where is now my husband ? "

Your — husband ! " gasped Esse.

'* My husband' returned the stranger
calmly.

Have pity ! It is I, who must plead to
you for mercy, not you to me," moaned
Esse. '* It is I, who must cry aloud and ask,
Where is now my husband ? ' — not you,"
And then her pent-up anguish could no
longer be restrained, her misery no longer
kept back. '^ Go to him," she cried, in heartrending
accents, ** go to him — to your husband
; tell him that you have been here — that
you have seen me — that you have seen us."
She pointed piteously to the baby on her lap,
as she spoke. " Tell him that, there is no
one, upon all the earth so forlorn, so miserable,
as we are — and — be patient with me —
in another day, he and this place, will be all
your own."

Esse grew each moment more excited and
incoherent, but a strong grasp was suddenly
laid upon her trembling shoulder, while a firm
voice said —

^'Esme Greatorix, calm yourself. There is
some terrible mistake between us. Who
knows, but that, in His mercy, God will let
me do the good work of clearing it away.
What misery, can there be between you and
your husband, of which I should tell him ?
Go to him yourself, lay your sweet head upon
his breast, nestle In his arms and from out of
their strong, true clasp, whisper to him of
your woe. And, as surely as the Great One
above gives His peace to the righteous, so
surely, will your husband give comfort to you."
'' Mr. Maxwell, and the ' Roll-call,' " murmured
Esse, the first faint streaks of a
dawning hope lighting her wan face with a
tinge of colour ; while she nervously laid her
fingers upon the arm of the hand which still
grasped her shoulder.

The soft touch was shaken somewhat
roughly off, as the kneeling figure started
to her feet, and for a few moments afterwards
no sound was heard throughout the
bough-girt enclosure. Then Esse, partly to
herself and partly to her companion, whispered
again, " Mr. Maxwell and the ' Roll-call.'
"

*' Poor child, poor child ! " said the stranger,
while she earnestly scanned the young face,
before her, with its tear-dimmed eyes and
sorrowful expression. ** Poor child, then you
have heard my ' Roll Call ' ; you know my
shame — my sin — my story — and," she added
with touching gentleness, '' you thought that
your husband was my husband ; or rather,
you thought, that your husband's cousin and
your husband were one and the same person.
Both are named Arthur — both Greatorix —
but — ah, God, how different!"

In her earnestness the weird-looking
woman, who thus passionately addressed

Esse, sank once more upon her knees, as she
continued —

Your husband, he, who in the merry days
of happy youth we laughingly nicknamed
Arthur the Colossal,' is one who has wronged
no woman, and injured no man ; one who protects
the weak, and who has, ere now, kept
the betrayed from plunging into the dark
abyss of utter despair. His child will inherit
a blessing for its father's sake ; and you," she
added softly, *' you, who are his wife, need
ask no other blessing, since such a lot is
yours."

The words rang out softly, slowly, solemnly,
and distinctly as the tolling of a far distant
knell, yet, to the ears of Esse, they were
sweeter than the most gladsome peal of joy-telling
bells. At every stroke, a woe was
buried. At every echo, fresh hopes took
birth. Mistakes rolled away. Truth was no
longer clouded. Circumstances ceased to
shine, with a false and borrowed light.

And more !

The dread secrets were known to be
delusions — the haunting skeletons were forever
laid to rest — the mystery of the '^ Roll-air'
was a mystery no more.

But not all at once could the care-laden
mind of Esse be brought to comprehend the
glad change which had arisen for her. Eyes,
which have been long accustomed to darkness,
cannot all at once rejoice in the sweet
light of Heaven. Slowly, and by degrees,
must the dazed sight be led back to the full
enjoyment of sunshine and brightness.

Just so was it with Esse. The transition
from grief to happiness was too great to be
quickly realised ; the reaction was too overpowering
for immediate relief.

Joy came so fast towards her, that she was
half afraid of it. Its gay robes dazzled her ;
its rapid airy motion turned her giddy.

Very gently did the impulsive bearer of
the good tidings — the wild, passionate writer

of the '' Roll-call " deal with Esse ; — very
gently did she support her shaking, half-fainting
form, repeating, meanwhile, those glad
words which made surer and more sure that
joy which, Esse had been too tremblingly
timid, to go forth and meet.

When at last the truth stood clearly out,
and might no longer be mistaken, Esse gave
a cry of great rejoicing, and, burying her
face in her hands, wept, for very happiness, as
though her heart were breaking. For a few
moments, her companion watched her in
silence. Then she softly stepped from beneath
the screening branches of the tree,
and Esse was left alone.

Ah ! what a self-communing followed, and,
when Alice returned, what a history there
was to tell — what a history to hear !

Beginning from the night upon which she
had waylaid Arthur in the gardens at Brash-leigh
Manor, Alice rapidly explained her
reason, not only for this action, but also for

shaving persisted In accompanying him to
Gibraltar. Next, she told of the assumed
name of '' Royston " which she bore. Then
one by one, each in its turn, the horrors of
the " Roll-call " were passionately touched
upon, until in conclusion, Alice said —

I never knew until about three months
ago, either, that my husband was in England,
or, that he had adopted the name of ' George
Maxwell.' He wrote me several threatening
letters concerning our marriage certificate,
but the post-mark which they bore was
always that of Gibraltar ; while the signature
to them was always that of ' Royston : ' the
name by which he and I had passed in other
countries. The certificate in question I sent
to your Uncle Ralph, with my ' Roll Call.'
As soon as I knew that my husband had
-changed the name of Royston for that of
Maxwell, I wrote to tell Arthur — I mean your
Arthur, of the discovery, and he came to mein
London ; it was the day, I think, upon

which you were taken ill. Since then, I have
written many times here, but I have never
received any answers. That is why I have
come. I have heard that my husband —
George Maxwell — call him what you will —
has been seen often in this neighbourhood.
And so I came, both with the hope of definitely
finding out his whereabouts, and also to
give warning that, he has sworn, by fair means
or by foul, to possess himself of the only
proof, which, God help me, I can give, that I
am his wife. I thought, when no answers
came to the letters which I directed here,
that at last your husband had deserted me —
that even his generous patience was exhausted,
and so, as a last resource, I asked
for you, determined to throw myself upon
your kindness."

Then Esse took up the thread of explanation,
and told, of the finding of the " Roll-call,"
of her agony, of the audacity of George Maxwell,
of her subsequent peril, of the birth of

her child, and finally, of that illness which
had befallen Arthur in Cornwall, which still
detained him, there, and which accounted for
his silence towards Alice.

Side by side sat the two women. Bitter
tears dropped from the eyes of one ; while
returning dimples hovered, ready to break into
smiles, about the beautiful mouth of the other.

** And there was no paper — no certificate
in the ' Roll-call?' " asked AHce, presently.

*^ No ; nothing of the sort," returned Esse,
and then a sudden thought flashing upon her,
she enquired, '* Why did Uncle Ralph address
the ' Roll-air to me?"

A burning blush spread itself over the face
of Alice. For a moment a sullen air of wild
defiance mingled with the blush, and she
looked fiercely at Esse. Perhaps, the sweet
and innocent face disarmed her. Anyhow, her
mood changed suddenly, for it was with the
gentle tones of sorrow and penitence, rather
than with those of anger, that she replied —

Because, I am the sister, of your sweet
Aunt Lily. Yes ; Esse Greatorix, you may
well turn away — I am the sister, of the first wife
of good Ralph Grant — and more — I am the
sister of your own dead mother. Do you
wonder now, that the ' Roll-call ' was addressed
to you ? Not into the hands of
strangers — not into the hands of the second
mistress of Brashleigh Manor, did its good,
kind master will that, at his death, the written
testimony to my disgrace should fall. Aye !
not to the ears of strangers, not to the tongue
of his second wife would he trust the secret
of my shame. His love for you, his love for
his lost Lily, his love for your husband was
too great — his pity for me was too vast. Do
you understand now, Esse Greatorix, why the
tale of your aunt's misdoing was safer with
you than with others ? Do you understand,
why your husband sought to help me to
right, who have so suffered for my wrong —
ah ! do you understand, all that has well-nigh

broken your heart, and are you happy ? If
so, if I have been permitted, even at this
late hour, to do some slight good for you —
some slight service for Arthur's wife, I shall
go on my way less wretched, and less utterly
despairing. God has not quite forsaken those
to whom He deigns to give work ; no matter
how little ! The world is all wrong. Too
much love, it seems, can bring misery, as well
as too little. They tried to hide the existence
of your runaway aunt, and of all particulars
concerning her disgrace, too carefully
from your knowledge. But that is over now.
I must wait until your Arthur is well, and then
he will try to find for me that certificate,
which should have been enclosed in the
Roll-call ' — that certificate, I mean, for
which my Arthur hazarded his midnight visit
to you. Without that paper, he cannot go
further from me — cannot erect an impassable
barrier between us. With it — ah ! me — I could
never hope to look upon his face again ! "

When Alice ceased speaking, Esse strove
with many gentle words to persuade her to
enter the house. But the kindly endeavours
of Esse were fruitless. Without partaking
of either rest or refreshment, Alice insisted
upon going her way.

When the last fold of her dark dress was
lost to sight, Esse lifted her baby high in
the air, and holding it out before her, cried
joyously —

Oh, baby, baby, what a terrible mistake we
have been making ; and, what will the father
say, when he knows how silly we have been ! "

Two or three hours later on in the day,
Rachel Tritton was to be seen impatiently
waiting at the end of the avenue leading upto
the entrance of the house. She was looking
remarkably bright and cheery, as, from
time to time, she opened the lodge gate,
and after stepping forward to gaze down the
road beyond, returned to an open window, by
which, Esse sat, evidently for the purpose

•of receiving information with regard to
the outlook, which Rachel was engaged in
making.

'' You will be tired to death, dear Rachel ;
if you keep trotting backwards and forwards
like this. You have had a long journey, and
it is really quite a pilgrimage from the house
to the end of the avenue," said Esse, after
this same distance had been traversed several
times by the energetic little woman whom she
thus addressed.

'' I will only go this once more. If I cannot
see anything of him this time, I promise
to come and settle myself down at the window
with you," replied Rachel, and before
Esse ■ could offer further remonstrance,
Rachel was again half way on her road.

The reader, doubtless, will have guessed
already that the person, for whose arrival
Rachel was thus anxious, was Lord Oakdene.
Perseverance does not often go unrewarded.
In this instance, that of Rachel Tritton did not.

She had scarcely taken her stand for a final
gaze, in the direction which the expected
arrival must take, before a dark speck, appeared
in the distance, which gradually
developed into the outline of a vehicle of
some description, and finally into that of a
dog-cart containing two figures. Rachel
had quick eyes. It did not take her long,
to make sure that one of the figures was
Lord Oakdene. Before he could reach
her, a smile of welcome was beaming over
her face ; a smile which, fairly broke into
a gentle laugh of delight, as he sprang to
the ground and shook her warmly by the

hand.

'' I am awfully glad to find you here. Miss
Twitton," he began eagerly, and then, catching
an expression upon her face which he
had by no means expected to see there, he
checked himself, uncertain how to proceed.

'rand I am as pleased to be here, as, you
are pleased to see me," she answered gleefully.

Then with another soft laugh, she
added, " I have good news to tell you'*

Lord Oakdene regarded her with as much
blank astonishment as a peer of the realm,
or any other well-bred individual, could allow
to become patent. From the time when he
had left Esse until the present, he had been
in the most frantic state of excitement and
anxiety. Notwithstanding all his honest distress
at the idea of the scheme which Esse
had unfolded to him, he had, as she had requested,
striven faithfully to aid her. Scarcely
allowing himself time either for food or for
sleep, he had driven madly from end to end ,
of town ; and from the ofhce of one house
agent to that of another. The bundle of
papers, which he carried in his hand, attested
the zeal with which he had laboured.

Glancing merrily at them, Rachel said —
'' I know what those are, but they will not
be wanted'*

*' Huwwah ! " shouted Lord Oakdene, and
VOL. III. S

he sent the packet spinning into the air, and
then caught it with the dexterity of a
Chinese juggler.

Rachel was rather taken aback, by this
noisy, as well as active, demonstration of
delight, but she continued, only rather less
merrily than before —

'^ The storm has passed over; all is again
calm and bright."

Lord Oakdene looked steadily at her for a
moment, as though half doubting his sense
of hearing, and then he literally danced a pas-seul
upon the gravel before her. After which,
he thrust the papers into his pockets, and
seizing her by both hands, he shook them
so heartily and for so long, that, she began to
wonder, whether he expected her to perform
a terpsichorean feat with him, by way of a
finale to his previous evolutions.

Rachel had not seen Esse, in her dark
hour ; Lord Oakdene had. The joy of
Rachel, therefore was more moderate than

that of Lord Oakdene. The storm was over ;
but It Is one thing to be told how the thunder
roared, and the angry Lightnings flashed, and
another thing altogether to have been an eye
and an ear witness to the furious elements.

The pleasure of Lord Oakdene was thoroughgoing,
In Its sincerity. To see Esse bowled
low with grief was a bitter trial to him. To
think of her as separated from her husband,
with her name bandied from one idle mouth to
another in coarse and vulgar comment, was,
even In anticipation, more bitter still. So,
out of evil, came this good. Henceforth,
Lord Oakdene wasted no more vain repining,
over the wedding which he had hitherto
looked upon as a cruel death-blow to his
happiness.

The turn which affairs had taken, so far as
they had been made known to him by Rachel
Tritton, was an inexpressible relief to him.
Indeed, It seemed, as If action of some kind
alone afforded him sufficient outlet to his

feelings, for no sooner had he relinquished
the hands of Rachel, than he dived into his
pockets for the now useless documents, and
again sent them whirling Into the air. Little
Rachel laughed heartily. A prolonged
pirouette however, as they were recaptured,
appeared at last to have carried off some of
her companion's superabundant satisfaction.
Dropping suddenly into a quiet pace at her
side, he said —

*' I am desperately sorry, Miss Twitton,
to behave so like a lunatic In your presence ;
but I have been in such a desperate fix, and
so awfully perplexed, I " —

• Here, he stopped abruptly, as the thought
occurred to him that he might possibly be on
the eve of relating more, to Rachel Tritton,
than Esse would desire.

Rachel, understanding how It was, hastened
to relieve him, so far as she could, from his
dilemma.

** I do not know very much about all this,

Lord Oakdene ; but Mrs. Greatorlx tells me
that her unhappiness arose entirely from a
mistake of her own. Mr. Greatorix knows
nothing whatever about it, and Mrs. Greatorix
is longing for his return tomorrow, so that
she may make her confession to him, and receive
his forgiveness for, what she is pleased
to call, her extreme foolishness."

'' Upon my honour," returned Lord Oak-done,
emphatically, '' it is really, most remarkable,
but, all along, I thought there must
he a mistake somewhere. It was too dreadful,
to be true."

By this time Rachel and Lord Oakdene
had reached the door of the house, where
they were met by Esse, who, between a
smile and a sigh, said shyly —

'' If ever I should really need the help of
you, my two kind friends, I am afraid you will
both think, that I am only again crying 'Wolf!'
and so will refuse to listen to me."

CREMATED.

At the appointed time, Arthur Greatorix
returned to Thorndyke. A few days afterwards
he carried his wife and child back with
him to Cornwall. But, before he did so,
Esse had told to him the story of the " Roll-call."


Nestling in his arms, she had whispered,
now with sobs and then with smiles, the
tale of her grievous mistake ; and, as he
listened, he had but kissed back the tears
which would have fallen from her true eyes.

Restored health quickly followed upon renewed
happiness. There was little trace,
therefore, of the suffering through which they
had both passed, to be found upon the face
of either Esse or Arthur, as, some three
weeks after their arrival in Cornwall, they

were seated upon a rock, with the cloudless
heavens all blue above their heads, and with
the calm sea gently rolling rippling waves to
their feet.

After nearly losing Arthur's pet walking
stick, and quite drenching her own sunshade,
in her fruitless endeavours to catch the pieces
of seaweed which now and again were drifted
within her reach, Esse suddenly declared
that it was too warm for even the slight exertion
in which she was engaged. Her husband
offered no dissent to her opinion. Whereupon,
after a short silence, she produced two
books from out of a small basket, and, handing
one of the volumes to him, proposed
that they should 'get on" with their reading.


Arthur was evidently very docile. Without
a word, and with only a lazy smile by way of
thanks, he took the book and did as he was
bidden.

The "getting on" with the literature, however,

had not made much progression before
Esse, dabbling one hand in a deliciously
cool miniature bay of salt water, which, full of
clinging shells and other natural beauties,
sparkled close to her, said thoughtfully —

I wish, Arthur, we could hit upon some
plan to cheer poor Aunt Alice ! She is so
very, very wretched, it makes my heart ache
to think of her. Is Mr. Maxwell, or Mr.
Royston, or your namesake, for really I never
know by which of the three names to call
him, so desperately wicked, that he cannot
be persuaded to turn over a new leaf, and be
kind to her ? "

'' Confound him ! " ejaculated Arthur, " I
firmly believe, that he is the greatest rogue
unhung. He has sloped off to France now.
I only hope that Alice will not be infatuated
enough to follow him. I know one little
woman," continued Arthur, with a provokingly
sly glance at Esse ; ** who would be far more
likely to run away from, instead of to rua

after, a much less barbarous husband than
my ne'er-do-weel cousin is."

** Don't, Arthur ! " interrupted Esse,
splashing her fingers more vigorously than
before in the miniature bay, and stooping low,
so that the broad brim of her straw hat might
hide the colour which the words of her liege
lord had called to her face.

Arthur laughed, and bending forward he
drew her head back until he could look fairly
upon her crimsoned cheeks.

'' Don't," she repeated, '' now that we have
cremated that dreadful ' Roll-call,' it is not
fair, to remind me how stupid I was about it.
You said that cremation was such a splendid
idea for it, because it meant complete destruction,
annihilation, or something of that
sort. But I call this, not only preserving its
ashes, but throwing them at me also."

Darling ! " murmured Arthur, affectionately,
** I did not for one moment mean to
remind you of unpleasant matters. You

were not to blame, my dear little wife. That
precious document, which I shall always call
the must not kiss-and-tell story,' would have
convicted me to the entire satisfaction of any
twelve of my enlightened countrymen, unless,
indeed, the knowledge of the name and existence
of my cousin could have been brought
to my rescue. It was, in fact, a clear case of
circumstantial evidence against me. How
could you know about my cousin, when I had
carefully kept all mention of him from you ?
And again, how could you know of your Aunt
Alice, when your poor Uncle Ralph had, with
equal care, hidden her existence from you?
Do not blame yourself, my darling. The mistake
began, when I went to Gibraltar without
telling you everything. I ought to have
stuck to my text that, there should be no
secrets, between us. But, you were so young,
and so innocent, upon my life I did not know
how to explain to you, or in what form to put
the evil doings, either of your relative or of

my own. And then your Uncle Ralph backed
me up so completely in my cowardice about
it. He had a morbid dread, which amounted
to a positive horror, of anything being revealed
to you that could cast the faintest
shadow over the memory of your mother and
of your Aunt Lily. They were, of course, in
no way responsible for the actions of their unfortunate
sister, but this reflection had no
weight with your Uncle Ralph. I feel persuaded,
that the papers, of which he spoke to
you before his death, were none other than
the 'Roll-calls'"

** Poor, dear. Uncle Ralph ! he was always
so anxious for our marriage," said Esse, reflectively.


"Yes, dear, I like to remember that he was
so : the intimacy which existed between your
Aunt Lily and myself, drew us first together
your uncle and myself, I mean. I grew
up, you know, almost as a brother to the three
pretty sisters, the eldest of whom became

your mother, darling ; the second was your
Aunt Lily, and the third, alas ! is the unhappy
Alice of whom we are speaking. You have
doubtless heard already that your father was
also a great friend of mine ; but, you have
not heard, I am sure, that it was I, who, in
an unlucky hour, introduced my scapegrace
cousin to Alice. I have never forgiven myself
for inadvertently being the cause of their
becoming acquainted with each other, and
although I could not possibly foresee events,
it has always seemed to me, that for this
reason, Alice has an especial claim upon my
sympathy ; while the death of your mother,
and then of your Aunt Lily, made me doubly
tender-hearted about her. I cannot tell what
has become of that unfortunate marriage certificate,
which I strongly suspect to be all
right and legal, or that precious ci-devant
George Maxwell ' would not bestow so much
pains upon striving to possess himself of it.
Would you like to have another hunt for it,

dearest, upon the chance of again stumbling
upon Lord Oakdene ? '*

Oh, Arthur ! " interrupted Esse reproachfully.


'' Well, never mind, little wife ; you need
not blush about it. I am so awfully happy ta
have you all strong and well again, that I
can't help chaffing, you know ! Oakdene is a
good fellow and I don't want to be hard upon
him for finding out, as well as myself, what a
first-rate sort of a darling you are. I hope
he will pick up an out-and-out nice wife
some of these days, which, is rather generous
of me, I think, when all things are
taken into consideration. I used to think
la belle had a chance, but since she has
engaged herself to a man in the artillery,
I suppose she has given Oakdene up asa
bad job. If I had not taken myself off to
Gibraltar, as I said before, no end of mischief
would have been avoided. Mrs. Grant
would have lost that grand handle against

me which my unexplained absence gave
her; and you would never have been bothered
with all that rubbish about the voices in
the grass-path, the pale lady, the letter, and
Heaven only knows how many hundred things
besides ; while, poor Oakdene would have
borne in mind that there was in existence
such a person as your humble servant, and
consequently, would not have lost his head so
hopelessly as he did."

His heart, you mean," interposed Esse,
merrily.

'' Both, I think," laughed Arthur, '' but,"
he continued, '' talking of Gibraltar, Esse,
you have no idea what a difficult woman Alice
is to manage. She ran me down in a most
determined manner, in the gardens at Brash-leigh.
I tried not to let your uncle know that
she had returned to England. There was no
good in worrying him about it. But, after
that, * come into the garden,' scene, I was
obliged to tell him all about it, and when I

did so, he counselled that I should go off and
not stop, to kiss my darling, before I went."

'* But, what did you think you were going
to do, when you got to Gibraltar, Arthur."

I thought, darling, that I was going to
find my cousin, and, finding him, that I should
bring him back to his wife, and to better
things."

*' And you failed ? "

'''' In toto. In the first place, the individual
in question was not in Gibraltar at all, but
had dodged over here. In the next, I know
now that if we had found him, my endeavours
would have been worse than useless. Alice,
you know, would go with me. Her disappointment,
as well as her distress, was quite pitiable."


'poor Aunt Alice!"

'' Yes ; one cannot help feeling sincerely
sorry for her. And yet, sometimes, she has
put me into an awful fix. She came to Brighton
once, and took a house close to where

you and Mrs. Grant were. It was quite an
accident upon the part of Alice. I stood it
for a couple of days, and then it got too hot
for me. I did not want the whole matter to
come to light, just at that particular time,
and when, one evening, you told me that you
had found a pocket-handkerchief, of which,
by the way, I don't know how I became
possessed, bearing the mystic name of * Alice
I thought it was time that something should
be done. So I went to poor Alice and told
her to whom she was such a near neighbour.
The information was enough. Shrinking
from discovery and recognition, until to a
certain extent her name, if not her fame, was
cleared, she left Brighton the next day. She
is so impulsive, I half dreaded that she would
make herself known to you, and then, what a
blow up of excitement, and so on, we should
have had with Mrs. Grant ! However, Alice
had no such intention. I only wish that I
could see a chance of brighter days for her.

But since she cannot rest contented without
her rascal of a husband, and I am perfectly
certain that no woman could, by any possibility
whatever, be happy with him, I do
not exactly see from whence the wished-for
brightness is to come."

'what motive had he for coming to me,
that night, in such an impertinent manner ? "
asked Esse.

''To frighten you out of the ' Roll-cal'
and the marriage certificate, both of which
he believed to be in your keeping. I had it
all out of him, the day before we came down
here. The details of a Divorce Court are
utterly unfit for your ears, darling, and to tell
you full particulars, concerning the life,
motives, and actions of my charming namesake,
would too closely resemble such details.
Therefore, you must rest contented with the
knowledge that he plotted a most diabolical
piece of rascality, with regard to Alice and
myself. He makes rather a boast of it than

VOL. III. T

otherwise, only regretting its failure. The
first part of his plan was to ask you simply,
as a favour, for a sight of those documents,
and upon an unsuccessful Issue to this arrangement,
you were to be frightened, coaxed, or
cajoled Into acquiescence, by a shameful
story about, as I said before, Alice and
myself. To aid him In this villany, he
made a tool of Mrs. Grant, drawing all
sorts of Information out of her about my
absence, the ways of the house, and soon.
Upon my word, he deserves penal servitude
for life for frightening you, nearly to
death, as he did."

'' He would not have frightened me half so
much, if, I had not just finished reading the
Roll-call,' when he appeared," put In Esse.

No, perhaps not ! That was a most unfortunate
circumstance, for you. But, you
know, It was particularly lucky for him, as
it gave your mind just the colouring which
he wanted for the reception of his abominable

lies. It was well that I appeared when I did,
for God only knows what more he would have
said to you. Alice made a great mistake when
she informed him that she had forwarded the
Roll-call,' certificate, and all, to Brashleigh ;
and, Mrs. Grant, put the finishing stroke to
the mischief, by asserting that all the private
papers which previously belonged to your
Uncle Ralph had passed into your possession.
Then the cabinet, in which you discovered
the ' Roll Call,' was a sort of Carlesford heirloom.
Your Aunt AHce had stuck to it
through many of her vicissitudes, and only
parted company with it, because, she wished
you to become possessed of it, at your
marriage. I do not rightly know at what
precise time your Uncle Ralph received it,
but I conclude that, when he did so, he removed
the ' Roll-call ' from the escritoire
in his old study, to the cabinet in question.
Somehow, when Mrs. Grant imported the
latter article to Thorndyke, I had a suspicion

that it might possibly contain some mysterious
revelations, and as our little one was so
soon to be born, you know, darling, I confess
I was not altogether sorry to hear that the
key could not be found. A little extra delay,
with regard to an investigation of the contents
of the cabinet, I thought, would prove
beneficial rather than otherwise. But, in
this supposition, as it turned out, I made a
most awful blunder. Of course, my cousin
knew all about the cabinet, and, what with
wheedling information out of Mrs. Grant,
cross-questioning servants — bribery and corruptions
of all kinds as well as sneaking into
houses like any burglar, there was scarcely
anything unknown to him which he cared to
know. He ran little or no risk of any serious
consequences to himself, you see, at Thorn-dyke.
If there had been a discovery and a
row, he would have plumped out his relationship
to me and so made it all square. Upon
my word, he is a living warning to all families,

not to indulge in the senseless practice of
bestowing the same Christian name upon
more than one of its members in a generation
! "

'* I often think, how strange it was that you
never happened to meet him when he was
going about as * Mr. Maxwell.' It was very
daring of him," said Esse.

No, darling ; I don't think it was, in
reality. The only person he was really afraid
of meeting was his wife, and of that he knew
there was no chance. He has played at hide-and-seek
long enough to be sharp at the
game. At the worst, he would but have acknowledged
his identity with some sort of
swagger. You saw how it was, when at last I
did bowl him out. There is nothing to be
done, with a man of his stamp. He would
slip through the noose with a bow and a
smile, I verily believe, even if the hangman's
rope were about his neck. He has no remorse
— no feeling — nothing in fact, to which

one can appeal. If I were your Aunt Alice, I
should leave him to his own devices, and let
him marry whomsoever he felt inclined, so
long as he left me in peace'

'aunt Alice loves him too well, for that,"
said Esse, so sorrowfully that Arthur remarked
quickly —

Now, Esse, darling, we will dismiss the
painful subject of the 'Roll-call' from our
minds. It brought us great and grievous
trouble, but it might have been infinitely
worse. Oh ! darling, I often think, how terrible
it would have been, if you had been
taken away from me with that horrible mistake
between us unexplained."

Esse made no reply. For a few moments
something, which very closely resembled teardrops,
stood in her eyes. Brushing them
away before they fell, she said —

One question more, Arthur dear, and I
have done. Why does Mr. Maxwell want so
very badly to find that certificate?"

*' Because, little wife, he wishes to destroy
it and then to marry again. While that may
at any moment turn up against him, he hesitates
to drive your Aunt Alice quite to
desperation. There is a certain unpleasant
punishment in store for those who, contrary
to the law of our land, espouse a second wife
while the first is still alive. Of this punishment,
he seems to entertain a wholesome
horror, if of none other. Nevertheless, if it
were not that your, or rather our. Aunt
AHce, shrinks from anything and everything
which might institute an enquiry into
the particulars of her own life, we might have
settled him long ago. He knows this, and
he is cur enough to take every possible advantage
of it. The whole affair is frightfully
complicated, you see, Esse. We can only
try, by small acts of kindness, to soothe a
Httle the desolate life which, I fear, is before
Aunt Alice. It was a very happy thought
upon your part, dear, to propose Nellie as an

attendant to her. The girl is so devoted to
you, that she will, if only for your sake, serve
her mistress faithfully."

'' It was Rachel Tritton's bright idea, not
mine," interposed Esse ; " I only carried it
out."

'' Ah ! " returned Arthur, reflectively, *' what
a heap of thoughts are suggested to one's
mind, by the contrast between the lives of
Rachel Tritton and Aunt Alice. I have often
pondered over it, and your mention of Rachel
Tritton, just now, put it into my head again.
When we want a good wholesome lesson we
have only to think of it — have we dear? "

'' I hope, baby will grow up like Rachel,"
said Esse, by way of answer.

In all but her experience of sorrow," suggested
Arthur, with a little fatherly anxiety in
the tone of his voice.

'' Ah, of course, I meant that, ?nd " —

"All right, little wife," interrupted Arthur,
with a merry laugh. Then he continued,

** When we have got over Mrs. Grant's next
visit, I hope Rachel Tritton will come to us.
By the way, Esse, I think we had better
keep our own counsel with Mrs. Grant respecting
her late attache Mr. George Maxwell
— what says the wife ? "

'' The wife says, yes — most decidedly,
yes," answered Esse ; '' dear Uncle Ralph's
secret shall still be kept, if I can help to
keep it. Of course, to explain anything relative
to your cousin would of necessity
expose the sorrow, and, I suppose I must
say it, the sin of Aunt Alice."

'' Yes, dear, one cannot blink it. There is
no other name for the fatal leap which she so
madly took ; but, God forbid, that we should
judge her harshly."

And may He keep us, Arthur, dearest,
always — all our lives — from passing either
unjust or harsh judgment upon anyone,"
whispered Esse very gravely, her thoughts
reverting from Alice to her own wrong reason-vol.

III. W

ing with regard to Arthur ; *' it Is so difficult'
she stammered shyly, *so difficult, to argue
fairly when " —

** When, you have it in black and white — ina
' Roll-call,' " interrupted Arthur, gaily.

There was a short silence between the
husband and wife, which was broken by
Arthur, who, speaking again in the same
light-hearted manner, said —

'' If in days to come, Esse, you should
ever again withdraw yourself from me as
though I were an ogre, I shall whisper to
you, not — ' remember love, the feast of roses'
but — remember love, the ' Roll-call.' "

Then stepping from their rocky throne,
they wandered hand-in-hand along the grand
sea-shore.

THE END.
