Florence IV! Ararat.

vel

W^M

\w* I

p,

m

BY

Florence MAEEYAT,

AUTHOR OF

LOVE'S Conflict"' " MY SISTER THE ACTRESS," "GENTLEMAN AND
COURTIER," " A CRO\V r N OF SHAME," ETC., ETC.

IN THREE VOL Uses.

VOL. T.

LONDON:

F. V. WHITE & CO.,
31, SOUTHAMPTON Street, Strand, W.C.

1889.

KELLY AND CO., MIDDLE MILL, KINGSTON-ON-THAMES;

AND Gate STREET, LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS W.C.



I

8-3 3

CONTENTS.

CHAP. PAGE

I. — "Unexpected Visitors" . 1

II. — Agnes Prudhomme . 27

III. — On the Ramparts . . .47

IV. — A Warning 71





144
VIII.— Mrs. Lorrimer • 168

IX.— A New Sister . ■ • . 1S>4

3 X.— The Earl of Hilton . •-'•'



Voir Beady, the Seventh Edition of
"ARMY SOCIETY." By JOHN STRANGE WINTER, Author of
Booties' Baby." Cloth silt, fis. : also, picture boards, '2s.

Also, Now Ready, in Cloth Gilt, 2s. Gd. each.

GARRISON GOSSIP. Gathered in Blankhampton. By John

Strange Winter. Also picture boards, 2*.
A SIEGE BABY. By the same Author. Also picture boards, 2*.
BEAUTIFUL JIM. By the same Author.
IN THE SHIRES. By Sir Sandal II. Roberts, Bart.
THE GIRL IN THE BROWN HABIT. A Sporting Novel. By

Mr, Edward Kennard. Also picture boards, 2*.
BY WOMAN'S WIT. By Mrs. ALEXANDER, Author of "The

Wooing O't." Also picture boards, 2s.
MONA'S CHOICE. By the same AUTHOR.
KILLED IN THE OPEN. By Mrs. Edward Kennard. Also

picture boards, 2s.
IN A GRASS COUNTRY. By Mrs. H. LOVETT-CaMBRON.

Also picture boards. 2s.
A DEVOUT LOVER. By the same AUTHOR.
THE COST OF A LIE. By the same Autiiok.
THE OUTSIDER, B\ Hawley SMART. Also picture boards, 2*.
Tin: MASTER OF RATHKELLY. By the same AUTHOR.
STRAIGHT AS A DIE. By Mrs. Edward Kennard. Also

picture boards, 2s.
TWILIGHT TALES. By Mrs. Edward CbNNARD. Illustrated.
SHE CAME BETWEEN. By Mrs. ALEXANDER Fraser.
THE CRUSADE OF THE 'EXCELSIOR." By Bred Harte. Also

picture boards, 2*.
CURB AND SNAFFLE. By SIR RANDAL 11. EtOBMBTB, Bart.
A REAL GOOD THING. By MM. EDWARD Renard, Also picture

Ii: in Is, Si.
A CRACK COUNTY. By the same AUTHOR.

DBBAM FACES. ByTHBHONBLB. MRS. FBTHBRSTONHAUOH.
THE HONBLB. MRS. VBRBKBR, By the Author of "Molly
Sawn,"

F. V. WHITE & CO.,
31, Southampton Street, Strand, London, W.O.

CHAPTER I.

UNEXPECTED VISITORS."

The old Chateau des Lauriers, now sunk into
decay, was once the pride and glory of the
city in Belgium near which it stood. It was
the country seat of the Barons Van Lippen,
and their children had been born and flourished
there for centuries past. It was surrounded
by a wood of chestnut, beech and
elm trees — a dairy farm was attached to the
estate — large lawns and flower gardens were
laid out in front of it, and a noble avenue
of a quarter of a mile in length led to its
approach. The Chateau itself, a square white
building, with innumerable shuttered windows,
required a great deal of foliage to
vol. i. 1

render it warm in appearance, and there was
a time when no one would have called it cold
or comfortless. But the Van Happens had
degenerated of late years, both in taste and
morals. The last barons of the name found
a country life and the privacy of the Chateau
des Lauriers too monotonous for them, and
had sought distraction in Paris and Vienna
and other fashionable places of amusement,
and their pleasures had cost the family estate
dear. One by one the avenue had lost its
noble trees, until a bare road full of ruts
alone marked the place where it had stood ;
the rest of the timber followed, and the land
was sold for farming purposes, until the poor
old Chateau, shorn of all its leafy honours,
remained naked and forlorn, like a square
white tomb set in the midst of turnip and
potato fields — a monument erected to the
memory of the past. The last inheritor of
the property, Baron Polycarp Van Lippen,
had indeed brought his French wife therein

an attempt to somewhat recruit his shattered
income by living quietly in the country.
But it had proved a failure. The fashionable
Parisian lady had moped and fretted at being
shut out from the world, till she had made
life a misery for him and herself, and four
children had been born and sickened and
died there, which had disgusted Baron Polycarp
with the very name of the place. So
he had left it as soon as he could, and never
returned again. For years it had been delivered
over to the rats, the mildew and the
moth. The gilded and embossed papers hung
in strips from the damp walls, and fungi had
sprouted in the dark cellars and flagged passages.
Not a Belgian could be induced to remain
in the house at night, there were so many
rumours of spoken, i.e., ghosts, being seen
upon the premises, and the gardener Joseph
who kept the keys, and lived on the produce
of the strip of ground still belonging

to the Chateau, was the only person who

1—2

ever went near it. At last the house had
fallen into such disrepair that the agent of
Baron Poly carp Van Lippen wrote him word
that if the place were not seen to, or let,
it would tumble to the ground, and he received
orders in consequence to accept the
first offer made for its occupation. That
offer came from Captain David Grant, a
retired officer from the army, with a large
family and small means. Captain Grant had
done a very foolish thing. Finding it next
to impossible to live upon his pay and keep
a sickly wife and six children, he had left
the profession and commuted for his pension,
hoping to make more by commerce than he
had done by glory. But an army man in
business resembles a fish out of water. He
has been too much accustomed to be thought
for to be able to think for himself, and this
lack of necessity to exercise his mental
muscles renders him unfit to compete in the
race for wealth, where sharpness will at anytime

outwit honesty. Captain Grant shared
the fate of many another retired officer. He.
put his money in a speculation which was
warranted to produce a maintenance for his
family and himself, and lost it all. Luckily
for him his wife had a small income of a
hundred a year, and his friends procured
him the guardianship of a motherless girl to
bring up with his own children — the daughter
of an impecunious sprig of nobility who
paid him a similar sum for her maintenance,
and with these scanty means of subsistence
Captain Grant emigrated with all his belongings
to Eevranches, near which was situated
the tumbledown Chateau des Lauriers, which
could boast of little by that time but the
straggling shrubs from which it derived its
name. He had had possession of it now at
a nominal rent for the last ten years, and
there he had reared a family of six daughters
and a son, and given them some sort of an
education, and kept ten persons and a couple

of servants on an income of two hundred a
year.

Many people will affirm that this is impossible
and ask how it was done, but they
are evidently ignorant of the resources of
Eevranches — Eevranch.es, the refuge of the
needy and the destitute — the home of the
impecunious and out-of-elbows — the sanctuary
of the swindling and the shady. But
even Eevranches cannot produce miracles,
and as the children grew up the living grew
down, until it could only be called existing.
Mrs. Grant reared her chickens, and ducks
and rabbits, and carefully collected the walnuts
and chestnuts that grew on the few
trees left at the back of the Chateau, and
made Joseph yearly plant every inch of spare
ground with potatoes — but the family seldom
tasted butcher's meat, nor any luxury but
what they cultivated themselves. The hon£
stone passages of the Chateau and the oak
staircase and many of the rooms were guiltless

of covering, and the children's rough
shoes clattered up and down the place as if
it were a barrack. Eomanie, the Flemish
maid of all work, who was stupid as an
owl, and obstinate as a mule, and ran home
every night at eight o'clock because she was
too much afraid of the spoken to sleep
at the Chateau, was generally engaged in
washing either the floors or the clothes, or
feeding the live stock, whilst Mrs. Grant
toiled over her paraffin stove, trying hard
to eke out her scanty supplies to satisfy the
demands of twelve hungry mouths. On the
evening when we first see her, she was thus
employed — her face flushed with the heat
and her hands trembling with weakness. She
had been a pretty woman in her day, but
care and anxiety and sickness had aged her
before her time. Her features were livid
and pinched — and her scanty grey hair was
tucked away under a Belgian mob-cap. Her
black gown, brown with use, fell flat upon

her attenuated figure and her back was
bowed beneath the small square shawl pinned
about her shoulders. Her six sturdy girls
should have been taking all the trouble of
housekeeping off her hands by this time,
but they had been allowed to run wild from
their babyhood and never thought of offering
to help their mother in any way ; and
as for her husband Captain Grant — well,
whatever he had lost, he had at heart retained,
as he used proudly to observe, " the
feelings of a gentleman," which meant that
he expected to be waited upon and made as
comfortable as he was in the days of his
prosperity. Poor Mrs. Grant indeed seemed
to take it as a matter of course that she
was to be everybody's servant, from her lord
and master down to her son and heir — her
little Davie, the youngest of her numerous
brood, and the most cherished of them all —
Davie, who was familiarly know to his sisters
as "the Toad," on account of his being so

much spoilt by his mother, and whom she
was bringing up to be more like a girl thana
boy. He sat in the kitchen by her side
now, poring over a picture book, while she
stirred and sighed and fumed over the contents
of the saucepans on the stove, pushing
back her grey hair every now and then to
cool her heated face. It was the close of a
warm day in June, the Feast of Corpus
Christi, and the young people had walked
into Eevranches, the distance of a mile and
a half, and back again, in order to view
the procession. The daughters of the house
were all growing up fast now, the eldest,
Marian, being nineteen and the youngest,
Fanny, eleven, the " Toad ' being the only
child who had been born in the old Chateau.
The scanty crop of grass which grew beneath
the trees behind the house, had been
carefully mown by Joseph that morning,
and heaped up in a little haycock, which it-was
hoped might bring in a few centimes,

and the loud boisterous voices of Xellv and
Elsie might be heard raised in laughter as
they pulled it to pieces again, and pelted
each other with it. Marian was in her bedroom,
renovating an old dress, and Fanny
had run across the potato field to catchup
her sisters Margaret and Emily, who
were strolling about with their arms twined
round each other's waists. Romance had
gone over to the farm, now let to tenants, to
beg for a drop of milk, and there was no
one apparently to help poor Mrs. Grant by
f etching her a little more wood.

Davie, my darling," she said coaxingly to
the little puny six-year-old who sat at the
kitchen table, " go down to the cellar and
fetch mother a few sticks of wood. I can't
leave this saucepan or the potage will burn."

"Xo," replied the spoilt brat, shrugging
his shoulders, " I can't, I'm busy ! Where's
Agnes? Why can't she go?"
"I don't hear Agnes anywhere. I think

she must be out too," said Mrs. Grant ina
despondent tone.

No, she isn't ! She's reading on the
bench there ! Here ! Agnes," he continued,
calling in his shrill treble from the kitchen
window, " mother wants more wood. Come
and fetch it for her."

The girl he addressed rose slowly from her
seat and obeyed the summons. She was
rather a remarkable-looking young person,
the daughter of an English mother and a Belgian
father, and talking both languages perfectly.
She was not exactly pretty, but she
was striking in appearance, with something
of a gipsy beauty about her and more thana
gipsy's cunning. Agnes Prudhomme was,
in fact, cleverer than all the rest of the
Chateau household put together. She had
been encouraged to mix with the Grant girls
at first, because she made herself useful, and
her widowed mother was very poor and glad
to give her daughter's services in return for

her food. But Agnes had always secretly rebelled
against the arrangement. She believed
herself to be quite as good as these poverty-stricken
English emigrants, and she only
bided her time to show them that she was
so. Especially was she jealous of Muriel
Darner, Captain Grant's charge, who was now
eighteen and beginning to be universally
admired. The girls often speculated to each
other how soon Muriel's father would recall
her to England and what sort of a home she
would have there, and Agnes Prudhomme's
teeth would gnash with envy as she thought
of the chances that might await Miss Darner
in the future. She was discontented with
her lot; she believed herself to be above it,
and yet she could devise no means of bettering
her condition. She hated children and
hard work of all sorts, but she cherished a
hope that when Muriel Darner left the Chateau
to return home, she might take her as her
lady's maid, and Agnes felt she would do

the rest for herself. For this reason she
veiled her natural dislike to Muriel under a
semblance of making herself useful to her ;
but there was no love lost between the two
girls, and they intuitively knew it. As Agnes
drew near the kitchen, she made a face
behind the back of the "Toad," who had
summoned her there.

What is it, madame ? ' she asked in a
meek voice as she entered, addressing Mrs.
Grant.

Only some more wood, Agnes. You will
find it in the basket in the cave. The girls
are all out, as usual, or I shouldn't have
troubled you."

Agnes walked down the cellar steps without
another word. As soon as Davie saw
the matter was to be settled without any
dispute, he tore after her. " Here ! I'll take
them ! Give them to me," he said, trying
to seize the faggots from her. Agnes, appearing
to yield to his wishes, gave him a

good blow over the head with one of the
pieces of wood, which set him off roaring.

Why didn't you let me carry them,
then?" she inquired as she walked upstairs!

what is that? Has my darling hurt
himself?" cried Mrs. Grant, meeting her at
the top, regardless of the burning of her soup.

It is only Davie who hit himself trying
to wrest the faggots out of my hands,
madame."

Oh, Agnes ! you should be more careful.
He is so delicate. My poor boy ! '

"He did it himself," replied the girl sullenly,
as she turned away. But the next
moment she was all excitement. " Madame,
madame! there is a carriage coming to the
Chateau."

Such an event was unheard of. Poor Mrs.
Grant turned white with surprise.

'" It is impossible, Agnes ! Who would
come here in a carriage ? It must be going
to Sainte Marie."

Oh, no ! It has long passed the turning.
It is coming straight alon this road. There
is a lady and a gentleman in it. I can see
them quite plainly. Now they have stopped
to question Margaret and Emily, and they
point this way. There is no doubt of it,
Mrs. Grant. The voiture is coming to the
Chateau."

"But I can't see any one," cried Mrs.
Grant in despair. " I am so untidy. And
will they want anything to eat ? Oh ! who
can they be ? It must be a mistake."

Perhaps," said Agnes Prudhomme with
a sudden intuition, " it is somebody for Miss
Darner."

Mrs. Grant sunk into a chair, half paralyzed
with fright.

You are ri<?ht — I feel sure of it," she
gasped, " and Captain Grant is away at
the club; and Muriel, where on earth is
Muriel?"

"I met her on the Eamparts as I came

home," piped the " Toad," " walking with
Athol Ferguson."

Agnes's dark cheeks flushed crimson with
unaccountable annoyance, but Mrs. Grant did
not appear to notice it.

Now, here's a nice business," she said
feebly ; " every one from home and no one

V * ft

left to receive these strangers. Isn't Marian
to be found ? Couldn't you call in Margaret
and Emily, Agnes ? "

It is too late, Mrs. Grant. The carriage
is close to the gates. You go upstairs,
madam e, and make your toilette ', and I will
let them in myself."

But we're out of tea, Agnes, and these
English visitors always expect tea. And Fm
not sure if we have sufficient coffee either.
Eomanie was to have fetched some as she
went home to night."

Never mind, madame, leave it to me.
As soon as I have let them in, I will runover
to Madame Sylvestre and borrow some

coffee." And reaching down a rusty key that
hung on a nail in the passage, Agnes Prude
having first seen Mrs. Grant nervously
climb the spiral oak staircase to the upper
story, walked down the weed-grown drive
to unlock the Chateau gates. These gates,
which were the most imposing portion left
of the old building, were always kept locked,
not from fear of burglars where there was
nothing to steal, but to keep out the pigs
and sheep that were occasionally turned into
the potato and turnip fields. The young
ladies of the family seldom troubled themselves
to open them. They either climbed,
over the top rail or took a flying leap
over the tiny stream (scarcely more than a
ditch) that skirted the strip of kitchen
garden, thereby much discomposing their
mother's ducks, and sometimes coming in
for a wetting themselves. Captain Grant,
with his " gentlemanly feelings," was the
only member of the Chateau household who

VOL. I.

would stand outside the gates in any weather
until his wife or Agnes or Romance had
run through the soaking rain to let him in.
And more than once on such occasions had
Agnes Prudhomme longed to throw the key
away in the long grass, and compel him to
stand outside for ever, or lower his dignity
by emulating the activity of his daughters
and climbing over the gate. When she reached
it on the evening in question, the carriage
had already stopped outside, and at a respectful
distance, for the Belgian cocker knew the
capabilities of the narrow drive too welland
would not venture to take his vehicle
inside. A fine-looking, middle-aged man
was peering through the iron fretwork of
the gate, and a lady, very youthfully attired,
was seated in the carriage, addressing
questions to him which it was impossible he
could answer.

Colonel de Crespigny ! those girls must
have misled us! This cant be the place!

Now, can it? It is only a farm. The earl
would never have allowed Muriel to live
here. Would he, now ? Is it likely ? Hadn't
we better tell the cocker to drive on?' :

Let me make some inquiries first," replied
the gentleman. " Here is a young
woman coming from the house. It is certainly
a most desolate-looking abode — more
like a hospital or a maison de santa than a
dwelling-house, but perhaps Lord Elton
never saw it. Does Captain Grant live here ?"
he continued, as Agnes came up to the
gate and placed the key in the ponderous
lock.

Yes, monsieur, but he is not at homer''
ic Is Miss Darner at home ? "
No ! monsieur, but Mrs. Grant is."
"Then we must see her. Kindly open
the gate and let the carriage drive in."

I will open the gate for you, but the
voiture cannot come through, as there is no

room to turn."

2—2

"It is the right house, Miss Rutherford,"
said the colonel, addressing the lady in the
vehicle, " but you will have to get out here
and walk up to it."

Walk through that mass of dirt and
cinders ! " exclaimed his companion with an
air of disgust. " Why, the ducks and fowls
are running all over the place. I had no
idea poor Muriel lived in such a hole. What
can Ehylton have been thinking of to put
her with such a beggarly family ? "

Hush ! This may be one of them," said
Colonel de Crespigny, who seemed to have
more delicacy than his friend. " As we arc
here, the sooner we dispatch our errand the
better. Let me help you to alight," and
giving Miss Butherford his arm he led her
up to the front door of the Chateau. Agnes
Prudhomme surveyed them walking before
her with great curiosity. Miss Butherford
might have been any age from forty to sixty,
but she was dressed like a girl of sixteen,

in a cream-coloured muslin with innumerable
frills and a broad-brimmed hat, covered
with nodding grass and poppies. Her companion
was a tall, well-built and muscular
man of about fifty, fashionably attired and
with a face that would have been handsome,
but for its look of cunning and sent

.

quality. Agnes was wondering what relation

they could bear to Muriel Darner, as she

ushered them into the bare comfortless

apartment which was ironically termed the

drawing-room, where the gilded paper had

been replaced by whitewash, and a table

with a faded cloth on it and a few old

books and some dozen chairs in different

stages of " rickets " represented the furniture.

Miss Rutherford sank down on one of the

seats with a look of intense disgust, as she

desired Agnes to inform Mrs. Grant that

Miss Darner's cousin had called to see heron

particular business. Mrs. Grant, who had

managed with shaking hands to tie a wisp

of dirty lace round her neck and smooth
her faded hair under a somewhat smarter
cap, was ready waiting her summons to the
drawing-room and lost no time attending toit.
Her apologies for everything around,
including herself, were so profuse and so
feeble that Miss Rutherford cut her short in
the midst of them.

I dare say you are surprised to see us at
so late an hour, Mrs. Grant, but the fact is
we intended to call on you tomorrow, but
I received news to-day that compels me to
start for Paris by the early train. I have
been travelling this summer, with a niece
and my — my friend, Colonel de Crespigny ;
and Lord Ehylton, who is a cousin of mine,
begged that I would see you on the subject
of Muriel Darner."

"Lord Ehylton," repeated Mrs. Grant with
a look of perplexity.

Ah ! I forgot ! You have not vet heard
of the change in Mr. Darner's affairs, and

indeed it was to break it to you that I called
in person. My cousin Darner has not been
a very good correspondent, I am afraid, Mrs.
Grant. His first wife's death made him
quite a bachelor again and he concerned
himself very little about his daughter. In
fact, he would not have known what to do
with her in England. But now, things are
quite altered, and he is anxious to have herat
home again. By the death of his uncle
and cousin, Mr. Darner has come into the
family title, and is now the Earl of Ehylton,
and last week he was married to the Honourable
Mrs. Seton, so that there is no further
necessity for dear Muriel — Lady Muriel
Darner as she has now become — to remain
abroad." Miss Rutherford mouthed the
grand names as though they were something
good to eat, and indeed, they did sound
rather imposing ; but poverty-stricken Mrs.
Grant heard but one thing — that they were
suddenly to be deprived of half of their

income. She went white and red and yellow
by turns, as the truth broke upon her, and
had considerable difficulty in keeping back
her tears, and her visitors could not but
recognize her distress.

c: I am afraid the news comes rather unexpectedly
to you," remarked Miss Rutherford
presently.

It does indeed ! We have had dear
Muriel with us now for ten years and regard
her as one of our own daughters. I thought
Mr. Damer — I mean Lord Ehylton — would
certainly have given us a little more warning
of his intentions."

His lordship would be the last person
to do anything that was unfair, Mrs. Grant.
He desired me to say that his solicitor would
forward Captain Grant the half-yearly allowance
for his daughter as usual. But Lady
Muriel is now eighteen and it is time she
was introduced into society, and no one
could do it more fittingly than her stepmother,

who has a young daughter of
about the same age. I have been staying
in Brussels, Mrs. Grant, and came over to
Eevranches expressly to tell you this. As
I am going on to Paris, Lord Ehylton
thought it would be an excellent opportunity
for me to take Lady Muriel thereat
once, and renovate her wardrobe before
she returns to England. Therefore — if it is
all the same to you — my friend Colonel
de Crespigny will call for her by ten o'clock
tomorrow."

To-morrow ! " echoed Mrs. Grant, with a
look of dismay.

But Miss Rutherford was beginning to be
tired of Mrs. Grant's sentiment, and to suspect
that her chief grief for Muriel's departure
lay in the fact that she took her
money away with her. So she answered
briskly :

Yes ! tomorrow ! You have had her for
many years and it is our turn to see a

little of her now. But where is the dear
child ? Has she been told of our arrival ? '

Has Lady Muriel Darner returned yet ? '
inquired Mrs. Grant in a voice like a funeral
knell to Agnes Prudhomme.

No, madame," replied Agnes, who had
been standing in the ante-room all the while.

Then go, Agnes, and ask Davie to run
down to the ramparts and see if he can
find her and send her home — and get some
coffee for this lady and gentleman."

Very good, madame," said the girl as
she left the room, her heart burning with
envy and jealousy the while.

■» > X c +

Chapter II.

AGNES PRUDHOMME.

She walked out at the back of the house
and took her way through the little wood of
chestnut and walnut trees to where Madame
Sylvestre lived, on the farm which had been
once a part of the Van Lippen estate. There
she found the stout Flemish serving-wench
Eomanie, leaning over the wooden gate that
separated the grounds, chattering in her uncouth
tongue with a farm hand and quite
unmindful of her employers at the Chateau
who had sent her there for milk. Agnes sent
her flying back with the jug in her hand and
a sharp word in her ear, for if Agnes could
speak only two or three languages perfectly,
she seemed to be able to scold in all, and with
Flemish she had been familiar from a child.

Eomanie feared her (young as she was) much
more than she did her mistress, for Mrs. Grant
was the sort of woman who might have lived
fifty years in a country without acquiring
its language, and was at the mercy therefore
of her Flemish attendants. But the tone in
which Agnes Prudhomme reproved Eomanie
that evening was unnecessarily severe, and
was the emanation of her own envious and
malicious feelings. Lady Muriel Darner ! As
she walked back to the Chateau with the
borrowed coffee her teeth ground together
as she pronounced the name, over and over
again, until it seemed to leave a bitter, acrid
taste upon her tongue that caused her to
turn aside and spit upon the ground, as if
that action would mitigate her rancour. She
could hardly contain herself for jealousy.
Muriel Darner, with whom she had associated
almost on equal terms, an earl's daughter,
to be taken to Paris — that unattainable but
dearly-desired heaven of delight — and thence

to London to be introduced into society,
whilst she, for no fault of her own, was condemned
to a life of servitude and monotony
in Eevranches. The girl could have screamed
aloud in the intolerance of her envy. She
did indeed give vent to her passions in someway,
for she startled the wood-pigeons that
were just cooing each other to sleep in the
tall fir trees and sent them reeling once more
into the still summer air. " Fools ! Brutes,"
exclaimed Agnes, as their soft tones sounded
on her ear and seemed to mock the fury of
her spirit, " to be content with such a life as
this," and then she flung herself headlong on
a wooden bench, and for a moment gave vent
to her feelings in a flood of angry tears. That
moment sealed her fate. Before she recovered
herself a footstep sounded on the pathway,
and Colonel de Crespigny stood beside her.
It was not without a motive that the colonel
had followed her into the little wood. He
had made a cigar the excuse to the ladies to

go out for a few minutes into the open air,
but he had not been unmindful of Agnes
Prudhomme's presence in the ante-room, and
her appearance had attracted him. Colonel
de Crespigny was nothing if he were nota
sensualist. He lived but to crratifv his
senses in every possible way, and his taste
lay particularly amongst the lower orders.
He did not care much for women whose intellect
made him aware of the deficiency of his
own. The bizarre gipsy-like beauty of Agnes
attracted him. Her tangled mass of brown
curls and dark cunning eyes, and wide reclined
mouth, conveyed an idea of wickedness,
and Colonel de Crespigny, like a few
others of his sex, was more attracted by vice
than by virtue. Agnes was young — only the
same age as Muriel Darner — but there was a
world of possibilities in her glance, and of
coquetry in her actions, and the colonel
thought he would like to see a little more of
her. But he little expected to find her on a

garden bench abandoned to some unknown
grief. The sight broke down the barriers between
them quicker than a year of prudence
would have done. " My dear child," exclaimed
the colonel as he hastened to her — Colonel
de Crespigny was always extremely paternal
in his first advances to young girls — " what
is the matter ? Have you hurt yourself ? '
Agnes felt ashamed for a moment to have
been discovered by a stranger when she was
not mistress of herself. She looked up at
him half angrily, but the glance of admiration
with which he regarded her flashing eyes
and crimson cheeks soon mitigated her first
wrath.

No. I am not hurt," she answered, sitting
up, " but I am very sorry to hear that
Miss Darner is going to leave us."

Is Lady Muriel so great a friend of
yours, then? Are you one of the Misses
Grant ? "

Oh, no, monsieur ! I do not belong

to the family. I am called Agnes Prude
But I have known Lady Muriel
ever since she came here, and I have always
hoped that when she left us she would take
me with her as her companion and maid, and
that we should go to London together."

And are you so very anxious to see
London, then ? "

Oh ! yes, monsieur ! above all other things.
My mother is an Englishwoman. She came
over to Eevranches as governess in some
gentleman's family, and married my father,
who was in the carved oak trade. But he
died years ago and left us almost destitute,
and I am forced to earn my living. But to
earn it here and in this way. Bah ! it is not
living — it is a prison — a purgatory ! I would
as soon be in a convent at once."

Then you have no taste for becoming a
nun, Agnes."

There was no need of an answer. Agnes
had only to lift her eyes to his to assure the

colonel that her proclivities did not tend that
way.

And you want to go to England and be
Lady Muriel's maid ! Well, I don't see why
it should not be accomplished ! Where is
the difficulty?"

Do you think you could help me,
monsieur ? " demanded the girl boldly,
for something in his manner made her
bold.

I will do my best, certainly. Is Lady
Muriel anxious to take you with her ? "

"I am not sure, but if she had been going
to England by herself I think I could have
coaxed her to take me too. But this lady
coming — this Miss Rutherford "

Oh ! I understand. She is the supposed
stumbling-block. Well, I have a little influence
with her, Agnes, and I will try what
I can do to persuade her to gratify your
wish. But if she should be obstinate — and

ladies are obstinate sometimes, you know
vol. i. 3

perhaps I may be able to manage it by
myself."

You, monsieur ! " exclaimed Agnes, staring
at him.

Yes, /. Oh ! you needn't open your
pretty eyes quite so wide with astonishment.
I am not going to propose that you shall be
my maid (though if I" might keep one, I
should never wish for a prettier than yourself),
but I have several lady friends, and
amongst them all I daresay I can find you
a home. What do you say ? If Lady Muriel
does not take you into her service will you
accept a situation that I find for you ? '

"Monsieur, I should be only too grateful.
It is the dream of my life to get away
from Eevranches."

"Well, your looks should prove your fortune,
my dear, for you are pretty enough for
anything, and those eyes of yours would turn
the head of any man. Here is my card with
my club address. When you want my assist

ace, write to me there, and I'll see what I
can do for you."

Oh, monsieur is too good. I will take the
utmost care of his card," replied Agnes as she
dropped it into her pocket. At that moment
Eomanie came flying from the Chateau to say
that madame demanded her coffee.

The coffee ! " exclaimed Agnes, starting
to her feet. " I had forgotten all about it !
Monsieur will say nothing of this indoors," she
continued hurriedly, tapping her pocket significantly,
" for if I do not leave with Lady
Muriel there may be some difficulty about
my getting away."

I understand, and I will keep the secret,"
replied Colonel de Crespigny, as she ran away
from him to make the coffee.

Miss Rutherford was getting very impatient,
not to say rude, before it appeared.
Mrs. Grant was still her sole entertainer, for
though the daughters of the house had returned,

they had all slunk up to the bedroom

3—2

story, and nothing had yet been seen of
Captain Grant, the " Toad," or Lady Muriel
Darner.

Isn't it very extraordinary, Mrs. Grant,"
inquired Miss Rutherford, " that it should
be nearly nine o'clock, and Muriel has not
come back, or is it the custom in Eevranches
for young ladies to run about by themselves
up to all hours of the night ? "

Oh ! no," replied her unfortunate hostess
with a sickly smile. " You mustn't think so
badly of us as that. But this is a very
quiet place, you see, and the dear girls have
been accustomed to run about it since they
were children. They know every one in
Eevranches, and are perfectly safe. But it
is unfortunate that dear Muriel should be
later than usual this evening. I have sent
my little boy after her, but the Eamparts
extend for some distance and they may
not meet."

And Captain Grant — is he also in the

habit of running about the Eamparts until
midnight?" demanded Miss Butherford sarcastically.


I am almost afraid to say when he will be
home, either. Of course, if you had given
us any warning of your visit, he would have
made a point of meeting you ; but he usually
spends his evenings at the Eevranches Club
with the other English gentlemen, and sometimes
they do not break up till late."

Well, it is impossible that I can stay here
much longer," said her visitor peevishly,
for my niece is expecting me back at the
hotel; and we have a great many preparations
to make before we start for Paris.
Therefore I think we had better return to
Eevranches, and my friend Colonel de Cres-pigmy
will call here for Lady Muriel at ten
o'clock tomorrow morning. You said you
would do me this favour, didn't you, colonel?' 1
she added in a much sweeter tone to her
travelling companion.

"With all the pleasure in the world, n
replied the colonel, bowing.

"But, Miss Rutherford," pleaded Mrs.
Grant in a distressed voice, " consider. Ten
o'clock tomorrow. How is it possible forme
to get Lady Muriel ready to accompany
you in so short a time ? She has no clothes
to wear, except her convent uniform. It
was her papa's wish that she should be
educated with my girls at the Convent of
the Ursulines at Steinbock ; and the pupils
there are not permitted to wear anything
but black and white. Lady Muriel's attire
is quite unfit to go into society with."

Nonsense, my good lady. She will see no
society but ours till she gets to Paris, and
there Lord Ehylton has commissioned me to
get her everything she may require. So
please make no more excuses, but see that
my little cousin is ready in time to accompany
Colonel de Crespigny whenever he may
call for her. Is this one of your daughters ? "

continued Miss Rutherford as Agnes Prude
handed her a cup of coffee.

Mrs. Grant's pale cheeks flushed pink with
annoyance, and she put on a dignified air.
Certainly not, Miss Rutherford. That is
my servant, Agnes Prudhomme."

It was Agnes's turn to flush now, as she
darted an angry glance towards her employer.


"I have always understood that servants
received wages," she interposed saucily, " but
you have never paid me any, madame."

Agnes, it is not your place to take any
part in the conversation. Please to remember
who you are," returned Mrs. Grant with
mild deprecation. The girl did not speak
again, but she directed a look of significance
towards Colonel de Crespigny, which
did not pass unnoticed. As he passed out
of the door a few minutes afterwards, in the
wake of Miss Rutherford and Mrs. Grant, he
managed to stoop towards her and whisper :

Good-bye, pretty one. I will do my
best for you, and if I fail, write and tell
me where to address you."

Bon soir, monsieur," replied Agnes with
a demure courtesy, but a glance that spoke
volumes.

As soon as she found herself alone again
with her companion, Miss Rutherford was
loud and emphatic in her denunciation of
everything concerning the household at the
Chateau.

"My dear colonel, did you ever see such
a place in your life ? Why, you might have
scraped the dirt off the windows and floors,
and the disorder of it ! If it were not so big,
it would be for all the world like an Irish
cabin. The passage was full of ducks and
fowls as we came away. I can't think what
Ehylton can have been thinking of to have
left Muriel there for ten years. She cannot
have had enough to eat. I believe the whole
family have been living on her allowance.

And I quite tremble to think what the dear
child may be like. One cannot fancy that
woman, Mrs. Grant, being fit to bring up any
girl — a poor, weak, nerveless thing. '

Yes, but a lady, notwithstanding all her
disadvantages," observed the colonel.

But imagine a young girl of eighteen
allowed to go about without any chaperonage.
It is shocking. Ehylton has not come
into the title a day too soon. What might
not have happened had she been left there
much longer ? "

Lady Muriel is certainly quite old enough
to return to her father's care. Did you
notice that young girl who brought in the
coffee ? "

A dark creature, with curls and an impudent
face ? Yes ; I saw her."

She was in the garden crying when I
strolled out with my cigar, and she told me
that Lady Muriel has promised to take her to
England as her maid, and she is most anxious

to go. She seems a nice-spoken, lady-like
girl, and I suppose her little ladyship will
require an attendant. Would it not be as
well to give her the place ? "

My dear colonel," cried Miss Rutherford
tartly, " what are you thinking of ? My
cousin Ehylton gave me no orders about
maids, and if he had, I wouldn't engage
an inexperienced, pert-looking girl like that.
And indeed, between you and me, I am not
at all sure that Muriel will have a maid to
herself. You mustn't forget that if Ehylton
has the title, his wife has the money, and may
not be disposed to spend too much of it on
her step-daughter. I expect Miss Seton and
Muriel will have to share a maid between
them. Fancy that Belgian girl having the
impudence to address you on the subject."

It wasn't her fault, I assure you. I found
her in tears and demanded the reason. It
seems a pity a girl like that shouldn't have
a chance of bettering her position. She seems

much above it, and tells me she has associated
with Lady Muriel and the Misses Grant
since they were children."

"Then that's all the more reason they
should part now," returned Miss Rutherford
sharply, for she did not approve of the
colonel's championship of Agnes Prudhomme.
If they have been brought up together, she
would never keep her place as a lady's maid.
But really, colonel," she continued, more
affably, "I shall have to look after you if
you go playing knight-errant in this way to
any distressed damsel you may chance to encounter.
You will make me jealous. I shall
think you have got tired of looking after me"

"You will never do me that injustice, I
hope," replied Colonel de Crespigny, his bold
eyes beaming almost as fascinatingly as if
his vis-a-vis had been twenty instead of fifty ;
but when we get to Paris, I fancy our
positions will be reversed, and it is you who
will have to look after me."

He spoke the truth there, for the secret of
his travelling in company with Miss Rutherford
and her niece Lina Walford, was that
he had but lately come into a large fortune
and retired from the army, and was entirely
ignorant of the ways, manners or language
of France and Belgium. Miss Rutherford,
who had been accustomed to live on her
slender pittance wherever it was cheapest —
who had shivered in German boarding-houses
all through the winter, herded with the art
students in Italy, and occupied the meanest
floor in a pension the other side of the Seine
in Paris — was an able cicerone and knew
every step of the trottoir she had so often
walked over. Colonel de Crespigny had
therefore found it very convenient to cross
the Channel in her company, and had not
been backward to pay his way, by various
little offerings such as ladies love ; but unfortunately,
Miss Rutherford mistook his
attentions for a feeling of a warmer nature.

Let us say at once that Miss Rutherford had
been much in the habit during her loner lifetime,
of mistaking gentlemen's attentions, and
that, after many failures, she still considered
herself an eligible object for matrimony. She
quite believed that the colonel had fallen a
victim to her fascinations, and was only
waiting the moment when he should make
his intentions plainly known. She considered
his age and appearance and income
all most suitable to herself, and never stopped
to consider that a handsome man in the
prime of life, with a princely fortune, might
require some one younger and fresher to fill
the place of his first wife. For Colonel de
Crespigny was a widower, with two grown-up
sons, of whom he was very much ashamed
and whose existence he never mentioned
unless obliged. He considered himself quite
as juvenile in his way as did Miss Rutherford,
and was really such a general lover of the
sex that he could make himself agreeable to

all, without doing much violence to his own
feelings. He did so on the present occasion
with such success, that by the time they
reached Eevranches, Miss Rutherford was
whispering and giggling to him as if she had
been seventeen, and the subject of Agnes
Prudhomme was no more mentioned between
them.

iT^S^Sl

OX THE RAMPARTS.

The Eamparts of Eevranches extended from
Sainte Marie on the one side to Bois Gilbert
on the other, and formed at all times the
favourite walk of the residents in the city.
They were cool in summer and high and
dry in winter. They were sheltered to the
rear by the outlying buildings of Eevranches,
and in front of them flowed the placid canal,
fringed with long grass and bulrushes, upon
whose bosom every now and then came floating
ponderous barges, laden with wool or
wheat, whilst a sturdy Flemish cart horse
tramped along the towing-path, and helped
them on their way. It was here that Lady
Muriel Darner lingered, all unconscious of the
equivocal good fortune in store for her, whilst

such important events were passing at the
Chateau. It was a glorious summer evening.
The dusk had hardly fallen at nine o'clock,
and none of the loiterers on the Eamparts
were surprised to see her, sitting on the
wooden benches, or strolling up and down
the broad pathway in company with Athol
Fenmsson. The sight had been familiar to
them at intervals for a twelvemonth past, and
they all considered it quite a settled thing that
Miss Darner and Mr. Fergusson were some
day to marry each other. Muriel thought
of it too, in her girlish way, but it was too
remote a contingency to assume very substantial
proportions in her eyes. In fact her
whole future was a mystery to her as her life
had been, and whenever she tried to speculate
on what might happen, she felt as if she were
looking into the dark. She was a graceful
girl with a slight willowy figure, which even
her ill-cut and ill-becoming conventual dress
was unable to spoil, although it showed it off

to the worst advantage. From beneath the
brim of her old-fashioned black straw hat
her fair hair fell in loose wavy curls halfway
down her back. Her face was oval and
her complexion rather pale, but her large
grey eyes were luminous with hidden feeling,
and her mouth was full of passion.
She was clinging to the arm of Athol
Fergusson with a very confident air of
possession, whilst he looked down upon her
upturned face with the deepest love apparent
in every feature of his own. He was little,
older than herself, being only twenty-two ^
but he had already passed through a furnace
of affliction that had added ten years to his
age — not in appearance but in feeling. His
father, Mr. Fergusson, had been a very
wealthy man, a great landowner, and a well-known
member of the Jockey Club and
frequenter of the turf. His home had been
lapped in luxury, and his children brought

up to want nothing that they had set their
vol. i. 4

hearts upon. But in the midst of their utmost
prosperity — when Athol, the only son and
heir, had just entered a military college and
the two daughters were being educated in
Paris — the sword of Damocles which unknown
to themselves had been suspended
above them by a single hair for many years
past, descended without warning and destroyed
all their happiness at one blow. Mr.
Fergusson lost everything of which he had
been possessed, even to his wife's jointure, on
the racecourse, and cravenly shot himself
to avoid the disgrace which must ensue,
leaving it all to be borne by his unfortunate
widow and orphans. By the kindness of his
uncle, Sir Eobert Fergusson, Athol continued
at college to pursue his studies for the army,
whilst his mother and sisters retired to Branches
and maintained themselves by teaching.
Muriel had been their pupil for singing,
and so an intimacy had sprung up between
her and Athol, during the young man's half-yearly

visits home, which had culminated ina
sort of engagement between them, recognized,
however, by no one but themselves.
But whatever Muriel's intentions may have
been, Athol Fergusson was thoroughly in
earnest. He loved the girl with all the
strength of his nature and never dreamt of
making any other woman his wife. His was
a very serious nature too, one that had
thought and suffered deeply, and there was
a grave expression in his dark blue eyes,
like a summer cloud above the Lake of Como,
that seemed to tell the tale. He had had
but one thought before he met Muriel, how
he should soonest make money to relieve the
necessities of his mother and sisters, but now
was added to it the fonder desire to make
a home for this girl who had wound herself
about the very tendons of his heart, and for
whom no one seemed to care but himself.
He loved her and she loved him, and his

nature was too pure and earnest to suppose

4—2

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

that such a love could end in anything but
marriage, even if they had to wait for years
before accomplishing it. What were years,
or life itself, to lovers ? To love was, in his
young and ardent estimation, to love for ever.

And so, " said Muriel with a smile and
a sigh, " the important event is really over,
and you have passed your examination ! How
pleased Mrs. Fergusson must be."

"Yes," he answered with another sigh,
the papers arrived this morning, and I
have passed with honours."

"And yet we both sigh! Aren't we stupid,
Athol?"

"Oh, no! darling, it is but natural. To
pass with me, means to pass away. I shall
be gazetted to the Horse Artillery and may
have to leave England, and have no opportunity
again of seeing Eevranches or you. Is
Lat not sufficient to make me sigh ? '

But if you are not gazetted to the army,
you will never get on. You must look at

it in that light," said Muriel practically.
"And if you don't get on "

"I shall never be able to marry my dear
little wife," said Athol, kissing her — they
were alone now, the Eamparts being almost
deserted. " Oh, yes ! don't be afraid. I
have not forgotten that ; it is the only
bright spot I have to look forward to. But
the prospect of parting now makes me very,
very sad, Muriel."

Is it certain you will go away ? '

"Almost. I am bound to take whatever
they choose to give me. My uncle, Sir
Eobert, has generously offered, in case of
my being appointed to a battalion in England,
to make me an allowance of a hundred a
year, but (dearly as I should like to be near
you) I would rather be independent at once
and live upon my pay."

But your uncle is very rich ! Why
shouldn't he allow you something? A hundred
pounds a year would be nothing to him."

Next to nothing, certainly ; but, Muriel,
I must try and help my mother and sisters
a little. You cannot think how hard they
work nor how poorly they live, and I could
not do that with any comfort on another
man's money. And then there are my poor
father's creditors. It has been the dream
of my life to be able to satisfy their claims,
if only in part."

"But you will never be able to marry at
all at that rate," pouted Muriel. " I shall
be a horrible old maid long before you have
accomplished one half what you design to do."

Oh, darling, don't say that ; you make
me feel so wretched," replied Atliol fervently.
" You don't know how I shall save
and screw to pay off something of these
heavy debts that hang like a weight upon
my heart. And then my poor mother!
She has suffered so terribly, and her health
is failing so fast. I should feel as if God
would forsake me if I ever forsook her."

Muriel hung her head, and something
very like a tear stood in her eye. But it
was a tear of wounded vanity. She thought
that Athol prized his relations above herself.

What is the matter, Muriel ? " he demanded,
when silence had reigned between
them for a moment. " You are not offended,
dearest, surely, at what I have said. You
cannot suppose that the claims (even of
my mother) can come before those of my
promised wife. But you will help me, won't
you, and be the most economical of little
housekeepers, for my poor mother's sake ? '

It strikes me," said Muriel slowly, " that
with such a drain upon you, it would be
very silly to think of marriage."

Her words were perfectly true, but they
struck chill to her lover's heart.

My darling girl," he exclaimed, " don't
cast a doubt upon our marriage, or I shall
lose all my courage. What have I been
working for, if not for that ? It cannot be

yet. It may not be for many years ; but
you will wait for me, Muriel, will you not ?
You have promised that you will wait forme.


Oh, yes, indeed I will," she answered
warmly, for her heart was more firmly
wedded to Athol Fergusson than she was
aware of herself. " Why, aren't we as good
as married already ? Look at my wedding
ring, sir," she continued playfully, as she
held out a slim finger, adorned with a twisted
gold ring, for his inspection. " Didn't you
put that on six months ago, and make me
promise I would never remove it until you
could replace it with a real one ? And I
never have, Athol. It has been on my
finger night and day since, and it will remain
there till we are married."

Athol Fergusson took the girlish hand in
his, and raised it to his lips.

And such a rubbishy ring as it is, too,"

he murmured. " It is not good enough for

this dear hand, but it was the best that I
could manage, Muriel. Some day perhaps
I may be able to give you a better one.
They say it is unlucky to wear a ring upon
the wedding finger before you are married,
but I can believe in no ill luck whilst you
are faithful to me, Muriel."

Of course not ! It is all nonsense. But
I wonder what I shall say if papa ever sends
for me home again, and asks me what this
ring means ? "

Has he sent for you ? " demanded Athol
with sudden interest.

Oh, dear, no ! I haven't even had a
letter from him for the last three months.
Captain Grant is thinking of writing to his
solicitor. He says something must be the
matter."

I don't think so. You would have
heard fast enough in that case. But it is
very strange, Muriel, that Mr. Darner should
have left you here all these years, isn't it ? '

"Why, what could he have done with
me, Athol? I have no mother, and papa
lives at his club. I could not have kept
house by myself."

"But now you are a woman you could
keep house for him."

Perhaps he likes his club better, and I
am not at all sure that I should like him!
Bessie Elton, who came over last year to
stay with the Churchill, met him several
times in London, and she says he is an ugly,
scraggy little man, with a huge nose."

M But, my dear child, can't you remember
your father ? How long is it since you met ? '

Years and years. He has only seen me
twice since I came to Eevranches, and that is
ten years ago. Once I was sent to him in
Brussels for a couple of days, and once to
Paris for a week, but he didn't seem to care
anything about me, and he was out all day,
and I remember I was very glad to get
home again."

But he surely will not leave you here
for ever ? "

I hope he will, Athol ; that is," said
Muriel shyly, " until — until you come and
take me away."

My own darling ! How I wish I could
take you away at once. But we shall have
to get Mr. Darner's consent first, and sometimes,
Muriel, I feel so afraid that he will
never give it."

"But why? You are a gentleman, and
you cannot be more."

But I am so poor, dear Muriel. When
Mr. Darner sees you, he may think you ought
to make a better match than an officer with
nothing but his pay."

Then I hope he never may see me.
And if he attempts to part us, Athol, I will
leave him and run away to you, and then
you will be obliged to marry me, that is
if you would"

"Wouldn't I?" cried the young man in

an ecstasy of affection, squeezing her to him,
and thinking what a treasure the love of
such a pure-minded, noble heart would be.

And if my father neglects me much
longer," continued Muriel, " I think I shall
be quite justified in taking the law into my
own hands, for if it were not for you, Athol,
I don't think I could stand the life at the
Chateau. Eeally, it is too dreadful ! I
didn't perceive it whilst I was a child, running
all over Eevranches as I felt inclined.
I was too hungry then to care what I had
for dinner, so long as there was enough to
eat, but now that I am grown-up, I feel
quite differently, and the common food and
the dirt and disorder sicken me. Do you
know." she continued, lowering her voice,
that sometimes we do not have meat on
the table for days together ; nothing but
potage and fromage, and I am often quite
hungry when I go to bed at night."

"Oh, Muriel," exclaimed Athol, who was

still quite young enough to sympathize with
such a privation, " Mr. Darner ought to
know of this. He cannot be aware of the
way in which you are treated. I have
always understood that he makes the Grants
a handsome allowance (for Branches) for
your maintenance, and it is a shame that
you should not even be fed properly."

But that is not all, Athol. Papa allows
Mrs. Grant carte-blanche for my clothes, but
I never have a decent thing to wear, for
before they are half worn out she passes
them on to Margaret or Emily, and leaves
me with only one dress or cloak for myself.
I am sure I have worn these old things for
nearly a year," said the girl, with a nervous
little laugh, twitching at her scanty black
skirt.

"My pretty Muriel, who ought to be fed
and clothed like a princess if she had her
dues, it is too bad," replied Athol Fergusson,
and I feel half inclined to write to your

father myself about it. Only that might
make him take you away from Eevranches
at once, and I should lose you for the remainder
of the vacation. Am I not selfish,
Muriel ? "

Not at all. I couldn't bear to go away
whilst you were here, Athol. I'd rather live
on dry bread and come out and walk with
you on the Eamparts every evening, than
live in a palace whilst you were in Branches.
How could I be happy anywhere
without you?"

"My own sweetheart!' exclaimed the
young man as he bent over her again and
kissed her rapturously. They were startled
from their position by a loud laugh, and
Muriel sprang apart from her lover to encounter
a Belgian girl, Sylvie Brissot, who
went to school at the same convent as she did.

Good-night, my friends," called out Sylvie
in her own language. " A pleasant time to
you. Do you know that it is half-past nine,

Muriel ? The good mother will wonder what
has become of her stray lamb."

Half-past nine ! " echoed Muriel in astonishment.
" Why, I thought it was eight
o'clock that sounded just now from Saint
Jacques. Athol ! I must go home, or they
will be locking up the Chateau'*

Then I will see you across those dark
fields," he answered as they turned their
steps in the direction of the Chateau des
Lauriers. As soon as they had left the last
estaminet behind them and entered the road
full of ruts and inequalities which had so
tried the patience of Miss Rutherford, Athol
Fergusson threw his arm around Muriel's
slight form and bent down his face to hers
whilst he whispered a thousand promises of
love and fidelity into her ears, which she
was not slow to respond to and reiterate.

Kiss me once more, dearest," he said as
they stood together outside the Chateau
gates. " Put your arms round my neck and

swear you will be faithful and true to me
until I can make you my wife."

"Oh, Athol ! I have said it so often.
You know that it is true. Why should you
want me to say it over again ? "

I don't know, Muriel. I feel sad
to-night. I have a kind of foreboding that
there is trouble for us in the future. And
if it comes, I shall feel the happier to remember
that you have sworn, under any
circumstances, to remain faithful to me."

"You frighten me, Athol! But indeed it
is all fancy. You know you will have to go
away and it makes you melancholy. But
your vacation lasts for four weeks more.
We shall have many pleasant walks on the
dear old Eamparts yet. But if it will please
you, I swear — yes, Athol, I swear that nobody
but you shall ever be my husband.
Oh, how could you think such a thing of
me, after the long, long time that we have
loved each other ? "

"I did not doubt you, dearest, believe me
and if I had, your oath has made me
quite happy again. We belong to each
other now, Muriel — remember that, whatever
may betide ; for I too swear with you in the
presence of God, that no other woman shall
ever be my wife. So Heaven bless you,
dear," said Athol Fergusson with a solemn
gravity far beyond his years, as he tenderly
laid his lips upon her forehead, " and keep
you in every way. Shall I help you over
the gate, Muriel, or will you ring ? "

No, Athol ; there is a plank in the grass

out there. Throw it across the ditch and I'll

be over in no time. Once more £ood-niofht,"

and with a last kiss the young lovers parted,

although Athol did not leave the spot until

she had turned on the doorstep and waved

her hand to him by the dim light of the

oil lamp which hung above the portal.

There was no need for Muriel to knock or

ring for admittance. The doors of the Chas
i. 5

tea always stood on the latch until they
were barred for the night, and in another
moment she had burst in upon the family
party at supper. They were all assembled
there, even down to little Davie (who had
never gone farther than the bridge, from
which he had amused himself by throwing
stones into the water, in his search for
Muriel), but they had not commenced the
meal, and a profound gloom seemed to have
settled on every one. Mrs. Grant was whining
and sniffling into her handkerchief: the
girls were huddled together whispering in
the corners ; and Captain Grant (who had
just returned from his club, where he indulged
in games of halfpenny whist during
the evenings) was walking up and down
the room in a state of unusual perturbation.


I said something was wrong ; I was
sure something was wrong," he was reiterating
as Muriel appeared ; " but to keep

us in the dark in this way for three mouths
and then to take the girl away without any
warning is disgraceful, perfectly disgraceful."

What is disgraceful ? " asked Muriel,
standing on the threshold.

Oh, here she is ! Oh, mother, do tell
her," burst simultaneously from the daughters,
who were dying to see how Muriel
would receive the wonderful news of her
exaltation to the peerage.

"Oh, Muriel! My dear child — Lady
Muriel, as I should say," exclaimed Mrs.
Grant, " such a wonderful thing has happened."


Yes, Lady Muriel !— Lady Muriel Darner ! "
echoed Margaret and Emily and Fanny,
dancing round her.

Muriel looked utterly perplexed. She had

never been told that her father had the

remotest chance of coming into the earldom.

It is doubtful if she had ever heard there

was a title in her family, so much had she

5—2

been left to her own thoughts and the protection
of the Grants ; and the words used
by her adopted sisters conveyed no meaning
to her ears.

I don't understand you," she answered
smiling. "Is it a joke? Are you all
laughing at me ? "

"Hold your tongues, girls," said Captain
Grant authoritatively. "It is my business
to inform Muriel of the news we have just
received."

Nothing unpleasant I hope, papa," she
answered (for she had always called Captain
Grant "papa" with the! other children) as
she went up to him and touched his arm.

Well, my dear, it may be pleasant for
you, but it is quite the reverse for us. A
lady called here this evening — your aunt, I
believe "

No, no, David ; her father's cousin, Miss
Rutherford ! " corrected Mrs. Grant.

It's all the same," he returned impatiently.

"Your father's cousin came here,
Muriel, to tell us that Mr. Darner has
lately come into the family title — I suppose
you knew there was a title in your family,
Muriel ? "

No, I didn't," she said shaking her head.
"No one ever told me."

"Well, your father is now the Earl of
Ehylton and he was married again last week
to a lady called the Honourable Mrs. Seton,
and they are on their honeymoon trip to
Italy."

My father is married again ! " repeated
Muriel in surprise. " Oh, I'm sure I shan't
like that. I wonder what she is like."

"I believe she is (or was) a great beauty,
and I daresay you will be very happy with
her. So now you understand why you are
Lady Muriel Darner."

But how can it alter my name ? '

It does, my dear, and it will alter you
in many ways beside. But I have not told

ON CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE

you all, Muriel. Lord Ehylton's orders are,
that you leave us tomorrow morning, to go
with Miss Rutherford to Paris."

A WARNING.

At these words Muriel, who had displayed
no emotion on hearing that her father had
gained an earldom and a new wife and herself
a title, gave a loud cry of dismay, and.
rushing forward, fell on her knees beside
Mrs. Grant and buried her face in her lap.

Oh, no, no ! " she exclaimed as she
commenced to sob violently. " I cannot —
I will not! Oh, mamma, don't send me
from you ! "

My dear child," replied Mrs. Grant, beginning
to cry too, for they were all
genuinely fond of Muriel (except Agnes),
what can I do ? Do you suppose we
would let you go if we could help it ? But
against your father's will we have no remedy.

I entreated — I implored Miss Rutherford to
give us a little more time to get accustomed
to the idea, but she was inexorable, and
Colonel de Crespigny is to call for you tomorrow
morning at ten o'clock. I shall
have barely time to pack your things."

Miss Rutherford, Colonel de Crespigny ! '
reiterated Muriel looking up through her
tears. "But who are they? I never heard
of them before."

Oh, it's all right, my dear ; there is no
doubt of that. Miss Rutherford is your
father's cousin, and the colonel is a friend
of hers : a fine, handsome-looking man too."

Late of the seth Rioters," interposed
Captain Grant, who was a walking Army
List, "gazetted in 1860, retired in 18S4 ;
must be fifty or thereabouts. One of his
sons is in the 26th Dangers, the other in
the Indian Staff Corps. Yes, there is no
doubt about it ; it's a genuine thing''

"But why" demanded Muriel with quivering

lips, " why, if my father is in Italy with
his new wife, must I leave Eevranches
directly : why cannot I remain here till he
returns to England ? There is no one forme
to go to. Oh, papa, do write and ask
him to let me stay with you for a few weeks
longer."

"My dear girl, it would be of no avail,
even if I knew the earl's present address.
You hear what mamma says, that she pleaded
for a little delay, but they had arranged
everything before they called here."

Everything" echoed Mrs. Grant, " even
down to the time of starting. So now, dear
Muriel, all you have to do is to eat your
supper and get to bed as soon as you
may. Agnes and I will look after the
packing."

I cannot eat anything — my heart is breaking,"
cried Muriel in another burst of tears,
as she broke from them and sought the
refuge of her own apartment.

Poor darling ! How bitterly she feels it,"
said Mrs. Grant with her handkerchief to her
eyes. " I expect she will often sigh, in the
gay life she is going to lead, for the peace
of the old Chateau. Agnes, go after Lady
Muriel, and see if you can help her, and if
she refuses to come down stairs again, persuade
her to go to bed. And now, children,
take } r our supper, for we must all be up
early tomorrow morning."

Agnes Prudhomme lighted the little pet role
lamp and obeyed her mistress's orders cheerfully.
It afforded her the opportunity she had
been longing for, to speak to Muriel privately,
about taking her to England. But she found
the girl indisposed to listen to anything
but the wild regrets of her own heart. She
was lying across her pallet bed, in an abandonment
of grief, sobbing as if she had lost
everything in the world. The spectacle filled
Agnes's breast with genuine surprise. An
earl's daughter ! soin to Paris and London,

and crying as if some great misfortune had
overtaken her. It was inexplicable.

u But, mademoiselle," she said (for Agnes
sometimes addressed the young ladies by their
Christian names, and sometimes as if she were
their servant), " surely, all these tears are not
for leaving the old Chateau. Ah ! if I had
but the good luck to be going too. You
would not see me do anything but laugh.
Fancy, mademoiselle, you are going to Paris !
Picture to yourself the shops, the boulevards,
the theatres — all the delights of that
heavenly place, and you will soon realize the
folly of crying over this stupid, piggish, 
way old Eevranches."

Oh ! Agnes," replied Muriel lifting her
stained and swollen face from the pillows, " it
is not only because I am going to leave
Eevranches that I shed tears ; indeed it is
not for Eevranches at all — it is — it is because
of poor Athol."

"For Monsieur Femusson," exclaimed

Agnes with well-acted surprise, although she
had known well enough why. Muriel wept.
Oh ! mademoiselle, a gentleman like Monsieur
Fergusson can go anywhere. Doubtless he
will follow you to Paris. It is the business
of the men to follow the women, and you
will see him again before long. I would not
cry for that if I were you."

Ah ! Agnes, you do not know everything.
There are more difficulties in the way
than you think of. Athol and I love each
other, oh ! so dearly, but he is not rich, you
know, and we must wait, perhaps for many
years, before we are married, and in all that
time what am I to do ? If I had stayed here,
I should have seen him sometimes, but now
that I am going away we may never, never
meet again."

Agnes had tried to look sympathetic during
this confidence, but she had not felt so. It
had long been a great cause for jealousy
with her, that Muriel had won the heart of

the handsome young Englishman, whom she
had tried to attract herself in vain, and she
was maliciously glad to think that they would
be parted. But . her answering words contained
the very essence of comfort.

Mademoiselle, surely you are doing
Monsieur Fergusson a great wrong by such
a doubt. Of coarse you will meet again.
Depend on it, he will make lots of money —
a brave, handsome, clever gentleman like that
and then he will find you out and pour it
all at your feet. Oh ! mademoiselle mustn't
cry for that. The future contains nothing
but happiness for her. I am sure of it."

But, Agnes, how can I let Athol know
that I am going away? Ten o'clock tomorrow
morning. It is so horribly soon.
And when we parted at the gate this evening,
he said — poor darling ! — that he had a kind
of foreboding that trouble was coming for
us. And it has come sure enough."

You must write to him, mademoiselle."

And you will give him my letter, Agnes,
will you not, and explain how it was that
I could not see him asrain?"
• "Yes, if I am here — and if not, we will
post it."

Why do you say, if you are here,
Agnes ? " demanded Muriel.

Ah ! Muriel — miladi, as I suppose I must
say now — have you forgotten your promise to
take me to England with you as your maid ? '

"Did I promise it?' said Muriel wearily,
but that must have been when I thought
my father would come himself to fetch me,
and I could talk to him about such things.
But now I feel quite alone and friendless.
I am going out into this strange world,
Agnes, as if it were a wilderness, and Athol
and Eevranches were the only home that
I had ever known."

But won't you speak for me to Colonel
de Crespigny, mademoiselle, when he calls
for you tomorrow morning ?"

I don't know. I cannot promise. How
can I besoin at once to talk to a strange
man about such things ? It is all so hurried
so entirely without warning. ■ I don't feel
as if I quite knew what I want, or do not
want."

Love does make us very selfish as a
rule," observed Agnes with sententious impudence,
as she turned away and busied herself
with emptying Muriel's chest drawers.
Her companion did not fail to notice her
manner, but remembered that she needed her
help to convey her last farewell to Athol
Fergusson.

"Don't be hard on me, Agnes," she
answered gently, " for I am very, very unhappy.
But I will mention your name to my
cousin (I promise you that), and if I am to
have a maid, perhaps it may be managed that
you shall get the place. And you will take
a letter for me to Mr. Fergusson as soon as
ever you can, tomorrow, won't you, Agnes?

and tell him — tell him how utterly wretched
I was to go away." Here Muriel broke
down again, but presently rising with an
effort, wrote a blistered scrawl, full of vows
of love and fidelity, to Athol Fergusson, promising
to write to him and let him know
her address, and inclosing a little seal with
a cupid engraved on it and the motto " Toujours"
(the only thing she had to give him),
as a parting present. She had barely time
to confide the packet to Agnes' keeping, when
Mrs. Grant and her boisterous daughters came
upstairs and after having packed Muriel's
scanty wardrobe in a box, persuaded her to
retire to rest. But the poor child could not
sleep. Visions of the unknown , future that
lay before her, and regret for the life she
was leaving behind, combined to keep her
awake and grieving, until her sobs disturbed
Mrs. Grant also, and brought the weak-minded
but kindly-hearted woman to her
bedside to try and soothe her grief.

Why, Muriel, my dear, is it possible you
are still awake ? What will you look like
tomorrow morning if you continue to cry
like this? Indeed, my dear, you will make
yourself ill. You must try to be more composed.
It is very sweet of you to regret
parting with us so much (and we have all loved
you very dearly, Muriel) ; but perhaps Lord
Ehylton will permit you to come back and
see us sometimes — that is, if you do not
grow too fine to wish to revisit our poor,,
humble home."

Lady Muriel was somewhat weak in character,
and easily led, but she was honest,
and her foster mother's speech made her feel
guilty. She knew she was not grieving to
leave the old Chateau des Lauriers, nor the
discomforts of which she had justly complained,
and she could not accept the merit
which was not her due.

Dear mamma," she said affectionately as

she sat up in bed and laid her aching head
vol. i. 6

on Mrs. Grant's shoulder, " you have all been
very kind to me, and this is the only home
that I have ever known. I should have been
sorry, under any circumstances, to leave you
and the girls, and to go out into a world of
which I am so ignorant and a little afraid.
But I am not crying only for that. This
sudden departure is a terrible grief to me
because — because "

Because that, my dear ? Surely you have
no secrets from me."

I have had — not quite a secret though,
because you have known that we were great
friends, and always walked together "

Are you alluding to young Fergusson,
Muriel ? "

Yes, mamma ! but I have never told you
yet, how fond we have grown of each other,
and that I have promised to marry him as
soon as ever he is able to keep a wife."

To marry Athol Fergusson! Oh, my dear
child, that is an impossibility. It can never

be. You must put it all out of your head
at once. A promise from a girl like you,
and without your father's knowledge, goes
for nothing. You will have forgotten all
about such nonsense three months hence."

Indeed, Mrs. Grant, I shall never forget
it, for I love him as dearly as he loves me.
Besides, why should it be impossible that I
should ever marry him ? "

Because he is a pauper, my dear, and
has no expectations of any sort. His poor
mother was lamenting over it to me only the
other day. She mentioned that very fact
that her son would never be able to marry,
because he will have nothing but his pay,
and may have to support her as well as himself.
You see, Muriel, the daughters may
get husbands who would object to having
their mother-in-law in the house, and it
leaves very little chance for poor young
Athol in my opinion."

Still, I mean to wait for him," said Lady

G— 2

Muriel stoutly ; u I have promised and I will
keep to it. Besides, I love him, and I
shall be wretched without him," she cried
relapsing into tears.

Muriel ! be warned by me," said Mrs.
Grant solemnly, " and don't think of marrying
a man who has no money. Just look
to what I have fallen. Ah ! my dear girl,
innocent as you are of the world and its
ways, I am sure you have found out for yourself
that we are not in the position we should
be. And yet I married with fair prospects.
Captain Grant was an officer on good pay,
and we expected it to increase every year.
But a large family and sickness weighed us
down, until we could not possibly exist upon
it with any comfort. Then — in an evil
moment — my husband sold out of the army
and lost all his money in speculation, and
brought me down to this. You see what my
life is, Muriel. I am no better than a servant,
and I have not a servant's strength to

compete with labour. And how do you suppose
it will end. A few more years at the
most of this drudgery, and I shall sink into
the grave, and be thankful to have rest even
there, from the miseries that a poverty-stricken
marriage has brought upon me.
Oh, Muriel, be wise, and cast away all idea
of marrying Athol Fergusson, for even if you
remain faithful to him (which is very doubtful),
I am sure his lordship will never sanction
your making so poor a match."

But I love him, and I will marry no one
else," reiterated Muriel. "If papa won't consent
to it, I will wait till I am twenty-one,
and then I will run away with Athol and no
one will be able to separate us. You forget,
mamma, that I am eighteen," continued the
girl drawing herself up, " I am not a childlike
Fanny. I am a woman and I know my
own mind perfectly on this matter and am
resolved to have my own way."

I am very sorry'to hear it, my dear," replied

Mrs. Grant with a sigh, " and I only
hope Lord Ehylton will not think that Captain
Grant and I have encouraged you in such a
piece of folly. I had no idea that Mr. Fergusson
liked you better than he did the
other girls. I thought you were all friendly
together, and I am grieved to find that, in
your case, it has gone further. Pray make
the earl understand that we had nothing
whatever to do with the matter."

Yes, yes ; if he should ever ask me, of
course I will ; but, mamma, you will be
kind to poor Athol for my sake, won't you ?
You will ask him to the Chateau and talk
to him of me and give him a little comfort,
for I know he will be so very miserable
when he hears that I am gone."

No ! Muriel, my dear, you mustn't ask me
to do it, for I couldn't. If he had been your
friend only, it would have been different ;
but what you have told me now puts it
entirely out of the question. I must be

prepared (in case the earl calls me to account
for this) to say that I never knew of
or encouraged it."

Oh, mamma ! you speak as if I had committed
a crime. "i

Poverty is a crime, my dear, for it leads
to crime. When it comes on us like an
armed man, all we can do is to fight it as
best we may, but if ever you feel inclined
to rush into it, Muriel, of your own accord,
think of me, for God's sake, and of all the
misery you have witnessed here, and turn
your steps deliberately the other way."

Mrs. Grant was so unusually decided as
she said these words, and her careworn,
anxious face looked so full of pain, that
Lady Muriel shrunk within herself, frightened
at the fancied glimpse she had taken into
the future.

Oh, don't talk of it any more now," she
exclaimed wearily ; " I don't want to think
of it. I can only realize that I am going

away from dear Eevranches and that I may
never, never see it again'

Mrs. Grant consoled her as well as she
was able, but Muriel slept no more that
night, and when the bright June morning
broke, she was a blot upon it, with her
swollen eyelids and white tear-stained cheeks.
Yet Colonel de Crespigny on first beholding
her, thought she was one of the loveliest girls
he had ever seen, and wondered how such
a handsome, graceful daughter could belong
to the high-shouldered, pigeon-breasted, ugly
and awkward Earl of Ehylton. The first
thought that struck him as Ladv Muriel came
shyly forward to greet him was that he should
have liked to know her mother.

The colonel was very punctual, and ashe
explained that he had received directions
to take his charge straight to the railway
depot to meet Miss Rutherford, there was
nothing to be done but to carry Muriel's:
solitary box to the voiture and bid her their

last farewells. Agnes Prudhomme stood by
while these went on, with something very-like
a frown upon her countenance. She had
caught the admiring gaze with which Colonel
de Crespigny had received Lady Muriel, and
imagined she had outstripped her in his
estimation. But as soon as he thought that
he was unobserved, the colonel drew nearer
to her side.

And so it is not to be this time, Agnes ? "
he commenced.

So it appears, monsieur. I spoke to
Miladi Muriel last night about it, but she
said she could do nothing without asking
you or Miss Rutherford. And you have forgotten
all about me, doubtless."

Indeed ! you do me wrong. I broached
the subject to Miss Rutherford as soon as
we got clear of the Chateau gates, but she
has received no directions about engaging
a lady's maid, and is afraid to take the
responsibility on her own shoulders. I expect

you will have to depend upon me
after all, Agnes."

I will accept any situation monsieur is
£Good enough to find for me."

Then you will soon be suited, and indeed
I think I know the very place for you. Wait
till I return to England next month, Agnes,
and you shall hear from me. Where shall
I address you ? "

At the Poste Estate, Branches, monsieur,"
replied the girl hurriedly as Lady
Muriel turned towards them.

Good-bye, Agnes. I am sorry you cannot
come with me. It would have seemed
like carrying away a bit of the old home
to the new one ; " and then she laid her
hands on the girl's shoulders, and kissed
her on the cheeks. " Adieu I ma chcrc,
and you won't forget what you promised
to do for me — will you ? "

Trust me, mademoiselle," returned the
girl, " I will do it as quickly as you would

have done it yourself. It is quite safe with
me."

And then, with one more embrace all
round, and a longing desire to wrench herself
away and run to Athol, Lady Muriel
Darner suffered Colonel de Crespigny to lead
her to the voiture, where she flung herself
down upon the seat in an agony of despair.

->-#^

LADY MURIEL.

Her travelling companion did not attempt to
speak to her until she was somewhat calmer.
But as they left the fields that surrounded
the Chateau behind them and approached the
town of Eevranches, he ventured to lay his
gloved hand very gently upon hers and say,
Try and compose yourself, dear Lady
Muriel. In a few minutes we shall be at
the depot, and Miss Rutherford will be very
grieved to receive you like this. She has your
happiness so much at heart."

"I don't know her," sobbed Muriel childishly.


But you soon will, and you ought to have
known her long ago, for she is your father's
first cousin. Miss Walford is travelling with

us too — a young lady not much older, I
imagine, than yourself — so we shall be a
charming parti carre in Paris, just the risrht
number to go about to theatres and exhibitions
together. Are you fond of the theatre,
Lady Muriel ? "

I have never been to one," she answered,
drying her eyes vigorously with her handkerchief.


Never been to one ! " echoed Colonel de
Crespigny with surprise. "What a treat there
is in store for you ! How you will enjoy it !
I have promised Miss Rutherford to take her
the round of the Parisian theatres."

Are you her cousin too ? " demanded
Muriel, who was beginning to feel interested
in her new acquaintance.

I am not, I am sorry to say, else I should
be able to claim some sort of relationship
to yourself. But I am an old friend of the
family. I knew your father, Lord Ehylton,
when he was a boy, but I never had the pleasure

of seeing your mother. I was in India
during the time of his first marriage."

And my new mamma, the lady papa has
just married, do you know her too ? ' asked

Muriel eagerly.

Very well. I have known her for several
years."

Oh, do tell me what she is like," said the
girl, sitting straight upright and forgetting
all about her tears.

She is very handsome, and some time ago
she was considered a great beauty. But she
is no longer young. Her daughter, Miss
Seton, must be twenty. But she is very rich,
and she looks a countess every inch of
her."

I am glad she is rich," said Lady Muriel
naively. " I suppose papa married her for
that, for it is a terrible thing to be poor. If
he had been rich, I am sure he would not
have left me all those years at the Chateau
des Lauriers."

"Have you been unhappy there, Lady
Muriel ? "

Not exactly, but somehow I wish I had
left it years and years ago," she answered
with a sigh.

Colonel de Crespigny was very sharp where
matters of the heart were concerned, and he
guessed at once that Lady Muriel's sigh was
connected with some person in Eevranches
dearer to her than the uninteresting family at
the Chateau. But he was not so impolitic as
to allude to it. He merely said :

"It certainly was not a suitable place for
you to be brought up in, and were Lord
Ehylton to see it, I am sure he would say so
too. However, that is all over and best forgotten.
You will never be placed in such a
position again. You are a grown-up young
lady now, and will be able to do pretty well
as you please."

Do you really think so ? " asked Muriel
with a brighter look.

Certainly I do. Lady Muriel Darner,
living in her father's house, will be a very
different person from little Muriel Darner
running about the Chateau des Lauriers.
Don't you agree with me ? Why, life has but
just opened before you, Lady Muriel, and you
have every prospect of a long and healthy
one in which to have all manner of enjoyment.
I envy you, upon my soul I do. But
here we are at the depot, and there is Miss
Rutherford's voiture just in front of us.
Allow me to help you," and as he gave her
his hand in alighting, Muriel (who until that
moment had jumped in and out of carriages
without any offer of assistance) descended to
the ground like a grown-up woman, and felt
ten years older for the proceeding. Her eyes
were dry now and her voice steady, but
she looked a very quaint, old-fashioned little
figure as Colonel de Crespigny presented her
to Miss Rutherford.

Here is Lady Muriel Darner," he said,

and you had better take her into the salle
d'attente, while I settle with these thieving
cockers"

"Oh, my dear child," cried Miss Rutherford
effusively, as she embraced her young relation,
" and so this is really you. Why, how
tall you are — taller than Lina or myself, I do
declare — but you are sadly pale. Well, well,
we will soon remedy that. You must feel
quite at home with us, you know, dear, until
you join your papa, for I am your very own
cousin, and Lina is my niece, so that we are
one family after all."

Muriel thought it very funny at first to
be claimed as a cousin by an old lady with
sharp features and lines all over her face,
and she looked with astonishment from Miss
Rutherford's pink cheeks and dark eyebrows
and abundance of hair to her juvenile attire
and the gay scarlet poppies nodding over the
brim of her hat. She did not know how to
make the two things agree, but she had no

VOL. 1. 7

time for speculation, for Lina Walford was
kissing her on the other side, and the two
ladies between them bore her off to the waiting
room and assailed her with a storm of
remarks and inquiries.

Are you not very glad, dear, to get away
from that terrible old Chateau and those dreadful
people, the Grants ? Are you not longing
to see your father again and Lady Ehylton,
and to settle down in London ? Shall we not
have a delightful time in Paris, with dear
Colonel de Crespigny, who is so good and
kind to us ; and don't you anticipate the
pleasure of visiting the theatres and the
Louvre and all the exhibitions ? And oh,
you sly, sly puss, are you not anxious to
change that horrid conventual dress for some
pretty fashionable costume that will make all
the men fall in 'love with you as soon as
they see you ? "

Lady Muriel did not know what to answer
to such very searching questions. She had

been brought up in such a simple country
fashion, that the vivacity of her new friends
confused and puzzled her, and made her
shrink in herself. She blushed when Lina
talked of her having lovers, and her lip
trembled and the tears rose to her eyes, for
the allusion recalled the thought of Atliol ;
but she was too proud to show her emotion
before strangers, and with a strong effort she
choked them back again and only looked
foolish and ill at ease.

Don't talk such nonsense, Lina ! " exclaimed
Miss Rutherford, though she had
joined in the conversation herself. " Our
little cousin is not used to such frivolity.
You forget she has been educated at a
convent and is much steadier than yourself.
But you will try and be happy with us,
Muriel, will you not? — and great friends with
Lina, or Ehylton will regret that he intrusted
you to my care."

Oh, indeed I will, and I am sure I shall

7—2

be happy," replied Muriel smiling, for she
could smile again by this time. Everything
around her was so new and interesting, and
she began to feel so curious about the great
outside world which she had never yet
peeped into.

In another minute the colonel was amongst
them again with his hands full of railway
tickets, and in the bustle of looking after her
belongings, and being seated in the train,

© O 7 © '

Lady Muriel Darner had parted from Branches

and all the surroundings of her child



hood before she had realized that they were
passing away from her.

From that moment her life became so
entirely altered, that she could never link
the two halves together again. It seemed
indeed as if she had stepped out of one existence
into the other, and that a broad gulf
divided them, over which there was no repassing.
As she had suddenly, from being
a commoner's daughter, become a lady of

title, so did she pass from a retired home
and scholastic duties into a world of fashion
and amusement, and it was enough to turn
the head of any girl. It was not that as
soon as she joined the party to Paris, she
loved Athol Fergusson less, or desired to
think less of him, but they gave her no time
to think at all. Miss Rutherford and Miss
Walford talked so incessantly of what they
had seen, and what they were going to see
of what they had done, and what they
were going to do — that Muriel's brain became
quite confused, and she was willing only to
sit by and listen. She soon found that it
was expected that she and Lina were to be
companions to each other, and leave Miss
Rutherford and Colonel de Crespigny to
themselves. For some inexplicable reason
these two were always supposed to sit side
by side in a carriage, or at a dinner table,
and if the party split into half for walking
or driving, Muriel invariably found she was

left behind with Lina Walford. Not that
she grumbled at it, for she was indifferent
both to the colonel and Miss Butherford,
and she found Lina a pleasant and lively
companion. Miss Walford was a typical
young lady of the nineteenth century. She
knew everybody and everything — had read
books that her grandmother would have
hesitated to open, and was au fait with subjects
that have (until lately) been held to
be fit only for medical disquisition. She was
petite and a brunette, in age from twenty
to twenty four, in experience from forty to
sixty. She had had more lovers than years,
and fell out with them as rapidly as she fell
in love with them. As may be imagined
from this fact, she had little sentiment in her
composition, and laughed at the idea of any
woman proving a martyr to the tender passion.
Lina had not been many days in close
companionship with Lady Muriel Darner
before she found out that she had a secret

grief, and that it was connected with some
lover left behind at Eevranches. The discovery
did not in the least surprise her.
What could a girl do with herself in such
an unexciting, dead and alive, sepulchre of
a place like Eevranches, unless she fell in
love? But a lover who could not be displaced
at a moment's notice, to make way
for new dresses and mantles and hats, for
mornings spent in the picture galleries, or
at the Bon Marche, and evenings at the
theatre or in the Bois, was a revelation to
Lina Walford and ended by rousing her
curiosity. For, after the first days of excitement
were over, Muriel's thoughts reverted
very tenderly to her absent Athol, and
she fell into a state of deep depression.
Her new costumes ceased to interest her —
she sat, distraite and inattentive, even at
the feet of Sara Bernhardt, in the Porte
St. Martin, and sauntered through the
Louvre, with her thoughts and her eyes

alike fixed on anything but the pictures.


My dear Lina ! what can be the matter
with her?' said Miss Rutherford in confidence
to her niece. " She is positively melancholy.
She cannot possibly regret that
tumbledown old pigsty at Branches, and
those detestable Grants. Has she told you
nothing ? "

"No, auntie, she has never alluded to the
subject, but I have guessed it has something
to do with a young man. Have you noticed
the ring she wears on her emmet finger ? '

I think I have, but surely the child
cannot consider herself engaged to any one.
Who could she be engaged to?"

"You must ask me something easier, auntie,
but she never takes that ring off her finder
night or dav. I noticed it once when we
were in bed together, and told her she
would spoil the shape of her hand if she
did not remove her ring, but she said she

had worn it for twelve months, and nothing
would induce her to take it off again. What
do you think of that, auntie ? "

"My dear Lina, you must get the truth
out of her as soon as possible. Use a little
diplomacy, my love. Be sympathetic, but let
me have the whole story as soon as may befor
it must be put a stop to. Lord Ehylton
would never forgive me if I didn't crush all
such nonsense in the bud. He is quite determined
that Muriel shall make a good
marriage (as he writes me to-day), and is delighted
to hear she promises to be so handsome.
And he is right, too, for the poor
child has no money of her own, and I doubt
the amiability of Lady Ehylton as a stepmother."


"I'll worm it all out of her, auntie. You
may depend upon that," replied Lina, and
in effect she had heard the whole story of
Muriel's love for Athol Fergusson before
many days were over her head.

What chance had Muriel against the
strategy of such a little woman of the world
as Lina Walford ? The poor child stood in
need of sympathy, and Lina was so sympathetic.
She wanted counsel, and Lina
(apparently) had passed through just such
an ordeal herself. Above all she longed for a
friend and confidante, and Lina wooed her
confidence so sweetly that her secret was gone
from her before she knew it. And then when
it was once confessed to her girl friend,
what a comfort it was to tell her everything
— how handsome Athol was, and how
good. What an excellent son and brother.
What a clever scholar. What a thorough
gentleman in every way, with such strong
views of right, and hatred pf everything that
was mean, or dishonest or wrong. Muriel,
with glowing cheeks and tear-suffused eves,

o o

expatiated on the many excellencies of her
young lover, whilst Lina listened and forbore
to make a single remark that should stem

the current of her confidence. At last she
had heard everything, and Lady Muriel went
on to entreat her assistance.

And now, dear Lina, you must see why
I am so unhappy. I had to leave Branches
without even bidding him adieu,
and I am afraid he will think me unkind.
I would have written to him last week, for
I promised in the letter I left behind me
to let him know my address as soon as I
was settled, but I never go out alone and
I was afraid you would see his name on the
envelope and question me about it. But now
I feel much happier, because you understand
my difficulty and will help me through it."

Of course I will," said Lina heartily.
In fact if you will trust me with the letter
I will post it. I wouldn't tell auntie, if I were
you, Muriel. Old ladies don't understand
these matters, they have forgotten all about
them. I have never told her of one of my
lovers and I've had scores of them."

"But I don't think Cousin Amelia has
forgotten all about them," replied Muriel
laughing, " for I'm sure she makes love to
Colonel de Crespigny quite openly. I caught
her holding his hand on the sofa yesterday."

I daresay," returned Lina carelessly.
"They are supposed to be going to make a
match of it some day, you know. Not that
the colonel's attentions to her are any proof
of it, for he makes love to everybody. But
that has nothing to do with the matter.
If you write your letter / will see it posted."

"Oh, thank you, Lina. You have taken
a weight off my mind. Athol will be longing
to hear from me. Oh ! dear, oh ! dear !
I wonder how long it will be before we
meet again ? Months and months, perhaps
years."

You will have had any number of lovers
meantime," laughed Lina.

Lina ! " exclaimed Muriel, in a tone of
horrified incredulity.

c: You will, my dear, take my word for
it. Why, this is only number one. You don't
imagine that a pretty girl like yourself is
going through life with one lover."

But I have promised to be true to Athol.
I am going to marry him," replied Muriel.

"When?"

Oh, I can't say ' when.' It must all depend
on his promotion in the army. But
when he is a captain I daresay he will be
able to afford to keep a wife."

Do you know how long it takes to make
a captain in the British army, when a man
has no money to purchase his steps with,
Muriel? / do, because I happen to have
fallen in love with a ' sub.' once, and it was
all explained to me. An officer may remain
at the bottom of the ladder till his hair is
grey, unless there is a war, and he stands
his chance of being shot like the rest."

Oh ! Lina, don't talk like that. You
frighten me," said Muriel tearfully. " But

however long it may be, I must wait for
Athol, because I am pledged to become his
wife,"

Well, dear, I hope you'll enjoy it ; but I
would just have one or two flirtations meanwhile,
if it's only to keep your hand in."

Lina laughed heartily to see Lady Muriel's
look of horror at the proposition, but she
kissed her the next moment to make up for
it, and her words were forgotten as soon as
uttered. Not so with Muriel's own. They
were all repeated to Miss Rutherford on the
first opportunity until that lady was au
courant of the whole affair.

"Now I don't want to tell Ehylton about
this, and bring down his wrath upon poor
Muriel's head, Lina," she answered, " and
there is no need for it, for the poor dear
child has done no wrong. She has only
been amusing herself, and a season in town
will drive it all out of her head, only it
must not go any further. If it is checked

now, it will die a natural death. Let her
write her letter and confide it to your keeping,
and then bring it to me, Lina, and
we'll burn it together. Silence kills a fancy
sooner than anything else, and if it is correct
that this young man is going out to India
with his regiment, why, there will be an end
to it. It's ridiculous, my dear ! it could
never come to anything. A girl without a
sixpence marrying an officer on his pay !
What would it end in? A menage like
that terrible Chateau des Lauriers, the
very remembrance of which makes me
shudder."

Of course, auntie, and nobody with any
sense would have thought otherwise, but
Lady Muriel is very simple ! She has the
most old-fashioned ideas about love and marriage
you ever heard ! She makes me scream
with laughter, sometimes."

Knock them out of her head as fast as
you can, Lina. It's the kindest thing you

can do for her. She will have a splendid
opportunity to make a good match next
season, for the Ehyltons will launch out
well, I expect, for Miss Seton's sake. And
I hope dear Muriel will take advantage
of it, for Lady Ehylton's temper is so uncertain,
I don't know how they'll agree. But
Muriel looks quite different in her Parisian
costumes and with her hair properly dressed
almost handsome at times. What do you
think, Lina ? "

It doesn't much signify what 1 think,
auntie," returned the girl, who was pretty
enough herself to be able to afford to be
generous ; " it's what the gentlemen think !
I know Muriel gets stared at enough whereever
we go, whether we're walking on the
Boulevards, or driving in the Bois, and
Colonel de Crespigny said yesterday that he
thought she was the most beautiful girl he'd
ever seen."

The colonel!" reiterated Miss Rutherford,

reddening violently ; " you must be mistaken.
I don't believe it."

It's true, auntie, upon my word. Not
very complimentary to me, was it? but I
stood the affront with equanimity because I
really don't care what an old widower with
two grown-up sons thinks about me, or
doesn't."

Lina ! you're growing pert, and I don't
like your manner at all. Whatever you may
think of our friend Colonel de Crespigny, he
is a very fine man, and has a princely fortune,
and there are very few young ladies
who would not be glad to jump at him."

"I daresay, auntie. Let them jump! I
have my eye fixed on my own prospects
(as you know) in quite another direction, so
I shall never interfere with any of the
colonel's amours. But, with regard to this
letter, auntie. If I bring it to you, you
must promise me not to read it, because I

like Muriel too well to allow that."

vol. i. 8

Lina, what do you take me for?" cried
Miss Butherford, with virtuous indignation.

Come, auntie, you know you've done it
once or twice before, and with respect to
some people's letters, I might say nothing ;
but Muriel is so thoroughly in earnest (just
at present, that is to say) that it would
seem a shame to pry into her secrets."

The upshot of this conversation was that
a few days after Miss Walford brought her
aunt a thick letter, closely sealed and addressed
to Athol Fergusson, Esq., 74 rue des
Pierres, Eevranches."

Double postage, you see," she said gaily,
"fifty centimes worth of sighs and kisses
and vows of eternal fidelity. Now, auntie,
honour bright ! There's no stove alight to
pop it into, but we must tear it up at once
and scatter it to the four winds of heaven."

Stop, Lina," exclaimed Miss Rutherford,
ct on second thoughts, I think it is my duty
to send this letter, just as it is, to Muriel's

father. Now, don't make any objection, my
dear. It is the kindest thing to do after
all, for this is a very serious matter, and
Lord Ehylton is the proper person to deal
with it. If it isn't stopped at once, it may
lead to a lifelong misery for Muriel. And
should she ever hear of the disposition of her
letter (which is very unlikely) you can say
that I insisted upon your giving it up to me."

And so the long epistle which carried all
poor Lady Muriel's hopes and fears with it,
travelled to Italy instead of Branches, and
was perused by the Earl of Ehylton instead
of Athol Fergusson. His approval of his
cousin's prompt action knew no bounds.

"You have done perfectly right, my dear
Amelia," he wrote in answer, " and I trust
you to destroy all future letters that may
fall into your hands, either to or from my
daughter. I shall not communicate with the
young man. It would look like making too

much of the foolish affair ; but leave it to die

8—2

of itself, as it is sure to do. Lady Ehylton
and I have decided on returning to Oakley
Court next month to make preparations for
the shooting season, and we shall expect
Miss Seton and Muriel to join us there.
Meanwhile, ask de Crespigny, as a favour
to me, to do all in his power to divert
Muriel's mind by taking her about to places
of amusement. Leave her no time to think,
my dear Amelia, and pour as much ridicule
as you possibly can on any cases similar to
her own, and she will soon forget this loutish
lover of Eevranches."

Miss Butherford acted faithfully on these
instructions, and the days in Paris flew by
so quickly in the pursuit of pleasure, that
Lady Muriel was astonished to find that a
whole fortnight had elapsed since her letter
to Athol had been posted. But when she
ventured to express her wonder at not having
received an answer, to Lina, that young
lady's remark was not very consolatory.

Did you expect to hear, ray dear ? Oh !
you don't know boys. Nothing frightens
them so much as having to write a letter.
They'd rather walk up to a cannon's mouth
any day. I had a boy lover once — a nice
young fellow he was, too, and awfully good-looking
— but when we parted he couldn't
keep up a correspondence with me, and soit
came to nothing, and I said, ' No more
boys for me, thank you, who don't know
their own minds.' "

Oh, but At hoi does know his own mind,
Lina, and I am sure he would have written
to me, unless something very particular had
prevented him."

Perhaps you will hear in a day or two,"
said Lina soothingly.

"Perhaps" echoed Muriel with a sigh.

But " tomorrow and tomorrow ' came,
without a line from Athol Fergusson, and Lady
Muriel Darner turned her back on the country
that held him, without having heard a word.

ATHOL Ferguson.

Athol Ferguson did not walk away from
the Chateau des Lauriers directly he had
parted from Muriel Darner, on the last night
of her residence there. He had more feeling
than love for this girl. A great sense
of protection and ownership was associated
with all his thoughts of her, and it seemed
quite wrong, somehow, that she should be
entering a house where he had no right to
follow her. He stood for some minutes outside
the sate, watching the dim light of the
petiole lamp through the shuttered window,
and as he reluctantly walked away at last,
he said half-audible, " God bless her and
make my love a blessing to her."

The night had fallen by this time and he

had to pick his way rather cautiously over
the rutted road, on each side of which was
a deep ditch, but he hardly thought where
he was going, his mind was so full of Muriel.
Oh ! how hard it seemed to contemplate parting
with her. How much harder than he
ever thought it would be ! and how fair the
prospect and how light the duties would
stretch out before him, if he might only take
her with him as his companion and his wife.
The contemplation of such an idea made
Athol's heart beat like a sledge-hammer.
Was it, after all, then, such an utter impossibility
? Mr. Darner (as the young man
still believed him to be) had systematically
neglected his daughter. He had left her for
ten long years to the tender mercies of the
Grants. He hardly knew indeed what she
was like, and he certainly could care nothing
at all about her. Was it absurd to imagine
then that he might be glad to get rid of
her altogether, even to share the somewhat

uncertain fortunes of an English subaltern.
13ut after all (as Athol proudly thought) —
and if this young man had some faults in
his character more prominent than others,
they were those of overweening pride and
ultra-sensitiveness — his birth and position
were those of a gentleman, and if he lived
he might hold a better position than Mr.
Darner himself. He had heard occasional
references to Muriel's father, made by visitors
to Branches, and they had not been very
favourable ones. He had been described as
an intensely selfish and somewhat niggardly
character, universally disliked by men and
not in much better odour with the women.
Such a man might reject his modest overtures
with scorn, or snap at the opportunity
to rid himself of the burden of Muriel, and
Athol Fergusson almost came to the resolution
to stand his chance. He was a very
deep-thinking and deep-feeling young fellow
(as has been already said), and the events of

his life had made him years older than
his age, and he decided he would rather
know what lay before him at once and shape
his course accordingly. This decision and
the pleasant dreams it brought in its train
warmed his blood and quickened his step,
so that by the time he arrived at his mother's
rooms in the Eue des Pierres, his face and
eyes were glowing. As he entered the little
salon Mrs. Fergusson's eyes turned on him
with unspeakable affection, and, indeed, he
was a son of whom any mother might have
been proud. His young, lithe figure was
fast developing into that of a well-set-up and
muscular man. His face bore the impress
of truth and goodness. It seemed impossible
that his frank deep blue eyes could
look you in the face and lie, or that any
ribald or offensive language could issue from
his cleanly cut and sensitive mouth. When
he appeared amongst them all his womenkind
bestirred themselves to do him honour.

Alice commenced to lay the supper-table;
Helen moved her easel to one side, and
prepared to listen to any news Athol might
have to give them, and Mrs. Fergusson put
down her needlework, and pulled a chair
significantly to her side.

Well, dear boy," she said as her son
sat down in it, ' ; and what has kept you
out so late this evening ? Alice and Nelly
thought you were going to take them fora
walk."

The had him so seldom amongst them,
that they all made a great deal of him
when he was there, but to his mother
Athol was more than to any one else in the
world. Mrs. Fergusson loved her girls, but
she did not hope to keep them long. Alice
was already engaged to marry a Belgian,
Baron Raymond dragon, and Helen was
studying to become an artist, and would
probably drift away from home on her
own account. But Athol was his mother's

stronghold — the tower of defence she looked
to for her old age. He had passed with
the highest honours for a noble profession,
and she knew that as long as he lived, he
would never desert his mother, who was
penniless except for the support afforded
her by her daughters' earnings as teachers
of music and drawing. It had often made
Athol's heart ache to see the privations
they were compelled to endure at home,
and he would have relinquished the hope
of marrying Muriel (even if it tore his
heart out) sooner than give up the prospect
of helping his [mother out of his own
earnings. It was for this he had studied
and striven so hard — that he had denied
himself the pleasures natural to his youth — ■
and refused the assistance offered by his
uncle — that he might become independent
of all but himself, and feel that his mother
owed her support to no one but her son.
When Mrs. Fergusson asked him where

lie had been that evening, he blushed a
little, for he was still young enough and
ingenuous enough to blush. He half suspected
that she did not entirely approve of
his intimacy with Muriel "Darner, but a lie
was foreign to his nature and he answered
her without hesitation.

I have been on the Ramparts, mother,
with Muriel Darner, and have just returned
from seeing her home. I didn't know my
sisters expected me to join them, or I should
have told them I was engaged."

You are always engaged, it seems to
me*' said Helen, in a tone of annoyance.

Well, why shouldn't he be ? " returned
Alice, who was the most amiable of the
two sisters. "It's much pleasant for the
dear boy to stroll about the Ramparts with
a pretty girl like Muriel, than to be walking
after you and me like a footman. Isn't
it, Athol?"

The young man laughed uneasily, but

said nothing. His mother glanced at him,
and then turned to Alice reprovingly.

"It may be pleasant, Alice, but it is
certainly not so safe. Mrs. Grant neglects
her charge very much, in my opinion, to let
Miss Darner run about alone as she does,
and what Mr. Damer can be about not to be
cognizant of it, beats me altogether. It is
quite disgraceful. No modest girl would
do it or she would not remain modest long
if she did."

"You wrong both Miss Damer and myself
there, mother," said Athol hotly. " I'll
lav there's not a more modest, nor loveable
little girl in the United Kingdom than
she is, and that I shall never do anything
to violate it. On the contrary, I would
give my life to preserve it, for — / have
promised to marry her."

The murder was out now, and he was almost
astonished at his own audacity in having
let it out so freely. lie hung his head a

bit, when the words were said — not from
shame, but dread of the storm that nrisrht
ensue, but the Ferguson were ladies, and
would not indulge in vituperation.

Helen laughed rather sardonically, as if
the news were too absurd to be credible.
Alice stared and exclaimed, " What nonsense
! How can you ? " — and his mother
turned very pale and said, " My boy ! you
are not in earnest ! You are playing offa
joke upon us."

But the accusation of not being in earnest
irritated Athol more than anv other

■

could have done.

Why should I not be in earnest ? ' he
exclaimed. " I was never more so in my
life. Muriel and I have been fond of each
other for a year past and she engaged herself
to me six months ago ; and I wouldn't
give her up for all the world. I would
have told you of it sooner, mother, had
there been any prospect of my marrying

her, but now that I . am an officer, it is
but right you should hear of my intentions."


But what prospect have you of marrying
her now?" demanded Mrs. Fergusson,
with trembling lips.

Not immediately perhaps, but Muriel is
quite willing to wait for me, and as for
myself, I shall never forget her to the last
day of my life."

At this declaration Helen laughed immoderately.


Forgive me, my dear Athol, but it is
too absurd. You, at twenty-two, and Muriel
at eighteen, vowing a life-long fidelity. Why,
it's calf love, dear boy. You will forget all
about it before six months are over."

Athol drew himself up proudly, but
vouchsafed no answer, except what was
conveyed by turning round to his mother
and saying :

You won't laugh at my trouble in parting

with her, mother. It is a very real and
heavy one to meu

No, my dear, of course not; but I
sincerely hope, with Helen, that you will
get over it. It is very ridiculous, Athol ;
every one would say that. You have positively
nothing but your pay, and Miss
Darner appears to be a pauper. There is
no chance of your being able to marry anyone
for years — if even then. And to suppose
this schoolgirl will keep faith with
you for an indefinite period, is really laughable.
Indeed, I trust you do not think too
seriously of her, for your own sake. If I
believed what you say, I should be truly
miserable ; but I look upon it as a mere
flirtation, that will fade as quickly as it has
sprung up."

Then you think wrong," said Athol
gloomily.

"Well, my opinion is that you're both
very hard on the dear boy," interposed

Alice in her cheery voice. " He can't
marry now, of course, and I don't suppose
he wants to ; but why shouldn't he engage
himself to Muriel Darner if he has a fancy
that way ? It's the girl's own choice to wait
for him, and I think she will show her
sense if she does so. He's going into a
splendid corps, and will draw good pay,
by-and-by ; besides there's always the chance
(a poor one I grant, but nil desperado)
of Uncle Eobert and his sickly little son
vacating the baronetcy for Athol's benefit."

Oh, my dear, it is you who are talking
nonsense now," exclaimed her mother, " and
I think it wrong of you to put such ideas
into your brother's head. Your cousin
Herbert is almost restored to health, and
Sir Eobert is likely to outlive us all. I hope
Athol will never be so foolish as to indulge
in any expectations from that quarter."

Never" said the young man emphatically.
" I mean to depend en my own exert

I. 9

tions, and wait for no man's shoes. But I
thank you for your advocacy, dear Alice,
all the same. You know what love is, and
will understand me when I say that I would
rather wait till I am grey-haired for Muriel,
than marry any other woman."

But will she wait for you ? " demanded
Helen.

I think so, Nelly," he answered briefly.

We are making much too much of this
affair," interposed Mrs. Fergusson fretfully.
"After all it is only a boy and girl fancy,
and time alone can prove whether it will
ever be anything more. But I hope (whatever
happens) that Athol will never forget
what he owes to his mother and sisters."

Never ! mother ! " he repeated as earnestly
as before, but he perceived how distasteful
his news had been to his hearers,
and his natural reticence made him drop
the subject. But he only thought of it the
more, and walked to the "Ramparts to meet

Muriel the next evening, with the full determination
to ask her consent to write at
once to Mr. Darner and learn his opinion
with regard to their engagement. If he
would only consent to their immediate marriage
(he thought), or agree to its taking
place at any definite period, how hard he
would work and save, meanwhile, to provide
his darling with a comfortable home.
It was beyond the usual hour of their
meeting, and he had just begun to wonder
what had detained her, when he saw Agnes
Prudhomme advancing to him. Athol had
a particular dislike to this girl. Her influence
disturbed and irritated him. The
atmosphere of cunning and malignity by
which she was surrounded, had nothing in
common with his open soul and generous,
charitable spirit. Added to this, he felt uneasy
in her presence. There was a time
when Agnes had tried hard to win the

young Englishman for herself and failed,

9—2

and such misunderstandings between the
sexes generally culminate in mutual dislike.
He tried to avoid her, on this occasion, by
turning quickly back and sauntering down
a lower path, but Agnes quickened her footsteps
and overtook him.

Ah ! Monsieur Fergusson ! " she exclaimed,
" so you are running away from
me. But you would not do so if you knew
the grand news I bring you."

News" he said, wheeling round to face
her. " Of whom ? Miss Darner ? "

But, yes ! of Miss Darner. Conceive the
consternation we are in, monsieur, at the
Chateau. We are deserted. She has left us."

Athol turned very white. The intelligence
came so suddenly that it unnerved
him, and, for the moment, all his feeling
rushed into his face and betrayed him. It
was what Agnes had intended it should do.

Ah ! you are surprised. You did not
believe she would leave you like this, without

a word, eh? But I knew all along that
some day Mademoiselle Darner would play
you a trick, and show you what she is."

I don't understand you, Agnes," he said
hurriedly. "Do you mean that Muriel has
left Eevranches? When did she go? Whom
did she go with ? "

"That is just what I have come to tell
monsieur, if he will but listen. I promised
mademoiselle the last thing that I would
come here this evening and tell him everything.
But wait. The greatest surprise of
all is, that mademoiselle is no longer mademoiselle,
but Miladi Muriel Darner, and monsieur
son pere is the Earl of Ehylton."

Oh, Agnes ! have pity on me and say it
more distinctly. You do not know what I
am feeling," he cried, in a voice of genuine
distress.

I am telling you the truth, monsieur.
Last night an English lady and gentleman
relations of Miladi Muriel — came to the

Chateau to tell us the grand news, and this
morning at ten o'clock they fetched her
away, and she has gone — I do not know
where — with them."

44 And she is actually gone! She has left
me," he exclaimed, as he turned his face
away from Agnes's scrutinizing stare.

She has, monsieur; but she couldn't
help it. She was obliged to go. They
would not let her have one day more in
Branches. Her papa, the earl, has made
a grand marriage with much money, and
he sent for miladi home at once, that she
may be introduced into society. That is
what the lady who fetched her, said. And
Madame Grant and I were up all night,
packing her clothes, and as soon as the
dejeuner was over, she went."

But did she leave no letter for me — no
message ? ' cried the young man, using all
his moral strength to stamp down his rising
emotion:

How could Miladi Muriel write ? What
time had she ? " demanded Agnes, shrugging
her shoulders at his unreasonableness.
She was crying too much at leaving the
Demoiselles Grant and Eevranches, to be
able to think of anything. Only she said
to me, ' Go to the Eamparts this evening,
Agnes, and tell Athol ' — that is how she
called you, monsieur — ' why I cannot come,
and say I am going home to my papa in
London.' "

She might have scribbled me one word,"
he said despairingly. " But I will write to
her instead. What is her address, Agnes?"

The girl opened her big eyes at him.

I don't know, monsieur. I don't even
know where Miladi Muriel is gone ; but I
have heard Captain Grant say that Milord
Ehylton is in Italy."

But you can get it for me, Agnes,
surely ? "

She shook her head.

But how, monsieur ? If I make such a
demand, I shall be asked the reason. They
know I cannot need it for myself, and for
you, would they disclose it ? "

"Oh, you are so clever, I am sure you
could find it out if you choose. You will
try, won't you? I shall be so unhappy till
I hear from her."

Miladi will write to you herself perhaps.
She knows your address," said
Agnes, dubiously.

Yes — yes ; you are right. Of course she
will. There may be a letter on its way tome,
even now. Thank you, Agnes, for the
suggestion. I will not despair, though it is
hard to part with her like this."

I told miladi you would find it hard ;
but parbleu t how can you expect those who
go away to feel like those who are left
behind ? It was a moment of great excitement
for her. She could talk and think of
nothing but the theatres and operas she was

to see, and the costumes of the newest
mode that the lady promised her."

"It is no wonder they thrust me out of
her mind, 5 ' said Athol sarcastically.

Ah, Monsieur Fergusson, a young girl's
affection is not often very strong, and Muriel
is too frivolous to love well. She does not
know what real love is. It is all very pleasant
to amuse oneself (as she did with you) when
there is nothing better to do, but I would
not give much for her love after she has
been to a few balls and parties in that
beautiful heaven of London."

"There, there, Agnes, that will do," returned
the young man hastily ; " you wrong
her, but it does not signify. It is not likely
Muriel would speak of all she felt to you.
Never mind the address, I will find it out
for myself. And now, thank you for coming
to meet me, and good-night."

He raised his hat and strode away quickly,
gnawing his budding moustache as he went.

The news of Muriel's departure had taken
him so completely by surprise that he could
hardly believe it was true. Gone from Branches,
and hardly leaving a trace behind
her ! She, who but four and twenty hours
before had walked with him on that very spot,
with her hand clasped in his, and her eyes
looking fondly in his face. It appeared impossible,
and yet what reason had he to disbelieve
his informant ? His first impulse was
to walk straight to the Chateau and ask
Mrs. Grant to tell him every particular she
might know concerning her ward. But
second thoughts made him change his mind.
The same pride which had forbid his using
Agnes Prudhomme as a go-between, or
showing her how deeply her intelligence
affected him, prevented his going to the
Chateau. What right had the Grants (he
thought) to know his secret, or to have the
chance of commenting on, or ridiculing it?
It was sacred to himself and Muriel, and he

would keep it so. He decided that lie would
wait until he heard from Muriel herself, and
then ask her leave to address her father.
But the light had faded from the bright summer's
evening for him as he reflected how
his darling might be weeping for him even
at that moment ; he could no longer take
any pleasure in the sights and sounds around
him, and turned his steps towards home,
that he might battle with his disappointment
unwitnessed and alone. But when he arrived
there he found his news had preceded
him. Gossip was a staple commodity in
Eevranches, and the Misses Fergusson had
not mixed with their pupils long that day
before they had heard the whole story of
Muriel Darner's sudden transformation into
Lady Muriel Darner, the daughter of the
Earl of Ehylton, and how she had been at
once sent for to return home and take her
proper position in society as one of the aristocracy.
Athol found his mother and sisters

brimful of the wonderful intelligence which
had just been brought home by Alice, and
they assailed him with it as soon as his foot
had crossed the threshold.

Well, my dear son," exclaimed Mrs. Fergusson,
not without a degree of satisfaction
in her voice, " and so this is the end of
your fairy dream. Your inamorata is transformed
into an earl's daughter. You must
see what an impassable gulf divides you now."

And she left the Chateau without giving
you the slightest notice," cried Helen ; " that
doesn't look as if she were very responsive.
But I don't trust Muriel Darner, and I expect
you will say the same, Athol, before
long. Miss Bush tells me the ingratitude
she displayed towards the Grants was really
disgusting, for they have done their best for
her, when all's said and done. She left
them without the least feeling, and poor
Mrs. Grant has been in bed all day from
fretting."

Poor dear Athol," chimed in Alice compassionately,
" I am really afraid this sudden
change will put a stop to your little love
affair. You could never hope to aspire to
an earl's daughter ; so the sooner you give
up the idea the better."

Stop, stop ; you don't know bow you are
torturing me," cried Athol in a voice of
pain. " I have suffered enough to-day
already. For God's sake, spare me your
suggestions and surmises. I only know one
thing — that my Muriel will be faithful to me
through everything, and marry me before
the man of highest rank in England. When
I hear from her (as I shall do perhaps tomorrow)
I will tell you her determination,
but till then in pity leave me to bear this
unexpected trouble by myself."

He walked up to his own room as he
spoke, and they saw no more of him until
the following morning, and by that time the
subject of Lady Muriel Darner had been

tabooed amongst them by general consent.
They were wise enough to see that Athol
was too much of a man to be influenced in
such a matter by their likes or dislikes, and
that the best means to make him forget it
was to leave him to himself. They watched
his anxious looks and nervous manner as
the post came in, day after day, without
bringing any letter from Lady Muriel, and
though they secretly rejoiced at her defalcation,
they could not help grieving for the
young fellow who was so dear to them.
At last the weary weeks came to an end,
and Athol Fergusson received the news that
he was gazetted to a battalion of Horse
Artillery, stationed at Malta, and was under
orders to join at once. lie came into the
salon to communicate this intelligence, which
he knew would be received with consternation
by his mother and sisters, with a face
beaming with expectation.

Mother," he exclaimed, " my orders have

arrived, and I am off to London tomorrow.
Will you and the girls see that my things
are ready in time ? "

To-morrow ! " echoed the women with
dismay. " Oh, Athol, are we really to lose
you so soon ? "

Well, you knew it was coming, my dear
mother, and since I am doing no good here
the sooner I get to work the better."

But in his own heart a different tune was
ringing.

To-morrow ! To-morrow I shall be in
London, and if I die for it, I will see my
Muriel and learn the truth of her silence
before I go."

^

Te— 1<&&-<S

OAKLEY COURT.

Lord Ehylton was everything that he had
been described to be, both to Lady Muriel
and to Athol Fergusson. In person, he was
of low stature, with narrow chest and stooping
shoulders — keen eyes, a large hawk-like
nose and a cold mouth with thin and bloodless
lips. His character corresponded to his
appearance. He was cruel (in a small domestic
way), selfish and stingy. It is to be
supposed that he had possessed some attractions
in his youth wherewith to win the
affections of Lady Muriel's beautiful but un-aristocratic
young mother, but it was fortunate
for the poor child that she died early
and passed out of a world that would have
proved very disappointing to her. As Mr.

Darner, the Earl of Ehylton had been very
impecunious — in fact, the scanty allowance
he made his daughter had swallowed up a
fourth of his income. It was not therefore
wonderful, that as a commoner he had not
married again. It would have been a brave
woman indeed who would have risked binding
herself to such a man, without the means
of getting away from him. But when he
suddenly and unexpectedly walked into the
earldom, everything became changed ; for a
coronet covers a multitude of sins, and from
having been despised and forsaken — his name
forgotten in every visiting list and his only
associates the members of his club — Lord
Ehylton found himself to be in universal request.
The income which accompanied the
title was very inadequate to keep it up, but
the name of " countess " alone was such a
marketable article that the earl had the pick
of the prettiest heiresses for sale at once.

But he did not wish to commence a second
vol. i. 10

voyage on the troubled seas of matrimony
with an inexperienced traveller. He wanted
a fashionable, handsome and experienced
woman, with a fortune of her own, to preside
over his household, and the Honourable
Mrs. Seton seemed made for the purpose.
She was not of aristocratic lineage herself, and
so she was likely to value the privileges of
being admitted to the purple all the more.
Indeed originally she had been rather less
than gentle, having been picked up at a
very early age by the Honourable James
Seton — some said on the stage, others from
behind a bar, and others again from a still
more dubious position. But all such rumours
(whether true or false) had been forgotten
long ago, for Mr. Seton had married her,
and died, and left her in possession of Oakley
Court and a princely fortune years and
years before, and she had lived there and
brought up her only child, Cecilia, like a
young lady, and been admitted to the county

society ever since. So the early ban had
gone through the bankruptcy court of public
opinion and been whitewashed, and the
Honourable Mr. Seton's widow was considered
a very suitable match for the new
Earl of Ehylton. There was not a dissentient
voice with regard to her beauty, which
had been a byword from her youth, and
now, at past forty, seemed only in its prime.
Her magnificently moulded figure and alabaster
skin, her large hazel eyes and auburn
locks, made her look (as Colonel de Cres-pigmy
had remarked) " every inch a countess
; " and if her manners were sometimes
more free than is permitted in the strictest
canons of good taste, she had arrived at an
age when a woman is supposed to be a law
to herself. But there was one peculiarity
about Lady Ehylton which his lordship had
heard nothing of before he married her.
One seldom does hear anything of a woman's

faults during the period of betrothal. They

10—2

are reserved for a bonne-bouche after marriage.
She possessed a most violent temper
so unrestrained indeed at times as to
frighten those about her. It had frightened
her daughter, Miss Seton, into a cowering
timid creature, who was afraid of the sound
of her own voice when in the presence of
her mother. Cecilia Seton had not inherited
one tithe of that mother's beauty. She was
the living image of her father, who had
possessed small eyes and a sharp pointed
nose, and been dubbed " Bandy-legged Jem '
amongst his intimate associates. Her want
of good looks had made Cecilia almost repugnant
to her handsome, dashing mother
and it was a source of annoyance to Lady
Ehylton that (notwithstanding the substantial
dowry left her by her father) she had failed
in marrying off her daughter before herself.
She would have liked to have made her
second start in life unencumbered by a
living tell-tale of her age, but all her endeavours

had been in vain. Cecilia was so
stupid and dull and uninteresting, that no
man would take the trouble to become acquainted
with her. And now, there would
be a second trouble on her hands in the
shape of Lady Muriel Darner, whom report
said to be handsome ; and though Lady Elton
would have preferred her own daughter
to be a beauty, she did not relish the idea
of having a rival near her throne in the
shape of a step-daughter. However, she
was politic enough to make the best of it
before her husband, trusting that she might
be relieved before long of Lady Muriel's
presence, and meanwhile, she ordered preparations
to be made on an extensive scale to
receive both the young ladies at Oakley
Court. They were not to share a maid between
them as Miss Rutherford had anticipated.
Each of them was to have an attendant
of her own, for the countess, with
the vulgar ideas common to those who have

risen in the social scale, thought that no
one could be a " lady " who did anything
for herself. The girls' suites of apartments
adjoined each other and had been fitted up
according to the taste of the upholsterer —
one suite being radiant with rose-colour,
the other, with pale blue. They were very
luxurious and convenient, but the " smell of
money " was on everything in Oakley Court
and jarred on the senses of those who possessed
refined and cultivated minds. The
Earl and Countess of Ehylton returned home
in the latter part of July, and Lady Muriel
Darner and Miss Seton were desired to join
them without delay. Cecilia was the first
to arrive, having stayed with friends during
her mother's absence. She was nervous and
miserable in the presence of her purse-proud
and self-conscious mother and her silent, undemonstrative
step-father, and crept away by
herself as often as she could to wander
through the rose-tinted apartments reserved

for Lady Muriel, and wonder what her new
sister would be like. Muriel did not cross
from Paris for some da T s later. Miss Rutherford
(who was not afraid of the earl, or any
man) did not find it convenient to obey his
summons immediately, and therefore took
French leave to put off the journey home
until she did. And Muriel was not sorry
for the delay. She had become interested
in Paris and its amusements by that time
and was loath to leave them. Colonel de
Crespigny had carried out her father's injunctions
to the letter and taken her about
to see everything, until she was so familiar
with the city and her new friends she seemed
to have known them all her life. And during
this time she had not received one line
from Athol Fergusson. She had written
him a second letter which Miss Walford had
also managed to get into her hands, but
there was necessarily no reply to it, and
Muriel had begun to believe that Lina must

be right when she averred that men only
cared for a woman while she was present,
and forgot all about her directly her back
was turned. It was with a heavy heart
that she said good-bye to her cousins at
their rooms in Jermyn Street, and prepared
to accompany Colonel de Crespigny down
to her father's house in Surrey. Lord Shelton
had especially begged his old friend de
Crespigny to take the trouble of bringing
his daughter to him at Oakley Court, and
the colonel appeared only too willing to
execute the commission. He did not say
much to combat Lady Muriel's evident nervousness
and timidity at the prospect of
meeting her father again, before Miss Rutherford,
but as soon as they found themselves
in the train and free from observation, he
commenced to rally her on her melancholy.
And what is the matter with Lady
Muriel?" he inquired playfully, as he took
her hand. " She is surely not in any doubt

of the cordial reception that awaits her at
Oakley Court ? "

"I don't know," replied Muriel, whilst a
rebellious tear which refused to be held back
coursed slowly down her cheek. " They are
all strangers to me, you see. I don't seem
to know even my own father. I can hardly
remember what he is like, and — and — I have
been so happy in Paris with Cousin Amelia
and Lina and you."

It gives me inexpressible pleasure to
hear you say so, dear Lady Muriel," said the
colonel with effusive gallantry, " but I trust
you will be still happier with your own
family, distracting as your loss must prove
to our little circle in Jermyn Street. Lord
Khylton cannot fail to be charmed with your
appearance, and Lady Ehylton is most enthusiastic
when she takes a fancy. Miss
Seton is, too, I understand, a most amiable
young lady. And Oakley Court is furnished
in a style of exceptional comfort and luxury.

I am sure you will have everything there
that you can possibly desire."

"But I don't want anything better than
I had in Paris," replied Lady Muriel childishly,
and with something very like a sob.
Her words and manner awakened the colonel's
vanity — a sentiment always very much on
the alert in his bosom — and made him flatter
himself that the girl's tears fell for the loss
of his own company, and the idea added a
thousand, charms to her in his sight.

My dearest Lady Muriel," he said softly,
as he drew nearer to her, " may I hope that
you will sometimes think of the pleasant
time we have had together with regret, and
wish for its renewal ? For Paris is not the
only city in the world, remember. London
teems with pleasure and interest, and I shall
be just as charmed to be your cicerone here,
as there."

"If papa will let me," faltered Muriel.

Let you! Why, of course he will. I am

afraid the difficulty will be to get you away
from Oakley Court."

"But my step-mother. You forget her.
She may choose to interfere with my visiting
Cousin Amelia."

Now, my dear girl ! you are taking a
most distorted view of the matter. Why
should Lady Ehylton interfere with your innocent
amusements? She is not an old beldame
who has forgotten what pleasure is.
You will laugh at your own conjectures an
hour hence."

And indeed Lady Muriel was quite ready
by that time to own herself mistaken. A
magnificently-appointed carriage, with two
footmen standing behind it and a third to
open the door, met them at the Richmond
Station (near which the Court was situated),
and in a quarter of an hour more they had
driven to it through a park-like approach,
and stopped at the hall door. Colonel de
Crespigny felt Lady Muriel's hand tremble

in his own as he assisted her to alight, so
he drew it under his arm and patted it
paternally, in a way that was very soothing
to her and made her cling to him for protection.
The powdered flunkey, who had
met them at the hall door, ushered them into
a large and luxurious library, at the further
end of which a handsome woman attired in
purple velvet was seated at an inlaid table
writing letters. As soon as she heard their
names announced she rose hastily and,
coming forward, folded Muriel in a close embrace.
The girl's first sensation was that
she had got into a perfumer's shop — so
powerfully scented was Lady Ehylton, from
her hair and her hands to her dress and
her pocket-handkerchief. Her ample bosom,
falling and swelling beneath the folds of
purple velvet, seemed to breathe forth Rimmel's
extracts, and the very powder on her
skin was dense with patchouli. Lady Muriel
drew back, half stifled, but her step-mother

insisted upon kissing her again and
again.

And so this is my new daughter. Upon
my word, you will make me feel quite an old
lady — you look such a woman. How surprised
your dear father will be to see you.
He always speaks of you as if you were a
little girl."

"I am eighteen," replied Muriel, drawing
herself up.

"No more? Why, then you are the same
age as my Cecil — what could be nicer ?
Colonel de Crespigny I don't know how to
thank you for bringing this dear child tous,
and now you have come we must keep
you prisoner until tomorrow morning. I
have brought a whole case of treasures home
from Italy for your inspection."

"Indeed, Lady Ehylton, you must excuse
me. I did not come prepared to stay, and
have no change with me. I shall only wait
to see his lordship before I return."

Oh, do stay," pleaded Muriel. It was
the cry of a child about to lose her protector
and the face most familiar to her, but
the countess chose to interpret it differently.

Hullo !" she exclaimed significantly, " and
what is this? Has the colonel been making
himself too agreeable during the Paris trip?
You must be very careful what you do with
him, Muriel. He is a terrible flirt, and always
has been — one of the sort that 'loves
and rides away.' "

You will find me ' riding after,' more
likely, Lady Ehylton," laughed de Crespigny.
Upon my word, you have made the Court
look so bright and beautiful that I doubly
regret not being able to accept your kind
invitation."

Here is Ehylton. Perhaps he will make
you rescind your refusal," cried the countess,
as the earl entered the room. Lady Muriel
ran up to him at once without speaking. She
had not seen him for many years, and he

was not very attractive in appearance now
she did see him, but he was her father, and
the tie between parent and child is an unalienable
one, however hard we may try to
rend it asunder. Lord Ehylton drew a long
breath as his daughter came up to him and
held her at arm's length for a moment whilst
he gazed earnestly into her beautiful, speaking
face. What memories surged up in his
withered and hardened heart as he did so
memories of another face as lovely and
ardent and unsophisticated — unsophisticated
enough, indeed, to give itself up to a man
who cared so little for its owner as to send
her broken-hearted to her grave within a few
years of her marriage to him. Some sort
of emotion displayed itself in the dark, thin
countenance of Lord Ehylton as he met
Muriel again, but it went no further. With
an effort he drew the girl towards him and
kissed her on the forehead, and then, as if
ashamed of the feeling into which he had

been betrayed, he shook her hand, and said
huskily :

"How do you do, my dear? Very glad
to see you. How are you, de Crespigny?
Had a pleasant journey ? I thought the
carriage would have been back sooner."

"It must have been your anxiety to see
Lady Muriel, Ehylton. We came as quickly
as the train would bring us."

"All well in Jermyn Street?" said the
earl, turning over some papers on the
table.

Quite well, thank you. Miss Rutherford
sends her love, of course, and hopes you
will soon let Lady Muriel visit her again."

"Ah! we must see about that. You are
not going back to-night, colonel. You will
stay and dine with us."

I have been trying to persuade him todo
it before you came in, darling," said the
countess, entwining her arms about her husband's
neck in a most youthful fashion, " but

the naughty man refused me. Perhaps you
will be more successful."

"Your ladyship can hardly believe what
you say," replied de Crespigny. "Nothing
would have given me greater pleasure had I
been prepared for your invitation, but I have
no evening clothes with me, and I could not
dine with you like this — added to which, I
have already made an engagement for this
evening. Believe me, Lady Ehylton, it is my
loss rather than your own."

And Lady Muriel's," interposed the countess
archly.

Lady Muriel knows what a pleasure her
society is to me," rejoined the colonel, glancing
at the earl's daughter.

"Eh! eh! what's that?" said Lord Elton,
pricking up his ears.

Nothing for you to hear, my dear," exclaimed
his wife playfully. " It is a little
secret between Muriel and myself. But you

would like to change your dress, dear, doubt-vol.
i. 11

less," she continued, addressing her stepdaughter,
who stood by perfectly unconscious
of the badinage directed against her. " I
will ring for your maid at once."

The summons soon brought a smartly-dressed
young woman to the library door.

Fielding," said her ladyship, " this is your
mistress, Lady Muriel Darner. Show her the
way to her apartments, and inform Miss Seton
of her arrival. One more kiss, dear, and
don't forget that afternoon tea will be served
at five o'clock. Colonel de Crespigny will
at least stay for that"

I am afraid I must deny myself the
pleasure, Lady Ehylton, for my time is limited.
Indeed, I must be off now. Adieu, dear
Lady Muriel. I trust it will not be long
before we meet again."

Muriel gave him her hand with an appealing,
timid look in her grey eyes, which did
not pass unnoticed by the earl and countess.

Oh, you naughty, naughty darling," cried

the latter as soon as the door was closed,
to give me such a great big daughter, and
make me look seventy years old. But isn't
she lovely, Colonel de Crespigny ? " she continued
gushingly to their visitor. " Hasn't
she wonderful eyes, and the most perfect
mouth in the world ? "

She is indeed very beautiful," sighed de
Crespigny.

You think so ? ' said the earl interrogatively.
" Ah, well ! she is the image of her
poor mother. But I hope you have not
been putting any foolish ideas in my girl's
head, de Crespigny. She is too young to
marry yet''

The colonel started. He had never
thought of Lady Muriel in a matrimonial
light, but an idea once roused is sometimes
difficult to put to sleep again.

My dear Ehylton, you are doing me a

great injustice. Did you not confide your

daughter to my care ? Do you think me

11—2

capable of betraying your trust ? You may
accept my assurance that I have never said
a word to Lady Muriel that you might not
have overheard. The difference in our ages
alone would have prevented me."

! rubbish," exclaimed Lady lthylton.
Your age would not deter any girl from
accepting you, Colonel de Crespigny. Why,
you don't look forty."

But, unfortunately, I am much older,
and quite aware of all my many deficiencies
into the bargain," he answered with a
deprecating bow.

It was all very well, and the right thing
to do, to depreciate the advantages of a
marriage with himself in the presence of
his friends, but Colonel de Crespigny had
no belief in what he said concerning himself,
and the persiflage about his having paid
attention to Lady Muriel Darner raised
some serious thoughts in his mind concerning
her as he travelled back to London.

Was it really on the cards (he asked himself)
that Lord Khylton might accept his
proposals for his daughter's hand ? He had
never contemplated such a thing before, but
the notion once put into his head, grew
and flourished there. She was certainly very
lovely, and gave promise of still greater
beauty, and the colonel's sensual nature
was ready to accept her physical perfection
as all that was necessary to fit her for a
wife. He was no longer young, it is true
(having passed his fiftieth birthday), but no
one ever took him for his full age, and if
they did, it mattered little in a man. He
was still robust and healthy, and capable
of enjoyment, and he had always been esteemed
good-looking — and at this junction
de Crespigny's memory went back with a
deep-drawn sigh to the days before those
dropsical-looking bags had formed under his
full blue eyes, or his jaw developed its
present coarse and cruel expression — the

days when he had rejoiced in the enviable
sobriquet of " Handsome Arthur." Then, as
to his fortune, it rivalled that of Lady
Ehylton, and when he came to think of it,
all he needed was a wife from the aristocracy,
to launch him fully on the tide of
fashion. There was no barrier in the way
of a second marriage. His two awkward
louts of sons (as he usually designated his
offspring) were safely disposed of in India,
and he, and the new Mrs. de Crespigny
would have it all their own way. Was it
possible that Fate had led him to the right
woman's feet? He allowed himself to dwell
on this exciting topic, until he was quite
absorbed in its contemplation, and woke up
with a start to find he was at Waterloo,
and that it was past six o'clock. Flinging
himself into a hansom, he rattled off to his
chambers in Victoria Street, where he
changed his clothes for an evening suit,
and having descended to where his brougham

stood waiting for him, jumped into it, and
directed the coachman to drive him to Mrs.
Lorrimer's in Bryanston Square.

1(7*. (sG>)

MRS. Lorimer.

It was considerably past seven o'clock
when he arrived there, and some one was
evidently on the look-out for him, for the
door was flung open as soon as his carriage
stopped before it, and a smart-looking female
servant, with a profusion of curls over her
forehead and an artificial rose stuck in the
side of her lace cap, stood under the gas
globe, smiling him welcome.

Colonel de Crespigny gave his directions
to the coachman, and entered the house as
if it were his own.

"All well, Rosa?" he said interrogatively,
as the maid relieved him of his hat and
overcoat.

Yes, sir, thank you, and the mistress is

in the drawing-room. She expected you
half-an-hour ago."

I've been detained," he answered carelessly,
" but you can tell Parsons to dish up
now." And then he walked deliberately
and rather heavily upstairs (for he weighed
fifteen stone with his fifty years), and
turned the handle of the drawing room
door.

Mrs. Lorrimer was standing on the hearth-rug,
waiting to receive him, and looking
very much put out. She was a short
woman of about five-and-thirty years of
age (though she only confessed to thirty),
who might have possessed some title to the
beauty de diable in her youth, but had
certainly lost all claim to it now. She had
become fatally stout with the passing years,
and had one of those broad flat faces that
cannot keep up with the changing fashions,
so that she appeared to be quite out of
date. Her flaxen hair was worn in crimped

bands, parted in the middle, her pale
greenish-blue eyes had lost their lustre, and
her small straight nose was sunk in two
cheeks of pallid fat. She was a woman of
a sharp acid temper too, which had aged
her before her time. Mrs. Lorrimer was
not attractive therefore, nor was she clever,
or rich — and so, many people might have
wondered at the intimacy between her and
the pleasure-loving Colonel de Crespigny.
But there are various kinds of affection in
this world, and some drag out their course
and refuse to die — like the cat's affection
for the house she has inhabited — not because
there is anything left in them, but
because w T e do not know how to tear ourselves
away. We huddle over the ashes of
a burned-out fire sometimes, when it has lost
all power to warm us — and this . was the
secret of de Crespigny 's continued friendship
with Caroline Lorimer. She was the
widow of one of his brother officers, and

there had been sundry love-passages between
them in the years gone by (for
Arthur de Crespigny had never had the
honour to spare any woman who was
foolish enough to succumb to him), and he
was sometimes a little afraid of the mischief
her tart tongue might do him, even now.
And so it was less troublesome for him to
give a sop to Cerberus occasionally, by
using her house as his own, and pretending
(for it never came difficult to the colonel
to make love to any woman) that the sentiments
of the past were not wholly extinguished
in him, than to avow his real
sentiments towards her. But Mrs. Lorrimer
expected something more from him than
this. She had kept very quiet during his
wife's lifetime, for her own sake as well as
his, but now that he was free and rich,
she considered that she had a right to demand
some satisfaction for her wrongs.
Mrs. de Crespigny had now been dead over

two years, and he had never professed to
have any attachment for her. And Mrs.
Lorrimer considered it was time he spoke
of something more definite than kisses and
sighs over a past, which it was in his
power to remedy, if not to expunge. She
had not been pleased at his trip to Brussels
and Paris, taken without her consent and in
the company of other women, and she had
written to him immediately on his return
to beg him to come to her. Colonel de
Crespigny had no appearance of a criminal
however as he entered her presence. He
had been used to consider her for so lone
as a piece of personal property, which he
could not get rid of (as we may keep a
hall clock, or a wardrobe which is cumbersome
and in the way, simply because it
belonged to our great-grandfather) that he
never dreamt the relations between them
would be altered, or done away with. He
walked up to her as coolly as if she had

been his mother, and kissed her on the
cheek as an established precedent.

Well, my dear, and how are you ? !
here is Arthur," he continued, perceiving a
tall lad of fifteen, in Eton jacket and
trousers, who stood by Mrs. Lorrimer's side.
Quite well, my boy, and studying hard ?
That's right. I'm afraid I'm a little over
my time, Carrie, but it was unavoidable !
I have just come up from Richmond."

Mrs. Lorrimer consulted her watch.

Ten minutes to eight," she said sharply.
Yes ! that's considerably over seven, but
if the fish is spoiled you will have only
yourself to blame for it. Artie, dear !
run and tell Parsons we are ready for
dinner."

I have ordered it," said the colonel
languidly. But the boy had already taken
the hint and disappeared.

What did you have him up here for
to-night? Can't we ever have an evening

to ourselves ? " demanded de Crespigny as
soon as the door had closed after him.

I thought you took sufficient interest in
your godson to want to see him after an
interval of six months," replied Mrs. Lorrimer,
tartly. " Besides it is the summer
vacation. However, we can easily dispose
of him after dinner — if you wish it."

I do wish it ! I have several matters to
speak to you about, Caroline, which are no
concern of his. He is growing a fine boy,
however. Let me see ! What is his age ? '

Fifteen, last March. I should think you
might remember that, Arthur."

Ah ! my memory is not what it was.
And I suppose you will put him into his
father's profession ? Lorrimer always intended
it, didn't he ? "

Yes," she answered in a low voice, " but
the expenses will be very heavy I am afraid."

Oh ! never mind the expenses. I will see
about that. I always intended to do as much

for my godson. But here is Rosa to announce
dinner. We will talk more of this
by-and-by."

He gave her his arm to lead her down to
the dining-room, but Mrs. Lorrimer's heart
was heavy as he did so. Women are very
intuitive, and she felt, without knowing why,
there was something impending that should
blight her hopes. It was genuine feeling
that made her stop for a moment as they
descended the narrow staircase, and press
his arm and whisper, " I have missed you
so, Arthur," and her voice shook as she
recognized that her power had departed,
and she might have to reiterate the sentiment
for many years to come. But de
Crespigny squeezed her hand in return and
replied so warmly, " Yes, of course, and you
can't think how glad I am to be home
again," that her pale face brightened, and
she was able to go through the meal that
followed with comparative cheerfulness.

As it drew to a conclusion the colonel
turned to his godson and said :

And what are you going to do this
evening, my fine fellow ? "

I don't know, sir. I have nothing to do
in particular," replied the boy, glancing at
his mother.

De Crespigny drew two sovereigns from
his pocket and laid them in his palm.

Then take these, Arthur, and go out and
enjoy yourself. There are dozens of places
in London where you can spend a few hours
pleasantly."

The lad reddened with delight.

But is it safe ? " urged Mrs. Lorrimer.
He is only fifteen, you know, and he has
never been used to go out by himself at
night. Consider the dangers of a town,
Colonel de Crespigny. Why ! he might be
robbed or murdered."

Rubbish, my dear Carrie. Are you going
to bring the boy up as a milksop ? Why,

before I was fifteen I knew every nook and
corner of London either by night or day, and
what harm has it done me ? Let the lad
learn to take care of himself. Now, Arthur,
off with you ! I want to have a talk with
your mother."

Mrs. Lorrimer sighed as her son left the
room. He was her only child and she was
inordinately fond of him, which was the
reason perhaps that she still cherished some
lingering regard for a man who had long
ago proved himself to be utterly selfish
sensual and self-opinionated.

As they found themselves alone, Colonel
de Crespigny drew his chair closer to her
own. .

I want to interest you in a little protegee

of mine, Carrie. A young girl, the orphan

daughter of a man for whom I had a great

esteem, and who asked me to look after her.

She is half Belgian and half English — smart,

capable and active — and wants to be a lady's
vol. i. 12

maid. Can't you find room for her in }-our
household ? "

My dear Arthur, how can I afford
another servant ? You know what my means
are, and that I can barely pay my way. 1
have never kept a lady's maid in my
life."

I don't wish her to be any expense to
you, Carrie. / will pay for her board and
wages whilst she is with you, and if you don't
get on together we will find her another situation.
I only want you to receive her on her
first arrival in England as she has never left
Belgium before."

I have never heard you speak of her,"
said Mrs. Lorrimer with knitted brows.

My dear Carrie ! As if I told you of
every person I have been mixed up with in
my roving life. 1 did not even know of the
girl's existence until lately. But I fancy you
will find her a great help to you in making
your dresses and so forth. Her name is

Agnes Prudhomme, and she has been a sort
of companion to Lady Muriel Darner."

"That reminds me, Arthur, about your
late tour. A very painful report has reached
me concerning it, and though I hate speaking
about such matters to you, I must, because —
because — my own happiness is involved in
it.

What on earth do you mean ? "

If it is not true, you must forgive me,
and lay my anxiety to its true cause ; but my
informant was a very reliable one. I was
told that you have serious thoughts of marrying
Miss Rutherford."

The colonel burst out laughing.

J marry Miss Rutherford ? Why, you

must have been out of your senses to

believe such a story ! What on earth should

I marry her for ? An old woman of forty

or fifty — Heaven best knows her age —

without beauty, or talents, or money. You

must think me a fool. No, no, my dear

12—2

Carrie ; if I should ever be induced to alter
my present condition you may depend it will
be for some one a little better worth having
than Miss Rutherford, or any one like her."

And de Crespigny leant back in his chair
and puffed collectedly away at his cigar.
Mrs. Lorrimer was trembling all over. She
could hardly trust herself to speak, for
strong as were her claims over this man,
she would have renounced them all at once
sooner than have let him see that their relinquishment
spoilt her hopes for the future.
But when she was a little calmer she said :

Then you do intend to marry again,
Arthur."

Possibly. It is on the cards. You can
hardly expect a man of my age to remain
single for the rest of his life."

And you would do it without any consideration
for me, or for Arthur," she said,
looking full into his face.

Certainly not ! I shall never cease to

have consideration both for you and for
Arthur to the end of my days. I shall always
rank you as one of my very best and truest
friends. But I don't see what that has todo
with the prospect of my marrying again,
which, after all, is only a dream which may
never be realized."

And do you imagine," continued Mrs.
Lorrimer significantly, " that in the event of
your marrying some other woman I should
continue to be your friend ? "

He saw what she was driving at now, but
he would not acknowledge it.

Of course you would, Carrie. What
reason is there against it ? Poor Lorrimer
confided you with his latest breath to my
care, and I can honestly say I have never
abused his trust nor forgotten my promise
to him."

He did not know " she faltered.

"Who ever thought he did," said the
colonel pettishly (for he was a man of violent

passions and his temper was quickly roused).
Not one husband in fifty knows what his
wife does when his back is turned. And let
us trust he has continued in the same blissful
ignorance, or his bed in Heaven cannot be
one of roses."

"Oh! Arthur! Don't joke on such a
solemn subject."

Look here, my dear Carrie. Let us understand
each other plainly, and don't try and
trade upon an old affair that was done and
finished with years ago. Lorrimer has been
dead — let me see — for ten years, and the boy
is past fifteen. We got well out of the scrape
and it can never rise up against us now. Let
us rest and be thankful."

You got well out of it, you mean," replied
Mrs. Lorrimer, with something like the
fire of indignation twinkling in her greenish
eyes.

"And so did you, my dear," said de Cres-pigmy
coolly; "what have you to complain

of? Your son is everything (it appears
to me) that a mother's heart could desire,
and I shall always be ready to forward his
interests in life "

Except by giving him a father's protection,"
she answered.

The truth was out now, without further
disguise, and the colonel felt he must take
the bull by the horns and settle it, once and
for ever. It might prove a painful business,
but it had to be done, for he had other
views for himself, which might attain their
fruition any day. And the idea of his
marrying Caroline Lorrimer was ridiculous.
She had been all very well fifteen years before,
as a means of excitement and vicious
amusement, when he had been located with
his regiment in some out-of-the-way station
in India and had nothing else to do. She
had also been very faithful and attached to
him during the intervening years, and denied
herself many comforts and even necessaries,

in order to rear and educate his son on the
scanty pension of a captain's widow. But
no good qualities in women, however conspicuous,
had any weight with Arthur de
Crespigny, against the fatal error of want of
youth, or beauty. Caroline Lorriraer was
worse than nothing to him now ; in fact she
was a nuisance, for continuing to endure
which he had accredited himself with considerable
virtue during the last ten years.
And that she should presume, now that he
was free, to put in her claim to fill the
place of his late wife incensed and irritated
him, and when he answered her, it was with
unmistakable tokens of annoyance.

By giving him a father's protection," he
echoed, " do you mean to say that you want
me to openly acknowledge the lad, and disgrace
both him and yourself in the eyes of
the world ? You must be mad."

No ! no ! Arthur," she said with something
like a sob in her throat, " you know

I don't mean that. He must always retain
the name of Lorrimer, but if — if — you made
what amends you could, to him and me, I
should feel at least that I had a right to
leave him to your legal protection."

"You would say if I married you,"
he answered coldly. Her only reply was
conveyed by inclining her head, and the
burning blood rose in her pale cheeks as
she did so. It had not seemed so hard to
be his mistress, but it was a terrible thing
to have to ask him to do what was right
by her, and be refused, as she felt she would
be. De Crespigny puffed for a few seconds
longer at his cigar to give her time to
speak, but finding she continued silent, he
took up the parable himself. " We had
better discuss this matter openly at once,
Carrie," he said, " and then dismiss it from
our minds for ever."

She knew for certain what he meant todo
now and her pride rose in the ascendant.

She had not much sentiment in her composition,
and what little she possessed, she had
wasted on this man, hoping that some day
might see the idol of her youth renewed,
and her past dream become reality. But
the last five minutes had seen that hope die
and her sentiment died with it. She sat
upright again — she had bowed her head fora
moment on her clasped hands — and looked
him full in the eves whilst she answered ina
steady voice :

That is just what I desire. Let me hear
exactly what you propose to do in the
future."

"You set me too difficult a task, for I
have decided upon nothing definitely. But
why have you never mentioned your ideas
or wishes (or whatever you may call them)
to me before this evening ? '

Because I waited for you to speak first.
I have been expecting you to do so, ever
since your wife died."

Colonel de Crespigny shrugged his shoulders
as who would say, " How unreasonable these
women are," but he only answered 1 :

I wish you had taken the initiative. It
would have saved a world of misunderstanding
and trouble. However, I will be candid
with you now. I have some intentions —
not, as you have been wrongly informed,
with regard to Miss Rutherford, but of
entering, at no very distant date, into the
married state again. But late events have
somewhat raised my value in the matrimonial
market. I don't want money with
my second wife, but I must have birth and
quality — something in fact to advance mein
the social scale."

And youth and beauty of course," interposed
his hearer, bitterly.

And youth and beauty," he repeated
with the utmost sang-froid; " I should be a
fool if I didn't get as much as I could for

my money

>>

Perhaps you have cast your eye on Miss
Lina WalforcL I hear she is both young
and pretty," suggested Mrs. Lorrimer.

But of no higher rank than myself," he
rejoined.

Ah ! Then it is Lady Muriel Darner,"
she exclaimed.

You are nearer the mark now," said de
Crespigny.

That child. Why ! She is hardly out
of the nursery," cried Mrs. Lorrimer, and
then, unable to conceal her feelings any
longer, she covered her face with her hands
and burst into tears.

Now, Carrie, don't be a fool," said the
colonel impatiently. "Nothing is settled
yet and it never may be, but Lord Shelton
has given me to understand he would not
be averse to such an arrangement. And if
it comes to pass, you will be one of the
first to benefit by the change. I shall setup
house in a good style in London, and

Lady Muriel's name and connections will
bring the best society around us. And
wherever / am, you know that you will
always be welcome," he concluded, patting
her shoulder with his hand.

Don't touch me ! I wish I might never
see you again," she said in a broken voice.

You will think better of all this nonsense
tomorrow, my dear. You are too sensible
a woman to stand in your own light — and
Arthur's too. Such an establishment as I
intend to keep will be of infinite service in
launching the boy into society, and rubbing
off his rough edges. You may live to see
him married to a lady of title too. What
should you say to that ? "

I would rather live to see him dead
than false to a heart that trusted in him,"
she replied bitterly.

The colonel laughed as if she had uttered
a pleasantry.

I am afraid if he takes after his father,

Carrie, that he'll have a lot to answer for
some day. But you and I are old enough
to have outlived sentimentality. The best
part of our lives is over, and our only consideration
should be, how we can end them
most comfortably. I am thinking of you,
as much as myself, in contemplating a possible
marriage with Lady Muriel Darner."

Mrs. Lorrimer knew that this assertion was
as false as the man who uttered it, but she
had lost the same and she would degrade
herself in his eyes no longer. So she rose,
and professed to be busy with getting out the
spirit flask from the sideboard, and ringing
for soda-water and tumblers, and when she
sat down again alone with her guest, she was
to all appearance reconciled to his intelligence.


"You are quite right, Arthur. The news
startled me at first, but I am alive to i
advantages, both for Arthur and myself, and
I am not sure if, after all, I should have felt

inclined to change my condition. When do
you expect this French girl you spoke of to
arrive in London? "

Agnes Prudhomme. I had nearly forgotten
the poor child. Why ! She is only
waiting to hear I have procured her a situation.
You need not be afraid to give your
consent, Carrie. She shall be no expense to
you, and you have often told me how much
you would like to have a personal attendant."

I know I have, and I will receive her
whenever she may come over."

Thank you, my dear. And now, if you
will excuse me, I think I will toddle homewards.
We only arrived early this morning,
and I have long arrears of sleep to make up.
Good-night," and with another placid kiss
upon her forehead, Colonel de Crespigny
went upon his way. Caroline Lorrimer sat
where he had left her, feeling very blank and
chill, and as if something which she had considered
to be her own possession had passed

out of her life. She did not weep, as she
thought over the events of the evening but
her teeth — now somewhat yellow and discoloured
— clenched over her pale lips, and a
light came into her greenish-blue eyes that
was not love. She remained there immovable
and thinking, for the best part of another
hour, until Arthur Lorrimer ran in breathless
and excited, to tell her of the wonderful
things he had seen and heard in an adjacent
music hall, where he gained admittance with
part of his godfather's handsome present.

Wasn't it kind of him, mother ? ' cried
the lad ; " I've got a lot of it left, and may I
go with Will Claret to the Crystal Palace
tomorrow and stay there all day, and have a
regular blow-out? Will says my godfather
must be a jolly old brick, and he wishes he
had got another like him for himself '

Yes, yes, my boy," replied Mrs. Lorrimer
hurriedly, and then to Artie's intense surprise
she threw her arms round his neck and bursts



ing into tears, exclaimed, " Oh ! Artie, you are
all that I have in the world. Be kind and
true to me, my darling, or my heart will
break."

VOL. I.



A NEW SISTER.

Lady muriel Damer followed her new maid
out of the library of Oakley Court into a vast
corridor carpeted with rich velvet pile, and
decorated with marble statue?, and up a broad
staircase, the walls of which were hunir with
oil-paintings, and the banisters made of oak,
carved in fanciful wreaths of fruit and flowers.
She looked around her at first with some
degree of awe, which was soon followed by a
feeling of pride to think that she had stepped
into her proper position at last. For the
difference between those who are born to the
purple and those who acquire it through an
accident, is, that the former, though bereft of
their right for years, never feel so much at
home as when they regain it, whilst the latter

never feel at home in it at all, but wear it like
an ill-fitting garment that refuses to accommodate
itself to the owner's shape. Muriel
could scarcely remember any other home but
the Chateau des Lauriers, and yet she had
always been distinctly conscious that her surroundings
were beneath her. She had a
sensuous and luxurious nature, and shabby
clothes, bare rooms, and coarse food, had
ever been matters of offence to her fastidious
taste. Now, though it seemed strange to
think that the smart lady's maid who preceded
her upstairs was really her own servant,
she who had often helped the Flemish wench
Eomanie with the housework of the Chateau,
and had even sometimes lighted the pole and
prepared the vegetables for dinner, still, some
feeling that had been born in her rose in her
breast and prevented her evincing anything
like surprise. Her visit to Paris had paved
the way for this great change in her life, for

she had seen there in what luxury the fashion -

13—2

able people lived, and Miss Rutherford had
well impressed, her mind with the grandeur
she should meet at Oakley Court, and that
she was only entering her proper position by
attaining it. She gazed at everything around
her therefore with deep interest and curiosity,
but she did not make a remark concerning
anything, and the maid Fielding was too well
schooled to venture one. She felt a decree
of pride as she looked at the young lady she
was called upon to serve — for domestics often
cross swords with one another on the rival
merits of their employers— and Lady Muriel
was a mistress that any maid might have been
proud of. Miss Rutherford had made her put
on one of her most becoming costumes, to
meet her father and step-mother, and with the
colour which excitement had called into her
face, she was looking her very best.

This way, my lady," said Fielding, as they
reached the head of the staircase, and found
themselves in another corridor as vast and as

richly furnished as the first ; " these are your
ladyship's rooms, and Miss Seton's are next to
them."

She threw open a white and gold panelled
door as she spoke, and Lady Muriel passed
into a bedroom, draped in rose-colour damask
and furnished with every possible convenience.
A large mirror stood above the mantelpiece,
which was decorated with two vases of
snowy-white china, and mounted on a chair
before them, with her hands filled with flowers
from a basket at her side, was the figure of a
girl busily employed in filling them. As the
door opened she looked round, and as Muriel
appeared on the threshold, she gave a startled
cry and seemed as if she were going to
tumble off the chair altogether.

Why, it's Miss Seton," exclaimed Fielding.
La ! miss, I should think as Watson might
have told you as her ladyship had arrived."

(Watson was Miss Seton's personal attendant,
and the two Abigail were already at

war because one served an earl's daughter
and the other only a commoner.)

"Oh! are you Lady Muriel? 5 exclaimed
the girl with the colour rushing into her pale
face.

She was neither pretty, nor prettily dressed,
yet Muriel's heart went out to her at once as
it had done to no one else of the relations
amongst whom she had been so suddenly
thrown. Cecilia Seton wore a heavy dark
silk dress, unbecoming both for her aire and
her appearance ; her face and figure showed
symptoms of ill-health, and her features were
commonplace and uninteresting ; but there
was a yearning look for affection and a fear
of giving offence, in her eyes, that were
unmistakable, and appealed to the newcomer.


Yes, I am Muriel," she answered with a
smile.

Miss Seton glanced at her Parisian costume
of delicate French crew and the rosebuds

that crowned her bonnet, to the lovely face
smiling beneath it, and seemed to grow more
timid ' at the sight.

What will you say at finding me in your
rooms — and before I had even seen you ?
But I wanted to make your mantelpiece look
gay, and so I — I "

She did not finish the sentence, but pointed
nervously to her basket of flowers.

La ! miss," cried the maid jealously, " /
would have done that if you had asked me.
It's my business to keep her ladyship's rooms
supplied with flowers, that is if her ladyship
approves of sleeping with them in the room,
which I call very unwholesome."

But Muriel's heart was making response
to the nervous, twitching mouth, and frightened
eyes, and a new dignity rose in her.

You can go, Fielding," she said, turning
to the servant.

"But your ladyship will lay aside your
bonnet and mantle."

"Not now. I will ring when I want you.
I wish to be left alone with my sister''

The woman disappeared affronted, but
neither of the girls cared for that. Cecilia
had only heard those two welcome words, my
sister, and her pale face beamed with anticipation.
She jumped off the chair and ran upto
Muriel, and threw her arms about her neck.

Oh, is it true ? " she gasped. " Will you
really be my sister ? I have never had one,
you know. I have been all alone ever since
my birth, and I have so longed for you to
come to Oakley Court, and yet I have dreaded
it at the same time."

"Dreaded it. Oh, why? Ever since I
heard that my new mamma had a daughter
of my own age I have hoped we would befriends."


But you are so pretty, Muriel. I don't
think I ever saw any one so pretty as you
are before, and I "

Well, what of you ? "

I am quite different, I know that. Mamma
is ashamed of me because I am so plain, and
your father doesn't like me either. No one
likes me, Muriel. I am so stupid and shy,
and I care for nothing but books and studying
all by myself in my own rooms*'

I shall like you, Cecil, and you will not
be shy with me, will you ? For I am your
sister now, and you must love me dearly."

The neglected girl clasped her arms tight
round her new sister's neck for a few minutes
and buried her face upon her shoulder, and
when she lifted it up again it was wet with
tears, though lighted with a smile.

Oh, Muriel, I will love you so — so much.
I did not think that such happiness was
coming to me, or that you would call me
1 sister ' all at once. How nice it will be to
ride and drive and walk together. Do you
love books and study, Muriel ? "

Muriel shook her head.

Not very much. I have been brought

up in a convent, Cecil, and it was nothing
but study there all day long till I was sick
of it. But I like novels. I never could duet
any nice new ones to read in Branches,
only a volume of Tauchnitz now and then
that visitors had left behind them."

k You must come and see my rooms bv-
and-by, and overhaul my bookshelves, Muriel.
I have plenty of standard novels in them,
and mamma has a box from Muche every week.
But how do you like your rooms, dear F Are
they furnished to your taste ? "

<; They are lovely, Cecil," replied Muriel, as
she sat down on a rose-covered sofa in front
of an elegant writing-table. " I can imagine
nothing nicer or more convenient, and pink
is my favourite colour. Were they your taste
or Lady Ehyltons ? "

Cecilia's face fell.

Neither, dear ; though if I had known
you were going to be such a darling I would
have asked mamma to let me have a voice in

arranging them. But she would not have
consented. She leaves everything concerning
the house to the upholsterer, and he
does just what he likes."

"Never mind. They are very beautiful,
and I am more than content. But go on
arranging my flowers, Cecil. I shall value
them so much because you thought of putting
them there."

"Then I shall keep your vases always supplied,
dear Muriel," said Cecil kissing her
again, " and you will promise me that
Fielding shall have nothing to do with
them."

Certainly not. Fielding must learn to
mind her own business," replied Muriel with
the air of a little princess. She did not call
in the assistance of the maid at all, but
divested herself of her walking apparel, and
when the arrangement of the vases was complete
she wandered with her new sister into
the other suite of rooms, and was introduced

to Cecil's books and birds and flowers, and
was fast friends with her before an hour had
passed over their heads. As five o'clock
struck, Fielding tapped at the door and informed
the young ladies that the countess
had sent up the footman to desire their
presence in the library. Cecilia Seton changed
colour at the summons.

Oh, I wonder if your papa will be there,"
she gasped ; " he does frighten me so."

Frighten you" said Muriel, " and why ? '

I don't know. He never says anything,
but I always feel, somehow, when the earl
is present as if I were an intruder and in the
way and had no right to be there."

What ! in your own mother's house, Cecil ?
It is we who should feel like intruders."

Oh, don't say that of yourself. You have
made me feel so happy, I could endure fifty
step-fathers for your sake. Only mamma and
the earl seem so intimate, you know, and she
calls him ' darling ' and those kinds of names,

and it seems so strange, and as if I shouldn't
be by to hear."

I don't think I shall like it better than
you do," replied Muriel shrugging her shoulders
; " it sounds so silly, doesn't it? in two old
people. And I don't think I shall love my
father much either, although I shall be obliged
to pretend to for the sake of appearances.
Bnt we won't stay downstairs any longer than
we need, and we will never go there unless
we are obliged. We will make that a bargain,
Cecil, and for the rest we go together, which
is one comfort."

The best comfort in the world," cried
Cecil clinging to her. " Oh, Muriel, I feel
quite a different girl since you have
come."

"We seem to have been made for companions,"
said Muriel laughing, " and the
same age, too. It is very curious."

But you are only eighteen."

And so are you — are you not ? "

206 ON CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE.

Oh, no, much older than that, I am
five-and-twenty, though as I am so little
and so fair, I may not look it."

But I am sure Lady Khylton said you
were the same age as myself."

Cecil coloured.

"Perhaps so. Mamma generally tries to
make me out younger than I am, because
she is ashamed of having so old a daughter. "

"But that is very mean," cried Muriel,
who was of an exceedingly frank and outspoken
disposition.

I think it is, but I suppose I mustn't
say so. Let us go down to the library now,
and try and forget it, Muriel, dear, for my
sake."

But such things are not easily forgotten.
The young perceive the faults and weaknesses
of their elders far more distinctly
than the old imagine, and are severe critics
into the bargain. As the girls walked upto
the five o'clock tea-table, Lady Shelton

again fell into ecstasies over Muriel's appearance,
although her heart sank as she noted
how pinched and wan Cecilia's face seemed,
and how undeveloped her figure, beside
those of her step-sister.

Here are my darlings' she exclaimed
enthusiastically, as she caught sight of them.
Why, Muriel, you look taller than ever
without your bonnets You bid fair to be a
perfect grenadier." And then she turned
snappishly to her own daughter. " What
on earth makes you wear such a sombre
dress, Cecil ? If you will wear silk gowns
that are only fit for a grandmother, you
might at least choose them of some brighter
shade. That funereal green takes all the
colour out of Muriel's grey."

I am very sorry, mamma," replied Miss
Seton meekly; "but you never objected toit
before, and you always say light tints
make me look so yellow."

So they do, but there's a medium in all

things. However, you never had any taste.
Muriel, dear, do you know where your
darling father is ? "

No, Lady hilton. I have not seen
him since I went upstairs."

Oh, fie, dear, you mustn't call me ' Lady
Ehylton.' You must say ' mamma,' or ' Bee,'
if you like it better, for I am sure I feel
much more like your sister than your
mother. Which shall it be, dear? Will
you call me ' Bee ? ' "

I would rather call you ' mamma,'
replied Muriel gravely.

Very well, darling, just as you please,"
returned the countess lightly ; " but it seems
funny to me to have such tall daughters.
The world will begin to say I am quite an
old woman. Ah! here is my sweetheart,"
she continued, as the door opened to admit
the earl. " Now, my dearest. Here is
your tea, just as you like it, but you shan't
have it unless you come and sit down close

by me," and as she made room for her
husband on the velvet sofa, Lord Shelton
shambled to her side, with scarcely a look
at his newly-recovered daughter. Cecil drew
Muriel into one of the deep embrasures in
the library windows that looked out upon
the park, and there talked to her of her
horses and her dogs (for riding was one of
her chief pleasures), and of the various outdoor
employments which she had made for
herself. Muriel stared to hear Miss Seton
speak of having given one hundred pounds
for her Arab palfrey, and twenty-five for a
St. Bernard mastiff, and at last she ventured
to remark :

Oh, Cecil, where do you get the money
to do all this ? Your mamma must be very
generous to you."

It has nothing to do with her, Muriel.
I suppose you have not heard that my poor
papa left me independent. He was very
rich, and I was his only child, and ever

VOL. II. 14

since I came of age I have had two thousand
a year of my own."

Two thousand a year ! " repeated Lady
Muriel, with astonishment.

Yes. It seems a lot of money, doesn't
it, for an unmarried girl, but I suppose I
shall want it all some day, for mamma says
that if I were likely to marry, I should have
been picked up long ago, with such a dowry.
So I feel almost glad sometimes to think I
am so uninteresting, for it would be a terrible
tiling to be married only for one's
money."

Well, I shall never be married for that"
laughed Muriel, u for I have none."

But the earl will make you an allowance
now, Muriel. He is sure to do so, and
then we will arrange all sorts of pleasures
and excursions together, won't we ? '

Yes, and it will be delightful," sighed
Muriel contentedly, as she gazed out upon
the wide expanse of foliage and flowers

before her, " and I am very glad indeed
that my father has married your mother."

Her luxurious temperament was beginning
to appreciate the comforts by which she
was surrounded, and to revel in them, and
if she looked back upon the past at all, it
was only to wonder how she could ever
have put up with it. Even the thought of
At hoi Fergusson (if it troubled her occasionally)
troubled her like a past dream which
one would rather leave in oblivion. She
had shed many tears over his silence, but
had learnt to believe at last that he must
have joined his regiment before her letter
reached him, and left the country, and she
might never meet him again. She had
thought she loved him in her girlish way,
but the feeling had been but skin-deep, and
was easily effaced. It requires time and
experience to enable us to analyze a man's
character and plant our love upon a goodness

that cannot fail, and any passion founded

14—2

upon a lower basis must, sooner or later,
inevitably fade. If Muriel had confessed
the truth (or been able to recognize it),
she would have known that she had loved
Athol Fergusson for his deep blue eyes, with
their long lashes, or his tender, caressing
manner, or for anything but the worth and
solidity of a character which she could not
appreciate until she had compared it with
others less worthy. It is certain, at any
rate, that at this juncture the remembrance
of her Branches lover was fast fading
away. The novelty of her life and the
pleasures and interests of it, were gradually
but surely pushing it to one side. And as
the days went on, these distractions increased.
The delight of learning to ride on
horseback with Cecil, of reading new novels
and ordering new dresses, of coming down
to dinner every evening attired in some
pretty costume, and by being waited on by
powdered and liveried servants, all these

things soon turned Lady Muriel Darner's
head, and made her past life an unpleasant
memory only. And other seductions were
soon added to her more innocent pleasures.
The gentlemen visitors to Oakley Court —
amongst whom Colonel de Crespigny put ina
frequent appearance — began to natter the
earl's lovely daughter whenever they had
an opportunity, and let her plainly know
what they thought of her, paid her compliments
indeed so warm and full-flavoured
that they made the remembrance of Athol's
simple praises seem poor and cold beside
them. There was only one drawback to her
enjoyment. Lady Ehylton continued gushingly
demonstrative in her protestations of
affection for her step-daughter ; Cecilia was
always kind and loving, and her father
never said a word of remonstrance against
anything she did. Only, whilst Miss Seton's
purse was replete with money, Lady Muriel
had never received any allowance, nor had

the subject been mentioned to her. She
was too shy for some weeks to broach so
delicate a matter to the earl, but as the
time went on, and she found herself dependent
on Cecilia for the means to defray the
expenses of her various little wants, she felt
that she must speak openly to him. Soone
evening in August, when Colonel de
Crespigny (who was dining at Oakley Court)
had been urging Lady Muriel to join her
cousins and himself in a picnic to Maidenhead,
she stole away from the drawing-room
and found her way to the little room where
the Earl of Ehylton usually spent his post-cranial
hours alone.

THE EARL OF Hilton.

Lord Ehylton was busily employed reading
a letter which had come by the evening
post, as his daughter tapped at his study
door, whilst a pile of unopened ones lay
neglected at his elbow. In fact, he could
not take off his eyes from (what he considered)
the cool impudence of the epistle
he was perusing. It was from Athol Fergus-son,
and it stated plainly what he hoped,
and wished, and prayed for. The young
man had made it his first business on arriving
in London, to find out the address of
Lady Muriel's father, and to inform him of
the relations he supposed to exist between
his daughter and himself. He felt that he
could not in honour keep on an engage-merit

with her in her altered position, without
the sanction of Lord Ehylton, but at
the same time it was impossible to him to
give her up whilst he believed she loved
him. His letter was very respectful and
very humble, but it was manly and straightforward.
He stated plainly his own poor
prospects, but he proclaimed his earnest
love for Lady Muriel and the opportunities
it had had to ripen, without any shame.
But the earl could only see one thing in
it, and that was the confounded assurance
of a pauper, in aspiring to the hand of his
daughter. He had been annoyed when he
heard of the foolish altar through the a^encv
of Miss Rutherford, but as it had not been
brought before his notice since, he had hoped
that the young people had forgotten it. Kit
now the lover threatened to be troublesome,
Lord Ehylton did not quite like the decided
manner, expressed in a firm, manly hand,
in which Athol Fergusson wrote of his en-sacrament

to Muriel, and of his determination
to wait for her, even if it should be years
before he could offer her a home. It was
not the love-lorn letter of a timid youth,
but the frank avowal of a fearless man,
and he felt it must be answered at once
and for ever. He was pondering over the
matter when Lady Muriel entered, and her
appearance added to his determination. He
was not exactly fond of his daughter, but
he was beginning to be very proud of her,
and to want to see her well settled, and
as she stood there in a white dress with
crimson roses in her hair and at her bosom,
she looked a fit consort for a duke.

What is it, my dear ? " he inquired kindly.
Does your mamma want me ? "

No, papa, it is / who want you. May
I come in for a minute ? "

Certainly. But what important business
has taken you away from the drawing-room ?
You'd better make short work of it, or we

shall have de Crespigny here to fetch you
back again."

Lady Muriel blushed.

Why Colonel de Crespigny in particular,
papa ? Lord Norton, and several other
gentlemen are there also."

Because de Crespign}^ admires you, my
dear (as you must know), and I am glad of
it, because (though I don't wish you to
decide in a hurry) his fortune makes him
a good match for any woman in the county''

You don't want to get rid of me again
so soon, do you, papa ? " said Muriel, laughing
and colouring.

No, my dear, but when you do go, I
shall make it my business to see you go
properly. But what is it you came to say
to me ? "

You have made it more difficult than
I thought it would be," replied Muriel, taking
a seat beside him, " for it has arisen
out of a proposal of Colonel de Crespigny's.

He has been urging mamma to let Cissy and
me go to Maidenhead on Thursday, with
cousin Amelia, to a picnic-party."

"And where's the objection? Doesn't
Lady PJrylton approve of it ? "

Oh, yes, papa ; but — but — these excursions
all cost money, you know. I can't
go out for the day with an empty purse —
it might be so awkward — and I have positively
not a penny. You have forgotten
all about my allowance since I came home,
so I want you to tell me how much I may
spend, and in what way you will pay it
me''

The earl looked unnecessarily discomposed.


Miss Seton has always money at her
command," he said ; " she has a large fortune
for so young a woman."

Yes, and she is most generous and would
pay for everything if I would let her. But
you would not like me to place myself

under such an obligation for ever, papa.
It would be too humiliating a position for
your daughter."

Lady Muriel drew herself up so proudly
as she said this, and spoke in so womanly a
manner, that her father felt that she could
not be put off with a quibble, but must be
told the whole truth.

"I am glad you have mentioned the subject,
my dear, as it will enable me to explain
my exact position to you. With regard to
your allowance, well — I suppose I must give
you something, but I'm afraid it will be very
inadequate to your desires, for (as I suppose
you must be aware) I am really very poor."

Isn't mamma's money yours, then ? " cried
Lady Muriel, surprised.

"No, my dear, not at all. It is strictly
tied up on herself. She defrays, naturally
all the expenses of the household, but toy
miserable pittance of four hundred a year,
with the sum that I came into bv this beggarly

earldom, is all the income that I can
call my own."

And we are actually pensioners on Lady
Ehylton's bounty ? " exclaimed Muriel, tears
of wounded pride welling to her eyes.

Well, that's rather an unpleasant light
by which to view our position, Muriel ; but
there is no doubt that the bulk of the
money belongs to my wife, and that she can
dispose of it as she chooses. I had hoped
she would have seen the necessity of your
having an allowance now you have returned
to us, and have proposed to give you a certain
sum quarterly "

Oh, papa ! I would so much rather take
it from you. I don't want Lady Shelton
to give me anything. It is bad enough to
know that she pays for everything I eat
and drink."

"Well, my dear, it will necessarily be a
small sum, but I will give you the same
allowance I made the Grants for your annual

expenses. I'm afraid you will have to be
very economical with it, but you must
make it do. The countess has been already
complaining of the expenses of your
outfit. Amelia Rutherford has sent us in
bills to the amount of two thousand
francs."

"Well, papa, and what is that? Eighty
pounds. It is little enough, when you come
to think that I had not a single article of
clothing fit to be seen, and had to be fitted
out from head to foot."

Your mamma thinks it extravagant, but
I told her it was not your fault. But now,
my dear Muriel, I must speak to you on
another subject. You see how you are situated,
and how important it is that you
should make a wealthy marriage. I can
give you nothing but a title, and (if you
wish to live in the position to which you
were born) you must exchange it for a
fortune."

These words brought the remembrance of
Athol Fergusson to Muriel's mind, and she
looked unhappy and hung her head.

What is the matter ? " said the earl.

"It is so miserable to be poor," she

answered.

"It is the greatest misery this world
can bring us. I speak feelingly, for it
has been the curse of my life, Muriel.
Whatever troubles we may encounter, money
has, at least, the power to alleviate them,
but the greatest happiness becomes worthless
when we don't know where to look
for a shilling. You have seen for yourself
now what luxuries money can procure for
us. How would you like to give them all
up again ? "

Not at all, papa."

To go back to the sour bread and salt
butter you tell me that they gave you at
Eevranches ; to exchange that pretty robe
you wear for your convent dress, and the

company of your equals for that of the
Grants."

Oli ! papa ! don't speak of it. I don't
think I could go back to it now. It would

seem doubly hard. And yet " she ended

with a sigh.

And yet, you had once some idea of
spending your whole life in an atmosphere
of poverty and privation, and thought it
would be a delightful tiling to follow the
roving fortunes of a beggarly subaltern."

Lady Muriel started.

Papa ! who has told you ? How did you
hear ? "

Lord Ehylton considered a moment.
Would it be wise to let his daughter know
that her lover was close at hand? He
thought not. Nothing like absence to make
a crave for love, and if Lady Muriel could
be led to believe that Athol Fergusson had
gone completely out of her reach, he might
be able to work her according to his will.

So he answered deliberately, " The young
man has had the impudence to write, and
tell me so himself."

Oh, papa," she cried eagerly, " where is
he ? Did he receive my letters ? "

"I don't know. He mentioned nothing
about letters. As to his whereabouts — if he
is not at the bottom of the sea — I conclude
he is in India, where he was proceeding
with his regiment, when he wrote."

In India " repeated Muriel weeping. "Oh,
then I feel I shall never, never see him
again."

I don't suppose you will ; nine-tenths of
the Englishmen who go to India never
return, and the rest are kept there for an
indefinite number of years. If you wanted
to keep your lover by your side you should
have chosen one who was not going to
India."

"Oh! how could I tell? How could I

tell," she cried ; " we were so fond of
vol. i. 15

each other, and I — I — promised to be his
wife."

wt Now, look here, Muriel," said Lord
Ehylton turning to his daughter, '• I want
to talk very seriously to you about this
matter. I have already pointed out to you
the stringent reasons there are, that you
should marry well, and according to your
station as a woman of title. But I am not
going to oppose you in this matter of Mr.
Athol Fergusson. He writes me word that
you love him, and he considers you are
engaged to marry each other. He is a
subaltern on eighty pounds a year and without
any prospects. He has a mother and
sisters dependent on him. He may not be promoted
for ten or fifteen years, and then he will
still be a pauper. If, however, you are convinced
you love him so strongly, and so well,
that you will not be happy unless you go
following the baj^a^e waggon of his reins

OJD O Co o

ment all over the world, and give up every

comfort and luxury for his sake, I will not
thwart your wishes ; but I shall not keep
you here. I shall send you back to Branches
to live with the Grants during the
ten or fifteen years you will have to wait for
Mr. Fergusson. It would be useless your
remaining at Oakley Court, to prove an expense
to your mamma and myself, and to
cultivate a taste for luxuries which you can
never hope to enjoy. So, take your choice,
my dear. Either give up this pauper lover
of yours, or go back and wait for him in
Eevranches."

Go back to Eevranches ! " echoed Lady
Muriel, with a look of dismay. " But, papa,
I cannot — indeed I cannot."

Well, I give you the alternative, my dear.
There is no need for you to leave us, unless
you choose to do so. But then you must
give up Mr. Athol Fergusson."

It will break his heart. He loves me so,"

she sobbed.

vol. i. 15 — 2

"Rubbish ! He will get over it sooner than
you do. It's the way with men. He is most
probably making love to some other girl,
even now. Salt water is a wonderful cure fora
youthful passion. But if you don't believe
me, go back to Branches."

Do you really Think he will get over it
so soon, papa ? "

I am sure of it ! "

He certainly might have written to me before
he went, for I sent him three long letters."
More fool you, my dear. You made the
young fellow think he was sure of you, and
so he took no trouble to please you. Now,
what are you going to do ? "

"I will do as you wish, papa. I cannot go
back to Branches."

My dear girl, this lad will never be able
to marry you. He will never have money
enough to keep a wife. Be wise, and break
it off at once. There is my desk. Sit down
and write and tell him so."

What shall I say ? she exclaimed despairingly,
as she took up the pen. " He will think
I am such a wicked girl to give him up."

He cannot think you wicked for obeying
your father. Say what you like, and I will
send it to him and explain all the rest."

So Lady Muriel sat down and wrote, whilst
her tears fell fast upon the sheet of paper :

Dear Athol, my father says that it is all
nonsense, and we can never marry, and that
if I do not give you up, he will send me
back to Eevranches. And so we had better
break off our engagement, and be free,
though it gives me dreadful pain to write
the words. But I shall never forget you,
nor the days at Eevranches "

But here Lady Muriel, unable to proceed
for the memories that rushed upon her, cast
herself prone upon the writing-desk, and
burst into tears.

"This is ridiculous," exclaimed the earl
testily, for he was losing patience with her.

Here, you may have the chance of becoming
a countess or a duchess, with plenty of money
and influence, and you would throw it all
away for the sake of a silly lad who will
probably jilt you for some other girl, as
soon as he gets out to India."

No ! no ! papa ! I wouldn't. I see the
folly of it as clearly as you do ; but just at
first, you know — it seems so hard."

Then get it over as quickly as you can,
my dear. It is like having a tooth out, the
harder the wrench, the sooner the ease that
follows. What is that gold ring you wear
upon your linger ? "

It was his. He gave it me," sighed
Muriel.

"You must inclose it in your letter."

"Must I? Mayn't I keep even this?"

Certainly not. Has this young man anything
of yours ? "

Only a lock of my hair and a little seal.
I had nothing else to give him."

"Ah, well! lie may keep those, but that
ring must decidedly be returned to him.
Thank you, my dear," he continued, as Muriel
drew the ring from her finger and handed it
to him. " You have behaved very sensibly
in this matter, and you will have your reward.
You had better go back to the 
now, or your mamma will wonder
what has become of you."

Papa ! I cannot. Let me go to bed. My
head aches terribly, and I — I — want a little
time to myself to — to get over this."

Very well, Muriel. Do as you think
best, and I will make your excuses to Lady
Ehylton. I daresay you feel it just now, my
dear. These things are always painful, however
necessary, but you will soon laugh to
think you were courageous enough to do it.
You have saved yourself from a life of
poverty, or perhaps from being left, after
all, to end your days as an old maid."

But he loved me," replied Lady Muriel,

with a choking sob, as she rushed up to the
shelter of her own apartments.

Lord Ehylton did not join the party in
the drawing-room until he had written a
short, but peremptory answer to poor Athol
Fergusson's appeal, and inclosed the note
and ring from his daughter in evidence of
her acquiescence in his decision. And then
he hoped the foolish affair was ended, and
he should never again be troubled with a
reference to it.

END OF VOLUME I

March, 1889.

F. V. WHITE & Co's

LIST OF

PUBLICATIONS.

NOVELS AT ALL LIBRARIES IN TOWN AND COUNTRY,

BEAUTIFUL JIM.

By JOHN STRANGE WINTER, Author of "Booties' Baby," " Mignon's
Husband," " Booties' Children," &c. 2 Vols.
A story that has the merits of movement and liveliness"— Academy.
** 'Beautiful Jim' is as fresh and engaging a work as this charming writer has
produced, while the structure of its plot has a peculiar strength which adds much to
the effect of the story as a whole.— .Scotsman."

PUEPLE AND FINE LINEN.

By Mrs. ALEXANDER FRASER. 3 Vols.

LONG ODDS.

By HAWLEY SMART. 3 Vols.

LANDING A PRIZE.

By Mrs. EDWARD Renard, Author of "The Girl in the Brown Habit."
3 Vols.

ON CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE.

By FLORENCE MARRYAT. Author of " My Sister the Actress." 3 Vols.

THIS WICKED WORLD.

By Mrs. H. LOVETT CAMERON, Author of "In a Grass Country," "A
North Country Maid," &c. 3 Vols. (2nd Edition.)

HER LAST RUN.

By the Honble. Mrs. WALTER R. D. FORBES (Eveline Michell Farwell), Author
of " Fingers and Fortune," " The Man in Cords," &c. 9 Vols.

SEVERED TIES.

By Mrs. HENRY WYLDE. 8 Vols.

A DANGEROUS EXPERIMENT.

By Lady DUFFUS HARDY, Author of " Paul Wynter's Sacrifice," "In Sight
of Land," &c. 3 Vols.

A DISTRACTING GUEST.

By Mrs. ROBERT JOCELYN. 2 Vols.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31. Southampton Street, Strand.

THE WORKS OF JOHN STRANGE WINTER,

Uniform IN STYLE AND PRICE.
Each in Paper Covers, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6. At all Booksellers & Bookstalls.

MY POOE DICK.

(4th Edition.) Illustrated by Maurice Greiffenhagen.

BOOTLES' CHILDREN.

(5th Edition.) Illustrated by J. BERNARD Partridges

Strange Winter is never more thoroughly at home than when delineating
the characters of children, and everyone will be delighted with the dignified Made
and the quaint Pearl. The book is mainly occupied with the love affairs of Terry
(the soldier servant who appears in many of the preceding books), but the children
buzz in and out of its pages much as they would come in and out of a room in real
life, pervading and brightening the house in which they dwell." — Leicester Daily
Post.

THE CONFESSIONS OF A PUBLISHER.

The much discussed question of the relations between a publisher and his clients
furnishes Mr. John Strange Winter with material for one of the brightest tales of the
season. Abel Drinkwater's autobiography is written from a humorous point of
view ; yet here, as elsewhere. ' many a true word is spoken in jest,' and in the conversations
of the publisher and his too ingenuous son facts come to light that are
worthy of the attention of aspirants to literary fame"— Morning Post.

MIGNON'S HUSBAND. cst Edition.)

It is a capital love story, full of high spirits, and written in a dashing style that
will charm the most melancholy of readers into hearty enjoyment of its fun." —
Scotsman.

The name of John Strange Winter is enough to tell the reader that ' Mignon's
Husband ' is a brisk, lively tale, with a little pathos but more fun." — Graphic.

THAT IMP. (7th Edition.)

Barrack life is abandoned for the nonce, and the author of ' Booties' Baby '
introduces readers to a country home replete with every comfort, and containing
men and women whose acquaintanceship we can only regret can never blossom into
friendship"— Whitehall Review.

This charming little book is bright and breezy, and has the ring of supreme
truth about it." — Vanity Fair.

MIGNON'S SECRET, aim mm.)

"In 'Mignon's Secret ' Mr. Winter has supplied a continuation to the never-to-be-forgotten
' Booties' Baby.' . . . The story is gracefully and touchingly
told"— John Bull.

A clever little story. . . . It is lightly touched, and has somewhat a tragic
termination. It is easy to imagine we have not seen the last of ' Mignon ' yet by a
long way." — Punch.

■ - - ■ —

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

THE WORKS OF JOHN STRANGE WINTER

ON MAECH. (6th Edition.)

"This short story is characterised by Mr. Winter's customary truth in detail
humour, and pathos." — Academy.

"By publishing 'On March,' Mr. J. S. Winter has added another little gem to his
well-known store of regimental sketches. The story is written with humour and a
deal of feeling." — Army and Navy Gazette.

IN QUAETEES. (7th Edition.)

' In Quarters ' is one of those rattling tales of soldiers' life which the public have
learned to thoroughly appreciate." — The Graphic.

"The author of 'Booties' Baby' gives us here another story of military life, which
few have better described." — British Quarterly Review.

AEMY SOCIETY: Life in a Garrison Town.

Cloth, 6/- ; also in Picture Boards, 2/-. (8th Edition.)

This discern-ive story, dealing with life in a garrison town, is full of the pleasant
go ' and movement which has distinguished ' Booties' Baby,' ' Pluck,' or in fact a
majority of some half-dozen novelettes which the author ha submitted to the <.
of railway bookstall patronisers." — Daily Telegraph.

GAEEISON GOSSIP, Gathered in Blankhampton.

(A Sequel to " Army Society") Cloth, 2/6; also in Picture Boards, S -.
(4th Edition.)

' Garrison Gossip ' may fairly rank with 'Cavalry Life." and the various other
books with which Mr. Winter has so agreeably beguiled our leisure hours." — Saturday
Review.

The novel fully maintains the reputation which its author has been fortunate
enough to gain in a special line of his own." — Graphic

A SIEGE BABY , Cloth, 9/6 ; Picture boards, 2 -

The story which gives its title to this new sheaf of stories by the popular author
of ' Booties' Baby ' is a very touching and pathetic one. . . . Amongst the other
stories, the one entitled, ' Out of the Mists ' i6, perhaps, the 1 * St written, although
the tale of true love it embodies comes to a most melancholy ending"— County
Gentleman.

BEAUTIFUL JIM. (mark

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

MRS. EDWARD Renard's SPORTING NOVELS,

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

A CRACK COUNTY, cloth gut, 2/6.

THE GIRL IN THE BROWN HABIT.

Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-. (4th Edition.)

1 ' ' Nell Fitzgerald ' is an irreproachable heroine, full of gentle womanliness, and
rich in all virtues that make her kind estimable. — Daily Telegraph.

There is a wonderful freshness about this novel which cannot fail to charm even
those who have never ridden to hounds." — Court Journal.

KILLED IN THE OPEN.

Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards. 2/-. (3rd Edition.)

' Killed in the Open ' is a book that cannot fail to excite interest. Its tone is
thoroughly healthy." — Illustrated London News.

"It is in truth a very good love story set in a framework of hounds and horses,
but one that could be read with pleasure independently of any such attractions." —
Fortnightly Review.

'Killed in the Open ' is a very superior sort of hunting novel indeed"— Graphic,

STRAIGHT AS A DIE.

Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-. (3rd Edition.)

"If you like sporting novels I can recommend to you Mrs. Kennard's ' Straight asa
Die.' "truth.

Mrs. Edward Kennard can write, and write well. Her descriptions of country
life are many of them admirable, and her story will be read to the end. Some of the
love passages between Dulcie and Bob are full of beauty and pathos." — Pictorial
World.

A REAL GOOD THING.

Cloth gilt, 2/6. (3rd Edition.)

"There are some good country scenes and country spins in ' A Real Good Thing.'
The hero, poor old Hopkins, is a strong character"— Academy.

TWILIGHT TALES, cute***) cloth g nt, 2/6. . -

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
In Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6. The Second Edition of

A GLORIOUS GALLOP.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

HAWLEY SMART'S Sporting NOVELS.

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

THE MASTEE OF EATHKELLY.

Cloth gilt, 2/6.

THE OUTSIDER

Cloth gilt, 2/6; Picture Boards, 2/-. (4th Edition.)

Since the deaths of Surtees and Whyte Melville, Captain Hawley Smart has
worthily held his place at the head of those writers who devote then bo sporting

subjects . his readers know precisely what to expect when they take up
one of his books, and they are never disappointed"— Saturday Review.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
Each in Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6.

THE LAST COUP.

THE PEIDE OF THE PADDOCK.

CLEVEELY WON.

THE HONOURABLE MRS. FETHERSTONHAUCH S

NEW NOVEL.

Cloth, 2/6.

DEEAM FACES.

By the Author of "Kilcorran," " Robin Adair," &c.

BRET HARTE'S NEW NOVEL.

Cloth, 2/6.

THE CEUSADE OF THE Excelsior.

By the Author of " The Luck of Soaring Camp," Ac

As a sketcher of the life of the Far West he is still unrivalled. . . . Mr. Bred
Harte's readers will greatly enjoy the amusing account of the travellers' life at the
Mexican outpost, and the very clever way in which at last the castaway are extricated.
In this story the author shows a faculty of invention and a literary tact BO
noteworthy that we may eyes venture to expect another romance as superior in permanent
value to the delightful crusade of the 'Excelsior' as the latter is to ifs
lengthy predecessor 'Gabriel Conroy." " — Aatihmn.

SIR RANDAL ROBERTS' NEW SPORTING NOVEL.

Cloth gilt, 2/6.

CUEB AND SNAFFLE.

By the Author of "In the Shires." &o.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

MRS. H. LOVETT CAMERON'S NOVELS,

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

IN A GEASS Country.

(A Story of Love and Sport.) (7th Edition. ) Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-.

We turn with pleasure to the green covers of ' In a Grass Country.' The three
heroines are charming each in her own way. It is well sketched, full of character,
with sharp observations of men and women — not too hard on anybody — a clear story
carefully written, and therefore easily read. . . . recommended." — Punch.

When the days are short and there is an hour or two to be disposed of indoors
before dressing time, one is glad to be able to recommend a good and amusing novel.
'In a Grass Country ' may be said to come under this description"— Saturday
Review.

A NOETH COUNTEY MAID.

(3rd Edition. ) Cloth, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-.

A DEAD PAST.

(3rd Edition.) Cloth, 2/6; Picture Boards, 2/-.

A DEVOUT Love. cloth, 2/ 6.

"Without doubt, one of Mrs. Loveth Cameron's best and prettiest stories. The
character of Rose de Brefour is admirably drawn. . . . Mrs. Loveth Cameron
deserves great credit for having made a good woman interesting." — Ladies' Pictorial.

THE COST OF A LIE. cloth, 2/ 6.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
Each in Paper Cover, cloth 1/6.

NECK OE NOTHING.

. it is pleasant, easy reading, and the characters act in a way one can
understand. "saturday Review.

. is really very bright and readable from first to last. "academy.

. is a capital story of hunting and love-making combined. . . .
Nothing prettier or more natural has been written for some time than the scene^in
which Lucy Netterville betrays her cherished secret with such happy results"—
Pictorial World.

THE MADNESS OF Marriage.

Mrs. Loveth Cameron's books are never devoid of merit. . . . The interest in
Daisy Carew's fate is well sustained. . . . " — Morning Post.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

MRS. ALEXANDER'S NOVELS.

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

A FALSE SCENT.

Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6.

BY WOMAN'S WIT.

(3rd Edition.) Cloth 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-.

Mrs. Alexander deserves credit for keeping her readers mystified for some time in
the matter of Mrs. Ruthven's rubies. . . How the widow's wit discovers the
treachery of the man she loves in spite of it ; how she avenges herself, and the terrible
straits Nora is involved in for a season, when she has accepted the wrong man
because the right man has been slow to declare himself ; and how all ends well for
her and her gentle stepmother, not to mention the old shinar whom she weds, is
written in Mrs. Alexander's book, and very readable." — Athenaeum.

In Mrs. Alexander's tale
Much art she clearly shows
In keeping dark the mystery
Until the story's close ! " — Punch.

MONA'S CHOICE, awn**

"Mrs. Alexander has written a novel quite worthy of her." — Athenaeum.
". . . it is pleasant and unaffected." — Saturday Review.

"Rite's" NEW NOVELS.

Each in Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6. At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

THE MYSTEEY OF A TUEKISH BATH.

(2nd Edition.)

Every fresh piece of work which ' Rita ' publishes, shows an increase of power,
and a decided advance on the last. The booklet contains some very smart writing
indeed." — Whitehall Review.

' The Mystery of a Turkish Bath ' has a well-wrought out plot of slightly sensational
interest, and is written with this author's well-known grace a£ style." —
Scotsman.

THE SEVENTH DEEAM. A Romance.

. is a powerful and interesting study in weird effects of fiction. It will
hold the close attention of its readers from first to last, and keep them entertained
with changing sensations of-wonders"— Scotsman.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

POPULAR WORKS AT ALL BOOKSELLERS AND

BOOKSTALLS.

A NEW ONE SHILLING NOVEL,

OR IN CLOTH, 1/6.

THE MYSTERY Belgrade SQUARE.

By CURTIS YORKE,

Author of "Hush,"&c.

By SAMUEL LAING.

A MODERN ZOROASTRIAK

By the Author of " Modern Science and Modern Thought,"
A Sporting Quixote," &c.

1 Vol. Cloth, 2/6. (Second Edition.)

By W. H. DAVENPORT ADAMS.

CELEBRATED ENGLISHWOMEN of the VICTORIAN ERA.

By the Author of "England on the Sea," &c.
1 Vol. Cloth, 2/6.

By PERCY THORPE.

HISTORY OF JAPAN.

1 Vol. Cloth, 3/6.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

"SELECT" NOVELS.

Crown 8vo., Cloth, 2s. 6d. each.
AT ALL BOOKSELLERS AND BOOKSTALLS.

BY FLORENCE MARRYAT.

1 THE HEIE Presumptive.

2 THE HEAET OF JANE WARNER.

3 UNDER THE LILIES AND ROSES.

4 HER WORLD AGAINST A LIE.

5 FACING THE FOOTLIGHTS.

BY ANNIE THOMAS (Mrs. Pender Clip).

6 HER SUCCESS.

7 FRIENDS AND LOVERS.

8 Juniper.

9 KATE Valiant.

10 Atherton TOWERS.

BY LADY CONSTANCE HOWARD.

11 MATED WITH A CLOWN.

12 MOLLIE DARLING.

13 ONLY A VILLAGE MAIDEN.

BY MRS. Houston,

Author of " Recommended to Mercy."

14 BARBARA'S WARNING.

BY MRS. ALEXANDER FRASER.

15 A PROFESSIONAL BEAUTY.

P. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand

SELECT" HOVELS-continued).
BY HARRIETT JAY.

16 A MAEEIAGE OF CONVENIENCE.

BY IZA DTJFFTJS HARDY.

17 LOVE, HONOUR, AND OBEY.

18 NOT EASILY JEALOUS.

19 ONLY A LOVE Story.

BY JEAN Middlemost.

20 POISONED AEEOWS

BY MRS. H. LOVETT CAMERON.

21 A NOETH COUNTEY MAID.

22 A DEAD PAST.

23 THE COST OF A LIE.

BY LADY VIOLET Greville.

24 KEITH'S WIFE.

BY NELLIE Fortescue HARRISON,

Author of " So Euns My Dream."

25 FOE ONE MAN'S Pleasure.

BY EDMUND Leather.

26 THE ACTOE's WIFE.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

it

POPULAR" NOVELS.

Picture Boards, 2s. each.

AT ALL BOOKSELLERS AND BOOKSTALLS.

♦ —

1 GARRISON GOSSIP. By John Strange

Winter, Author of " A Siege Baby," " In
Quarters," " On March," " Mignon's Secret,"
"That Imp," "Mignon's Husband," &c.
(Fourth Edition.)

2 AEMY SOCIETY; Or, Life in a Garrison

Town. By the same Author. (Eighth Edition.)

3 THE OUTSIDER. By Hawley Smart,

Author of "The Pride of the Paddock,"
"Cleverly Won," "Bad to Beat," "Lightly
Lost," &c.

4 BY WOMAN'S WIT. By Mrs. Alexander,

Author of " Mona's Choice," " The Wooing O't,"
The Executor," " The Admiral's Ward," &c

5 THE GIRL IN THE BROWN HABIT. By

Mrs. Edward Kennard, Author of " Straight as a
Die," "Twilight Tales," "A Real Good Thing,"
A Glorious Gallop," " A Crack County," &c

6 KILLED IN THE OPEN. By the same

Author.

7 STRAIGHT AS A DIE. By Mrs. Edward

Kennard, Author of " A Real Good Thing," &e.

8 IN A GRASS COUNTRY: A Story of

Love and Sport. By Mrs. H. Loveth Cameron,
(Seventh Edition.)

9 A NORTH COUNTRY MAID. By the

same Author.
10 A DEAD PAST. By the same Author.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

ft

POPULAR" NOVELS-continued).

11 POISONED AEEOWS. By Jean Middle-mass,

Author of " Wild Greorgie," " Dandy."

12 ONLY A LOVE STOEY. By Iza Duffus

Hardy, Author of " Love, Honour, and Obey."

13 THE HEAET OF JANE WAENEE. By

Florence Marryat, Author of "Facing the
Footlights," "Her World against a Lie," "The
Heir Presumptive," " My own Child," &c.

14 UNDEE THE LILIES AND EOSES. By

the same Author.

15 KATE VALLIANT. By Annie Thomas

(Mrs. Pender Cudlip), Author of " Her Success."

16 KEITH'S WIFE. By Lady Violet Greville,

Author of "Zoe: A Girl of Genius,"
Creatures of Clay."

17 MATED WITH A CLOWN. By Lady

Constance Howard, Author of " Only a Village
Maiden," " Mollie Darling."

18 NOT EASILY JEALOUS. By Iza Duffus

Hardy, Author of " Love, Honour, and Obey,"
&c.

19 FOE ONE MAN'S PLEASUEE. By

Nellie Fortescue Harrison, Author of "So
Euns My Dream," &c.

20 THE CEUSADE OF " THE Excelsior."

By Bred Harte.

21 A SIEGE BABY. By John Strange

Winter.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31 Southampton Street, Strand.

ONE SHILLING NOVELS.

In Paper Cover.

THOSE MARKED * CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED IN CLOTH (1/6.)

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

1 *MY POOE DICK. (Fourth Edition.)

By John Strange Winter, Author of " Booties'
Baby," " Houp La," &c. (With Illustrations by
Maurice Greiffenhagen.)

2 *BOOTLES' CHILDEEN. (Fifth Edition.)

By the same Author. (With Illustrations by
J. Bernard Partridge.)

3 *THE CONFESSIONS OF A PUBLISHES.

By the same Author.

4 *MIGNON'S HUSBAND. (Eighth Edition.)

By the same Author.

5 *THAT IMP. (Seventh Edition.) By the

same Author.

6 *MIGNON'S SECEET. (Eleventh Edition.)

By the same Author.

7 *0N MAECH. (Sixth Edition.) By the

same Author.

8 *IN QUAETEES. (Seventh Edition.) By

the same Author.

9 *A GLOEIOUS GALLOP. (Second Edition.)

By Mrs. Edward Kennard, Author of
The Girl in the Brown Habit," " A Real Good
Thing," &c

10 *THE MYSTEEY OF A TUEKISH BATH.

(Second Edition.) By " Rita," Author of " Dame
Burden," « Sheba," " My Lord Conceit," &c

11 *THE SEVENTH DEEAM. A Romance.

By the same Author.

12 *THE PEIDE OF THE PADDOCK. Bv

■

Hawley Smart, Author of "The Outsider,"
« The Master of Rathkelly," &c

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

ONE SHILLING NOVELS-continued).

13 *Cleverly WON. By Hawley Smart

14 *A MILLIONAIRE OF EOUGH AND

READY. By Bred Harte, Author of "The
Luck of Roaring Camp," &c.

15 *DEVIL'S FOED. By Bred Harte.

16 *NECK OE NOTHING : A Hunting Story.

By Mrs. H. Loveth Cameron, Author of " Ina
Grass Country," &c. (second Edition.)

17 *THE MADNESS OF MAEEIAGE. By

Mrs. H. Loveth Cameron.

18 *THE FASHION OF THIS WOELD. By

Helen Mathers, Author of " Comin' thro' the
Eye," &c.

19 *A Playwright's DAUGHTEE. By

Mrs. Annie Edwardes, Author of " Archie
Lovell," &c.

20 NO MEDIUM. By Annie Thomas (Mrs.

Pender Cudlip), Author of " Her Success," &c.

2 1 A MOMENT OF MADNESS. By Florence

Marryat, Author of " My Sister the Actress,"
&c.

22 SAVED IN TIME. By Mrs. Houston,

Author of " Recommended to Mercy," &c.

23 Every INCH A WOMAN. By Mrs.

Houston.

24 A PAUPEE PEEE. By Major Arthur

Griffiths, Author of " Fast and Loose," &c.

25 *THE WESTHOEPE MYSTEEY. By Iza

Duffus Hardy, Author of " Love, Honour, and
Obey," &c.

26 *Stories OF "THE WOELD." (Reprinted

by Permission.)

27 TWO BLACK PEAELS. By Marie Condor,

Author of " A Morganatic Marriage," " Beauty's
Queen," &c.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

AT ALL NEWSAGENTS, BOOKSELLERS, AND BOOKSTALLS.

c$Lott5ott ^ociefg:

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE. PRICE Is.

ESTABLISHED 1862.

Rite's "' New Three-volume Novel, " SHEBA," commenced in
the OCTOBER NUMBER, and SARAH Tatler S Novel,
"DUCHESS FRANCES," in the NOVEMBER NUMBER.

'SOCIAL ECHOES," edited by Mrs. Humphrey, appear each
Month ; also Articles by well-known "Writers.

"There is a marked elevation in the literary character of 'London Society'
since it changed hands." — Evening Standard.

. is an excellent number, full of the • light and amusing literature ' it professes
to supply"— Literary World.

. this attractive magazine . . . remarkable for variety of subject and
excellence of its light literature"— Public Opinion*.

' London Society ' deserves great credit for the evenness with which it keeps upto
a high standard of excellence in its particular line, that, namely, of wholesome
fiction and magazine miscellanea." — Pictorial World.

This gayest of the magazines shows no sign of failing to preserve the tone it has
taken from the first. It is above all entertaining, and goes in largely for good
fiction by well-known authors. "life.

. this favourite magazine . . . " — Society Herald.

the CHRISTMAS NUMBER of

bonbon ^ociefg

illustrated),
At all Reagents, Booksellers, and Bookstalls. Price containing

CONTRIBUTIONS BY THE FOLLOWING AUTHORS :—
JOHN STRANGE "WINTER,
MRS. CASHEL Holy— FLORENCE MARRYAT— THE AUTHOR OF "MOLLY
BAWN"— THE COUNTESS DE BREMONT— THE AUTHOR OF " WHO IS
SYLVIA ? "mrs. H. LOVETT CAMERON— JESSIE SALE LLOYD—
W. W. FENN— THE AUTHOR OF "MISS MOLLY "sand ELLA CURTIS
(Shirley Smith).

At all Booksellers, Vol. LIV. of LONDON SOCIETY, 780 pages,
handsomely bound in cloth gilt, gilt edges, 10s. 6d. Also Cases
for Binding, 2s. each.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

m

\3>-

TJ\

&

w

m

\3>

"$

3 0112 049086991

min

Ckctjmstahiial

Evidence

FLORENCE-MARRYAT.

'LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY
or ILLINOIS

.2.

t*¥<U&*4l

!+*/&

Mi

Wj

f£

W

BY

Florence MABBYAT,

AUTHOR OP

'love's conflict'' "my sister the actress," "gentleman and
courtier," " a crown of shame," etc., etc.

IN THREE VOL Uses.

VOL. TT.

LONDON :

F. V. WHITE & CO.,

31, SOUTHAMPTON STREET, STRAND, W.C.

1889.

CONTENTS

CHAP. PAGE

I. — A Picnic to Maidenhead . . .1

II. — Lady Muriel seals her Fate . . 25

III. — " Good-bye, Athol ! " . . .55

IV. — The Betrothed 79

V.—" No Faith— no Hope " . . .107

VI.— The Little Rift . . . .139

VII— Mute Music . . . . .172

VIII.— Open War . . .193

IX.— A Flag of Truce . . . .217

Now Rendu, the Seventh Edition of

"ARMY SOCIETY." By Joii.v Strange Winter, Author of
Booties' Baby." Cloth gilt, $t. : also, picture boards, It.

Also, Now Ready, in Cloth Gilt, 2s. 6d. back.

GARRISON GOSSIP. fathered in Blankhampton. By JOHN
Strange Winter. Also picture boards It.

A SIEGE BABY. By the same AUTHOR. Also picture boards, It.

BEAUTIFUL JIM. By the same Author.

IN THE SHIRES. By SIR RANDAL H. ROBERTS, Bart.

THE GIRL IN THE BROWN HABIT. A Sporting Novel. By
Mrs. Edward Kennard. Also picture boards, It.

BY WOMAN'S WIT. By Mrs. ALEXANDER, Author of "The
Wooing O't." Also picture boards. It.

MONA'S CHOICE. By the same Author.

KILLED IN THE OPEN. By Mrs. EDWARD Renard. Also
picture boards, It.

IN A GRASS COUNTRY. By Mrs. H. Loveth-CAMERON.
Also picture boards, 2*.

A DEVOUT LOVER. By the same AUTHOR.

THE COST OF A LIE. By the same AUTHOR.

THE OUTSIDER. Bj Hawley SMART. Also picture boards, It.

THE MASTER OF RATHKELLY. By the same AUTHOR.

STRAIGHT AS A DIE. By Mrs. Edward Kennard. Also
picture boards, It.

TWILIGHT TALES. By Mrs. Edward Kennard. Illustrated.

SHE CAME BETWEEN. By Mrs. ALEXANDER ERASER.

THE CRUSADE OF THE 'EXCELSIOR." By BRET HARTE. Also
picture boards, 2*.

CURB AND SNAFFLE. By SIR RANDAL H. ROBERTS, Bart.

A REAL GOOD THING. By Mrs. Edward Kennard. Also picture
boards, 2*.

A CRACK COUNTY. By the same Author.

DREAM FACES. By Tilt: EONBLR. Mrs. 1'KTHERSTONHAUGH.

THE Hobble. MRS. Verger. By the Author of "Molly
Sawn." &c.

F. V. WHITE & CO.,
31, Southampton Street, Strand, London, W.C

Chapter I.

THE PICNIC TO MAIDENHEAD.

Having dispatched the letter to Woolwich
that was to blight young Fergusson's hopes,
Lord Ehylton walked into the drawing-room
prepared to make himself very agreeable to
Colonel de Crespigny. He really wished his
daughter to marry this man. That he was
not of a noble family was nothing in his eyes,
compared to the fact that he possessed a
princely fortune. The earl had already felt
the inconvenience of inheriting an empty title
without the means of maintaining it, and he
had suffered so much in the bygone days
from impecuniosity, that he had come to the
conclusion that money was the very best

VOL. II. 16

thing this world can afford. To contemplate
the probability that his beautiful daughter
(after having been brought up in need and
poverty) should link herself for life to a
poor man without any fixed income, was
most distasteful to him, as it would have
been to any father. He rejected the idea
with scorn, and only believed himself to be
doing his duty as a parent, in breaking off
an engagement which had never received his
sanction. Muriel's grief troubled him but
little. Girls cried for anything, and all she
wanted was a new lover to dry up her tears.
And that lover, Lord Ehylton was determined
should be his old friend Arthur de Crespigny.
As soon as he entered the drawing-room, a
general cry arose for Lady Muriel, who had
promised to return and give them some
music.

She has a headache," replied the earl
briefly, " and has retired to rest, leaving
me to make her excuses to the company."

Cecilia Seton flew after her friend at
once, and Colonel de Crespigny directed an
anxious glance towards Lord Khylton, who
smiled to meet it.

It's all right, my dear fellow," he whispered,
as he led the colonel a little aside.
"My daughter and I had a slight dispute
about this picnic to Maidenhead, which
ended in such a burst of tears on her part,
that I was forced to give in. But you must
promise to look after her for me, de Cres-pigmy.
There will be a lot of young fellows
there, I conclude, and Muriel is a prize that
I don't intend the first comer to carry off."

And yet you are not afraid to trust
her to me" said the colonel with a significant
look.

No, my dear de Crespigny, frankly, I

should not mind trusting her to you for ever,

nor do I think Muriel would require much

pressing to give her own consent. I conclude

all the tears I have been subjected to were

16—2

shed on your account, for she does not seem
to be over and above attached to my cousin
Amelia. However I know she will be safe
with you, and therefore I have consented
that she and Miss Seton shall join the river
party on Thursday."

"I can't pretend to misunderstand your
meaning, Ehylton, and your consent makes
me very happy. You must have seen my
admiration for Ladv Muriel, and I have told
you that it is my earnest wish to settle again
therefore I shall do my best now to win
her favour."

And I wish you every luck," replied the
earl.

Lady Ehylton (who would never be kept
out of any conference) had wheedled her
way into this, and added her congratulations
to those of her husband. Indeed she
had already been doing everything in her
power to further Colonel de Crespigny'fl suit,
and missed no opportunity of leaving him alone

with her step-daughter. Ever since she had
seen Lady Muriel's fair and delicate beauty
(which made her own look coarse and overblown
by comparison), she had earnestly
wished to get rid of her again, and the only
means to do so she knew were by marriage.
She was sincerely delighted therefore to
think it might occur so soon, and assured
the colonel he had only to go in and win, for
she was certain that her lovely step-daughter
had lost her heart to him in Paris, she
fretted so palpably on their separation.
Colonel de Crespigny was quite ready to
believe all the flattery she lavished on him.
He was intensely conceited where women
were concerned, and thought he had only to
exert his power, to win any female heart in
the world. He did not believe either in a
lengthened courtship, but thought the fair
sex admired force and courage more than any
other qualities in men, and that the way to
take a citadel was to storm it without warnings.

He thanked his friends therefore for
their <?ood wishes as though Ladv Muriel
Darner were already his own, and returned to
London as assured of her consent as though
her hand were in his possession. He had
heard all about the Eevranches admirer from
Miss Rutherford (who loved to place little
confidences in him as if he were her nearest
friend), but he did not believe in him anymore
than Lord Ehylton did. What girl of
eighteen had not had her boy lovers, and
forgotten them as soon as they were out of
si<zht ? And if not he flattered himself he
knew how to displace a youthful memory,
and Lady Muriel, once his wife, he would
take good care she had no lovers but himself.
He had no real faith in either men or
women, and treated the whole subject of
love and matrimony in a very airy style,
but he had immense faith in himself, and
believed that in all cases he had but to ask,
to obtain — but to command, to be obeyed.

Meanwhile, though confidences were being
exchanged between the step-sisters, they
did not concern Athol Fergusson. Muriel
seemed (all of a sudden) to have become
years older than her age, and to have learnt
the reticence of a woman of the world. The
thoughts, which she had poured so freely
into the ear of Lina Walford, she kept in
her own bosom now, as if they were something
wrong. The artificial atmosphere into
which she had been introduced, had already
influenced her mind, and made her ashamed
of having been so foolish as to plight her
faith to an ineligible candidate for matrimony.
Athol Fergusson seemed such a
simple boy beside such men as Lord Norton
and Colonel de Crespigny. She cried when
she thought of him, but her tears were
more for his disappointment than her own,
and she almost wondered (even while she
longed to see him again) how she could
ever have been so silly as to let him talk

of marriage to her. But she had another
source of trouble to weep over with Cecilia,
and that was, the scanty allowance her
father proposed to make her. However —
she asked amidst her sobs — was she to dress
decently, and defray her other expenses,
on a hundred pounds a year ? Why Cecil's
ordinary morning gowns cost ten and twelve
pounds apiece, and she had given three
guineas for a sunshade only the week before,
and when in addition to these Lady Muriel
remembered the Arab pony and the St.
Bernard dog, and the many other extravagant
fancies of which Miss Seton thought
nothing, she wept anew with despair at
ever being able to imitate her.

Cecil was very ready with her sympathy
on this subject and quite as indignant asher
sister. From the point of view of two
thousand a year in her own right, it seemed
utterly impossible to her that any lady
could dress on a hundred pounds. She

declared her step-father to be stingy and
niggardly and unreasonable, and that her
mamma should speak to him at once and
show him what an absurdity he expected,
in imagining his daughter could manage on
so small a sum.

"But that will be no use, dear Cissy,"
replied Muriel, " because papa has no more
to give me. He explained it all to me this
evening, and he is so poor himself he cannot
keep up his position."

"Then mamma must make it up to you,
Muriel. She has more money than she knows
what to do with — or / will, if you will let me."

"No, no," cried Muriel shrinking backward,
"I could not take it, either from her
or you, though I know you mean it kindly.
Don't you understand what I feel, Cissy ?
Papa and I are debtors to your mother
enough already. I am ashamed when I
think of it, that she should be so rich, and
we so poor."

Oh, that's nonsense," exclaimed Cecil
practically, "your father had the title, and
mamma the money. She knew what she
was about when she married him. It was
a fair bargain, you may depend on that;'

But / was not included in it," replied
Lady Muriel sadly.

"Oh, Muriel, don't talk like that," cried
Cecil, throwing her arms about her, " or I
shall think you are sorry it ever happened,
and if it had not we should never have
been sisters. Besides which, it is sure not
to be for long."

What do you mean ? " asked Muriel.

That you will marry, dear, and be perhaps
as rich as we are. Oh ! I am certain
you will, and so is mamma. I heard her
say to your papa, only yesterday, that with
your beauty you should make the best match
of the season ; and that means the richest
match, Muriel, for no one ever talks of :i
poor marriage as a good one."

"I suppose not," said Muriel sighing,
money seems to be the only thing people
care for in this world."

But what could we do without it, Muriel ?
See how wretched it is to be poor. You
must have had some experience of that (from
what you have told me) at Eevranches."

"Don't talk of it," cried Muriel with a
shudder, " it was too terrible. You never
saw anything like it in your life. But, Cissy,
tell me, is Colonel de Crespigny so very
rich? Papa says he is a match fit for any
girl in the county."

Tremendously, I believe. Mamma says
he has more than forty thousand a year.
He came into it quite unexpectedly, about
three years ago (through an old god father),
and he has a splendid place in Sussex, too,
called Hetherington Close— but his wife
died shortly after he got the fortune, and
so he has never lived there. He is a handsome
man — don't you think so ? "

Yes," replied La ly Muriel slowly, " but
he is rather old."

"Old! Oh, that's nothing. What does it
signify what age a woman's husband is so
long as he can buy her everything she wants ?
And the rich men are always old, Muriel.
The young ones have their fortunes to make,
and when a girl has no money of her own,
she can't afford to think of them."

"No, I suppose not," said her companion,
with another heavy sigh ; " but sometimes,
Cecil, they are very nice."

Oh, Muriel, you say that as if you were
regretting somebody in particular. Surely
you are not in love!"

it

Lady Muriel coloured like a rose.

What should make you think so ? All
girls like young men better than old ones,
don't they ? And if I were in love," she
added inconsequently, "what would be the
use of it? Papa has just been telling me
that I must make a wealthy marriage, or

he will send me back to that horrible
Eevranches. Oh ! Cissy, don't talk of it. It
only makes me miserable. Let us think instead
of what we will wear at the picnic on
Thursday."

Cecil took the hint and made no further
reference to the subject, and whilst weighing
the merits between sky-blue cambric and
French pink cashmeres, Lady Muriel's mind
became diverted from her trouble, and she
went to sleep and dreamed she was going
to marry a duke and had a trousseau that
had cost ten thousand pounds.

Thursday dawned, fair and beautiful as an
August day can be, and proving the lie to
the proverbial picnic weather. The river
party had been entirely organized by Colonel
de Crespigny in honour of his own birthday,
and he had engaged a steam launch to
convey his guests, about twenty in number,
to Maidenhead, where a sumptuous repast
was ordered for them at the hotel. Poor

Miss Rutherford was in the seventh heaven
of delight and expectation. She quite believed
that the whole affair had been got upon
her account, and that before the day
drew to a close she would have received
the offer she had so long anticipated. When
she was fully equipped in a white muslin
dress and hat, with a pink sash tied round
her waist and a bunch of roses nodding
over her brow, she might have aptly demonstrated
the heroine whom the Frenchman
alluded to when he said, he would give her
sixteen behind and sixty before." But fortunately
for her own peace of mind, Miss
Rutherford had not the slightest idea that
she was an object of ridicule. She could
not conceal her satisfaction at the turn of
affairs from Lina Walford, and played off so
many girlish airs and graces at the prospect
that lay before her, that her niece very
nearly risked being left at home, for blurting
out the bare unpleasant truth and rubbing

the scales off her aunt's love-blinded eyes.
And that would not have suited Lina, for
she too was looking forward with keen anticipation
to what the day might bring forth.
She was actively employed at that time in
running a certain very shy little lordling
to earth, and she trusted the river picnic
might afford her the opportunity to capture
her prey. Lina was twenty-three, and Lord
Ernest Greenham was only nineteen, but
where a title was concerned Miss Walford
was not such a fool as to carp at the difference
of a year or two. The young gentleman
was still under guardianship, but he
would come into plenty of money by-and-by,
and all she wanted was (by hook or
by crook) to marry him, and let the future
take care of itself. And here let it be said,
par parentheses, that she did not succeed.
In fact she never married anybody, but
lived and died a maid — always pursuing
but never overtaking — much after the fashion

of her Aunt Amelia. Such girls usually do.
In every woman's breast there dwells a heart,
eager to respond to true love from whomever
it may come, and when she deliberately
insults that heart — laughs at its weaknesses,
stamps on its best impulses and refuses
to allow it the liberty of choice — she kills
it, and when she calls on it to wake, and
love, she finds to her dismay that it is dead.
We may laugh at love jmr et simple in
this money-grubbing nineteenth century, and
ridicule the idea of its surviving the constraints
of poverty, yet it is, after all, the
very best thing this world can give us, and
without it riches and promotion and flattery
will never satisfy. It is true that we
generally have to pay for it, by giving up
something else on which we may have set our
hearts, but if we cannot make a sacrifice
for love, we are not worthy of it.

Lina Walford would have laughed till the
tears came into her eyes at the foregoing

sentiment, and voted the writer to be an
old-fashioned simpleton, who knew nothing
of the exigencies of the world of fashion.
But the day came when she would have
given all she possessed for one honest kiss
from a mouth that spoke the truth when it
said it loved her. On this day, however, no
such melancholy prospect loomed before her.
She was full of life and health and believed
her opportunities to be inexhaustible, and
her chance of making a good marriage
secure. She had attired herself in a most
fascinating and fashionable costume, and her
dark bright eyes shone dangerously, from
beneath the broad brim of a Gainsborough
hat. Lady Muriel Darner and Cecilia Seton,
who were dressed alike in plain blue cambric
gowns, with white chip hats tied under their
chins with blue ribbons, arrived in Jermyn
Street in good time, and eager to commence
the promised excursion. Lina's spirits were
so high as to be almost uncontrollable.

VOL. II. 17

u Oh, Muriel, you detestable darling," she
cried, as soon as she found an opportunity
of speaking to her alone, " you knew what
you were about, when you made your new
sister dress in blue like yourself. Why, my
dear girl, you never did a cleverer thing in
your life. Her yellow complexion (which
turns green when shaded by the blue) makes
yours look twice as fair as it really is.
Mind you keep close beside her all day,
and your fortune is made."

Lady Muriel was genuinely distressed.

Oh, Lina, don't talk like that. How can
you suspect me of being so ill-natured ?
Cecil is as kind to me as if she were my
own sister, and I love her dearly. I
wouldn't try to look better than I usually
do, at her expense, for all the world."

Lina laughed incredulously.

"Ah, well, my dear, intentionally or not,
you've done it, and so you may as well take
the credit for a sharp thing. But don't you

go poaching on my preserves. Remember,
Lord Ernest Greenham is my property, and
you mustn't interfere with him. Stick to
your colonel."

To my colonel ? ' repeated Muriel interrogatively.


Yes, to your colonel. Are you deaf as
well as blind? Can't you see he's head-overseers
in love with you, you silly, and
ready to propose at once, if you'll only give
him the chance ? "

But I thought he was going to marry
Cousin Amelia."

Bah ! Would any man in his senses

choose an old woman like her when he

might have a young thing like you ?

What do you think ? I'm afraid it's all up

with auntie's chance there, and she'll have

to follow a new trail. By-the-way, Muriel,

have you heard anything from that young

fellow at Eevranches, that you used to pipe

your eye over ? "

17—2

No," replied Muriel in a low voice, as
she turned away.

I thought you wouldn't. Boys like that
are no good at all. They can't marry you,
and they only interfere with your settlement
in life. It's better to be here to-day, isn't
it, Muriel — dressed in that bewitching frock
and hat, and going down to Maidenhead on
a steam launch in company with a dozen
eligibles — than making love amongst the
turnips and potatoes to a subaltern without
a halfpenny, eh ? "

"Much better," replied Muriel with a sigh.
I know that, so don't let us talk of it anymore.
Hark ! Cousin Amelia is calling us.
The carriage has come. Let us forget everything,
Lina, but the delightful day we have
before us."

She ran down stairs quickly as she spoke
only stopping for one moment on the
narrow landing to dash away a tear that
had risen to her eye — and entered the

drawing-room beautiful and radiant, her
beauty enhanced tenfold by the glowing
blush that overspread her face as Colonel
de Crespigny came forward to meet her.

The colonel had made up his mind to put
his fate to the touch that day, and win or
lose it all. Only he never dreamt of losing.
He was always very confident of his success
with women, and he had some reason to be
so, for he had been very lucky with them
through life — not because of his worth or
his wit, but because he possessed a large
share of animal magnetism, which influenced
the weaker sex almost against their will.
This gift (if it may be so called) of animal
magnetism, which some strong natures
possess, is not sufficiently taken into consideration
when we find our will succumbing
(without any reasonable cause) to that of
another. It possesses the same fascination
as the basilisk's glittering eye has for the
transfixed bird, as music exercises over the

serpent, as the mesmerist holds over the
weaker brain of his subject. Not that
animal magnetism has anything to do with
the powers of the mind. It is generally
people with small brains and largely developed
natural powers that exhibit it most
freely — such a man in fact as Arthur de
Crespkrny, whose one aim in life had been
to gratify his sensual instincts, in whatever
direction they might lie, and that without
any consideration for duty, or the feelings of
others. Dozens of women had acknowledged
the force of his attraction, but not one remained
that did not confess that she had
been mistaken, and he was not worthy a
single thought from a true heart. It would
be well if women would sometimes sit down
and draw up a written analysis of the
character of the men they feel tempted to
think too much of. They would be surprised
to find how few can bear the test,
and what a poor array of virtues they will

have to set against the vices. They judge
of a maD by what he is to themselves,
whereas the true test lies in what he is to
others. They will feel flattered by his jilting
another woman for their sakes, being too
foolish to discern that they will probably
suffer the same indignity in their turn. An
indifferent son and brother is bound to
make a bad husband and father ; yet women
are so vain, they imagine a man can fail in
every relation of life except that which he
holds to themselves. Oh, blind and fools !
How many of them will read these remarks
with grinding teeth, and acknowledge in
their hearts that they are true ? The failure
of marriage lies in the fact only that it has
not been cemented with a good man, or a
good woman.

Men and women with kind hearts, and
active brains and firm principles, which urge
them to do right for the sake of right
alone, will make loving husbands and wives,

and turn marriage into the greatest blessing
that life affords them. But all this time,
Colonel de Crespigny is handing the ladies
into the carriage that is to take them to
the station, securing a seat for himself
beside Lady Muriel, and doing his utmost to

make himself agreeable to her. Could the
poor child but have recognized the basilisk's
fatal glance in his wide open blue eyes and
fascinating smile, from what a world of
misery she might have saved herself.

6 VsbV

LADY MURIEL SEALS HER FATE.

Colonel de Crespigny's birthday party was
composed of the usual elements which society
considers necessary to the enjoyment of a
day spent on the river — that is to say, there
was an equal number of either sex, the
women being mostly young and pretty, and
the men ready to go to any length of flirtation
with them, provided they did not compromise
themselves. The steam launch was
large, and eminently convenient ; the refreshments
which were provided to sustain
the guests until they reached Maidenhead,
delicate and liberal ; the day, a glorious one,
and the surroundings unparalleled. For placid
and rural scenery — breathing of peace and
plenty — there is nothing to excel the banks

of the Thames on a summer's day. The
broad bright river, fringed with bulrushes
and blue forget-me-nots, and planted with
water lilies resting on their green leaves,
amongst which the snowy-breasted swans
sail about with proud bearing and elevated
crests, ready to resent the least insult offered
to their royal kingdom, is a sight of which
the equal is nowhere to be found. And the
pleasure boats which one passes on the way
the hired wherry, with its striped awning,
full to the brink of danger ; the swift canoe,
skimming like a swallow over the water,
with its solitary occupant in drawers and
jersey ; the house-boat, with its lounging
chairs, and pots of blooming flowers and
general signs of domestic comfort — all combine
to make up a picture of beauty and
of brightness that it does one good to sec.
To most of the guests on Colonel de Cres-pigmy's
steam launch the sight was doubt
no novelty (though it is one that never loses

its interest), but to Lady Muriel Darner
everything was completely new. She had
never seen anything like it in her life before,
and could not find words sufficient in which
to express her pleasure and interest. She
sat by her host's side on the steam launch,
a little conscious, perhaps, because of the
hints her friends had given her, but looking
all the more lovely for her confusion, and
eagerly questioning him as to the meaning
of everything she saw around her. Each
man on board wanted to be introduced to
her, and all the women (and especially Miss
Rutherford) were jealous of her monopolization
of the colonel, but it was of no use.
De Crespigny refused to see either the eagerness
of his own sex or the vexation of the
other. He had engaged the steam launch
and organized the picnic for this reason only,
and he was determined not to be baulked
of his purpose. He kept his place pertinaciously
by Muriel's side, encouraging her to

ask him questions, and when she had learned
all she could with regard to the Thames,
and the different buildings they had passed
on their way, she became curious to hear
something about the company.

Do tell me, Colonel de Crespigny," she
whispered, " all about your friends. I want
to know their names, and if they are nice
or nasty. I like to hear you talk."

You little tyrant," he replied laughing,
I might as well have brought Debrett in
my pocket with the pages turned down.
About whom is your ladyship so curious ? '

Everybody. But I will begin with that
pale lady at the further end of the launch.
She is dressed in green, and has a boy by
her side. She has been looking at me so
hard, I think she must know who I am."

Colonel de Crespigny glanced indifferently
to the spot where Mrs. Lor rimer stood with
her son, burning with indignation that had
no power to call one tinge of colour into her

cheek. It was characteristic of the man that
he should have invited this woman to witness
the triumph of his infidelity to herself, but
he would have been astonished if any one
had told him that by so doing he had
committed an act of cruelty. He was so
blissfully blind to everything, except what
ministered to his own vanity, that he would
have replied that if Caroline Lorrimer cared
for him, she ought to rejoice at what gave
him pleasure. As it was, he smiled as he
caught her eye, as much as to say, " See
how I am enjoying myself, and I hope you
are doing the same." And then he returned
eagerly to Lady Muriel, and said :

I should be very much surprised to find
that any one on board the boat was ignorant
by this time of your identity. Do you suppose
they would not be curious to learn
the name of the belle of the picnic? But
the lady you have pointed out happens to
be a very old friend of mine, and she would

esteem it a great honour to know you. May
I introduce her to you ? "

Of course Lady Muriel bowed and acquiesced,
and in another moment Mrs.
Lorrimer was standing before her. She
would not refuse the introduction that de
Crespigny had offered her, for she had decided
that if this thing must be, she would
force herself (for Arthur's sake) to put the
best face upon it that she could. But her
complaisance was all assumed, and under the
somewhat constrained smile with which she
greeted her beautiful young rival, there
lurked a deadly and bitter hatred, that
made her long to kill her on the spot. She
would have gladly enacted the part of Queen
Eleanor, and handed her supplanter a cup
of poison that should quench her hopes forever.
But these days are not the days for
the dagger or the bowl. They would be
less guilty, perhaps, if they were. These are
the days for smiling faces, and revengeful

hearts — for outstretched hands, and lying lips
for flattering compliments, and an envious,
malicious, and uncharitable spirit.

Mrs. Lorrimer proffered her gloved hand
for Muriel's acceptance, and murmured something
about the pleasure of making her
acquaintance, but under her apparent friendliness
the girl seemed to detect the cloven
foot, and shrunk involuntarily from her.

You have not been long home from
abroad, I believe ? ' she commenced, with a
frigid smile. "I think mv friend Colonel
de Crespigny told me as much."

Quite long enough to have forgotten all
about it," laughed Muriel, drawing a little
closer to the colonel for protection.

Oh, indeed ! Perhaps I have made a
mistake. But I believe this is your first introduction
to our beautiful river."

Yes, you are right there, but I hope it
will not be the last. I was just telling
Colonel de Crespigny that he may bring me

here as often as he pleases. I think it is

the most charming sight I have ever seen."

"Don't save me too much license, Ladv

O 'J

Muriel," replied the colonel, " or I may take
you at your word, and re-engage the launch
for tomorrow. What is the matter, Mrs,
Lorrimer ? Are you not well ? "

Quite well, thank you. I was only thinking
that poor Arthur does not seem to be
enjoying himself much. He is all alone."

"You shouldn't have brought him. Boys
are out of place in a party like this. He
would have been happier left on the banks,
fishing for minnows with a crooked pin.
But I must find a better cavalier for you,
Mrs. Lorrimer. Let me introduce Captain
Bars ton to you."

No, thank you. I prefer to go back to
nry boy," she answered coldly, as with another
bow to Lady Muriel she rejoined
young Arthur.

I don't think she is very nice, but I

am afraid you have offended her," said Lady
Muriel mischievously, as Caroline Lorrimer
left them.

De Crespigny shrugged his shoulders.

It's not my fault," he said, " if ladies
will be touchy."

But perhaps she thinks you ought to
go and talk with her a little now, as you
are such old friends," suggested the girl.

And what if I prefer my new friend to
any old one," he answered, looking full into
her blushing face. " Am I to be condemned
to banishment for Mrs. Lorrimer 's sake —
and on my birthday too ? "

I wish I had known it was your birthday,
colonel. I would have brought you a
present."

There is only one present I should care
to accept from you, Lady Muriel."

Eeally ! And what is it ? Don't be extravagant
in your choice. Remember I am

5>

very poor.

VOL. II. 18

But it is something of the utmost value."

Then you mustn't come to me for it,

colonel. Cissy will be more likely to be

able to get it for you. Oh! What is the

matter with Cousin Amelia ? "

Miss Rutherford, who had been trying in
vain, ever since they started, to attract some
notice from Colonel de Crespigny, was so
overcome by her failure and the sight of
his devotion to Lady Muriel, that she
thought she would try fainting as a resource
to bring him to her side. Faintness is an
elegant and refined sort of illness, which
need not affect the appearance of the invalid,
except by an interesting pallor, and
just sufficiently clouds her intellect to allow
her to confess her weakness as she is slowly
returning to consciousness. Therefore, fainting
(real or assumed) has always been in
vogue amongst ladies who can think of no
better way to appeal to the hearts of the
male sex, and Miss Rutherford (who was

really fretting enough to make herself ill)
considered the opportunity a good one to
show Colonel de Crespigny the tender materials
of which she was made. So what
with the heat of the day and her disappointment
and a little acting she managed to give
a very good imitation of a swoon, which
brought Lady Muriel and the colonel and
most of the picnic party to her assistance.
Lina Walford seemed excessively annoyed at
the occurrence.

What nonsense ! " she exclaimed, as she
shook her aunt with anything but a tender
touch. " Here, auntie ! Do rouse yourself
and come into the cabin. You can stand
perfectly well if you try. I wouldn't make
a fuss like this in public, for all the world."

"But, Lina, if she is really ill, she can't
help it," interposed Muriel ; " I suppose it's
the heat. Can't we get some water ? "

Of course, I will fetch it for you," cried
the colonel.

18—2

"Fiddlestick, Muriel," whispered Lina,
can't you see it's fudge ? It's only ill-temper,
because the colonel has not paid her
any attention to-day. It's sickening to see
such conduct in an old woman."

Hush," said Muriel, who was afraid her
cousin might overhear the words. At this
moment Colonel de Crespigny returned with
a glass of water.

Ease her head and try and make her
drink it," he said.

Better throw it right over her at once,"
suggested Lina, " the shock will recover her."

But at that moment, Miss Rutherford
slightly moved her head, and with a deep
sigh murmured "Arthur!'

"What did she say?" asked a bystander.

She asked for her maid Martha," replied
Lina with ready mendacity ; " she is all right
now she has spoken. Come, auntie, you
must let me take you down into the cabin.
I can't have you stay here any longer."

And with determined authority, Lina shook
Miss Rutherford up, and dragged, rather than
led her, to the tiny saloon cabin. There the
poor lady, overcome by the failure of her
little artifice, laid her head down on her
niece's shoulder and burst into a flood of
tears.

Oh, don't be so ridiculous, auntie," cried
Miss Walford in a tone of vexation. " You
are making a perfect exhibition of yourself,
and your tears will ruin my ribbons. I really
can't afford it. You must sit up straight.
It's horribly selfish of you. You know I
have my own little game to play, and you
are taking all the wind out of my sails,
crushing me up like that. Do try and remember
where we are."

"Oh! Lina! I do remember it," wailed
Miss Rutherford, "but it has been such a
blow to me. He gave this party entirely
on my account, and yet I have hardly seen
anything of him all day." ■.

Look here, auntie, you Lad much better
face the truth at once. Colonel de Crespigny
didn't give this party for you at all, nor forme,
nor for any one but Muriel Darner. He's
been in love with her ever since we were in
Paris — I saw it plain enough, if you didn't
and he has no intentions in any other
quarter. So don't go and give yourself
away in this ridiculous manner, for Heaven's
sake ! "

But I don't believe what you say," cried
Miss Rutherford. " The colonel paid me
attention long before he ever saw that chit
Muriel, and I shall not give up hope of
winning him, as long as he is to be won."

How is Miss Rutherford now ? ' asked
de Crespigny himself, putting his head in at
the cabin door. " Ah ! better, I am glad to
see. I have just been speaking to our captain,
and he says he can put you ashore wherever
you like to land, if you feel too ill to proceed
and would prefer to return home."

To return home?" repeated Miss Ku therefore!
indignantly. " If I do, I shall take my
niece and cousins with me. You seem to
forget I am their chaperon."

"I have provided against that" he said
with a smile. " My friend Mrs. Lorrimer will
relieve you of the charge if you should feel
it is beyond your strength."

No ! " replied Miss Rutherford emphatically,
" I know too well the responsibility I
have undertaken, and Lord Ehylton would
never forgive me if I were to leave his
daughter and Miss Seton behind. I shall
therefore go on as far as Maidenhead, Colonel
de Crespigny, and I hope — I hope I may
have no return of my illness."

Take some brandy and-water. It's the
best thing out," replied de Crespigny unsympathetically,
as he returned to the side
of Lady Muriel.

Now, auntie, don't be so foolish as to
spoil your day for a chimera," said Lina.

You'll never get that man, so you had
better put the idea out of your head at once.
Go on my tack and look out for another.
You know my little Greenham succeeded
Captain Patterson, after twelve hours' interval
only, and look how nicely we are getting on.
He wanted to kiss me just now, but I told
him he must wait till we got to Maidenhead.
Here, just puff yourself a bit, and comb out
your curls, and you'll be all right again —
for I can't stay here any longer."

And having forced her aunt to return to
the deck, and assure her friends that she
was quite recovered, the conversation once
more became general and the pleasure-party
went on as before. As soon as they reached
Maidenhead, they landed and went to the
hotel, where a recherche dinner was in readiness
for them. Lady Muriel sat by the host's
side at the head of the table, and though
she ate and drank but little, she laughed
and talked incessantly and became quite intoxicated

with flattery and excitement. She
could see plainly how each member of the
party envied her position, and was inclined to
be sulky on account of it — how the men
wished they were Colonel de Crespigny, and
the women that they were herself — and yet
how one and all tacitly yielded the place
of honour to her, as if it were her right.
The adulation thus afforded to her beauty
and the preference of her host, to say nothing
of the undisguised compliments which de
Crespigny kept pouring into her ear, made
Lady Muriel feel almost beside herself. She
forgot everything but the enchanted scene
before her, and if a thought of Athol Fergus-son
had intruded itself, she would have dismissed
it with a frown, so poor and simple
did his boyish protestations of love appear,
by comparison with the colonel's warm and
impassioned speeches.

When the dinner was concluded, and the
picnic party once more embarked on board

the steam launch, the August sun had sunk
to rest and the tender shades of evening were
settling on all around, turning the greens to
greys and the greys to sombre brown. The
river looked like a broad sheet of silver,
shimmering beneath the rays of the moon,
and the heat of the dav had been succeeded
by a light breeze, that made little ripples
on the surface of the water, and lifted
the ribbons that adorned Lady Muriel's hat.
Colonel de Crespigny had secured her a seaton
the poop of the little vessel, and kept
one for himself by her side ; and as they
steamed homeward, well sheltered with plaids
and shawls, his hand stole into hers beneath
the coverings, whilst he tried to enlist her
pity by a recital of the loves of his wasted
life. This was a favourite theme of Arthur
de Crespigny, when he wished to secure a
woman's interest, and one which he had
never known to fail. The female sex is (asa
rule) so rich in compassion for lost opportunities

and unrequited sensibility. It had
had great effect during the lifetime of his
late wife ; it was so sad to think that the
handsome manly creature was neither loved
nor looked after, and bore all his domestic
worries into the bargain with so resigned an
air. And now that she was dead it made a
still more interesting retrospect, for the hearer
could always cherish the hope of becoming
his consoler. Muriel was very young and unsophisticated,
and the story was new to her.
It was indeed sad to think that he had suffered
so much from want of sympathy and
affection in the days gone by, and when the
colonel saw the time was ripe for action and
ventured to ask her if she thought she could
possibly care for a man who was so much older
than herself, but whose heart was as fresh as
that of a boy of one-and-twenty, she squeezed
his big hand with her little one under the
plaid, and actually whispered " Yes" without
one thought of the princely fortune she had

so often heard discussed. This was the effect
of an eloquence which owed its perfection
to long and constant practice, but which
sounded to her as if it came fresh bubbling
from the depths of the colonel's heart. Ashe
received her answer, de Crespigny bent
his mouth to her ear, and said in a trembling
voice, " I cannot thank you here, my darling,
it is impossible ; but, thank God, I shall
have my whole life in which to thank
you. Only I must tell you how happy you
have made me, and how much I shall try
to requite your goodness. You are my very
own now, Muriel, remember, and I shall
never give you up again to anybody."

He spoke in an eager agitated manner
which a young girl might naturally mistake
for the emotion of love, but which an older
woman could have told her was the usual
effect of passion. Colonel de Crespigny would
have spoken in the same way, though not
in the same words, to a barmaid who had

encouraged his attentions. He had spoken
in that way dozens of times to poor Caroline
Lorrimer, who sat at a little distance from
him now, wondering what her old love was
saying to his new fancy. But Muriel only
thought that the idea of possessing her affection
had opened an unknown world of happiness
before him, and felt proud that she had
the power to heal a life-long wound.

She continued to sit by his side in the
moonlight as they steamed rapidly up the
river, with her hand clasped in his, listening
to the passionate bathos he poured into her
ear, and the vivid description he gave her
of the luxurious life she should enjoy.

There is not a place on the earth where
you may wish to dwell, my darling, that
I will not take up my residence in, whether
you choose Paris or London, Italy, Germany
or America. Everything I possess will be at
your disposal, and I shall be your very
humble slave. Only 1 should prefer my

queen to keep up the state that befits her
in London, and reign in society like one."

And that is the very thing your queen
would choose for herself," returned Muriel
with a low laugh. "I have had enough of
the country to last a lifetime, and feel as I
should never tire of the town."

"We shall suit each other down to the
ground," replied de Crespigny, " and I am
the happiest man in all the world. I wish
I could take you back to Oakley Court this
evening, and inform Lord Ehylton of my
good fortune : but I'm afraid it will be too
late. I will go down there early tomorrow,
however, and you can do as you choose,
my darling, about telling your father of what
has passed between us. And meanwhile,
you must wear this ring as a token that
you have pledged your word to become my
wife."

Under cover still of the friendly plaids,
de Crespigny slipped a magnificent diamond

LADY MURIEL SEALS HER FATE. 47

ring off his own hand on to Lady Muriel's
engaged finger — that finger which had not
yet lost the impress of poor Athol Fergusson's
paltry hoop of gold. It might have struck
a more experienced woman as curious that
the colonel should be so conveniently wearing
a lady's brand-new ring on his little
finger ; but Lady Muriel never guessed that
he had been so certain of his prize as to
buy the jewel in anticipation of her wearing
it. She twisted the ring round and
round her slender finger with the utmost
satisfaction, loving to feel the large diamonds
of which it was composed, whilst her fiance
whispered that it was but a forerunner of
all the beautiful things he meant to give her.
They were not far from their place of disembarkation
then, where waggonettes were waiting
to convey the party to the station, whence
they took the train for London.

Everybody was pretty well tired out by
that time and anxious to get home again,

only Lady Muriel Darner's eyes shone dangerously
bright, and her cheeks looked feverishly
crimson. Her excited appearance and
Colonel de Crespigny's looks of devotion,
divulged their secret to the rest, and as soon
as they found themselves in the railway
carriage Lina Walford put the question pointblank
to her :

Well, Muriel," she whispered, " and is
it un fait accompli ? "

Oh, yes," replied her friend nervously ;
"we are engaged, Lina. See, here is my

nncr

5)

u Very handsome," said the young woman
of the world, examining it, " and, like the
Bible, tells of better things beyond. You've
managed it very neatly, my dear. I didn't
give you credit for half so much cleverness,"
and then, to Lady Muriel's consternation, she
turned to Colonel de Crespigny (who was
the only person in the carriage beside their
own party) and said, " Muriel has confided

the great secret to me, colonel, and I congratulate
you. I wish I had pulled off my
own little affair at the same time, but I
regret to say it is in statu quo.' 1

What secret ? " demanded Miss Rutherford,
raising herself from semi-slumber.

Muriel and Colonel de Crespigny are
engaged, auntie. Wasn't I a true prophet?
I told you it would come off to-day."

You knew more, then, than / did,"
replied de Crespigny laughing. " 1 feared I
was too presumptuous even to allude to it, but
Lady Muriel was good enough to forgive me."

Muriel was looking down and blushing.
She was not used yet to hearing her engagement
mentioned in public, while Cecil
Seton was clinging to her other side and
telling her a thousand times how much she
congratulated her.

Everything will be right, my dear," she
said with a significant squeeze of her sister's
arm.

VOL. II. 19

Miss Rutherford did not know what to
say. She tried to wish them joy, but the
words died upon her lips. Poor soul ! It
was about her twentieth disappointment, and
she had not much time to repair her error.
And when at last she spoke, it was to say
in a very frigid voice, which she tried hard
to steady :

"I think we should postpone our congratulations
until we hear if my cousin
Ehylton gives his consent to the engagement
or not."

I am happy to tell you, Miss Rutherford,
that his lordship has already expressed his
willingness to give me Muriel," interposed
the colonel eagerly, " and so I have no
uneasiness on that score."

Oh, well, if that is the case, there is
nothing more to be said about it," she
returned in a low voice.

Don't you think so ? In my idea there
will be nothing else to be talked about for

the next month. But here is Haddington.
I think you said, Muriel, that the carriage
was to meet you at the station ? "

Yes ; Lady Ehylton said she would send
it all the way, as she did not like Cecil and
me to travel by train so late at night.
Good-bye to you all ; we have had a most
charming day. And I am to tell papa,
Colonel de Crespigny, that he will see you
tomorrow ? "

Yes, yes ; tomorrow at about dinner
time," replied de Crespigny as he leant on
the carriage door and looked his adieux.
He would fain have taken a more tender
one of her, but the influence of the river
scene had already faded, and Lady Muriel
had become shy of his endearments. So he
was obliged to content himself with a pressure
of her hand, and return to his duty of
seeing Miss Rutherford and her niece safely
into their vehicle. The Oakley Court carriage
with its splendid appointments rolled

19—2

UBRAR1

uwE*m of uno*

off towards Richmond, and two tired girls
in crumpled blue cambric leaned back on
the cushions and talked to each other.

Oh, Muriel darling, I am so very glad,
all but except for one thing ; and that is,
that we shall be separated again."

Never , Cissy ! Why should you think
so for a moment? What is the use of my
being so rich, if I cannot see whom I
choose ? "

But husbands are sometimes disagreeable,
you know, and make their wives do as they
tell them."

Colonel de Crespigny won't. He has
promised me I shall always have my own
way in everything. Oh, Cissy, I am so glad
he is rich. Nothing would have induced
me to have him without."

But he is very nice into the bargain,
and good-looking too."

Yes, very. He is everything that is
delightful, and he is going to settle a lot

of money on me for my own use. What
would the Grants say ? "

But that question was never answered,
even in Lady Muriel's own mind ; for the
allusion to her old friends brought a quick
sigh with it that set her thoughts rambling
in quite another direction.

Meanwhile Miss Rutherford was falling
from one fit of hysterics into another, whilst
Lina Walford (not too good-tempered after
the failure of her own plans) was alternately
ridiculing and scolding her unfortunate relative
for making such a fool of herself.

And Caroline Lorrimer, in her lonely
bed-chamber, was chewing the cud of bitterness
as she reviewed the triumph of her
young rival, and recognized how completely
she, herself, had lost all power over the
man who once declared that he loved her.

But Arthur de Crespigny slept well and
soundly. He was not young enough to let
love keep him waking. He was too well

used to that sort of thing to grow excited
over it when the object of his passion was
not in view. He did not know what it was
to pine in absence, though he might long
for a renewal of pleasure. He had, in fact,
but little brain to keep him from his sleep :
so his great animal nature slumbered composedly,
without even a dream to ruffle it,
and without a spark of pity for Amelia
Rutherford's disappointment or Caroline Lorrimer's
tears.

t->>^P«H|.

Good-bye, ATHOL ! "



When Athol Fergusson received the letter
from Lord Ehylton inclosing Lady Muriel's
note of dismissal, his first feeling was that
of despair ; his second, of incredulity. He
could not and would not believe that she
had written it of her own free will. What !
Muriel, who had walked for so many
evenings with him on the Eamparts of Branches,
with her hand clasped in his and
her eyes speaking volumes of love in answer
to his own ? Muriel, who had declared,
times out of mind, that she loved him better
than any one or any thing in the wide
world, and had promised to wait for years
until she could become his wife, or else
never to marry any one at all ? It was

impossible that his loving, faithful Muriel
could have penned those cruel words except
under circumstances of the most exceptional
cruelty. They had coerced his poor darling
they had frightened her into doing as
they wished, and she was doubtless breaking
her heart to think that her lover would
accept their dictum. But he was determined
not to do so. He resolved that he would
take his final answer from Muriel's lips alone.
He was only a subaltern, it was true, but
he was an officer and a gentleman, and his
overtures were at least entitled to respect.
He would go down to Oakley Court and see
Lord Ehylton on the subject himself. No
thought of fear entered his mind as he made
the resolution.

Athol Fergusson (though young) was made
of the stuff that fears no man, and if the earl
chose to regard his hopes as presumptuous,
he could not, at least, say that they were
wrong. So, as soon as he could obtain leave

(which happened to be the day after the picnic)
he made his way down to Oakley Court,
and arrived there purposely at about twelve
o'clock, in order to make sure of finding Lord
Ehylton at home. His heart was very heavy
as he journeyed thither, and the future
looked very black before him. He had but
one hope of ever calling Muriel his wife, and
that was founded on the faith he had in her
fidelity. It was a melancholy prospect for
both of them, long years of waiting for a
happiness that might never come, and perhaps
it was his duty to release his darling
from any formal promises ; but she should at
least know that he held himself bound, and
that whenever she wanted to go to him, he
would be ready to receive her. So strong
was his faith in their mutual affection, notwithstanding
the blow that cruel note had
given it. He reached Oakley Court about
noon, and was shown into a cheerful and
commodious ante-chamber, until his lordship's

pleasure concerning him was known.
The earl was in his own study, conning the
morning papers, and when Athol Fergusson's
card was put into his hand, and he was told
that the gentleman was waiting to see him in
another room, he felt, and looked, considerably
discomposed. Who was this pushing
and 'presuming puppy who refused to take an
answer written in plain English, but forced
his way into the privy r acy of the Court to demand
a reason for his rejection ? However,
the earl had an excellent answer read' for
him. He had not seen his daughter since
her return from the picnic, but he had just
received a hastily penned letter from Colonel
de Crespigny, posted the night before, in
which he informed the earl of his success
with Lady Muriel, and called on him to
sanction the engagement which he had promised
to approve. Lord Ehylton decided
therefore that he would see this presumptuous
subaltern, and give him his answer

viva voce, and told his footman to inform
Mr. Athol Fergusson that Lord Ehylton was
busily engaged at that moment, but that if
he would waits a few minutes he would have
the pleasure of seeing him. And then he
rung the bell for Fielding and ordered her
'to tell Lady Muriel that he desired her
presence in his study. Lady Muriel and
Cecil Seton were having a merry time of it
together when the earl's message reached
them. They had lain in bed till past ten
o'clock, in order to recover their fatigues of
the day before, and having made hasty
toilettes, had had breakfast served in Lady
Muriel's rose-covered dressing-room. There
they sat, in their white morning wrappers,
with their long hair hanging down their
backs, drinking chocolate and eating buttered
toast, whilst they discussed the events of the
picnic, and laughed heartily at everything
that had appeared ridiculous or strange to
them. Lady Muriel, especially, seemed to be

in the highest spirits. The first thing that
had attracted her on waking had been the
flashing of the brilliant on her finger, which
had brought all kinds of pleasant thoughts of
money, and jewels, and carriages, and horses
in their train, and renewed the excitement
of the day before.

"What shall I do about it, Cissy?" she
asked. " Shall I tell papa myself, or leave
Colonel de Crespigny to do so?"

Oh ! tell him yourself, Muriel. It isn't as
if there was any doubt of his being pleased
at it. Didn't he tell you that the colonel
was a good match for any girl in the
county ? "

Yes ! he did, and he knew that he admired
me into the bargain. Oh ! how funny
it will be to be married."

You don't look much like a married lady
now, Muriel ; wearing your hair down your
back takes three or four years off your age."

"' I must pile it all up on the top of my

head, and try and look as old as the colonel.
1 believe he's the same age as papa."

He doesn't look it — and surely, Muriel,
you would not have him younger. Boys are
so stupid and insipid."

"I know they are," replied Lady Muriel.
"They can't talk of the same things as men."

And indeed, a middle asked man like
Colonel de Crespigny, who has seen everything
and done everything, can soon throw
the conversation of an innocent-minded and
ingenuous boy into the shade. The boy has
not acquired the man's ready tongue, and
want of bashfulness, and disregard of truth ;
but the man will never regain the boy's
modesty, and candour, and shrinking from
wrong. Colonel de Crespignv's effrontery was
calculated to make the remembrance of Athol
Fergusson's timid avowal of love seem poor
and insipid by comparison, and he had intended
it should do so. He had not entirely
forgotten the lover of Eevranches, and many

of his speeches had been expressly made with
the view of causing the absent Athol to
appear in his worst light, although he was
not so foolish as to let Lady Muriel guess
what he was driving at. And he had succeeded
in leaving an impression on her mind
that resulted in the above-given sentiment.

At that moment Fielding entered the
room.

If you please, your ladyship," she said,
"his lordship desires you will go down to
him in the study."

"Papa wants me," cried Lady Muriel
springing up, " and I am not dressed ! What
shall I do ? "

Oh, Muriel ! you are quite nice enough
to go downstairs. You look lovely with
your hair down. Let Fielding tie a blue
ribbon round your waist, and you'll be all
right."

But suppose there should be some one
with him," said Muriel, holding back.

"His lordship is quite alone," said the
oracle, Fielding.

At that assertion, Muriel was persuaded
to do as her sister wished her, and in another
minute had run down to the study.

Papa," she said, kissing him, " what is
it that you want of me ? "

Several things, my dear. In the first
place I must congratulate you, Muriel, on
having made a brilliant conquest. I have
received a letter from de Crespigny, in which
he says you have engaged yourself to marry
him. Is that correct?"

Quite, papa. Colonel de Crespigny proposed
to me as we were returning home last
night, and as you said he was such a
good match, I accepted him. He gave me
this ring," continued Muriel, holding out her
finger.

Ah ! very handsome indeed," said the
earl, peering at it through his spectacles,
"but nothing, I expect, to what you will

have. You're a very lucky girl, Muriel.
You have landed the biggest fish of the
season, and I hope you are aware of your
advantages."

Oh, yes, papa ! I know how rich he is,
and he is coming to the Court to-day to
talk to you about it, and to tell you the sum
of money he is prepared to settle on me.
He said I was to tell you so."

He will make you a liberal settlement.
I am sure of that, and you have made a
noble establishment in life for yourself. This
is better than ^oin^ back to Branches,
eh, Muriel?"

Much better, papa," she answered fervently.


And now, my dear, I have another
matter to speak to you about. It appears
that I made a mistake the other day, when
I told you that Mr. Fergusson was on his
way to his destination. How I came to
misunderstand him I cannot sav, but I did,

and it seems that he has not yet started, and
instead of accepting your note and mine asa
final rejection of his suit, he has had
the impudence to force his way into Oakley
Court for an explanation of our decision.
At least, that is T presume the reason of his
appearance here."

At this Lady Muriel turned deadly
pale.

"Athol is here — in this house?" she ejaculated.


Yes ! His card was brought to me
about ten minutes ago, and he is waiting to
see me in the ante-chamber. Had I not
received this very satisfactory letter from
de Crespigny, announcing your engagement
to him, I should have simply dismissed the
young man and said nothing to you about
it ; but under the circumstances I think it
best that you should see him yourself and
tell him you are engaged to marry another

man."

vol. it. 20

/ — I see him and tell him ? " cried Muriel
with trembling lips. " Oh, no, papa, I cannot
— indeed I cannot ! Go and tell him
anything you like yourself, and let me go
back to my room till he is gone."

She would have made her escape at that
moment, had not the earl detained her.

No ! Muriel. I will not allow you to
shirk your duty in this way. This young
man is evidently both bold and pertinacious.
He refuses to take your written word that
you desire the engagement broken off, but
pursues you into the privacy of your home,
with the idea, I suppose, that he will make
you retract your decision. Now this is a
sort of thin that must be cut short at once
and for ever, or he may worry you again
and again. Come with me and give him
his answer. It will not take five minutes,
and then it will be over and done with."

And he took her firmly by the arm ashe
spoke.

I cannot — / cannot" exclaimed Muriel,
trying to wrench herself away.

And I insist upon it," replied Lord
Ehylton angrily. "What do you mean by
this behaviour? Do you wish Colonel de
Crespigny to hear of this scene, and break
off his engagement with you? If it results
in that, remember, there will be nothing left
for you but Eevranches."

But, papa, could you not tell him better
than myself? It is hard for me, you know.
It seems so cruel — because — because — he
cares for me."

Her voice was breaking now, and the
earl saw that another minute would see her
in tears.

Go to him, then," he said roughly, " and
tell him you love him, and then come back
and pack up your boxes for Eevranches."

Oh, no ! no ! " she cried out in agony.
Father, you will never send me there

20—2

a "am I

o

I will, unless you come with me now.
I swear it."

He wouldn't have done any such thing,
but Lady Muriel believed him, and allowed
him to half lead, half drag her to the antechamber.
A footman waiting in the corridor
opened the door for them and closed it
again, and the Earl of Ehylton and his
daughter were alone with Athol Fergusson.

He was sitting in an arm-chair, looking
out upon the park, and feeling more and
more despondent as the minutes went on,
and the earl's delay in giving him an
audience seemed to augur poorly for his
chances of success. As the door opened he
rose from his seat and prepared to address
the new-comer, but when he saw that Lady
Muriel — in her white dress and blue ribbons,
with her fair hair hanging down her back,
looking much as she did at Eevranches,
although so deadly pale — was leaning on
her father's arm, his speech forsook him,

and all his feeling rushed into his face
instead.

"Muriel!" he uttered, under his breath,
but she took no further notice of his appeal,
except what was conveyed by her sad,
frightened eyes.

Mr. Athol Fergusson, I believe ? " commenced
the earl, and Athol bowed in
acknowledgment of his name.

A few days ago, Mr. Fergusson, I sent you
a note inclosing one from Lady Muriel Darner.
I conclude you have not received it ? "

On the contrary, it is on account of that
note, my lord, that I am here."

I am very much surprised to hear it.
I thought both my daughter's letter and
my own were final."

Not to me, my lord. I have too much
at stake in that decision. I cannot help
thinking that Lady Muriel wrote that note
against her own free will, and I cannot leave
England without being assured of the truth."

"You do not place much restraint on
your tongue, sir, when you accuse me of
coercing my daughter's inclinations in this
matter," replied the earl, frowning ; " but
since you doubt our written words, perhaps
you will believe our spoken ones, and if
they are such as to hurt your feelings you
must remember that you have only yourself
to thank for it. I consider it is the height
of im — im — imprudence," continued Lord
Ehylton (substituting a milder term for his
first intention), " for you to have forced
your way into Oakley Court."

I am sorry to hear your lordship speak
of my visit in so objectionable a manner,"
said young Fergusson, flushing darkly with
suppressed anger, " but I have yet to learn
that one gentleman may not call upon another."

When he is invited, sir, not otherwise,"
returned the earl ; " and especially when
he has received a written intimation that
his presence is not desired."

"Then I will relieve you of it as quickly
as possible," exclaimed Athol as lie seized
his hat ; " but I thought (when you knew
how deeply my feelings are concerned in
this matter) you would have had sufficient
humanity to excuse an apparent intrusion.
But I must speak to your daughter before
I go. Muriel ! tell me the truth, and put
me out of this awful suspense. Do you
really wish our engagement to be at an
end ? "

He advanced towards her as he spoke,
and she felt the fire of his dark blue eyes
burning upon her own. She could not meet
his gaze, but, trembling and pale, turned
her white face towards her father.

Oh, papa ! you tell him ! What can I
say?"

Tell Mr. Fergusson the truth, my dear,
as he desires you to do. It is a sufficient
answer to his question."

Then she turned her scared eyes upon

Athol, but the sight of the handsome young
face she had thought she loved so well
broke her down.

Oh, Athol ! oh, papa ! I cannot, cannot
say it!"

What is it that you cannot say, Muriel ? "
asked the young man in a low, passionate
tone. " Not that you do not love me !
That is impossible after the long time that
we have been promised to each other. But
perhaps the prospect of waiting so many
years for me frightens you, and you think
that I shall not remain true to you. Then
I will release you, darling, as far as you are
concerned, but / can never be released
myself. 1 love you, Muriel, and I shall love
you to my life's end, and, if need be, I will
wait and hope for years until I can call you
my wife. Only say once more that you love
me, before I go."

Stop, sir, stop!" interposed Lord Ehylton
authoritatively. "I cannot allow this farrago

of nonsense to proceed any longer. You
are reckoning without your host. Lady
Muriel's hand is already promised to another
suitor. She is engaged to be married to
Colonel de Crespigny."

Athol Fergusson sprang backwards, as
if he had received a blow in the face.

Engaged ! " he repeated in a dazed voice.
Engaged ! It is impossible. She is engaged
to me ! "

Engaged to you, sir ! How dare you
talk of a young lady being engaged to you
without her father's consent ? It is a folly,
an absurdity, and the last thing in the world
I should have permitted her to do ! For a
beggar, your presumption exceeds all bounds."

Athol drew himself up proudly.

I may be a beggar, my lord, according
to your definition of the word, but I am
too much of a gentleman to insult any man
who comes to me .with an honest purpose,
however foolish his hopes may be."

Papa, papa ! don't speak to him like
that ! He loves me ! " cried Ladv Muriel,
hiding her face upon her father's shoulder.

u Yes, Muriel," said Athol gravely, " I love
you, and you will do me the justice to say
that I loved you long before you came into
all this state and grandeur, and when I had
a right to suppose that the man who kept
his daughter in actual poverty would not
object to her becoming the wife of an
English officer. Everything is changed between
us now, though, except my heart, and
it is not my fault that that is faithful still.
Put me out of my pain at once, then, and
tell me if Lord Ehylton speaks the truth
when he says you are engaged to marry
another man."

She bowed her head as if unable to
reply.

Sjieak," cried Athol fiercely. " I will
accept the truth from your lips only. If
you were brave enough to do this thing

you can be brave enough to acknowledge
it. I will not be put off with dumb show."

Speak, my dear," added the earl encouragingly.


It is true " she said, lifting her whiteface
for a moment to her lover's. " Papa
said that we could never marry, and he
would send me back to Eevranches, and "

Oh, spare me your excuses," exclaimed
Athol Fergusson bitterly. " It is enough
that you have done it, without saying why
it was done. You have perjured yourself,
Muriel — you are false. You have broken my
heart and destroyed air my faith in women.
Let that be sufficient, and don't soil your
tongue with fabrications of the ' why and
the wherefore You have cast me off, and
I leave you. But the day of retribution
will come."

Mr. Fergusson, I will not allow you to
address Lady Muriel Darner in this strain
any longer. You have received your answer,

and you must go ! " said the earl,
ringing the bell.

"I obey you, my lord," replied Athol
preparing to take his leave. " Good-bye,
Muriel, for ever."

She was about to speak when the footman
appeared at the door, and her lover
passed through it and was gone. Then she
screamed and would have rushed after him.

Good-bye ! Oh ! Athol, darling, goodbye,"
she exclaimed hysterically, but her
father clapped his hand over her mouth.

Are you mad ? " he said. " Do you wish
the whole house to know of your folly ?
Muriel, I am ashamed of you. Try and be
more practical. These things are always
painful, but none the less necessary for that.
Now ! do try and compose yourself."

For Lady Muriel had flung herself on the
sofa and was weeping bitterly.

This would be a nice thing for de Crespigny
to hear of," exclaimed the earl petulantly, as

lie paced backwards and forwards, " and such
matters have a wonderful faculty of travelling.
Why, he would break off his engagement
with you at once. Muriel ! I beg of
you to try and compose yourself. Go upto
your room again and don't come down
till you are calm. I wouldn't have Lady
Ehylton see you in this state for all the
world."

I will go," replied Muriel, slowly rising
and making her way towards the door.
But as she reached it she turned round and
asked in a quick, frightened manner :

"But, papa — if you supposed when you
had Athol's letter that he was on his way
to India, how was it that he received your
answer and came here in consequence ? '

Her large eyes were searching him through
and through, and Lord Ehylton's gaze fell
beneath them. He was detected in a subterfuge,
and did not know how to extricate
himself from the imputation.

"Well, my dear, I didn't know where to
address my answer," he commenced lamely,
and so — and so ■"

You deceived me," said the girl indignantly.
" You knew that I never would
have written that letter had I thought he
was in England. You hatched a plot against
us, papa, and I will never forgive you."

And with these words she left the earl,
utterly discomfited and unable to find any
excuse for himself.

THE BETROTHED.

Colonel de Crespigny did not wake a
minute earlier than his usual time on the
day after he became the accepted lover of
Lady Muriel Darner. His huge body lay
sunk in its downy bed till after eleven
o'clock, for he was a man who hated rising,
and would lie for hours, thinking of nothing,
sooner than get up and shake off his
drowsiness. Neither Love nor Duty had
the power to rouse him, for he had a self-imposed
duty to perform that day, before
he could go down to Oakley Court, and
that was to meet Agnes Prudhomme on her
arrival from Eevranches and take her onto
Mrs. Lorrimer's. The girl was to reach
London by the Antwerp boat, which was

due at eight o'clock in the morning, but
that was altogether too soon for the com-forthcoming
Colonel de Crespigny. So he
had directed Agnes to take a cab and drive
at once to a private hotel in the Strand —
the address of which he had given her —
and where he had directed she should be
shown every attention until he came to
fetch her away. And having performed
this munificent act of charity he considered
he had a right to lie in bed as long as he
chose. When noon struck, he rung for his
valet and dawdled over his dressing until
one, when he had his breakfast, and having
swallowed a couple of brandies and sodas
after it (for Colonel de Crespigny, though
no drunkard, was a confirmed drinker,
that is to say, though seldom tipsy, he systematically
drank more than was good for
his constitution), he stepped into his carriage
and drove down to the Strand. The
proprietors of the hotel to which he had

directed Agnes Prudhomme were well known
to him, and his card was an " Open Sesame '
in their establishment. This was not the
first of the colonel's protegees whom they
had received without question, but de Cres-pigmy
was a rich man and never looked at
the items of their bills. They received him,
therefore, with welcoming smiles and the
information that the young lady had arrived
safely, and was in No. 2 sitting-room, wherein
another moment the colonel had joined her.

"My dear child," he exclaimed as he
took her hand, " did you think I was
never coming ? "

Agnes, who had had time to rearrange
her toilette and her hair, looked as pretty
as ever, as she rose to greet him.

Mais non, monsieur ! I knew that you
would keep your promise, but the time
has seemed very long. But I am in ce cher
Londres at last and with you, and I am



quite content.

VOL. II. 21

She clasped both her hands over his, as
she spoke, and fixed her great gipsy eyes
upon him and looked so bewitching as she
did so that the colonel was tempted to
stoop down and impress one of his paternal
kisses upon her forehead.

And so you had a quick passage, my
dear. And they have made you thoroughly
at home here, and you do not find England
so triste as your friends in Eevranches
would have made you believe. That is
right. But how did you get your mother's
consent to your leaving her, at last ? '

I never did get it, monsieur. Madame
ma mere was so selfish, she would have kept
me at her side for ever. So as soon as I
received the money you were so good as
to send me, I packed up my box and said
I was going to visit my cousins in Ghent,
instead of which I went straight down to
Antwerp and took the boat over here."

Bravo ! my little Agnes," exclaimed the

colonel, laughing heartily, " you're the
stuff that women are made of. And so you
cheated them all at Eevranches, did you ? It
will be a longtime before you can venture
to show your face there again."

"I shall never go back there, monsieur ;
never ! ' ' replied Agnes emphatically, shaking
her dark curls ; " I knew it must be so when
I came away."

Then you must be my care now, Agnes,
and look upon me as your best friend,"
said de Crespigny, squeezing the hand he
held, " and if you should be in any difficulty,
you must be sure to come to me to
help you out of it. Mind, that is a bargain."


If monsieur will tell me where to find
him," said Agnes.

I will give you the address of my

chambers," replied de Crespigny, producing

a card, " but you must not come there,

my dear, without first giving me notice.

21—2

Remember that. Else you might meet
strangers, which will make it unpleasant
for both of us. But now, if you are ready,
I will drive you in my carriage to Mrs.
Lorrimer's. My time is rather limited this
afternoon, as I am engaged to go down
and dine at Oakley Court."

Oakley Court" repeated Agnes, with knitted
brows. "Is not that the place where
Miladi Muriel lives with her father ? Madame
Grant told me so''

And she was right, Agnes," replied the
colonel as they drove away ; "it is Lord
Ehylton's place, and I shall see Lady Muriel
this evening."

And has she a lady's maid ? " demanded
Agnes eagerly. " She might have taken me
into her service. It would be better, I think,
than this Madame Lorrimer's, for somehow
I do not feel as if I should like her."

Mrs. Lorrimer is a very nice lady, and I
see no reason why you should not get on well

together. But you must not blame Lady
Muriel. She had no choice. Her maid was
chosen for her by Lady Ehylton. When she
is her own mistress, and free to choose for
herself, I will do my utmost to persuade her to
take you into her service, and till then I hope
you will try and make yourself happy."

"Is Miladi Muriel going to get married,
then ? " asked Agnes quickly.

De Crespigny considered for a moment before
he answered her. He had no decided intentions
towards this girl, and yet her bizarre
beauty attracted him forcibly, and his self-love
forbid his telling her anything that might
lower the admiration she might feel for him.
She would hear soon enough of his engagement
to Lady Muriel. To-day, at least, there
was no necessity to enlighten her. So he
said, " You are too quick for me, my dear,
and indeed you women always jump at conclusions.
Is Lady Muriel going to be married
? I should think there is little doubt

of it, for she is young and pretty — and you
pretty women have a knack of playing the
devil with us poor men till we don't know
whether we are standing on our heads or our
heels — but when it will come to pass is beyond
my guessing. Only be patient for a
little while, Agnes, and I think it very probable
you may attain your wishes. But here
we are at Mrs. Lorrimer's. Wait in the carriage
for a minute till I have announced your
arrival to her."

He jumped out as he spoke, and ran up
the steps and into his friend's presence. Mrs.
Lorrimer received him with a very solemn air.
She was still suffering deeply from the events
of the day before, and not disposed to give
a cordial welcome to the author of her woes.

Well, Carrie," exclaimed the colonel cheerfully
as he entered the room, " I have brought
you your little maid, and I hope you'll be a
comfort to each other."

Is she another of your victims ? " demanded

Mrs. Lorrimer coldly as she refused his proffered
embrace, and presented him with her
hand instead.

Another of my victims" repeated de Cres-pigmy.
" Good heavens, Carrie ! what an extraordinary
woman you are. Do you wish
to insult me ? I take the trouble to go and
meet your servant and bring her to you and
that is all the thanks T get for my pains. I
must say you are not very grateful."

"And what have I to be grateful for,
Arthur ? Do you suppose I believe you would
take so much trouble on my account or the
servant's ? I can guess she is young and
pretty before I see her, or she might have
found her way from the wharf to Bryanston
Square without any assistance on your
part."

The colonel looked confused, and thought
it best to cut the matter short.

Well, look here, Carrie. Don't let's have
any fuss about it, for heaven's sake. You

said you wanted a lady's maid, and I have
brought you one. I have made myself responsible
also for any extra expense she may
cause you, and if you don't get on well together
I will find the girl another situation.
But while she is with you treat her kindly,
I beg, and don't make a scandal. She doesn't
know of my engagement to Lady Muriel
Damer, and I don't wish her to know it.
Will you be kind enough, therefore, not to
mention it before her ? "

Am I in the habit of making confidantes
of my servants, Arthur? Though I don't
understand what possible interest your engagement
can have for this Belgian girl. ;

None at all. That is why I don't wish
her to be told of it," he replied with his usual
effrontery, as he ran down the steps again
and told Agnes that her new mistress was
ready to receive her.

And are you going away again ? Shall I
have to part with monsieur ? " said the girl,

with dangerously bright eyes and les larmes
au voix.

Only for a little while, Agnes," he answered
pressing her hand. " By George !
you're so handsome, I almost wish we hadn't
to part at all. But send me a line to say if
you will be able to get out for an hour or
two next Sunday, and if so, come round to
my chambers, and we'll have chat together."

I will come," answered the girl briefly as
she entered the house.

Colonel de Crespigny followed her, but
only remained long enough to introduce her
to Mrs. Lorrimer, when he entered his carriage
again and returned home to prepare
himself for his visit to Oakley Court.

Things were not so bright there as they
should have been on such an auspicious day,
for Lady Ehylton was in a bad temper, and
when that was the case all the household
knew it. The actual cause of her ladyship's
mood was a mystery. Is not the cause of

that greatest curse to domestic life — uncontrolled
temper — generally a mystery, even to
the person who indulges in it ? The countess
had wished to get rid of Lady Muriel Darner.
She had also wished, and even encouraged
the idea, of her marrying Colonel de Cres-pigmy,
but yet when her daughter Cecil met
her that morning, brimful of the news, Lady
Ehylton turned on her like a fury, and reviled
the poor girl for having missed such a
chance for herself. The fact is, the countess
had been somewhat chagrined at not being
invited to the picnic. She was painfully
aware that her premiere jeunesse had passed,
and anything that reminded her of the unwelcome
fact roused her ill temper, and Cecil
was too proud of her sister's conquest, and
dilated too largely on the universal admiration
she excited, to please her mother.

Mamma, you should have seen how lovely
Muriel looked. All the other ladies — even
Lina Walford — seemed dowdy beside her.

And I couldn't help laughing to myself to
watch the disappointment of the gentlemen
when Colonel de Crespigny monopolized her.
They all wanted to sit next her at dinner.
And she was so merry and cheerful, too. I
don't wonder at it."

Cecilia, you are a fool about that girl.
Can't you see what a double-faced little hypocrite
she is ? She doesn't care two straws
for her father, and yet she hung about him
and kissed him as if he was the dearest creature
in the world to her, just to get his
consent to her going to this picnic."

Oh ! mamma, you have no right to say
that," cried Cecil with honest indignation.
How can we tell how much, or how
little, Muriel cares for Lord Ehylton ? And
I am sure he is very proud of her, and will
be delighted to see her placed in her proper
position in life."

Oh ! she has angled splendidly to catch
Colonel de Crespigny, I allow that," returned

the countess sarcastically ; " indeed,
it has been a matter of wonderment to me
where an innocent young girl fresh from a
convent can have learnt to handle the
matrimonial rod so skilfully. I fancy Lady
Muriel must have had a little practice in
Eevranches before we had the honour of
meeting her."

Mamma ! you are most unjust and unkind
to Muriel, and I cannot imagine the
reason," replied Miss Seton ; " you have
wanted to get rid of her ever since she
came to Oakley Court, and now that she
has secured a good match for herself, and
is going to leave us, you abuse her for
that. What do you want ? "

A little less impertinence from you if you
please, miss," retorted her mother angrily.
If you weren't a fool as your father was
before you, you would see this matter in the
same light as I do. Lady Muriel has stood
in your way ever since she came here."

"Then you ought to rejoice that she will
stand in it no longer."

But why didn't you secure the prize
for yourself, instead of letting her walk off
with it before your eyes ? "

Cecil stared.

I secure Colonel de Crespigny ? Why,
mother, you must be mad ! As if he, or
any other man, would look at me while
Muriel was by. Besides, I don't like him,
and I wouldn't cross swords with her for
him if I did."

And you couldn't get him if you tried,"
retorted Lady Ehylton with vulgar rage ;
you're too ugly, and too stupid for anything,
and you'll remain on my hands for
life — a worry, and an obstacle and a stumps


Oh, mother ! don't be so cruel. I am
no burden to you, and I will never stand
in your way," exclaimed Cecil bursting
into tears.

But you do stand in my way and always
will do so. Do you suppose it is any credit
to me to be known as your mother — you
at twenty-five, and looking ten years older —
plain, and dowdy, and uninteresting ? I am
ashamed of you wherever you appear."

Oh ! mother, mother," sobbed the girl
with her face in her hands.

"Don't 'mother' me. The word makes
me sick. I wish to goodness you had died
in your cradle, sooner than grown up to
be such a disgrace to me. Now, it's no
use your whining there. If you'd had any
consideration for me, you'd have got married
long ago, and left me to live the rest of my
life in peace. Your father gave me little
enough of it whilst he was living."

Oh, how could I ? How is it my fault ? '
cried Cecil rocking herself to and fro in the
violence of her grief.

At that moment the door opened and
Muriel appeared. She had resolutely dried

her tears, and removed all traces of the
emotion called forth by her interview with
Athol Fergusson. She was most anxious
that her step-mother should hear nothing
of the occurrence, for she dreaded her
ridicule, and had not much faith in her
keeping the secret to herself. So she had
made a great effort to rally her spirits, and
descended to the library as soon as ever
she was dressed for luncheon, with the intention
of herself announcing her engagement
to Lady Ehylton. But the sight of
Cecil Seton's tears drove every other thought
out of her head.

"My dear Cissy," she exclaimed as she
hastened to her, " what is the matter ? "

Nothing — nothing," answered Cecil between
her sobs.

"It cannot be nothing" repeated Muriel
somewhat indignantly (for that Lady Elton,
in vulgar parlance, " bullied " her daughter
was no secret to her). "Perhaps your

ladyship can inform me of the reason," she
added, turning to her step-mother.

And pray, what business is it of yours ? "
demanded the countess turning upon her in
her anger ; " perhaps you will remember,
Lady Muriel, that you do not belong to
our family, but are simply here, as it were,
on sufferance, and that you have no right
whatever to interfere between my daughter
and myself."

Lady Muriel's blood was roused. She had
often seen Lady Shelton in a bad temper
before, but this was the first time she had
presumed to visit it upon her head, and the
girl's new and important prospects invested
her with extra dignity to resent an affront.

"I am perfectly aware, madam," she
answered loftily, " that I do not belong to
your family (whatever it may be) and also
that you owe your present state and condition
to your having been admitted to
ours, and I think few people would hesitate

to decide which of us obtained the
greater advantage from the alliance."

This allusion sent the countess into a
regular fury.

Advantage ! " she screamed, " I should
like to know what advantage / got by
taking a set of paupers into Oakley Court.
Why, the very clothes upon your back —
the dresses in which you have angled for
Colonel de Crespigny, and landed him —
were paid for out of my money ! and if
you marry the man, you'll have to go to
church in a gown of my providing, you ungrateful,
impertinent minx."

Lady Muriel gasped with horror. She
had known poverty, but it had never fallen
to her lot before to be brought face to face
with the ultra-vulgarism of wealth.

"For shame, mamma! for shame," cried
Cecil Seton.

Hush, Cissy ! not a word. Don't get

yourself into trouble for me," interposed
vol. ii. 22

Lady Muriel ; " I can bear what Lady Shelton
says because it is not true. I will
never accept another present from her
hands, and as soon as I am married, Colonel
de Crespigny shall pay her back every
pound she has laid out on me. I see now,
how much better it is to be poor and well-bred
— than rich and vulgar."

You will not repeat a private conversation
to Colonel de Crespigny, I trust,"
said Ladv Shelton, alarmed for the consequences
of her imprudence.

I promise nothing, madam, except to
rid you of the burden of my support as
soon as possible. My poor father has indeed
bartered his birthright for a mess of pottage."

I will stand this conduct no longer,"
exclaimed the countess as she sailed towards
the door ; " and I shall inform the earl of
every word that has passed between us.
He is the last person, I am sure, to stand
by quietly and hear his wife insulted."

Or his daughter," replied Muriel as
Lady Khylton slammed the door behind
her.

Oh, Muriel," said Cecil, " what shall we
do? Mamma is so spiteful when she is
angry. Supposing she sets your father
against you ? "

"It is of little consequence if she does.
I shall soon be my own mistress and independent
of both of them. But I cannot
stand being insulted, even by your mother.
Something has happened this morning, Cissy,
that has greatly annoyed me. Papa has
not been acting fairly towards me. He has
treated me like a child, and for the moment,
he made me almost hate him and all men
into the bargain. I was more than half
inclined to tell Colonel de Crespigny that
I regretted my consent of yesterday, and
that I would rather be free. But this interview
has changed my opinion. I cannot

live happily at Oakley Court after what

22—2

your mother has said. The very things I
eat and drink will choke me. I must L r o
away again, as soon as ever I can, and the
colonel may fix the earliest day he chooses
for our marriage. I am panting already to
be gone."

And oh, Muriel ! my sister. What shall
I do without you ? ' sobbed Cecil.

I shall always be your sister, Cissy, and
you shall come and live with me altogether
if you like. But it must be right away
from Oakley Court. I never felt so wounded
or so proud in all my life before, " said Lady
Muriel, drawing herself up. " I know that
we are poor, but to call us paupers "

It was wicked of her ; it was a cruel
shame," said Cecil, " but mamma does not
know what she says when she is in a rage.
Very likely she will kiss you and ask you
to forget it, before dinner-time."

But I will never forget it ! ' returned
Muriel ; " I cannot forget such horrid things.

& v,* ~~v,~ —w v* v^^ c .

And I will marry Colonel de Crespigny as
soon as ever lie asks me to do so."

She went out for a ride on horseback in
the afternoon to try and shake off the unpleasant
sensations that mastered her, but
she returned home with the same swelling
breast and curled lip to remind her she
had been insulted. Colonel de Crespigny
had already arrived, and was closeted with
Lord Ehylton in his study, but as soon ashe
heard the sound of her horse's feet he
appeared at the hall door to help her to
dismount, and carried her off into the antechamber
as if she were his own property.
At any other moment Lady Muriel would
have felt shy and nervous, but just now the
paramount feeling in her heart was indignation
at her wrongs, and she had poured
out the whole story (told in her own excited
way and graphic language) to the
colonel before they had been ten minutes
together.

De Crespigny was properly indignant. He
knew the countess's temper, but had hoped
she would have recognized the propriety of
keeping the peace for the short time her
step-daughter and she were to live together.
He animadverted on her conduct in the
strongest manner, and turned it to his own
interest by entreating Lady Muriel to make
the period of her stay in Oakley Court as
brief as possible.

You know how I am lonsrm^ to have
you all to myself, Muriel," he said, with his
strong arms clasped round her, " and as
you will experience no pain in quitting your
home, what reason is there for delay ? '

Lady Muriel hesitated. She was a frank
and honourable woman, and the thought
suddenly struck her — ought she to marry
this man without letting him know that she
had been fond of Athol Fergusson? So she
lowered her eyes and answered half in a
whisper :

I don't know, but I think I — I — ought
to tell you something first, Colonel de Cres-say,

Arthur, my darling."

Arthur, then ; only it sounds so strange
from me to you. But perhaps you think that
I have never been engaged before, and that
you are the very first ; but it is not true.
I was fond of a young gentleman in Branches,
and we promised to marry each
other "

And he had the presumption to follow
you to Oakley Court this morning, and your
father and you sent him about his business.
Oh, yes ! I have heard all about it, Muriel,"
continued the colonel, laughing ; " Lord
Ehylton has just given me the whole story,
and I am not at all afraid of my formidable
rival, I can assure you that."

Muriel did not join in the laugh.

I am glad you have heard it," she said
simply ; " it is right you should. Of course

we could never have married because he
has no money, but I didn't think of that
when I gave him my promise."

And you won't think of it any more
now, will you, my darling?' exclaimed the
favoured lover ; " but it was most honourable
of you to mention it, and I admire
you for it. Most married people have some
little secret of the kind to leave behind
them, Muriel. Even /, you see, have had
a wife before yourself, although I can safely
say that I never loved a woman till I saw
your sweet face."

And you have two big grown-up sons,
Lady Ehylton says," replied Muriel, glad to
get away from a topic which made her
heart ache and her cheeks burn ; " will they
be my sons too ? How funny ! "

Oh, don't talk of them," said the colonel
with suddenly knit brows. "I never mention
the subject if I can help it. They are
two great mis-shapen cubs, Muriel, not a bit

like me, and we have never had any sympathy
with each other. They are their
mother's children, not mine ; and as soon
as they were old enough I shipped them off
to India, where I trust they will remain.
There is no need to think of them, my
dearest. They will never disturb our married
happiness."

How funny ! " repeated Muriel in her
childish way, as she tried to picture the two
sons in far-off India.

What we have to think of," continued
de Crespigny, " is how soon I can take you
away from a home where you are not happy.
Will next month be too soon, Muriel ? May
I suggest it to Lord Ehylton before I go tonight
? "

Yes, yes ! " she said clinging to him, " let
it be next month. I cannot bear to think
of living with Lady Ehylton even for that
space of time. But, Arthur, I can only
have such a trousseau as papa can buy forme.

I will not take another pocket-handkerchief
from that woman's hand."

Come to me just as you are and I shall
be content," exclaimed the colonel rapturously.
" And now let me dry these tears. Do
not give the countess the slightest cause
to doubt the fulness of our content. Yes,
Muriel, you are right ; she is an evil-minded
and dangerous woman, and the sooner you
are quit of her the better. But in this
world, my dear, we must dissemble."

They dissembled so well at the family
dinner that succeeded, that no one could
have guessed that anything had occurred
to annoy them, and before Colonel de Cres-pigmy
returned to his town residence that
night, his marriage with Lady Muriel Darner
had been fixed to take place exactly four
weeks from that date.

"NO FAITH — NO HOPE."

Athol Fergusson returned to Woolwich after
his interview with Lord Shelton and his
daughter like a man walking in a dream.
The blow he had received had stunned him.
He could not believe, at first, that it was
true. Had he really been within the doors
of Oakley Court and seen his Muriel again,
and heard her say that she was engaged to
be married to another man ? His thoughts
travelled back with irritating pertinacity to
the days at Eevranches, when the fair-haired
slender girl in her shabby convent dress and
hat, used to esteem it her greatest pleasure
to meet him on the Eamparts, and to echo
the words of love and vows of fidelity he
poured into her ear. How they had sworn

to be faithful to each other, through every
sort of difficulty and danger, in those dear
old days, and now, two months only had
passed away and Muriel had already forgotten
him. She had deceived him. She
had never loved him. Those sweet curved
lips of hers must have been uttering falsehoods,
all the time he thought them so pure
and true. So Athol argued — been£ too
young to know how a girl's mind may be
coerced by those older and more experienced
than herself — and what a long, long stretch
of time a few years in prospect appear, to
one who has only numbered eighteen. The
young man (for there was nothing of a boy
about Athol Fergusson) had set his whole
heart upon marrying his first love, and the
disappointment of his hopes was a greater
shock to him, than appeared upon the surface.
It was for this in reality, that he had
worked and striven so hard as to pass his
examination with first - class honours. It

was for this that he had led a pure and
upright life, fearful lest by lowering himself
he might contaminate his idol. Muriel had
been in truth the load-star of his existence —
the goal he had striven to reach — the bright
reward shining for him in the distance, which
it might have taken him years to win, but
which (had Heaven so pleased) he would
have grasped at last, and held in arms which
had never opened to enfold another woman
That had been his dream — to work for her
steadily, and win her worthily — but she had
shattered it in a few words. An older man
less sure of himself and with more knowledge
of the world, would have feared from the beginning
that the difference that had suddenly
arisen between their stations in life, would
put an end to their intercourse. But Athol
had had no such fear. He had anticipated
Lord Ehylton's objections to his youth and
poverty — but never dreamed that Muriel —
his Muriel — his promised wife — would join

issue with her father to cast him off. It

was the turning point of his life. He had

journeyed to Oakley Court somewhat nervous

and despondent, but with a strong faith in

the affection of his fiancee and a hope that

their joint solicitations might induce the earl

to rescind his verdict. He returned to his

quarters at Woolwich with his hope dead,

and his faith scattered to the four winds of

Heaven. He did not elect any one as a

confidant of his troubles — that was not in

the disposition of Athol Fergusson — he kept

them to himself, and never opened his mouth

on the subject ; but it was pre-evident that

he was suffering. Richard Kane, his chum

in quarters and his greatest friend at the

Academy — who was gazetted to the same

regiment, and was to sail in the same ship

saw plainly that " old Ath ' had received

a blow of some kind or other, but intimate

as they were, there was a dignity and reserve

about young Fergusson that inspired respect

in his associates, and Kane did not presume
to try and force his confidence. There was
an unexpected delay in their starting for
Malta, and before he sailed, Athol had read
the announcement and description of Lady
Muriel Darner's marriage in the society
papers. He did not shirk the ordeal nor
spare himself one detail of the ceremony
that was the grave of all his hopes, but
read every word from beginning to end,
even to the description of the bride's dress,
and the list of presents she had received,
and then he destroyed the papers that contained
the news, and never alluded to the
subject. Only, over his dark blue eyes
there fell a deeper shadow than before and his
sensitive mouth was seldom seen to indulge
in a genuine, heartfelt smile. Amongst his
male companions, Athol could apparently
shake off his melancholy and be as gay and
boisterous — sometimes almost as wild as they
were — but directly he was by himself, or

alone with Richard Kane, his grave serious
air returned, until it became habitual. Of
course his mother and his sister Helen had not
lost the excellent opportunity afforded them
by Lady Muriel's marriage, to prove to him
that they had been right in their opinion of
her and he had been wrong. Mrs. Fergusson
indeed, never forgot to thank God, in each
of her letters, that her poor son had been
delivered from such an intolerable snare, as
marrying so forward and unprincipled a
girl ; whilst Helen trusted that his eyes were
opened at last, and that in the future he
would be more ready to take the advice
of people who knew better than himself.
Athol was of too sweet a disposition and
temperament openly to resent his mother's
and sister's remarks, but they ruffled him
more than anything else had the power todo.
And could they have seen sometimes,
the dewy mist that overspread his eyes, ashe
read their unkind and thoughtless remarks,

and the effort he was forced to make

to regain control over himself, they might

well have been ashamed of increasing the

trouble which] his brave young spirit was

fighting so hard to bear. His chum, Dick

Kane, who was sincerely attached to him,

could not imagine what ailed " old Ath,"

unless it was leaving England, but he hoped

when the voyage was over he would be

himself again. Yet when they were settled

in Malta, it was still the same. It is true

that Malta is a stupid place enough, and

that one soon grows sick of its round of

amusements and longs for the cold winds-and

rough life of old England. Still, there

is plenty of pleasure and employment for

young people who are not utterly biases,,

and where there is a mixture of sexes, there

is generally also plenty of excitement. But

Athol held aloof from his fellow-creatures,

and refused to enter society, and the fact,

instead of deteriorating from his interest,
vol. u. 23

rather enhanced it in the eyes of the fair
sex, who are always on their mettle, directly
they have cause to believe a man tries to
avoid them. They can imagine but one
reason for his indifference — that he thinks
too much of another woman — and they are
up in arms at once to try and out-rival her.
This was much the case with the ladies of
Malta, married and single. From the wife
of the Governor, down to Lieutenant Jones's
youngest daughter, they all wanted to know
why the handsome young man who had
lately joined the Royal Artillery, never
looked at them, nor asked to be introduced,
when they met him at the band, or during
the evening promenade. What was his
name? How old was he? Where did he
come from? and "Why did he look so sad ? '
Such were the questions that fell incessantly
from their lips addressed to other officers of
the brigade. But no one seemed able to
answer them satisfactorily. Percussion was

a newly arrived subaltern, a Scotchman,
poor as a church mouse and proud as the
steeple, with nothing at all interesting about
him, that was all they knew, and the ladies
had better turn their attention to something
that would repay it better. But ladies are
rather fond of having their own wav, and
one and all determined to make the proud,
serious young Scotchman come out of his
shell, and join in their sports and amusements.
Athol could never appear at the band now,
without undergoing at least half a-dozen introductions
by special desire, which were invariably
followed by invitations to dinners, or
to dances, or lawn tennis in the cool of the
evening. He kept on refusing these invitations,
and tearing up the dainty little notes
that conveyed them, until he became wearied
of the operation.

Why can't they leave a fellow alone ? "
he complained testily to Kane. " This is

the third invitation Mrs. Vivian has sent me

23—2

in a fortnight. Can't she see that I don't
want to go to her stupid parties ? "

"Well, you are ungrateful, Ali. Half the
boys in the station would be only too glad
to get such a chance. They'd jump at it.
Mrs. Vivian is the prettiest woman on the
island, by long chalks."

Is she ? " yawned Fergusson indifferently.

Is she ? " repeated Kane mimicking him.
Why, of course she is. Where are your
eyes ? Laura Vivian is the toast of Malta,
and many a fellow has gone half daft, pour
r amour de ses beaux yeux. And she's a
tolerable flirt into the bargain, if all that's
said of her is true. Why, man, you've got
the devil's own luck. Three invitations in a
fortnight. She must have taken a regular
fancy to you. Go in and win."

Nonsense. I don't want to get into any
scrapes with married women. Let her flirt
with Vivian if she wants to flirt."

It seems to me that you fight as shy of

the single ones as the married ones, Ath.
Have you taken a vow to remain a bachelor?"

My father took that vow for me when
he lost all his money," returned Athol with
a bitter laugh.

Oh ! come, old boy, many a man marries
on his pay. I hope to do so some day, if
a certain little lady in England keeps her
promise to wait a year or two."

Do you expect her to do so ? ' asked
the other in an incredulous tone.

Of course. Ellie's as true as the day,
and we exchanged rings just before we
parted. Besides she's not likely to be
tempted to be unfaithful to me, for her
people are very poor and never go into
society ."

Ah. That fact may ensure her fidelity,"
said his companion.

My dear old Ath. What's come to you ?
You're very bitter, and sarcasm doesn't sound
right, somehow, from your lips."

Am I bitter ? Perhaps my life has made
me so. However, let's have a couple of
sherry cobblers and drink to your Ellie's
fidelity. It's to be hoped that no man with
thirty or forty thousand a year, will propose
to her during your absence."

"I hope not sincerely," replied Kane
laughing, " for I'm afraid I should stand no
chance against him. But seriously, Ath,
won't you 20 to Mrs. Vivian's ? "

Perhaps I may. It is, after all, exceedingly
dull in this place."

And I really think the dulness is having
an effect on your health. Laura Vivian
will brighten you up. She is very lively,
and witty, and a charming singer. An
evening at her house will do you all the
good in the world."

So Athol took his friend's advice, and Laura
Vivian was delighted to have triumphed overall
the other English ladies in Malta, and
wrung an acceptance out of the shy newcomer

— simply because he bad seemed difficult
to subdue, and women love a difficulty
where men are concerned. Her acquaintanceship
(as a rule) was rather a dangerous one
for an inexperienced youth, for she was a full-blown
specimen of that well-known genus, the
Army flirt. She was still young, not more
than seven or eight and twenty, very pretty
and very entertaining, and she won hearts
as easily as she tired of them. She never
intended to go too far (and it is to be presumed
that her husband, Major Vivian, had
no idea that she did so), yet there were one
or two stories afloat concerning the fascinating
Laura, that made prudent people fight
shy of her. Just now she was in rather
mauvaise odeur with the military society in
Malta, her latest admirer, Captain Lovelace,
having been ordered back to England, and
Mrs. Vivian's grief at his departure a little
too openly expressed. Her volatile heart
was indeed just ready to be caught in the

rebound, and most young men would have
fallen easily into the trap, and been proud
to ride, or walk about Malta by her side, and
be acknowledged as her favoured cavalier.
But Athol Fergusson was proof against her
witcheries. His was not a mind easily impressed
by women, and Muriel Darner's image
was engraved too deeply on it to make way
for any other. He was like a widower who
has unexpectedly lost her whom he fondly
believed would walk beside him all through
life, and who turns with disgust from any
overtures made to him, with a view to displacing
her memory. Athol went to dine
with Major and Mrs. Vivian, and made himself
agreeable in his quiet way, but he never
paid his hostess a single compliment, though
he sat alone with her fur half-an-hour in the
balcony after dinner, and his indifference
piqued her into asking him to her house
again and a<?ain. She was the owner of a
little pleasure boat, and was very fond of

going on the water when the heat of the day
had passed, and this was an amusement in
which Athol could join her with interest to
himself, for he understood the management
of a sailing vessel perfectly. Evening after
evening therefore they spent together on the
deep blue waters of the bay of Malta, and
Dick Kane chuckled to himself as he thought
that " Old Ath " was actually " caught " at
last, though all his time was employed in
steering the boat, and his conversation with
Mrs. Vivian consisted chiefly of monosyllables.
In this manner, interspersed with the ordinary
military duties, nearly six months
passed away, when one afternoon, the wind
suddenly got up as they were rounding the
point of the bay, and the flimsy little bark
nearly capsized. Indeed if it had not been
for the promptitude and presence of mind
of Athol Fergusson, they certainly must have
been swamped, and probably drowned, for
the Maltese sailors, who assisted him in her

management, lay down at the bottom of the
boat and began to say their prayers, instead
of taking in the sails. Athol, however,
worked, as only an Englishman can work
in a moment of danger, and all ended well,
excepting that Mrs. Vivian and a young lady
who was with her, got wetted through by
the waves washing over them, and had to
be conducted home as quickly as possible
to change their clothes. Athol (who thought
nothing of the adventure, except as something
to laugh over) returned to his barracks,
and was relating the circumstance to
Kane, when he received a hastily scrawled
note from Laura Vivian, asking him to go
and see her after mess, and stating that the
bearer would wait for an answer.

Han£ it all," cried the young fellow impatiently,
" I cant go this evening. Wilkinson
and Marshall are engaged to play a game
of billiards for ten pounds a side, and I want
to see them."

44 But they don't begin till eleven o'clock,"
said Kane. " You'll have time to run up and
see the fair Laura before they begin."

But what can she want to see me for ? "
grumbled Fergusson. " We've been talking
all the afternoon. I've got nothing more to
say to her."

Perhaps she wishes to thank you for
your services on the water. Rogers told me
it was a very close shave, and that she might
thank her stars you were at the helm."

It was all her own fault, Dick. She insisted
upon rounding the point. I combated
the notion till I was almost rude, but you
know what women are when they have got
an idea into their heads. You can do
nothing with them."

"Well, don't keep the man waiting any
longer. Write and say either one thing or
the other, but I should run up for ten
minutes if I were you. The Vivian have
shown you no end of politeness."

You're right there, Dick, and I will do
as you advise." So he sat down, and scribbled
a couple of lines to say he would wait
on Mrs. Vivian at ten that evening, and
having dispatched his answer, he dismissed
the matter completely from his mind, and
commenced to dress for the mess dinner. As
they rose from table, Dick Kane whispered
to him, " Don't forget your appointment," and
he answered, " I shan't be gone ten minutes,"
as he walked away.

As he entered the house of his friends, his
first inquiry was for Major Vivian, but the
servant said that he was not at home.

Where is the major ? " he asked, as he
encountered Mrs. Vivian. " I wanted to carry
him back with me to see a billiard match
played between Wilkinson, of ours, and Captain
Marshall, of the Seventieth. Will he be
absent long ? "

He has gone to Valetta to see some old
friends," replied the lady, casting down her

eyes, " and he will not be home again for
two or three days."

"Indeed!" said Athol, seating himself, " and
was it a sudden arrangement? Didn't you
know of it when we went out this afternoon ?"

Of course I did. He started early this
morning. Why do you look surprised ? "

"That you shouldn't have mentioned your
husband's absence to me."

Oh, do you think it is of so much consequence
to me as all that ? " replied Mrs.
Vivian, pouting. " If I had said anything,
it would have been to ask you to congratulate
me on my temporary liberty. Marriage
is not such a bed of roses, but that we are
glad to be free from it occasionally."

I am sorry to hear you say that," he
answered gravely. " It ought to be the
greatest happiness in the world. But may I
ask why you wished to see me to-night ? Is
there anything which I can do for you?'

Laura Vivian raised her eyelids, and looked

reproachfully at him as he spoke, and then
he observed for the first time how very tastefully
she was attired, in a soft white muslin
gown, trimmed with lace and ribbons, and
how red her eyes were, as if she had been
crying. In a moment it flashed across him
that he had been cruelly indifferent to her
appeal. She might be in some trouble, from
which he had the power to extricate her,
and anxious to make amends for his coldness
he rose from his seat and approached
the sofa on which she sat.

Surely," he continued, " you are not
grieving for anything. Tell me ! how can I
comfort you ? "

Sit down here," replied Airs. Vivian, motioning
him to the seat bv her side, and ashe
obeyed her behest, she put her head down
on his shoulder and commenced to crv.

I am so very, very unhappy," she murmured,
" and you must know why"

Athol felt himself to be in a very unpleasant

predicament. He had no feeling
whatever for this very pretty woman who
had elected to sob on his shoulder, and yet.
because she was " very pretty," she made his
heart beat faster, and he did not know how
to relieve himself of the burden. Had she
been old and ugly, he would have risen
quickly enough from the sofa, and left her
to support herself. But it has ever been the
case in this world, and it ever will be, till
the world ends. Beauty holds a power over
men that no amount of virtue can prevent,
though it may successfully resist it. And
yet — even while his heart beat faster to hold
her in his arms — he felt disgusted with her
for being there.

Mrs. Vivian ! " he exclaimed, as he tried
to make her sit up straight on the sofa ;
dear Mrs. Vivian ! be calm ; be careful,
for your own sake, I implore you. Some of
the servants might come in."

No, no ! they won't," she replied impatiently;

"but oh, Atliol, I am so shaken
by what occurred this afternoon. I was
terribly alarmed — for your sake more than
my own — and I felt I could not sleep until
I had seen with my own eyes that you were
really safe and well."

Oh, you may be assured of that" he said
laughing" uneasily. " I am as well as ever I
was in my life. I am too well used to all
sorts of weathers to mind a wetting. I am
sorry you were so much alarmed — but, indeed,
it was very rash of us to try and round
the point, and I shouldn't have allowed it
but 'all's well that ends well' remember,
and we will take care not to expose ourselves
to such a danger again."

But I haven't thanked you," said Laura
Vivian fervently. " You saved my life and
Ella Lawson's. You are our preserver, and
I can never, never do enough to prove my
gratitude, and my — my — affection for you,"
she added in a lower voice.

Oh, now, really, Mrs. Vivian, you are
going too far," replied Athol. " Boating
parties are placed in the same danger everyday
of the week, and a little promptitude
averts the peril. You mustn't make so much
out of a mere trifle."

"I could not make too much of it," she
insisted, with her face perilously close to his
own ; " besides, it was all my own fault, and
I placed your life in danger, and if — if— anything
had happened to you it would have
broken my heart."

Exaggeration — exaggeration," he cried
playfully, trying hard to avert a worse danger
that was close upon him. But Laura Vivian
would not be baulked of her intention.

"It is not exaggeration," she whispered
into his ear, " because — because — / love
you ! "

Then all his quasi-sentiment and pity

changed to contempt, and he rose quickly

from the sofa and stood before her.
vol. ii. 24

"Mrs. Vivian! for God's sake, think what
you are saying — yon, a married woman."

"I can't help that," she answered, weeping
with mortification at his repulse ; " I am
miserable with Major Vivian. I never did
care for him from the very beginning, and
of late years it has been unbearable. And
I have so little comfort or affection, so few
friends I care for, and now you — you '

Sobs choked the words upon her lips, and
she was unable to proceed.

And have I not been your friend ? ' demanded
Athol, in his rich, musical voice ;
"have I not joined in your amusements and
occupations and done everything for you that
was in my power, and consistent with my
duty towards your husband ? "

Oh, bother your duty towards him. You
wouldn't think twice of thai if you cared
for me" she said almost spitefully.

I think I should, Mrs. Vivian, at all events
I hope I should, for 1 can conceive nothing

more dishonourable than to visit at a man's
house and accept his hospitality whilst you
cherish any feeling for his wife that you
would be ashamed to confess to him. But
that is not the case with me. It is best I
should say it now at once and for ever. I
admire you immensely, and I have been
proud to call you my friend, but there is no
warmer place in my heart for any woman."

You are in love, then ? " exclaimed Mrs.
Vivian, forgetting her grief in her curiosity,
and raising herself so as to look into his
face. "No man of your age would have
spoken to me as you have done to-night,
unless he had been head over ears in love
with another woman."

I don't think I am," replied Athol sadly ;

at least I know that I try my hardest to

stamp it down and crush it ; but I have

been very fond of some one, Mrs. Vivian, and

I am afraid her place in my affections will

not be easily refilled."

24—2

"And doesn't she love you in return,
then?" she demanded with feminine sympathy.


Athol shook his head.

Oh, my poor boy. You are worse off
than I am. Is there no hope ? "

There is no hope," he answered impatiently.
" She is a married woman. Don't
mistake me, Mrs. Vivian. The sentiments I
expressed just now came straight from my
heart, and I have never yet outraged them.
But I knew the lady I referred to long before
she was married. We were en^afjed to
each other, but she jilted me for a richer
man. That is all my story. A very common
one, doubtless, but so are death and sickness
and all the other ills of life. At any rate,
it has settled my fate, and I shall never bea
married man — nor the lover of other men's
wives," he added after a pause.

Mr. Fergusson," said Laura Vivian with
an effort, " I am so ashamed of myself. I

am not half so good as you are. I do like
you awfully, and I shouldn't have minded a
flirtation with you pour passer le temps, but
I'm glad you put me in the right place, for
you are not the first, and I don't mind telling
you so."

I know I should not have been the first,"
said Athol frankly, "for I have heard all
about Captain Lovelace and one or two
others. But, oh ! Laura, what a life it is to
lead. How will it end ? What will you do
when you grow old and the love for such
frivolity leaves you, and you will have estranged
your husband perhaps for ever ? "

"I don't know. I've never thought of it
in that light, though, of course, I didn't suppose
it would go on for ever. However, I'm
safe for awhile now, for — though I haven't
said much about it — your eyes have riddled
me through and through, Athol, and it will
take me some time to forget them."

And during that time I had better not

come near here again," said Athol seizing
his cap.

What an old mentor you are. One
would suppose you were sixty, instead of
twenty-three. Well, you must do as you
like, but I shall be very dull without you.
We should have had a very pleasant time
together, I am sure of that ; but I am not
going to cut my throat for love of you, all
the same. I've gone mad once or twice in
my lifetime for love of a man, and I don't
mean to do it again. And so you are really
going. Kiss me, and say you forgive me before
we part."

"I have nothing to forgive," he answered
as he stooped down and kissed her gravely
on the forehead as a brother might have
done.

But the episode, quickly as it had passed,
made the impression he had conceived of
woman's faith and constancy harder than it
had been before.

So this is marriage" he thought to himself
as he strolled back to the messhouse.
This is the fidelity of wives during the
absence of their husbands — this is the way
they dishonour their vows and defile their
hearthstones, for the sake of having a c pleasant
time ' with the first young fellow that
takes their fancy. Is it thus that Muriel
would have dishonoured me ? Perhaps it
might have been. Then thank God, Who has
preserved me from it, for I think if I had
found her false I should have murdered her.
And yet — has she not been false to me as it
is in every sense of the word ? Why cannot
I, therefore, murder her memory, and let it
trouble me no more ? "

There was an increase of gloom about young
Fergusson's manner after this little episode
that greatly troubled Richard Kane, who
watched his friend as closely as if he had been
his brother. He thought perhaps that " Old
Ath " was bothered about his money affairs.

He knew that he did not possess a farthing
beyond his pay, and how difficult it is for a
young officer to make ends meet on that.
Athol was too proud to speak of his poverty
before his acquaintances, or borrow money
from them, still more to run into debt, and so
he was obliged to practise a rigid economy,
which prevented his joining in the same
amusements as other men of his age, and put
him at a disadvantage with his brother officers.
Yet he never grumbled at his lot. The
design, which he always kept before him, of
being able at some future time to help his
mother, and pay off his father's creditors,
made privation light, and he went on his
way without heeding the remarks of his
companions, and only anxious to do his
duty.

Kane admired him beyond all description.
He considered Athol the finest character with
which he had ever been brought in contact,
and was never tired of singing his praise to

others. Judge then of his delight when
one morning, about a year after they had
been sent out to Malta, he heard his friend
calling him in excited tones to enter his
barrack-room, where he found Athol with an
open letter in his hand.

Oh ! my dear Kane," he exclaimed as
soon as he saw him, "I have just received the
most wonderful news. My uncle, Sir Eobert
Fergusson, has died of a fit of apoplexy (you
know his little boy was carried off by scarlet
fever last spring) and I have succeeded to the
baronetcy. Here is the lawyer's letter to tell

me so."

Kane's excitement was almost greater than
his own.

"My dear, dear old Ath," he exclaimed,
slapping him on the back, while the tears
sprung to his eyes, " I am so very glad. Now
you will have money, as you ought to have,
old boy, and not be obliged to screw and
deny yourself as you have done any more."

Now I shall be able to wipe off the stain
from my poor father's name," said Athol
solemnly, "and keep my dear mother and
sisters in comfort. Yes, Dick, I am very
thankful. But — if we could only tell what
is coming for us in the future."

He was thinking of Muriel as he spoke, and
Dick Kane (who knew all about the trouble
of his friend's life) guessed to whom his
thoughts had wandered, and forbore to make
any comment on his words.

THE LITTLE RIFT .

Five months after Lady Muriel Darner's marriage
she was sitting alone in her boudoir in
the splendid mansion in Queen's Grate which
Colonel de Crespigny had taken and furnished
for her. If she had dreaded the sting of
poverty and longed for luxury and wealth,
surely she ought to have been contented now.
The house, which from the attics to the basement
was fitted up with the most perfect
taste, was as artistic as it was commodious,
and contained more servants than there
was work for. The colonel, who had determined
that his second marriage should
herald his entrance into fashionable society,
had spared no expense to prepare a home
worthy of receiving the guests that should

congregate round Lady Muriel de Crespigny.
The guests however had not yet made their
appearance in any number, because it was the
Christmas season, and the majority of London
residents were spending it in the country.
The colonel had also thought of taking
possession of his seat in Kent until the
new year had dawned upon them, but lit had
not been tenanted for some years past and
was scarcely fit to receive a bride ; he
therefore decided to put off their visit until
another time. So Lady Muriel sat in her
London home, a married woman, and with
every outward sign of prosperity and happiness.
Her boudoir was furnished with pale
rose-coloured silk and panelled in ivory-white,
and it opened upon a tiny conservatory,
full of the choicest hot-house flowers.
The walls were hung with water-colour drawings
by modern masters, the velvet mantelshelf
was covered with Sevres and Dresden
china, in a basket by the fire lay a tiny

terrier of about two pounds weight, and a
large cage of foreign birds stood between the
windows. All her possible girlish tastes
seemed to have been thought of and gratified.
Her half-finished painting stood upon
an easel, an expensively inlaid mother-of-pearl
and gold workbox was upset on the
centre table, and the couch was littered with
the periodical literature of the day. And
Lady Muriel herself, in a crimson plush tea-gown,
trimmed with costly lace, with a diamond
spray brooch at the ruffle round her
slender throat, and her fingers glittering with
rings, seemed a fit genius to preside over
the luxurious abode.

But, oh! how old she felt compared to
what she had done five months ago. She
was thinking of it as she bent forward from
the low chair she occupied, and held her
hands out to the flickering flame. Could it
possibly be only five months since she had
been transformed from a simple childish girl

into the wife of Colonel de Crespigny ? She
could hardly believe it. Marriage is such a
complete awakening for most women, and
more especially for an innocent maiden
handed over to the tender mercies of a
man of the world. Lady Muriel's wedding-day
had rather been hurried on than otherwise,
for Oakley Court had not been a very
pleasant home for her after her quarrel with
Lady Ehylton. The countess had never
forgiven her step-daughter for what she
termed "insulting" her, and Lady Muriel
had not made matters better by refusing to
accept anything for her trousseau from Lady
Khylton's hands. No, not even the customary
wedding gift which each of her
friends considered it their privilege to offer
her. She left Oakley Court with nothing but
what her father had provided for her, and
her obstinacy caused a serious breach between
her and her relations. But she had
not minded it then. Colonel de Crespigny

had taken her to Italy, and in the delight
of travelling and seeing new places of historic
interest, Lady Muriel had not bestowed
a thought on Oakley Court. Several things,
however, that her husband said and did
during the honeymoon considerably startled
her, but when he had decided that their
intimacy was fully established, and he might
give free vent to the thoughts that occupied
his mind, she shrank from him with horror.
It is the means by which many men disgust
their wives in the first months of marriage.
They overlook the fact that the things
which are every-day occurrences to them
have been sealed books hitherto to the girl
whom, perhaps, they have selected from her
companions for her purity and modesty.
They falsely imagine that the circumstance
of becoming a wife renders her at once fit
and willing to partake in their life-long
experience of indelicacy and vice.

And Colonel de Crespigny was essentially

coarse-minded and foul-mouthed. He had
wallowed in sensuality ever since he had
arrived at man's estate, and boasted of it as
though it had been a feather in his cap.
His first marriage had not had the power to
keep him faithful to his wife, and neither
would his second, directly the first bloom
was off his fancy. He did not know what
it was to love a woman for anything better
than her personal attractions, and every one
knows how that kind of love ends — in
satiety and indifference. Lady Muriel had
already begun to experience the difference
of her husband's moods, when his passion
was excited, and his passion was worn out,
and as she leant over the blazing fire and
thought of it, she shuddered — yes, shuddered,
though only five months had passed since
her wedding day. At times, he frightened
her with his vehemence and hurt her with
his rough embraces, and at others, he was
cool and sulky, ready to take offence at the

least trifle, and absent at his club for hours
together. Lady Muriel's thoughts travelled
back on the present occasion to Athol Fergusson,
and she could not help wondering if
he would ever have treated her so. She
had not yet arrived at the stage of comparing
the two men in her imagination, and
regretting the loss of her first lover, but as
she dreamed, with her eyes fixed on the
fire, she seemed to feel the touch of the
young man's moist lips laid so gently and
yet so tenderly upon her own, and shrunk
from the remembrance of her husband's hot-mouth,
which seemed to hurt and blister
her own. But here the tiny terrier, Fly,
jumped up in her basket and barked shrilly,
as some one entered the boudoir. It was a
powdered footman bearing a silver salver
with a card.

Mrs. Lorrimer, my lady, waiting in the
drawing-room to see you," he said.

Lady Muriel was not yet au fait with the
vol. ii. 25

highest social decorum. She too often
evinced her feelings before her dependants.

What a nuisance," she exclaimed in a
tone of vexation. " What on earth does she
come here for so often ? I am sure / don't
want to see her."

But as the footman was unable to answer
his mistress's questions, and only stood like
a carved statue in the doorway, she addressed
herself to him :

Show Mrs. Lorrimer up here, James.
Say I have a cold, and have not been downstairs
to-day. How I wish you had said
that I wasn't at home."

Your ladyship gave no orders," stammered
the servant.

I know ; it isn't your fault. Go and
show her up, and tell them to serve tea at
once."

And then she rose, and looked at her
hair in the mirror, and shook out her skirts,
and wondered again why Mrs. Lorrimer

should call so often. The fact is that Caroline
Lorrimer was beginning to look on the
house in Queen's Gate as a second home.
Colonel de Crespigny encouraged her to do
so, and as she could not unmake his marriage
with Lady Muriel she bowed her head
like a wise woman to the inevitable, and
determined to reap as much benefit from
her misfortune as she was able. She was
included in the list of guests for every party
they gave, and dined with them en famille
two and three times a week. Lady Muriel
was getting sick of it. She disliked the
pale flabby woman with her greenish eyes,
for she was neither sympathetic nor interesting,
and especially she had grown to
resent the presence of the awkward and
unmannerly Arthur, who invariably accompanied
his mother since the Christmas vacation
had begun, and generally ended by
overturning a table and breaking some of

her little specimens of china. Mrs. Lorrimer

25—2

was, however, one of her husband's oldest
friends, and Arthur was his godson, and so
she felt bound to be civil to them and
conceal her real feelings concerning their
constant appearance. Fly, who detested
them both, and saw no necessity for disguising
it, flew at Caroline Lorrimer as she
entered the room, and tried to bite her boots.

What a very unpleasant little animal
that is," remarked Mrs. Lorrimer when the
preliminary greetings were over ; " quite dangerous.
If I were Colonel de Crespigny, I
wouldn't allow it about the house."

Perhaps Colonel de Crespigny is not
allowed to express an opinion on the subject,"
replied Muriel laughing, as she caught
up her little dog, for Mrs. Lorrimer always
dilated largely on the duty of wives towards
their husbands before her, and she loved to
excite her ire and draw her out.

Not allowed, Lady Muriel ? Surely you
cannot think of the meaning of the words

you use. I cannot imagine my old friend
Colonel de Crespigny being dictated to by
anybody."

Can't you ? Then you should hear me
dictating to him sometimes. You wouldn't
know your c old friend.' He's so meek. I
beg your pardon, Arthur, but you are sitting
on my plush embroidery, and you'll spoil it."

Put it on the table, my dear," said his
mother. " Poor child, : you're always doing
something wrong. Can he run up into his
godpapa's dressing-room, Lady Muriel, and
change his boots? He has his shoes in his
pocket."

Oh, is it worth his while ? " asked Muriel,
purposely misunderstanding her guest, whilst
a flush of annoyance rose to her cheek.
"You'll be leaving again so soon."

If you desire it, of course," returned Mrs.
Lorrimer with an offended air ; " but as I
have some matters of the utmost importance
on which to consult my old friend and

trustee, I thought perhaps I might venture
to invite myself to dinner."

Mrs. Lorrimer had invented the fiction of
the trusteeship as a suitable excuse to obtain
private interviews with the colonel, during
which she usually treated him to tears for his
neglect of her and her darling boy.

Oh, certainly," replied Lady Muriel with
quiet politeness, although she felt blank at
the prospect of another stupid evening.

You were not going out then ? I shall
not detain you at home," said Caroline Lorimer
as she sipped her tea.

No ; I caught cold at the theatre last
night, and have been nursing myself all day
by the fire. My husband has gone over to
the Court."

That term " my husband " from Lady
Muriel's lips always grated terribly on Mrs.
Lorrimer's ears.

Oh, indeed," she replied icily, " but of
course he will return for dinner."

Perhaps," said Muriel, shrugging her
shoulders, " but I shouldn't count on it if I
were you."

Caroline Lorrimer elected to count on it,
however, and a very uninteresting hour succeeded,
during which the ladies were evidently
at daggers drawn, though they did not
dare to be otherwise than courteous to each
other.

It seems funny that Colonel de Crespigny
should be your trustee," remarked Muriel,
after a while ; " you must be nearly as old ashe
is."

That would be no obstacle," returned
Mrs. Lorrimer, " though you are mistaken as
to my age. I am nearly twenty years the
junior of the colonel."

And Arthur is fourteen ! You must have
been very young when he was born. And
did the colonel know your husband ? Were
they friends too ? "

Captain Lorrimer was his brother officer,

and naturally they were very intimate," said
Mrs. Lorrimer. " But how do you get on
with Agnes Prudhomme, Lady Muriel ? '

For Colonel de Crespigny had manoeuvred
to obtain Agnes's wish for her, and have her
transferred from the Lorrimer establishment
to his own.

How do I get on with her ? " repeated
Muriel with arched brows. " Is that quite
the term to use with regard to one's servants?
I believe Eosette is very well satisfied with
her, but Agnes is only under my lady's maid,
you know, and chiefly employed in keeping
my wardrobe in order.' 5

Oh, indeed ! But I understood from her
that she had been brought up quite as your
equal in the Chateau des Lauriers."

Lady Muriel laughed unaffectedly.

iC Oh, that is nonsense — a little bit of
boasting on Miss Agnes's part. She wouldn't
dare to say it before me. The Grants had a
large family of children, and I daresay we all

romped together when we were young, hut
she was never anything but a servant as she
is now. I was quite surprised when my husband
told me she was in England. I can't
imagine how she managed to get here. But
she was always a sharp pushing girl, and I
suppose she took service with some family
coming across."

I believe Colonel de Crespigny paid her
passage. He asked me to receive her on
landing in England, but I knew from the first
that her ambition was to enter your service.
And to tell you the truth, Lady Muriel, I
wasn't sorry to get rid of her, for I found
her lazy and disposed to be impertinent, and
I am not so rich as you are, you know, and
cannot afford to keep servants to look at."

Eosette won't let her waste her time, nor
be saucy either, I am sure of that," replied
Muriel. " She is a very steady, respectable
woman herself, and made Agnes tuck away
her curls and put on a cap the first day she

came. I don't think she liked it though," she
continued, with a girlish giggle ; but at that
moment the door opened again, and Colonel
de Crespigny entered. He was in walking
costume, just as he had entered the hall-door,
and he brought a whiff of the cold December
air in with him.

Holloa ! " he exclaimed, as his eyes fell on
the group by the fire. " You here, Caroline,
and Arthur ! Well, how are you ? All
right ? " And then he went up to Lady
Muriel and embraced her fondly. " And
how's my own darling ? " he said. " Is your
cold better, and have you been taking great
care of your precious little self?'

He kissed her several times passionately
as he concluded, and Muriel lifted up her
face to greet him, and felt quite contented
(for the time being) that it should be so, for
the man's animal magnetism was over her,
and when in his presence she forgot his
faults.

Caroline Lorrimer turned her head aside
whilst Colonel de Crespigny embraced his
wife, but he did not observe the action, nor
had he an idea that she was wounded by
the sight. It was one of his peculiarities
that he was not in the least sensitive at
having witnesses to his love-making, but was
quite as free in his manners before strangers
as if he and Muriel had been alone. The
girl often shrunk before his ardour, and
showed her annoyance by the hot blushes
that rose to her cheeks, but the mildest remonstrance
was enough to make the colonel
sulky for the rest of the day, and so she
had already learned the wisdom of silence.

Do you know what time it is ? " he said
next, as he examined his watch. "A quarter-past
seven ! The dinner-bell must have
sounded fifteen minutes ago. You'll be late
for dinner, Muriel, if you don't dress at
once. Come along with me ; I have a dozen
things to tell you. Caroline will amuse herself

here till we are ready." And with playful
persistence he dragged his wife up from
her seat and led her out of the room.

Mrs. Lorrimer sat where they had left her,
her green eyes yellow with jealousy as she
stared into the fire. This was what it had
come to. She was nothing — nobody — a neglected
friend — a tolerated guest — whilst that
girl, almost a child by comparison with herself,
occupied his whole thoughts and reigned
queen paramount over his possessions. And
she had another cause of complaint. Colonel
de Crespigny had been in the habit of helping
her considerably with her son's educational
bills and her own household expenses, but
since his marriage he had pleaded the heavy
outlay he had in decorating and furnishing
the mansion in Queen's Gate as an excuse
for not being so open-handed as usual. He
wanted to cast her off — to get rid of her and
her boy, as disagreeable memories that might
crop up at some future time to endanger the

peace of his domestic life, and she wouldn't
stand it — that is what she said to herself.
She would make him comprehend that very
evening that if she was to suffer, he should
suffer with her, and that if he wished to command
her silence he must pay for it. She
was falling in arrears with her rent, and had
not been able to defray Arthur's quarterly
bills, and her captain's widow's pension was a
very sorry comfort to look forward to in the
future. The greenish-blue eyes gleamed with
a vicious light as Mrs. Lorrimer pondered
thus in the deserted boudoir until her son
roused her from her reverie.

What are you thinking of, mamma ? Is
anything wrong ? Your eyes look so queer
in the firelight."

Nothing, my dear ; it is nothing. I am
only a little bothered about money, but your
god-papa will put it all right for me. Hush !
here they come. Mind you don't say a word
of it to anybody."

Colonel de Crespigny and Lady Muriel
came laughing down the stairs together, for
he had been relating some ludicrous story of
her stepmother ; he in evening clothes, and
she in a dress of grey velvet which showed
off her pretty figure to perfection. They were
preceded by a footman, bearing two lighted
lamps with rose-coloured shades, that threw
a most becoming tint over the luxurious little
boudoir.

Very cold, isn't it ? " exclaimed the colonel,
rubbing his hands over the fire, " wind due
east. I wonder you ventured out to-night,
Caroline. You'll get bronchitis to a dead
certainty."

Perhaps I shall," she answered stiffly,
but I was obliged to come. I have a matter
of the gravest importance to consult you
upon."

Colonel de Crespigny's face fell. He
guessed what the important matter was.

Oh, well, let's put it off till after dinner

at all events," he answered, "I can't discuss
business on an empty stomach. When that's
over, we'll have half-an-hour in the library
together. Let me take you downstairs.
Muriel, my angel, you must put up with
Arthur, unless you prefer to turn me into
a donkey between two bundles of hay''

"No, thank you," replied Muriel merrily,
I would rather have a small cavalier all to
myself than half a big one."

And although she hated the touch of the
lad's bony arm, she slipped her hand through
it, and led him in the wake of her husband
to the dining-room. The dinner was not a
success, as far as sociability was concerned.
De Crespigny tried to keep the ball of conversation
rolling, by relating anecdotes he
had heard at the Court, and messages with
which he had been intrusted by Cecil to
Muriel ; but Mrs. Lorrimer sat like a death's
head at the feast, without the ghost of a smile
upon her face, until her silence and gloom

became intolerable and infected the rest of
the party. The colonel perceived that he
was in for a storm, and wishing to get it
over, he said as soon as the meal was concluded
:

Come, Carrie, we had better adjourn to
the library and discuss your business, for you
mustn't stop out late this bitter weather.
Muriel, my darling, will you take Arthur back
to the boudoir, and wait for us there. We
will join you as quickly as we can."

His method of treating the interview between
them was not encouraging, and his
voice was still less so when the library doors
had closed behind them, and he ejaculated
impatiently :

Now, Carrie, whatever is the matter ?
More tears and reproaches for me, I suppose.
Bat I must tell you plainly that I'm getting
a little tired of them, and so I hope you'll
cut them short."

I don't know what I've done to make you

speak to me like that" she commenced, with
ready resentment ; " there was a time when
you were always but too anxious to hear of
my troubles, and try to alleviate them."

Yes, yes, and so I am now. Well,
what is it ? Let's have the whole story."

It is soon told, Arthur. I have not
sufficient money to meet my expenses. My
boy's bills come to thirty-six pounds, and Mr.
Richards is worrying me for his rent for the
June quarter."

Well, of course he ought to have had

it long ago, and as for the school accounts,

they must be paid. I tell you what it is,

Caroline, you're living too high. It's absurd

to keep up a house of that size for yourself

and a boy who will go out in the world

in a couple of years, and I really don't see

that Arthur is making the use he should out

of that expensive school. Why not send

him to King's College until he is settled in

life ? "

vol. ii. 26

"But have you decided what you are
going to make of him ? "

Don't ask me. It is for you to decide."
Oh, Arthur ! " she said reproachfully.
Now look here, Caroline, you must learn
to leave off appealing to me about the boy
or yourself. I shall always be happy to help
either of you — when 1 can ; but you must
not forget that as a married man I am placed
in a totally different position from what I
was, and whatever I may do for you must
be done with the utmost secrecy. I cannot
even promise that my assistance will be as
ready as heretofore. All sorts of heavy
expenses are cropping up in my new condition."


"And we shall be forgotten, or pushed
to one side for it," she exclaimed angrily.
You seem to ignore the fact that I might
have prevented your marriage altogether if
I had so chosen — that I could make it very
hot for you even now, if I thought fit."

You wouldn't dare to do so," lie
answer ed, " you would gain nothing by it,
and you would let all the world know what
you and your son are."

Oh ! you men are cruel," she said beginning
to weep, " cruel as the devils in hell."

Listen to me, Carrie, and pray don't make
an open scandal of this matter. How much
money will clear you ? "

A hundred and fifty pounds," she said
between her sobs.

I can't give you that — I can't indeed.
You can have no idea how my wedding trip
and furnishing this place has cleared me out,
and just at Christmas too, when I shall want
every halfpenny for myself."

Well, we must starve then. I declare to
you, Arthur, on my solemn word, I haven't as
much ready money as will buy us a Christmas
dinner."

Come and stay with us then," he replied,

suddenly struck with an idea how to get out

26—2

of the difficulty. " Pack up your traps and
Arthur's, and come and spend a few weeks
here. I know my wife is longing for an
excuse not to go to the Court, and your
presence will afford her a good one. And
before your visit is concluded, I may be able
to think of some method by which to relieve
your difficulties."

Mrs. Lorrimer's pale eyes suddenly glistened
with delight. This invitation was of all things
what she had most desired. To be in the
same house with her old lover, morning, noon
and night, was to have the opportunity of
regaining the influence, which (in spite of the
sudden passion he had conceived for his
beautiful young wife) she flattered herself
she still had the power to exert over him.
But she was too politic to exhibit her
triumph. She only looked down meekly, and
said, " I should like it of all things, Arthur.
Only too well — you must know that. Only it
will be such exquisite pain to me."

Oil, rubbish, rubbish ! " exclaimed de
Crespigny, who dreaded sentimentality above
all earthly things (that is to say, as soon ashe
had tired of the sentimentalist). " It will
be nothing of the sort. There will be no one
here but yourselves, so young Arthur can
have the run of the house, and we'll take him
to see the pantomimes. Now that's settled,
isn't it ? and you had better come over as soon
as you can — say next Thursday. Holloa !
there's some one tapping at the door. Come
in.

His permission was followed by the entrance
of Arthur Lorrimer, who stammered
out, " Oh, if you please, sir, Lady Muriel
has a bad headache, and has gone to bed, and
she told me to come down and tell you and
mamma so."

All right, my boy. Mamma and you will
be going home directly, so it's just as well.
Look here, Arthur," he continued, putting a
couple of sovereigns in his hand, " there's a

tip for you, and next Thursday you're coming
here to spend your Christmas holidays."

With Lady Muriel ? " cried the lad colouring.


Holloa ! Lady Muriel seems to have cut
out the god-father already."

Oh, no, no ! " exclaimed Mrs. Lorrimer
fervently ; " that can never be. Arthur must
never forget what we both owe to you —
how good and kind a friend you "

"Come, Carrie, that's enough. If you indulge
in these heroics you may forget yourself
some day and go too far. I see Arthur
has brought down your things ; you'd better
put them on whilst James calls you a cab.
I haven't seen my wife since the morning,
and she'll be expecting me upstairs."

He hurried them both out of the house
as soon as it was possible, and after smoking
a cigar in his study, walked up to
Muriel's dressing-room. He found her reclining
in an arm-chair before the fire, with

a book in her hand, her pale blue robe de
chambre contrasting most becomingly with
the fair hair falling over her shoulders, and
her little feet in velvet slippers, stretched
out upon a white bear-skin rug.

"Are they gone?' she inquired as the
colonel entered ; " what a blessing ! Arthur,
I positively detest that woman."

It was not a favourable opening, but de
Crespigny had a great notion of being master
in his own house, and also of bending everybody
according sto his will. So he replied,
almost jauntily :

You mustn't say that, my darling, because
she is going to be your guest for the next
fortnight."

What do you mean ? " cried Muriel,
flinging down her book ; " you are joking
with me."

Indeed I am not. The Lorimer are
not by any means well off, and so I thought
it a kindness to ask them to spend their

Christmas with us. They are coming next
Thursday."

And you never consulted me" said his
wife with wide-open eyes. " You have asked
that woman (whom you know I dislike) to
pass a whole fortnight in my society, without
even paying me the compliment of
gaining my consent first. Well, then, I won't
have her. There I '

Don't talk nonsense. You must have
her. She is one of my oldest friends, and
I will not see her insulted."

Then you may stay at home and entertain
your oldest friend by yourself, for I
shall go to my father's."

She had never spoken to her husband with
so much decision before. He hardly knew she
had it in her. This sudden insight to her character
transformed her at once in his eyes from
a girl to a woman, and he treated her as such.

You will do no such tiling," he thundered.
" You will be good enough to remember

that you are my wife, and your
duty is to do as you are told."

But not to receive guests who are distasteful
to me."

You will receive anybody whom I choose
to invite to my house."

"Then I'll make myself so unpleasant to
her that she'll never come here again. She
shall wish herself out of the house quicker
than she came into it. You cannot, at
least, prevent my doing that."

Colonel de Crespigny's handsome face
suddenly clouded over with a frown that
destroyed all its beauty, and with an oath
that made her shrink from him as if she
had been struck in the face, he turned on
his heel and left the room. The idea had
presented itself to him for the first time that
he might find himself some day between two
fires with these women.

Lady Muriel gazed for a moment after
him in silence, and then burst into a flood

of angry tears. Her husband had often
sworn in her presence before, but never in
so foul and blasphemous a manner, and the
sound had shocked her terribly. She was
still weeping when Agnes Prudhomme entered
the room from the bedchamber.

Excuse me, miladi" she said, " I was
not aware that you had retired." And then,
seeing that Lady Muriel was in tears, the
old feeling of familiarity came over her, and
she exclaimed, " Ah, mademoiselle ', are you
in trouble ? Can I do any tiling for you ? '

Nothing, Agnes, thank you. It is foolish
of me to cry, but I feel upset. Colonel de
Crespigny has invited some guests to stay
here for the Christmas week without first
consulting me."

"And miladi does not love her visitors?'
Agnes interrogatively said.

/ hate them ! " replied Muriel energetically.
They are that horrid Mrs. Lorrimer and
her son."

Ah ! " exclaimed Agnes with a long-drawn
breath, "Madame Lorrimer. Maladies
good reason to hate her."

What do you mean, Agnes ? "

Nothing — nothing, miladi. Perhaps I
should not have spoken. But le bon Dieu
has not given me my eyes and ears for
nothing, and I have heard and seen things
in Bryanston Square. Ah ! I could tell
miladi something if she chose to hear it."

But by that time Muriel had become aware
of the indiscretion of which she was guilty,
and refused to listen any further.

"No, Agnes, I have no wish to hear it.
Pray drop the subject. After all, Mrs. Lorrimer
is one of the colonel's greatest friends,
and I must put up with her for his sake."

Mais oui, she is certainly one of the
colonel's greatest friends. I could have told
miladi that," replied Agnes, as she glided
back into the bedroom, with a sneer upon
her face.

MUTE MUSIC.

Colonel de Ckespigny rushed downstairs and
bolted himself in his study, but he had not
been there long before he began to consider
if he were not a fool to quarrel with his
wife on account of a woman of whom he
was utterly tired. He was a man of loose
principles, unbridled passions, and intemperate
language, but Lady Muriel was his latest
fancy, and he had already ascertained that,
young as she was, she possessed a proud and
impetuous disposition, and would not hesitate
to resent (what she considered) an affront to
her dignity. So after half-an-hour's cogitation
with his meerschaum pipe, the colonel
crept upstairs again, and knocked submissively
at the dressing-room door, Muriel

(who was still agitated at the idea of having
Mrs. Lorrimer thrust upon her as a companion)
gave him permission to enter in a
voice that was very suggestive of tears.

My darling," exclaimed the colonel effusively,
as he caught sight of her swollen
face, " have I really made you cry ? Oh,
I am a brute — a beast — a devil ! I deserve
to be shot for speaking before you as I
did. I wonder if you will ever forgive
me."

He threw his huge form down on the
bear-skin rug as he spoke, and taking her
little slippered feet in his hands, kissed them
over and over again. It is the sort of thing
that disarms a woman's anger at once. She
has nothing to say when a big strong creature,
who could crush her (seemingly) with
his little finger, abases himself in the folds
of her dress and begs for mercy. De Cres-pigmy
knew the force of the situation. He
had tried it many times before, and never

knew it fail. Lady Muriel's youth and inexperience
succumbed to it at once.

Oh, Arthur, pray don't do that. It
is /, perhaps, who should ask your pardon.
I spoke too hastily, but your intelligence

annoyed me."

No, no ! It was all my fault. I should
have delegated the duty of issuing the
invitation to yourself. It falls naturally to
you as the mistress of the house. But I
did not stop to think. Caroline Lorrimer is
like a sister to me, and I hoped you looked
on her in the same light."

Oh, dear no," cried Muriel ; " let us
understand each other on this point plainly,
Arthur. Since you take such an interest
in Mrs. Lorrimer I am willing to do all
I can to make her visit here an agreeable
one, but I can never regard her as a friend,
and it is useless to deceive you in the matter."

But why not ? ' he demanded with some
anxiety. " What is it in her that you do

not like ? She always appears to me to treat
you with the utmost deference ; and I should
have thought that (having so few female
relations of your own) you would have been
glad to make a friend and confidante of a
lady with so much more experience than
yourself."

I don't want her for a friend," answered
Muriel shortly, " and I am not a woman to
confide in my own sex. I don't trust them
sufficiently. If I wanted a female confidante
I should choose my step-sister, Cecil Seton,
who is more of mv age and loves me better
than Mrs. Lorrimer will ever do."

I think Caroline would love you as much
as any one if you showed her that you wished
it."

"But I don't wish it, and, Arthur, you
are mistaken in her. I am certain she does
not like me. If it did not seem too ridiculous
I should almost say she was jealous of me.
I see such a disagreeable look in her eyes

sometimes when I show her any of my
things, and can hear the sneer in her voice
when she makes remarks on them."

Oh, my darling, you must be mistaken,"
exclaimed her husband, though he did not
believe what he said. " However, you will
make the best of it now, for my sake, won't
you? I really cannot neglect, nor give
up, so old a friend as Mrs. Lorrimer — the
widow of one of my brother officers too. It
would create a perfect scandal. And then,
the boy — poor little Arthur — my god-son.
How could I deny the responsibility I have
incurred on his account ? "

No, I suppose not," replied Lady Muriel
with a deep sigh ; " but I shall be very thankful
when their visit is over."

"Don't let us talk of it any more tonight,
then, my sweetest," cried de Crespigny,
who was " everything by turns, and nothing
long." " Let us think of nothing but our
love, and the happiness that accompanies

it. All ! you little witch ! you know you
have but to show me the tip of your
dainty foot, or the curve of your white arm,
to wield me as you will. You are a veritable
sorceress, and your enchantments render
me as weak as a child in your hands."
He threw his arms passionately around her
as he spoke, and Muriel was compelled to
submit to one of those outbursts of affection
on his part which she had already learned
to accept at their true value. She heaved
more than one secret little sigh as she resigned
herself to his caresses, and realized
how little she cared for them and how little
she believed in them. But Colonel de Cres-pigmy
was firmly convinced that his kisses
were sufficient to heal every wound, and that
if he were satisfied everybody else must be
satisfied too.

With such a prologue, it may be easily
imagined that Mrs. Lorrimer's visit did not

afford much satisfaction either to herself or
vol. ii. 27

Lady Muriel de Crespigny. Try as hard
as she would the latter could not infuse a
genuine cordiality in her welcome of her
guest ; and the other soon perceived that her
presence was not desired by the mistress of
the establishment. She took an early opportunity
to complain of Lady Muriel's manner
to Colonel de Crespigny, and in his anxiety
to prevent a quarrel between the two ladies
he paid so much attention to Mrs. Lorrimer
and her son that it became remarkable.
Young Arthur was allowed to run all over
the mansion in Queen's Gate as he chose.
Even Ladv Muriel's boudoir was not held

m

sacred from the invasion of his muddy boots,
and he lounged over the delicately-tinted
sofas and chairs, and pulled about the books
of engravings and photographs in a way that
made their owner feel inclined to box his
ears twenty times in the day. Mrs. Lorrimer,
also, when her first reticence had rubbed off,
took unusual liberties for a guest in the

house ; sitting up with the colonel in his
smoking-room until all hours, and ordering
the servants in their master's name to supply
her with everything she might desire.
She would decline to drive with Lady Muriel
also, pleading a headache, or the requirements
of her son as an excuse for her refusal ; but
when her hostess returned to the house she
would find that Mrs. Lorrimer had gone out
walking with the colonel, or some chance
word at dinner betrayed the fact that she
had taken tea with him at his club, or luncheon
at Very's. These petty deceptions
and intrigues irritated Lady Muriel's naturally
sweet disposition, and were the occasion of
several disputes with her husband. But
it always ended in the same way. Mrs. Lorrimer
was declared to be one of Colonel de
Crespigny's oldest and dearest friends, and
Lady Muriel very silly and childish and illiberal
to take offence at trifles. But still the

cause of irritation continued, and Mrs.

27—2

Lorrimer's manner (from being cold and
snappish) became at times almost insolent and
overbearing. She would thrust (as it were)
her son and herself under the observation
of her hostess, as though she dared her to
make a remark, or ask a question that should
lead to an explanation between them.

Dear boy ! " she would sigh, as young
Arthur left the room after having done all
the mischief he was capable of, "one may
almost see him grow. Isn't he an enormous
fellow for only fourteen ? "

"I really am not competent to give an
opinion on the subject, Mrs. Lorrimer. I
know nothing about boys," replied Muriel.

Ah ! but he %8. He promises to be as
tall as his dear god-papa. Let me see, what
25 the colonel's height, six foot three ? '

I believe so."

You don't seem to take much interest
in it. You should have seen him as lie was
when 1 first knew him. Such an Apollo."

Do you mean an ' Adonis ? ' I should
have thought he would have been more like

Mars."

"It is no use your laughing, Lady Muriel.
The fact remains. He was an uncommonly
splendid man, and many people think Arthur
resembles his god-papa."

"But how can that be? They are not
related, are they ? "

At this direct question — most innocently
put — Mrs. Lorrimer affected to be terribly
confused.

Oh, dear ! What a notion. What will
you say next? It's well no one heard you.
But really, it is strange that Arthur should
be such a monster, for I am not tall, as you
see, and Captain Lorrimer was quite undersized."


She was trying (by means that should not
condemn herself) to infuse doubts and suspicions
in the young wife's mind. It was to
her interest to cause a coolness between the

married couple that might throw de Cres-pigmy
back on her for sympathy and affection.
But Muriel was too innocent for her
purpose. She only considered the subject
most uninteresting.

Well, I should try and stop his growing
if I were you," she answered. "He is quite
big enough already. He never seems to
know what to do with his arms and legs."

What an idea ! He couldn't be too big
to please me. I should like him to be
just like the colonel, who is one of my
oldest and dearest friends "

Yes, yes, I have heard all that before,"
cried Lady Muriel impatiently, at which
Mrs. Lorrimer took offence, and relapsed
into silence.

But there was some one else beside the
lady of the house to whom the presence of
Mrs. Lorrimer and her son seemed to give
particular annoyance, and that was Agnes
Prudhomme. She had been told off by

Madame Eosette to attend to the requirements
of her former mistress, but she was
so careless and inattentive — not to say impudent
in her manner of address — that Mrs.
Lorrimer was (rather imprudently) making
constant complaints of her, which complaints
were carried by the chief lady's maid to Lady
Muriel.

"Agnes," said the latter one day, as she
encountered the girl in her dressing-room,
"I want to speak to you. Eosette tells me
that Mrs. Lorrimer has complained to her
of your being inattentive and saucy. What
have you said and done ? "

"Nothing, miladi, that I am ashamed of.
But I hate Madame Lorrimer, and I will not
be her servant. Voila tout"

You will not, Agnes. Is that the way
to speak of a visitor to the house ? Do
you know that Mrs. Lorrimer has threatened
to tell the colonel of your treatment of her
orders ? "

"Let her tell him, then, miladil I have
something too to tell of Madame Lorrimer
that she may not like all the world to
hear."

"Agnes! I cannot understand you. What
has made you so spiteful against this lady?
Has she injured you ? "

Ah ! Mademoiselle Muriel," cried Agnes,
relapsing (as she always did when under
strong excitement) into French, " if I might
tell you all I know, you would not keep
that woman and her son one hour under
your roof. It is a shame ! an infamy ! that
she should be here. Bah! the pig! I could
kick her into the street myself."

Agnes," exclaimed Muriel, seizing herby
the wrist, "you must tell me what you
know. Why should I be kept in ignorance
of what my own servants are aware of ? "

"But I do not dare, miladi. These things
always come back upon the informant.
Only, if you would know the truth, hide

behind the screen in the colonel's study
this evening, and if they think you have
gone upstairs, you will soon understand what
I mean. But for me — I open my lips no
more. It is too dangerous. Only see and
hear for yourself."

And with that, Agnes Prudhomme walked
hastily away, as if to avoid further temptation.
She left Lady Muriel in a whirl of
horror and amazement. Could it be really
true that she was being insulted in her own
house? The thought lent her strength to
control her first inclination, which was to
rush into the presence of Mrs. Lor rimer and
accuse her of treachery and dishonour. No!
she would make sure that there was no
mistake before she committed a possible
blunder. Her cheeks burnt as she pondered
on the idea that all her household might
have been pitying her for a dupe ; but if
she discovered that Agnes's hints had any
foundation, she would show the world that

she would be a dupe no longer. She did
not leave her own apartments until dinner
was ready, and then she descended to the
dining-room in a dark dress that would not
attract observation. Colonel de Crespigny
and Mrs. Lorrimer were rather late that
evening. They had been taking Arthur to
an afternoon pantomime, and came in together,
laughing and full of spirits. Muriel
tried to appear cheerful also during the
meal. She was most anxious to avoid them
having a suspicion of the state of her mind.
She was very unused to intrigue, poor child,
and felt as if her very looks must betray
her intentions. But as the dinner drew to
a conclusion, her husband unconsciously
helped her out of her difficulty.

Well, what are we going to do this
evening, Muriel?" he asked with the pleasant
smile that had never a suspicion of deceit in it.

"Anything you like," she answered in the
same strain.

Well, I'll have my pipe as usual in the
library, and then we'll meet in the drawing-room
and you shall give us some music,
eh ? "

"Just as you please, Arthur."

If you'll excuse me for half-an-hour,
Lady Muriel, I have an important letter to
write before the last post, and will go to
my own room for the purpose," said Mrs.
Lorrimer.

All right," replied Muriel, as her guest
ran upstairs. She felt the letter-writing was
but a ruse de guerre, and that Mrs. Lorrimer
would soon find her way down to the study,
so she hastened to get there before her.

Her husband, who had not finished his
wine, pulled her down towards him as she
passed his chair.

One kiss, my sweetest," he whispered, as
fervently as if he had never kissed another
woman in his life. Lady Muriel bent her
lips to his, but inwardly she recoiled from

an embrace which seemed only second to
that of Judas, and, as soon as she could
disengage herself, she hastened to the study
and peeped cautiously in. The fire was
burning brightly, but the lamps were lowered
and the room was empty. Before the door
stood a large black and gold Japanese screen
with many folds. It was the easiest thing
possible for Lady Muriel to conceal herself
in the corner of the room, which the last
fold converted into a perfect hiding-place.
Quick as thought, she darted into it and
stood close against the wall, trembling with
anticipation of what her manoeuvre might
reveal to her. She had not loner to wait.
A few minutes after, Mrs. Lorrimer came
stealing down, and stood with an expectant
air before the fire. Had she been caught,
she would have had a dozen excuses at the
tip of her false tongue. It was so natural
that she should find herself out of pens, ink
and paper wherewith to write that important

letter, and the study was of course the proper
place from which to get what she required.

But she had not been there a second before
Colonel de Crespigny joined her, and had the
discovery taken place then she would have
pleaded the need of her trustee's advice on
some point of which she was ignorant. However,
they believed themselves to be safe and
alone, and de Crespigny having closed the
door and lighted his pipe, they indulged ina
private conversation, during which Mrs.
Lorrimer made no secret of the connection
between them, of their joint interest in her
son, nor of her dependence on him in monetary
matters.

She did not abuse Lady Muriel, nor even
mention her name. She would have liked
to do so, doubtless, but though the colonel
was so weak that he had not the moral force
to break off a friendship that pandered to
his vanity, he would not have suffered Mrs.
Lorrimer (nor any woman at that period)

to speak against the wife whom he loved as
much as it was in his nature to love anything
that ministered to his pleasure. Lady
Muriel, however, heard sufficient to set every
nerve in her body quivering with a desire
for revenge. She stood behind the screen,
biting her lips to keep down the passion
which she feared would get the mastery over
her, and praying that she might have the
strength to control herself till they had left
the room. She had not long to wait. Either
the colonel's pipe had not its usual flavour
that evening, or he had had enough of Mrs.
Lorrimer during the afternoon, for in about
half-an-hour he rose, and stretching himself,
proposed they should adjourn to the drawing-room.


"I must run up to my bedroom again, I
suppose," exclaimed Mrs. Lorrimer with a
giggle ; " or stay — she will think I have
been downstairs to put my letter into the
post-box, so come along, dear. I shall be

glad myself of a cup of tea." And putting
her arm familiarly through his, she walked
with him out of the study.

Lady Muriel only remained there until
she had given them time to reach the first
landing, when she, too, left the room, and
gained her own apartments by a back staircase.
As she entered her dressing-room she
rang the bell for Eosette, and ordered her
to lock the door and prepare her for bed.

I can see no one to-night, Eosette, not
even the colonel," she said hastily. "Now,
remember, they are my orders. I have such
an attack of neuralgia in the head, I must
have complete rest. Will you go downstairs
and tell him so, and ask Mrs. Lorrimer,
with my compliments, if she will be
kind enough to take the task of entertaining
him off my hands until the morning."

The tinge of sarcasm in her message was
not recognized by either of the recipients,
and the colonel was most anxious to make

her rescind her resolution and grant him
an interview. He even wrote her a note
to that effect. But she was obdurate. She
declared that nothing but complete quiet
would do her any good, and she did not
wish to open her mouth, nor hear any one
speak until she was recovered. Her husband
grumbled at her decision, and Mrs.
Lor rimer shrugged her shoulders and wondered
where Lady Muriel had learned her
obstinacy, and whether she had been permitted
to give herself such airs in the
household at Eevranches. She made a remark
to the same effect, as Agnes Prude
was undressing her for the night,
but the lady's maid answered her with hints
and suggestions that sent her to bed in a

DO

state of mortal terror. For if Lady Muriel
should have taken offence at anything she
had said, or done, Mrs. Lorrimer knew that
her little pretence of a reign in the house
in Queen's Gate was over for ever.

OPEN WAR.

When Colonel de Crespigny found the next
morning that his wife still absolutely refused
to admit him to her presence, he
became both puzzled and angry. A horrible
suspicion of the truth took possession
of him, and he met Caroline Lorrimer at
the breakfast table with a face of portentous
gloom. She was not feeling particularly
happy either, for Agnes Prudhomme's
malicious hints were rankling in her mind,
but she tried to carry off her want of
ease, by an assumption of extreme cheerfulness.


"Well, and how is the dear wife this
morning?" she exclaimed, jauntily, as he

entered the breakfast-room. "Is she coming
vol. n. 28

down to perform her duties as hostess, or
must I take it upon myself to pour out
the tea and coffee again ? "

"I cannot tell you. I have not seen her
yet," he answered.

Not been up to inquire after her even ?
Oh, you naughty man. Is that what you
call being an attentive husband ? "

I didn't say I had not inquired after
Lady Muriel's health. I said I had not
seen her, and for a very good reason — she
refused me admittance."

Dear, dear," cried Mrs. Lorrimer sympathetically,
"I didn't think she had such
an unfortunate temper as all that. Can
she be ill ? Shall you not send for a
doctor ? "

Don't talk nonsense, Caroline. Lady
Muriel is neither ill, nor ill-tempered. I am
afraid it is something worse than either."

"What can you mean?"

I think she must have gained a suspicion

of the true state of affairs between
you and me."

Impossible ! How could she ? I have
hardly looked at you in her presence."

I know you have been careful, so have
I, but these things have a wonderful facility
for cropping up, and women are intuitive
creatures — particularly when they are wives.
Anyhow, I have never known Muriel like
this before, and there must be some strong
reason for her behaviour."

Oh, fiddle-de-dee," cried Mrs. Lorrimer
nervously (for she didn't feel like " fiddle-de-dee
" at all). " It's only your fancy,
Arthur. It is quite impossible. Lady Muriel
has an attack of the sulks — that's all. She
is cross, most likely, because you took
Arthur and me to Drury Lane yesterday,
without consulting her. Take no notice of
her fads, and she'll come down to luncheon
as usual. You are making a great deal too

much of it."

28—2

"I hope I may be," lie said, as lie rose
from table, "but I don't feel comfortable
about it at all. However, I shall go out
for the day, and when I return to dinner
I hope it may have blown over. If she
should happen to mention the subject to
you, Caroline, you must do your utmost to
disabuse her mind of the idea."

Of course I shall ; but wives are terribly
unreasonable. They are jealous even
of their husband's friends."

"Well, I shouldn't care for my wife to
have many friends of our sort," replied de
Orespigny significantly, as he left the room.

Lady Muriel had ordered Eosette to let
her know as soon as the colonel quitted
the house, and when the intelligence was
brought to her, she sent down a message to
Mrs. Lorrimer to say that she desired to
see her in her dressing-room.

She was robed with as much care as
usual, but she was looking very ill. The

poor child had passed a sleepless night, not
so much because the discovery she had
made had caused her heart to ache, as that
it had given her a shock, which had altered
her opinion of the whole world. It is a
terrible thing when our eyes are first opened
to the deceit and double dealing of which
human nature is capable. We begin life,
as a rule, with so much trust in our fellow-creatures,
so much belief in what they tellus,
so much faith that they will not fail to
fulfil all they have promised to do. And
then we find they have lied to us, have
spoken evil of us behind our backs, have
deceived us in every possible way, and the
trust, and belief, and faith crumble to dust
under our feet — not only for them, but for
every one — and we cannot recall them even
for the sake of the one or two true friends
we may meet whilst journeying 'through this
wilderness, where all is barren from Dan to
Beersheba. And Lady Muriel was so ignorant

of the world, and the ways of men, and
the falsehoods they consider it a point of
honour to utter to women concerning their
own sex, that the discovery she had made
was the greatest shock that could have
fallen on her, and shattered at one blow
all the feeling she had entertained for
Colonel de Crespigny. Had she loved him
very dearly, she might have felt more
sorrow and less indignation, but as it was
she experienced nothing but a deep sense
of the wrong done her, the humiliation to
which she had been subjected, and her determination
to let Mrs. Lorrimer know that
it must be put a stop to — at once and forever.


She sat, like a little queen on her throne, in
the luxurious fauteuil before her fire as she
waited the issue of her message to her guest.
Excitement and indignation made her eyes
blaze, and painted a deep spot of crimson on
either cheek. She felt, indeed, now that she

had left childhood and girlhood far behind
her, and was a woman, resolute and able to
avenge her wrongs. Mrs. Lorrimer (w^Iio had
really no idea how much Lady Muriel knew
of her treachery) entered the room, smiling
and affable, and with an outstretched hand
to greet her hostess. But somehow Muriel
didn't see that hand. She merely said " good-morning,"
and inclined her head towards a
chair, whilst she turned to address her lady's
maid.

Go downstairs, Eosette, and do not return
until I ring for you. Mrs. Lorrimer and I
have a little business to transact together."

A little business'" echoed Caroline Lorrimer
as soon as the servant had disappeared.
Have you a commission for me, dear Lady
Muriel ? I shall be only too happy to execute
it. What can I do for you ? "

Only one thing, Mrs. Lorrimer," replied
Muriel, as she rose and stood before her companion.
" You can leave my house."

Leave your house ! It is impossible that I
understand you rightly. Leave your house !
What can you mean, Lady Muriel ? What
have I done to be so insulted? n

You have done this, Mrs. Lorrimer. You
met my husband in the study last evening,
and talked to him freely, and I overheard
your conversation. I don't think I need say
any more."

Caroline Lorrimer's pale complexion turned
to a livid green as she heard the words. It
was impossible to defend herself. She was
like a rat caught in a trap, and like the rat,
she turned and tried to bite, only because
there was nothing else left for her to do.

So that is the way that Lady Muriel de
Crespigny rewards the devotion of her husband
and his friends, is it? Eavesdropping.
Well, if I caught a servant in my establishment
doing so mean a thing I should dismiss
her without warning."

Don't presume to speak to me like that,"

cried Muriel, angrily. " You are not fit to
speak to me at all. It was a despicable acton
the part of Colonel de Crespigny to invite
you to my house, and still worse in you to
accept the invitation. How dared you brave
me, madam, in my own house, and what
reason is there that I should not expose your
infamous conduct to my household ? "

A very good one, Lady Muriel — that you
have no witnesses to attest anything you may
say. I have always behaved as a lady should
do whilst in your house, and if (as you say)
you have overheard anything you have no
proof to bring forward of the truth of it."

I want no better proof than what my own
ears afforded me. I was behind the screen
last night whilst you talked with the colonel,
and I know now that you are his cast-off
mistress, and he is the father of your
child."

The term " cast off" put all Mrs. Lorrimer's
prudence to flight. There are women who

would rather be suspected of sinning than of
having no admirers, and of continuing to sin
than of having been compelled to relinquish,
it against their own free will. She jumped
up from her seat and advanced upon Lady
Muriel as though she would strike her, whilst
her green eyes seemed to fade into neutral
tints with rage.

Cast off" she repeated between her discoloured
teeth. " Cast off! That is what you
think, is it ? We will see which will be castoff
first. You — or myself."

So you own to it, you disgraceful woman,"
cried Muriel, as enraged as her guest. " Then
I have but one more thing to say to you —
leave ?ny house."

We will wait and see what Colonel de
Crespigny says to that. I am confident of
his opinion on the matter when he hears of
the indignity to which I have been subjected."


Then you must ascertain his opinions in

your own house, for I forbid you to remain in
mine."

You forbid me, Lady Muriel ? I have yet
to learn that this house is yours. I have
always understood that it belonged to Colonel
de Crespigny, and that he married you without
a farthing of your own— just as if you
had been a pauper."

Whether it is mine or his, Mrs. Lorrimer,
I am at least the mistress of it, and I command
you to leave it."

Then I refuse" replied the other doggedly,
as she sat down again in her chair and
set her teeth together like a bull-dog. Lady
Muriel was white as ashes and trembling like
a leaf. Her impetuous, passionate nature,
which had had so few opportunities hitherto
for indulgence, began to assert itself, and she
could have flown at her rival and strangled
her on the spot. But the force of education
and breeding restrained her, and she turned
and rang the bell instead. Not a word more

passed between them until Eosette appeared,
and then her mistress addressed her in set
tones.

Eosette, I wish to dress. I am going?
out. Open the door for Mrs. Lorrimer. She
is going downstairs."

This was a hint too broad for even Caroline
Lorrimer to refuse to take, and with the same
look of sullen obstinacy upon her face she
rose from her chair, and with a stiff bow
passed out of the room.

The lady's maid saw there was something
wrong between the ladies, but it was not her
business to comment upon it. She dressed
her mistress in a handsome walking costume
of velvet and fur, and received her directions
to order the carriage to be round in a quarter
of an hour.

I am going to spend the day with Lady
Ehylton, Eosette," she said in explanation of
her movements. " Tell the servants to see
that every attention is paid to Mrs. Lorrimer

during my absence, and if Colonel de Cres-pigmy
returns before I do give him the note I
have left on my writing-table."

She walked leisurely downstairs on the
thick velvet pile carpet, but not a sound of
her footfall reached the ears of Mrs. Lorrimer
(who, incensed and somewhat afraid, was shut
up in her own room), and the carriage containing
Lady Muriel de Crespigny had rolled
away in the direction of Oakley Court long
before her guest knew that she had left the
house. When her hostess did not appear at
the luncheon table, however, and she learnt
the reason of her absence, Mrs. Lorrimer
became really alarmed lest she had gone to
repeat the scandalous story to Lord and Lady
Ehylton, and awaited the return home of
Colonel de Crespigny with considerable trepidation
and fear.

When he arrived, a little before the dinner
hour, his first inquiry was for Lady Muriel.

Her ladyship has gone to Oakley Court

if you please, sir," replied the man who had
opened the door to him.

To Oakley Court ! " repeated the colonel.
But she will be back to dinner, I suppose."

"I think not, sir. Madame Eosette said
her ladyship had gone out for the day, and
left a note for you, if you please, sir."

"Tell Eosette to bring it to me in my study
at once," exclaimed de Crespigny, who felt
the shadow of an unknown dread creeping
over him.

As soon as the note was placed in his hands
he tore it open. Tt contained only these
words :

I know everything about you and Mrs.
Lorrimer. She refuses to quit the house, and
therefore I have done so. My father is the
proper person to resent the insult you have
put upon me. — Muriel."

As de Crespigny read the words his dark
face flushed purple. He had never been

placed in so awkward a predicament before,
or met with a woman so resolute to stand up
for her rights. He felt inclined to curse the
whole sex and himself for having had anything
to do with them. As soon as he could
collect his scattered senses, he rushed upstairs
to the boudoir with the note in his hand.
Arthur was, as usual, lolling on the sofa,
whilst his mother, yellow with anxiety, sat
before the fire, shading her face with a newspaper.


Send that lout out of the room," cried
the colonel fiercely as he entered it ; " here,
Arthur, cut at once, you're not wanted," and
as he slammed the door after him he turned
to Mrs. Lorrimer and, holding out the note,
asked :

What is the meaning of this ? "
You must tell me first what it is."
A letter from my wife to say that she
knows ' all about ' us — whatever that may
mean — and that as you have refused to leave

the house, she has been compelled to do so.
In God's name, what has happened ? "

A most disgraceful scene, in my opinion,"
returned Mrs. Lorrimer. " Lady Muriel summoned
me to her dressing-room this morning,
and insulted me grossly, after which she
ordered me to leave the house as if I had
been a discharged servant, and as I have
done nothing to merit such treatment I refused
to obey her until 1 had ascertained your
wishes on the subject. Then she ordered
her carriage and went out. I know nothing
more."

But how did she insult you ? What did
she say ? "

"That she hid herself behind the screen
in your study last evening, and listened to
our private conversation — the most disgraceful
admission I have ever heard from the lips
of any woman calling herself a lady."

De Crespigny's face became almost as livid
as her own.

But — good heavens ! you don't consider,
Caroline. Muriel must have heard everything !
You spoke of Arthur and our former connection,
and the allowance I made you. You
have let the cat out of the bag with a vengeance.
How often have I begged you to be
more cautious how you spoke — even to me
of the past ? You have put it out of my
power now even to remain your friend."

What do you mean ? "

Just what I say. Had you been contented
with my offices of friendship we might
have been happy together to our lives' end.
But I shall have no alternative now but to
give you up altogether."

Oh ! Arthur, you cannot do such a thing."

"I must do it. My father-in-law will be

down on me next for insulting his daughter

by bringing my mistress into the house. A

man could hardly be accused of a worse

action, and I cannot allow such a scandal

to become public property. Why the d — 1
vol. ii. 29

didn't you go when Lady Muriel told you todo
so ? Then she would have remained hereto
confront me, and I could have prevented
this story travelling to Oakley Court."

You would have had me turn out of your
house at the instigation of a girl like that?
Impossible ! You must be mad to think I
would do such a thing. Why should /
succumb to her ? "

Because she is my wife" roared the
colonel, " and the legal mistress of all I possess,
and no one can be admitted here of
whom she does not approve. I was a fool to
sanction your visit, but all would have gone
right enough except for your own folly. You
have gone too far, and taken too many liberties
— that's the truth of it — and you must
pay for your indiscretion. How long will it
take you to make your preparations to leave ?
I must follow Lady Muriel with as little delay
as possible to Oakley Court, but I will see
you safe to Bryanston Square first."

But to go at a moment's notice," gasped
Mrs. Lorrimer, " and during the absence of
Lady Muriel ; what on earth will the servants
think of such a proceeding ? "

D — n the servants," replied de Crespigny.
I am thinking of my wife and her parents,
and what they are saying at this moment
about us at Oakley Court. I hope to be able
to induce Lady Muriel to return home with
me to-night, and I certainly shall not do so
unless I can assure her that the coast is clear."

And so I am to be sacrificed in order
to gratify the caprice of a girl who will never
love you one half as well as I have done,"
exclaimed Mrs. Lorrimer, with her handkerchief
to her eyes.

You must hear reason," cried de Cres-pigmy.
"Whether Muriel loves me or not has
nothing to do with the question. She is my
wife, and you are "

The mother of your child ! " interposed

Mrs. Lorrimer solemnly.

29—2

Perhaps" said Colonel de Crespigny indifferently.


Arthur, do you mean to insinuate that
you can doubt "

What I mean to insinuate, my dear Caroline,
is that it is of no use your trying any
longer to trade on an old affair that was done
with years and years ago, and which I heartily
wish had never occurred. For your sake I
should have been glad to remain your friend,
but you see that [your imprudence has put
that out of the question. I am quite convinced
that before this unfortunate business
can be patched up I shall have to take an
oath never to see you again."

And you will keep it ? ' she inquired,
with a dangerous look in her eyes.



Colonel de Crespigny was about to say
Yes," but he saw the look and checked the
affirmative that was already on his tongue.

Well, not exactly, perhaps," he answered
hesitatingly, " but all communication on your

part between the two houses must be stopped
at once, and when I do see you it must be
in strict privacy, and away from Bryanston
Square. I will not give your servants a
handle for gossip any more."

Why not say at once that you intend
to desert us," she said with clenched
teeth.

Because that would be untrue. But come,
Caroline, we have no more time for bandying
words to-night. If you cannot make up your
mind to leave the house with me I must go
onto Oakley Court at once, in which case I
shall not bring my wife back here until I
have received the news of your departure.
Don't you think the first plan will breed the
lesser scandal ? "

And you will not even wait to have your
dinner ? "

How can I eat." he cried, " when your
cursed folly may have been the means of
upsetting all my domestic comfort ? '

She rose then, but before she left the room
to make her preparations, she gave him a
parting shot.

"You make a great deal more fuss over
it than Lady Muriel did." she said with a
sneer. " I fancy she was rather pleased than
otherwise to have an excuse to get away
from you for a few hours. But it is always
the way when a man marries a girl young
enough to be his daughter. He becomes a
dotard, and she — well, the more circumspectly
she behaves herself in public, the
more opportunity it gives her to indulge her
fancies on the sly."

Don't presume to say a word against my
wife," exclaimed the colonel angrily, though
he winced under her question.

CO

Oh, dear, no ; of course she is perfection
at present. It is early days to judge of her
fidelity, but only wait till she has become
as sick of you as you have of me and my
poor orphan child," cried Mrs. Lorrimer, as

she burst into a flood of angry tears and
rushed quickly from the room.

The colonel paced up and down the
boudoir rather uneasily until she joined him
again. He possessed a very jealous temperament
and (like most men who have lax
principles) he was always ready to believe
others to be as bad as himself. He thought
no woman was to be trusted further than
she could be seen, and Mrs. Lorrimer's
remark about Lady Muriel had .roused a
fear respecting her which he had never felt
before. When his friend reappeared, pale
and reproachful, to announce that she was
ready to take her leave, he bundled her
and her boy and her possessions into a cabas
if he longed to thrust the sight and
memory of them away from him for ever.
For the sake of appearances, however, he
accompanied them to Bryanston Square, and
after a cool and business-like parting on the
doorstep, drove off in the opposite direction

and made all the haste he could to Oakley
Court, where he arrived just as the family
party had separated after dinner.

A FLAG OF TRUCE.

De Crespigny's first inquiry on reaching the
Court was for the Earl of Ehylton. He
was afraid to meet his wife before he had
seen her father. He trusted to his old friend
to understand how such a contretemps as
the meeting of the two ladies might have
come to pass without any fault on his
own part, and to persuade Lady Muriel
to accept his promise that it should never
occur again. Still he looked rather crestfallen
as he was ushered into Lord Elton's
smoking-room, and the earl merely
nodded his head and received him in utter
silence.

This is a very awkward business," said
de Crespigny as the servant closed the door

upon him, " but I can assure you, Ehylton,
it was none of my doing."

What the deuce made you admit the
woman to Queen's Gate?' demanded the
earl, laying down his pipe. " Do you want
to insult my daughter, sir? If you must
keep up these foolish liaisons (though what
you can want to be running after every
petticoat you see at your age, I can't think),
why on earth don't you keep them to yourself?
Lady Muriel has blurted out the
story to the whole Court, and it'll go hard
but it will lead to a separation between
you. And after only six months' marriage !
It will be a nice scandal for the Society
papers."

My dear Ehylton, I beg of you to hear
my version of the story. Mrs. Lorrimer is
not at all what you imagine. I will tell
you the whole truth. Years ago (when I
was out in India and she was a passable-looking
woman) I confess there incas a flirtation

between us, and I believe it pleases
her to suppose there is a certain relationship
between myself and her son. But it is only
conjecture, and I have never encouraged the
idea. At present she is nothing to me (and
never will be anything) but a friend. If you
saw her, my dear Ehylton, she would bethe
best witness I could summon for my
defence. But you know how these old
worn-out amours clin to a man. I have
no doubt there is more than one lady in
London at the present moment who asks
an occasional favour from you on the score
of an old empressement, eh ? "

At this accusation the earl's hawk-like
features were seen to relax into a grim
smile, and de Crespigny saw that his cause
was won.

What can you expect with men of the
world like you and me, old boy," he continued,
with a playful dig in the side of his
friend. " We cannot quite turn into brutes,

however much the remembrance of past
favours may pall upon us. But my fault
lay, of course, in ever allowing Lady Muriel
to meet Mrs. Lorrimer ; but that was done,
unfortunately, at the picnic I gave to Maidenhead,
and before I had any assurance
that your daughter would do me the honour
to become my wife."

But Muriel tells me, de Crespigny, that
this lady has been staying with her son in
your house, and holding secret interviews
with you (one of which my daughter overheard),
when she has alluded openly to your
continued interest in her."

But against my will, my dear lord, I
most solemnly assure you," interposed the
colonel. " Unfortunately she dict intrude
herself on my [privacy last evening and
made some references to the past which I
deeply lament my wife should have listened
to, but I have done my best to remedy the
evil. As soon as I received the note Muriel

left for me, I took Mrs. Lorrimer and her
son back to their own home and made her
plainly understand that all communication
between us must be entirely broken off for
the future."

Yes, that is all very well and the least
thing you could have done under the circumstances;
but I fear it will not go very
far with Muriel. You see, de Crespigny,
she is very young and with no knowledge
of the world or the state of society, and this
discovery has shocked her beyond measure.
She was like a wild creature on her arrival
here, and Lady Ehylton had the greatest
difficulty to prevent her telling the story to
the whole house. She seems to consider she
has been so wronged and insulted by your
marrying her whilst that woman exists, that
it is not possible you can live together again,
and I am afraid you will find it difficult to
alter her opinion."

"That is the worst of such young girls,"

said the colonel moodily. " They are too
innocent. They expect impossibilities. Such
men as they desire to marry are not to be
found in Christendom."

Perhaps so ; but you will allow, de
Crespigny, that' your code of morals has
always been rather an elastic one, and I did
hope when you married Muriel that (if you
found it impossible to give up your natural
propensity for general love-making) you
would at least keep your peccadilloes strictly
to yourself."

But I do, my dear Ehylton," exclaimed
the colonel eagerly, " that is to say, I should
were there anything to conceal, but I call
Heaven to witness "

Look here, de Crespigny," interrupted
his companion, "I am not a religious man,
and I daresay you have the best possible
intentions, but I would rather not hear you
swear anything upon the subject. All you
have to deal with now is your wife's disposition

towards yourself. If you can win
her forgiveness for this outrage, I shall be
only too glad, for I am naturally anxious
to avoid a scandal. And I may tell you
for your comfort that my wife is on your
side, and doing all she can to persuade
Muriel to return to your protection. In
fact, we have had quite an argument upon
the subject. Now, what do you propose todo?"


I want to see my wife."

Shall we send for her here then ? I
am afraid that if you ask her leave first
she will refuse it. Although so young, she
is very strong-willed and resolute, and you
had better take her unawares."

Just as you please, my lord," replied
de Crespigny moodily.

The earl Rang the bell, and desired his
private attendant to inform Lady Muriel
that he wished to speak to her in his own
room.

And you need not mention that I am
not alone, Jessop," he added confidentially.

The valet bowed and retired, and in a few
minutes Muriel entered the apartment. Her
husband had partially concealed his tall
figure behind a curtain, and for the moment
she believed her father to be the only
person there.

Did you send for me, papa ? ' she commenced,
in a melancholy voice ; but then
catching sight of the colonel she drew backwards,
and added, with considerable dignity,
"Pardon me, I did not understand you had
a visitor. I have no wish whatever to speak
to Colonel de Crespigny."

But the earl had already put out his hand
to detain her.

Muriel — as your father, and with a
right to your obedience — I order you to stay
until you hear what your husband has to
say to you."

Nothing he can say will have the power

#

to alter my opinion, or my feelings," replied
the girl proudly.

But you will at least listen whilst I
speak to you ? " interposed de Crespigny.
Surely I have a claim on your obedience,
Muriel, as well as your father ? "

"I don't acknowledge it, sir," she answered.
"Marriage is a contract, and when one of
the parties to a contract breaks his engagement,
it becomes null and void. You have
neglected to honour me, and I see no good
reason why I should obey you."

The two men gazed at her in astonishment.
She appeared to have gained ten years in
manner and expression since the day before.

"If that is your opinion," said the colonel
humbly, " we will say no more about it.
We will waive the duties of marriage altogether,
and speak only of those of love.
And as your lover, my darling, let me implore
you to overlook the first fault of which

I have been guilty towards you."

vol. ii. 30

My lover ! " echoed Muriel scornfully.
Would my lover have brought his mistress
and his child into my very house to insult
me by their presence ? It is unlucky you
should have chosen that name for yourself.
It reminds me of the lover I have lost —
the only lover I ever had — the man I was
fool enough to give up for you. Oh ! papa,
do you believe that Athol Fergusson would
have outraged my feelings like this?'

Hush ! hush ! my dear," said Lord Elton
uneasily ; " that is all past and gone,
and much better not alluded to."

And such tender reminiscences cannot
be supposed to bear much interest for me"
interposed de Crespigny, with flaming eyes.

And how much interest do you suppose
your tender reminiscences have borne for
mew retorted Lady Muriel. "What do you
think / have suffered since I learnt the
truth, and knew who it was you had introduced
to me as a friend ? '

Muriel," said the earl, as lie laid his
hand upon that of the angry girl, "neither
de Crespigny nor I deny that you have just
cause of complaint, and that he is to blame
for having placed you in so awkward a
dilemma. But you are viewing the whole
matter in a distorted light. Your husband
assures me that this lady, Mrs. Lorrimer, is
nothing to him at the present time, nor ever
will be. He deeply deplores the weakness
which led him to invite her to the house,
but he promises it shall never happen again,
and for the future he will treat her as a
stranger. And under the circumstances, I
really don't see how he can do more''

You are right, papa ! He cannot restore
my faith in him, nor in any of his assertions,
and I have clone with him," cried Muriel
passionately, " and I refuse to go home anymore."


But, my dear, that is nonsense. You

must go. You are bound as a wife to obey

30—2

your husband's orders, and lie has come to
the Court to take you back to Queen's Gate.
And so be a good girl, and kiss and make
it up again. No marriage would last twelvemonths
if such trifles as these were taken
au grand series"

Muriel ! my darling ! Say you forgive
me," exclaimed de Crespigny (though his
eyes were still bloodshot from the remembrance
of what she had said concerning
Athol Fergusson), "I am so deeply humiliated
by what has passed. It was all my fault,
dearest. I am a brute not to have remembered
how innocent you are of the ways of
the world, and how terrible such a discovery
might prove to you. But had it not been
a, thing of the past, I would not have presumed
to bring her into your presence —
you, the only woman I have ever loved in
the whole course of my wretched life."

His face was glowing, his eves moist with
repentant dew, the hands which he clasped

about her were hot and trembling with
agitation. It was by such means as these
that de Crespigny worked upon women and
moulded them to his dominant will. There
was a magnetism in his look and touch
and voice, that they could not resist, and
which controlled them against their sense of
right. Even as he pressed his suit on Muriel,
her frame trembled, and the angry light
died out of her eyes, to be replaced by a
look of forgiveness, though she knew he
had no claim to be forgiven.

"It is such an indignity — such a humiliation,"
she murmured, " even our very servants
know that this woman has a claim
on you."

" She has no claim on me, my dearest.
She is no more to me than the lowest
scullion in our house. There was something
between us ages ago, but I thought
she had forgotten it as completely as I
have. She took me as much by surprise

last night as she did you. I have been
explaining all this to your father. And
when I returned home this evening to receive
your note, and learn the cause of
it, I sent Mrs. Lorrimer back to Bryanston
Square at once and made her understand
that she had cut herself adrift from me forever."


"But when all is said and done, I am
only her successor," said Muriel bitterly ;
"you call yourself my lover, but you said
the same to her before you did to me."

At this the colonel could hardly repress
a smile, to remember to how many women
he had said it before her, but he preserved
a discreet silence on that point.

I don't think that I ever did say it,"
he replied tenaciously ; " but if I did,
what then? You are my wife — the mistress
of my house and heart — the only woman who
has a right to issue an order concerning it,
or me — and I love you from the bottom of

my soul. Will you not pardon me this once,
and I give my sacred word of honour that
such a thing shall never occur again."

He folded the girl in his arms as he spoke
and covered her with passionate caresses,
which she had no power to resist. It is very
sweet to be loved, even if one does not love
very warmly in return. The French proverb
says, " there is always one who kisses, and
one who holds out the cheek " — and during
Lady Muriel's married life, she had never
done more than allow herself to be passively
embraced. She did so now. The tears were
still standing on her cheeks that had risen
at the remembrance of Athol Fergusson, and
she felt nothing but repugnance for the man
who had deceived her, yet he was her husband,
and for that reason she submitted to
his endearments. After all, she had not long
held to her first resolution never to return
to him. Lady Ehylton had become vehement
at the prospect of such an alternative,

and told her step-daughter in very plain and
somewhat coarse language what she thought
of her folly, in even thinking of such a things
represented the inconvenience, the misery,
and the scandal of the proceeding, in such
vivid colours, that Lady Muriel shrunk from
the idea of what might lie before her, and

CD 7

decided that she could not endure it. She
could never feel any trust or confidence in
her husband again, but whatever she might
have to bear, should be borne under the aegis
of his protection. And so, she cried a little
from the very feeling of impotency that pervaded
her, and hesitated to give her answer,
though she knew well enough what the end
of it would be.

Say you forgive me, Muriel. Don't
make me miserable for evermore," pleaded
the colonel in passionate tones.

I dare not say, I will not forgive. We
all have so much need of forgiveness," she
whispered in reply ; " but you have made

me very unhappy, and I am afraid it will bea
long time before I get over it."

But the addendum troubled the colonel
very little. His wife had consented to return
to Queen's Gate, and prevent an open
scandal, and that was all that he desired.

Only, there is one condition," continued
Muriel, " you must let me take my sister
Cecil Seton back with me, and you must
promise to leave me to myself, and to her,
until I have become a little more reconciled
to this terrible discovery. Give me time to
recover myself, and to look my marriage with
you in the face, and then, I will try to do
my duty, as if all this had never happened."

Colonel de Crespigny didn't like the conditions
imposed upon him, but Lord Ehylton
seconded them, so he was compelled to submit,
and after a little further conversation,
Lady Muriel slipped upstairs to put on her
things, and acquaint Cecil with her decision,
and the gentlemen went into the drawing-room

to Lady Ehylton. The countess was
extravagant in her felicitations at the happy
turn affairs had taken. She had been aghast
the prospect of Lady Muriel de Crespigny
taking up a permanent abode at Oakley
Court. She would have been no incumbrance
to them, for her marriage settlement
was amply sufficient to supply all her needs,
but her presence would have been a continual
foil to her step-mother and a bar on
her amusements.

Cecil was very different. She had been so
curbed and brow-beaten that she hardly
dared say her life was her own, far less make
an objection to anything she did not approve
of. But Lady Muriel was too frank and outspoken
to please the countess, and the idea of
having her as a perpetual guest had been a
very unpleasant one. So the relief to Lady
Ehylton's mind was immense, and she gave
vent to it in noisy compliments.

11 And so, dear Lady Muriel was actually

going to run away with her Cecil. Well,
perhaps it was best. Young people loved
each other's company. And how delighted
she was to hear that the silly child had become
reasonable at last. Ah ! Colonel de
Crespigny had been too good to her. That
was very evident. He mustn't continue to
indulge her in that manner, or he might have
trouble in the future. But all was well that
ended well. And here was dear Muriel,
ready dressed to start. What, going so soon,
darling ? It's not yet ten o'clock. Ah,
well ! you're in a hurry to get home I
daresay. Lovers' quarrels require a lot of
making up. Au revoir I and don't spoil my
poor little Cecil, or I won't take her back
again. God bless you all ! "

And talking " nineteen to the dozen " Lady
Ehylton let them at last go on their way.
Only the earl, as he placed his daughter in
the carriage which was to take her home,
held her hand for a moment and asked :

"Are you quite satisfied, my dear?"
I am satisfied to try again, papa," she
answered gravely ; and then the carriage
drove off, and she sat in it silent and thoughtful,
with her hand fast locked in Cecil's.

END OE VOLUME II.

March, 1889.

F. V. WHITE & Co's

LIST OF

PUBLICATIONS.

NOVELS AT ALL LIBRARIES IN TOWN AND COUNTRY.

BEAUTIFUL JIM.

By JOHN STRANGE WINTER, Author of "Booties' Baby," " Mignon's
Husband," " Booties' Children," &c. 2 Vols.
11 A story that has the merits of movement and liveliness." — Academy.
'Beautiful Jim' is as fresh and engaging a work as this charming writer ha
produced, while the structure of its plot has a peculiar strength which adds much to
the effect of the story as a whole. — Scotsman."

PUEPLE AND FINE LINEN.

By Mrs. ALEXANDER FRASER. 3 Vols.

LONG ODDS.

By HAWLEY SMART. 3 Vols.

LANDING A Prize.

By Mrs. EDWARD Renard, Author of " The Girl in the Brown Habit."
3 Vols.

ON Circumstantial EVIDENCE.

By FLORENCE MARRYAT. Author of " My Sister the Actress." 3 Vols.

THIS WICKED WOELD.

By Mrs. H. LOVETT CAMERON, Author of "In a Grass Country," "A
North Country Maid," &c. 3 Vols. (2nd Edition.)

HEE LAST Ein.

By the Honble. Mrs. WALTER R. D. FORBES (Eveline Michell Farwell), Author
of " Fingers and Fortune," " The Man in Cords," &c. 2 Vols.

Severed TIES.

By Mrs. HENRY WYLDE. 3 Vols.

A Dangerous Experiment.

By Lady DUFFUS HARDY, Author of " Paul Wynter's Sacrifice," "In Sight
of Land, "«fec. 3 Vols.

A Distracting GUEST.

By Mrs. ROBERT JOCELYN. 2 Vols.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31. Southampton Street, Strand.

THE WORKS OF JOHN STRANGE WINTER,

UNIFORM IN STYLE AND PRICE.
Each in Paper Covers, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6. At all Booksellers & Bookstalls.

MY POOE DICK.

(4th Edition.) Illustrated by Maurice Greiffenhagen.

BOOTLES' CHILDREN.

(5th Edition.) Illustrated by J. BERNARD Partridges

Strange Winter is never more thoroughly at home than when delineating
the characters of children, and everyone will be delighted with the dignified Made
and the quaint Pearl. The book is mainly occupied with the love affairs of Terry
(the soldier servant who appears in many of the preceding books), but the children
buzz in and out of its pages much as they would come in and out of a room in real
life, pervading and brightening the house in which they dwell." — Leicester Daily
Post,

THE CONFESSIONS OF A PUBLISHER.

The much discussed question of the relations between a publisher and his clients
furnishes Mr. John Strange Winter with material for one of the brightest tales of the
season. Abel Drinkwater's autobiography is written from a humorous point of
view ; yet here, as elsewhere, ' many a true word is spoken in jest,' and in the conversations
of the publisher and his too ingenuous son facts come to light that are
worthy of the attention of aspirants to literary fame"— Morning Post.

MIGNON'S HUSBAND. («* Edition.)

It is a capital love story, full of high spirits, and written in a dashing style that
will charm the most melancholy of readers into hearty enjoyment of its fun." —
Scotsman.

The name of John Strange Winter is enough to tell the reader that ' Mignon's
Husband ' is a brisk, lively tale, with a little pathos but more fun." — Graphic.

THAT IMP. (7th Edition.)

"Barrack life is abandoned for the nonce, and the author of 'Booties' Baby'
introduces readers to a country home replete with every comfort, and containing
men and women whose acquaintanceship we can only regret can never blossom into
friendship"— Whitehall Review.

This charming little book is bright and breezy, and has the ring of supreme
truth about it." — Vanity Fair.

MIGNON'S SECRET, emu Edition.)

In ' Mignon's Secret ' Mr. Winter has supplied a continuation to the never-to-be-forgotten
'Booties' Baby.' . . . The story is gracefully and touchingly
told"— John Bull.

A clever little story. . . . It is lightly touched, and has somewhat a tragic
termination. It is easy to imagine we have not seen the last of ' Mignon ' yet by a
long way." — Punch.

-■

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

THE WORKS OF JOHN STRANGE WINTER-fCWfn«*dj.

ON MAECH. (6th Edition.)

"This short story is characterised by Mr. Winter's customary truth in detail
humour, and pathos." — Academy.

"By publishing ' On March,' Mr. J. S. Winter has added another little gem to his
well-known store of regimental sketches. The story is written with humour and a
deal of feeling." — Aiiny and Navy Gazette.

IN QUAETEES. (7th Edition.)

' In Quarters ' is one of those rattling tales of soldiers' life which the public have
learned to thoroughly appreciate." — The Graphic.

"The author of 'Booties' Baby' gives us here another story of military life, which
few have better described"— British Quarterly Review.

AEMY SOCIETY : Life in a Garrison Town.

Cloth, 6/- ; also in Picture Boards, 2/-. (8th Edition.)

This discursive story, dealing with life in a garrison town, is full of the pleasant
go' and movement which has distinguished ' Booties' Baby,' ' Pluck,' or in fact a
majority of some half-dozen novelettes which the author has submitted to the eyes
of railway bookstall patronisers." — Daily Telegraph.

GAEEISON GOSSIP, Gathered in BlankhamptoD.

(A Sequel to " ARMY Society") Cloth, 2/6 ; also in Picture Boards, 2/-.
(4th Edition.)

' Garrison Gossip ' may fairly rank with 'Cavalry Life,' and the various other
books with which Mr. Winter lasso agreeably beguiled our leisure hours. "saturday
Review.

The novel fully maintains the reputation which its author has been fortunate
enough to gain in a special line of his own." — Graphic.

A SIEGE BABY , Cloth, 2/6 ; Picture boards, 2, -

The story which gives its title to this new sheaf of stories by the popular author
of ' Booties' Baby ' is a very touching and pathetic one. . . . Amongst the other
stories, the one entitled, ' Out of the Mists ' is, perhaps, the best written, although
the tale of true love it embodies conies to a most melancholy ending"— County
Gentleman.

BEAUTIFUL JIM. cloth gift, 2/6.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

MRS. EDWARD Renard's SPORTING NOVELS,

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

A Crack COUNTY, cloth gi it, 2/6 .

THE Girl IN THE Brown HABIT.

Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-. (4th Edition.)

' Nell Fitzgerald ' is an irreproachable heroine, full of gentle womanliness, and
rich in all virtues that make her kind estimable.— Daily Telegraph.

There is a wonderful freshness about this novel which cannot fail to charm even
those who have never ridden to hounds." — Court Journal.

KILLED IN THE OPEN.

Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards. 2/-. (3rd Edition.)

'Killed in the Open ' is a book that cannot fail to excite interest. Its tone is
thoroughly healthy." — Illustrated London News.

"It is in truth a very good love story set in a framework of hounds and horses,
but one that could be read with pleasure independently of any such attractions." —
Fortnightly Review.

' Killed in the Open ' is a very superior sort of hunting novel indeed"— Graphic,

Straight AS A DIE.

Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-. (3rd Edition.)

If you like sporting novels I can recommend to you Mrs. Kennard's ' Straight asa
Die.' "truth.

"Mrs. Edward Kennard can write, and write well. Her descriptions of country
life are many of them admirable, and her story will be read to the end. Some of the
love passages between Dulcie and Bob are full of beauty and pathos." — pectoral
World.

A Real GOOD THING.

Cloth gilt, 2/6. (3rd Edition.)

There are some good country scenes and country spins in ' A Beat Good Thing.'
The hero, poor old Hopkins, is a strong character"— Academy.

TWILIGHT TALES. (Illustrated.) Cloth gilt, 2/6. . •

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
In Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6. The Second Edition of

A GLOEIOUS GALLOP.

j\ v. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

HAWLEY SMART'S SPORTING NOVELS.

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

THE MASTEE OF EATHKELLY.

Cloth gilt, 2/6.

THE OUTSIDER

Cloth gilt, 2/6; Picture Boards, 2/-. (4th Edition.)

"Since the deaths of Surtees and Whyte Melville, Captain Hawley Smart has
worthily held his place at the head of those writers who devote themselves to sporting
subjects . . . his readers know precisely what to expect when they take up
one of his books, and they are never disappointed"— Hatvrduy Review.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
Each in Paper Cover, cloth 1/6.

THE LAST COUP.

THE PEIDE OF THE PADDOCK.

CLEVEELY WON.

THE HONOURABLE MRS. FETHERSTONHAUGH S

NEW NOVEL.

Cloth, 2/6.

DEEAM FACES.

By the Author of "Kilcorran," " Robin Adair, " &c.

BRET HARTE'S NEW NOVEL.

Cloth, 2/6.

THE CEUSADE OF THE Excelsior.

By the Author of " The Luck of B oaring Camp," &c

As a sketcher of the life of the Far West he is still unrivalled. . . . Mr. Bred
Harte's readers will greatly enjoy the amusing account of the travellers' life at the
Mexican outpost, and the very clever way in which at last the castaways are extricated.
In this story the author shows a faculty of invention and a literary tact so
noteworthy that we may even venture to expect another romance as superior in permanent
value to the delightful crusade of the ' Excelsior * as the latter is to its
lengthy predecessor 'Gabriel Conroy.' " — Academy.

SIR RANDAL ROBERTS' NEW SPORTING NOVEL.

Cloth gilt, 2/6.

CUEB AND SNAFFLE.

By the Author of "In the Shires." &c.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

MRS. H. LOVETT CAMERON'S NOVELS.

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

IN A GEASS COUNTEY.

(A Story of Love and Sport.) (7th Edition. ) Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-.

We turn with pleasure to the green covers of ' In a Grass Country.' The three
heroines are charming each in her own way. It is well sketched, full of character,
with sharp observations of men and women — not too hard on anybody — a clear story
carefully written, and therefore easily read. . . . recommended"— Punch.

When the days are short and there is an hour or two to be disposed of indoors
before dressing time, one is glad to be able to recommend a good and amusing novel.
• In a Grass Country ' may be said to come under this description." — Saturday
Review.

A NOETH COUNTEY MAID.

(3rd Edition.) Cloth, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, ?/-.

A DEAD PAST.

(3rd Edition.) Cloth, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-.

A DEVOUT Love. own**

Without doubt, one of Mrs. Loveth Cameron's best and prettiest stories. The
character of Bose de Brefour is admirably drawn. . . . Mrs. Loveth Cameron
deserves great credit for having made a good woman interesting." — Ladies' Pictorial.

THE COST OF A LIE. cioth,2 /6 .

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
Each in Paper Cover, cloth 1/6.

NECK OE NOTHING.

. it is pleasant, easy reading, and the characters act in a way one can
understand." — Saturday Review.

. is really very bright and readable from first to last"— Academy.

. is a capital story of hunting and love-making combined. . . .
Nothing prettier or more natural has been written for sometime than the scene sin
which Lucy Netterville betrays her cherished secret with such happy results"—
Pictorial World.

THE MADNESS OF MAEEIAGE.

Mrs. Loveth Cameron's books are never devoid of merit. . . . The interest in
Daisy Carew's fate is well sustained. . . . " — Morning Post.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

MRS. ALEXANDER'S NOVELS.

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

A FALSE SCENT.

Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6.

BY WOMAN'S WIT.

(3rd Edition.) Cloth 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-.

Mrs. Alexander deserves credit for keeping her readers mystified for some time in
the matter of Mrs. Euthven's rubies. . . How the widow's wit discovers the
treachery of the man she loves in spite of it ; how she avenges herself, and the terrible
straits Nora is involved in for a season, when she has accepted the wrong man
because the right man has been slow to declare himself ; and how all ends well for
her and her gentle stepmother, not to mention the old shinar whom she weds, is
written in Mrs. Alexander's book, and very readable"— Athenaeum.

In Mrs. Alexander's tale
Much art she clearly shows
In keeping dark the mystery
Until the story's close ! "punch.

MONA'S CHOICE, amy.

'• Mrs. Alexander has written a novel quite worthy of her"— Athenaeum,
". . . it is pleasant and unaffected"— Saturday Review.

"Rite's" NEW NOVELS.

Each in Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6. At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

THE Mystery OF A TUEKISH BATH.

(2nd Edition.)

Every fresh piece of work which ' Rita ' publishes, shows an increase of power,
and a decided advance on the last. The booklet contains some very smart writing
indeed"— Whitehall Review.

' The Mystery of a Turkish Bath ' has a well-wrought out plot of slightly sensational
interest, and is written with this author's well-known grace of stvle.*'—
Scotsman.

THE SEVENTH DEEAM. A Romance.

. is a powerful and interesting study in weird effects of fiction. It will
hold the close attention of its readers from first to last, and keep them entertained
with changing sensations of wonder"— Scotsman.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

POPULAR WORKS AT ALL BOOKSELLERS AND

BOOKSTALLS.

A NEW ONE SHILLING NOVEL,

OR IN CLOTH, 1/6.

THE MYSTERY ofBELGRAVE SQUARE

By CURTIS YORKE,

Author of "Hush,"&c.

By SAMUEL LAING.

A MODERN Zoroaster.

By the Author of " Modern Science and Modern Thought,"
A Sporting Quixote," &c.

1 Vol. Cloth, 2/6. (Second Edition.)

By W. H. DAVENPORT ADAMS.

CELEBRATED ENGLISHWOMEN of the VICTORIAN ERA.

By the Author of " England on the Sea," &c.
1 Vol. Cloth, 2/6.

By PERCY THORPE.

HISTORY OF JAPAN.

1 Vol. Cloth, 3/6.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

t (

SELECT" NOVELS.

Crown 8vo., Cloth, 2s. 8d. each.
AT ALL BOOKSELLERS AND BOOKSTALLS.

BY FLORENCE MARRYAT.

1 THE HEIE Presumptive.

2 THE HEAET OF JANE Warner.

3 UNDEE THE LILIES AND EOSES.

4 HEE WOELD AGAINST A LIE.

5 FACING THE FOOTLIGHTS.

BY ANNIE THOMAS (Mrs. Pender Cudlip).

6 HEE SUCCESS.

7 Friends AND Lovers.

8 Juniper

9 KATE Gallant.

10 ALLEETON Towers.

BY LADY CONSTANCE HOWARD.

11 MATED WITH A CLOWN.

12 MOLLIE Darling.

13 ONLY A VILLAGE MAIDEN.

BY MRS. HOTJSTOUN,

Author of " Recommended to Mercy."

14 Barbara's Warning.

BY MRS. ALEXANDER FRASER.

15 A Professional BEAUTY.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

SELECT" NOVELS-continued).
BY HARRIETT JAY.

16 A MAEEIAGE OF CONVENIENCE.

BY IZA DTJFFTJS HARDY.

17 LOVE, Honour, AND OBEY.

18 NOT EASILY JEALOUS.

19 ONLY A LOVE STOEY.

BY JEAN Middlemost.

20 POISONED AEEOWS

BY MRS. H. LOVETT CAMERON.

21 A NOETH COUNTEY MAID.

22 A DEAD PAST.

23 THE COST OF A LIE.

BY LADY VIOLET GREVILLE.

24 KEITH'S WIFE.

BY NELLIE Fortescue HARRISON,

Author of " So Euns My Dream."

25 FOE ONE MAN'S PLEASUEE.

BY EDMUND Leather.

26 THE ACTOE's WIFE.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

a

POPULAR" NOVELS.

Picture Boards, 2s. each.
AT ALL BOOKSELLERS AND BOOKSTALLS.

1 GARRISON GOSSIP. By John Strange

Winter, Author of " A Siege Baby," " In
Quarters," " On March," " Mignon's Secret,"
"That Imp," "Mignon's Husband," &c.
(Fourth Edition.)

2 AEMY SOCIETY; Or, Life in a Garrison

Town. By the same Author. (Eighth Edition.)

3 THE OUTSIDER By Hawley Smart,

Author of "The Pride of the Paddock,"
"Cleverly Won," "Bad to Beat," "Lightly
Lost," &c.

4 BY WOMAN'S WIT. By Mrs. Alexander,

Author of " Mona's Choice," " The Wooing O't,"
The Executor," " The Admiral's Ward," &c

5 THE Girl IN THE BROWN HABIT. By

Mrs. Edward Kennard, Author of " Straight as a
Die," " Twilight Tales," " A Real Good Thing,"
A Glorious Gallop," " A Crack County," &c.

6 KILLED IN THE OPEN. By the same

Author.

7 STRAIGHT AS A DIE. By Mrs. Edward

Kennard, Author of " A Real Good Thing," &c.

8 IN A GRASS COUNTRY: A Story of

Love and Sport. By Mrs. H. Loveth Cameron,
(Seventh Edition.)

9 A NORTH COUNTRY MAID. Bv the

same Author.
10 A DEAD PAST. By the same Author.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

**

POPULAR" NOVELS-(Co««n««f).

11 POISONED AEEOWS. By Jean Middle-mass,

Author of " Wild Greorgie," " Dandy."

12 ONLY A LOVE STOEY. By Iza Duffus

Hardy, Author of " Love, Honour, and Obey."

13 THE HEAET OF JANE WAENEE. By

Florence Marryat, Author of "Facing the
Footlights," " Her World against a Lie," " The
Heir Presumptive," " My own Child," &c.

14 UNDEE THE LILIES AND EOSES. By

the same Author.

15 KATE VALLIANT. By Annie Thomas

(Mrs. Pender Cudlip), Author of " Her Success."

16 KEITH'S WIFE. By Lady Violet Greville,

Author of " Zoe : A Girl of Genius,"
Creatures of Clay."

17 MATED WITH A CLOWN. By Lady

Constance Howard, Author of " Only a Village
Maiden," " Mollie Darling."

18 NOT EASILY JEALOUS. By Iza Duffus

Hardy, Author of " Love, Honour, and Obey,"
&c.

19 FOE ONE MAN'S PLEASUEE. By

Nellie Fortescue Harrison, Author of "So
Euns My Dream," &c.

20 THE CEUSADE OF " THE Excelsior."

By Bred Harte.

21 A SIEGE BABY. By John Strange

Winter.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31 Southampton Street, Strand.

ONE SHILLING NOVELS.

In Paper Cover.
THOSE MARKED * CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED IN CLOTH (1/6.)

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

f MY POOE DICK. (Fourth Edition.)
By John Strange Winter, Author of * Booties'
Baby," " Houp La," &c. (With Illustrations by
Maurice Greiffenhagen.)

2 *BOOTLES' CHILDEEN. (Fifth Edition.)

By the same Author. (With Illustrations by
J. Bernard Partridge.)

3 *THE CONFESSIONS OF A Published.

By the same Author.

4 *MIGNON'S HUSBAND. (Eighth Edition.)

By the same Author.

5 *THAT IMP. (Seventh Edition.) By the

same Author.

6 *MIGNON'S SECEET. (Eleventh Edition.)

By the same Author.

7 *0N MAECH. (Sixth Edition.) By the

same Author.

8 *IN QUAETEES. (Seventh Edition.) By

the same Author.

9 *A GLOEIOUS GALLOP. (Second Edition.)

By Mrs. Edward Kennard, Author of
The Girl in the Brown Habit," « A Real Good
Thing," &c

10 *THE MYSTEEY OF A TUEKISH BATH.

(Second Edition.) By " Rita," Author of " Dame
Burden," " Sheba," " My Lord Conceit," &c.

11 *THE SEVENTH DEEAM. A Romance.

By the same Author.

12 *THE PEIDE OF THE PADDOCK. By

Hawley Smart, Author of "The Outsider,"
The Master of Rathkelly," &c.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

ONE SHILLING HOVELS-continued).

13 *Cleverly WON. By Hawley (Smart

14 *A MILLIONAIRE OF EOUGH AND

Ready. By Bred Harte, Author of " The
Luck of Roaring Camp," &c.

15 *DEVIL'S FOED. By Bred Harte.

16 *NECK OE NOTHING : A Hunting Story.

By Mrs. H. Loveth Cameron, Author of " Ina
Grass Country," &c. (second Edition.)

17 *THE MADNESS OF MAEEIAGE. By

Mrs. H. Loveth Cameron.

18 *THE FASHION OF THIS WOELD. By

Helen Mathers, Author of " Comin' thro' the
Eye," &c.

19 *A PLAY WEIGHT'S DAUGHTEE. By

Mrs. Annie Edwardes, Author of " Archie
Lovell," &c.

20 NO MEDIUM. By Annie Thomas (Mrs.

Pender Cudlip), Author of " Her Success," &c.

21 A MOMENT OF MADNESS. By Florence

Marryat, Author of " My Sister the Actress,"
o&c

22 SAVED IN TIME. By Mrs. Houston,

Author of " Recommended to Mercy," &c.

23 Every INCH A WOMAN. By Mrs.

Houston.

24 A PAUPEE PEEE. By Major Arthur

Griffiths, Author of " Fast and Loose," &c.

25 *THE WESTHOEPE MYSTEEY. By Iza

Duffus Hardy, Author of " Love, Honour, and
Obey," &c.

26 *Stories OF "THE WOELD." (Reprinted

by Permission.)

27 TWO BLACK PEAELS. By Marie Condor,

Author of " A Morganatic Marriage," " Beauty's
Queen," &c.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

AT ALL NEWSAGENTS, BOOKSELLERS, AND BOOKSTALLS.

^onbon §>ociefp:

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE. PRICE Is.

ESTABLISHED 1862.

"Rite's " New Three Volume Novel, " SHEBA," commenced in
the OCTOBER NUMBER, and SARAH Titles Novel,
"DUCHESS FRANCES," in the NOVEMBER NUMBER.

'SOCIAL ECHOES," edited by Mrs. Humphrey, appear each
Month ; also Articles by well-known Writers.

"There is a marked elevation in the literary character of 'London Society'
since it changed hands." — Evening Standard.

. is an excellent number, full of the * light and amusing literature ' it professes
to supply." — Literary World.

. this attractive magazine . . . remarkable for variety of subject and
excellence of its light literature." — Public Opinion.

' London Society ' deserves great credit for the evenness with which it keeps upto
a high standard of excellence in its particular line, that, namely, of wholesome
fiction and magazine miscellanea." — Pictorial World.

This gayest of the magazines shows no sign of failing to preserve the tone it has
taken from the first. It is above all entertaining, and goes in largely for good
fiction by well-known authors. "life.

. this favourite magazine . . . " — Society Herald.

the CHRISTMAS NUMBER of

jHottbott ^ociefg

illustrated),
At all Reagents, Booksellers, and Bookstalls. Price 1/-

Containing CONTRIBUTIONS BY THE FOLLOWING AUTHORS :—

JOHN STRANGLE "WINTER,

MRS. CASHEL Holy— FLORENCE MARRYAT— THE AUTHOR OF "MOLLY
BAWN"— THE COUNTESS DE BREMONT— THE AUTHOR OF " WHO IS
SYLVIA ?-mrs. H. LOVETT CAMERON— JESSIE SALE LLOYD—
W. W. FENN— THE AUTHOR OF "MISS MOLLY "sand ELLA CURTIS
(Shirley Smith).

At all Booksellers, Vol. LIV. of LONDON SOCIETY, 780 pages,
handsomely bound in cloth gilt, gilt edges, 10s. 6d. Also Cases
for Binding, 2s. each.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

<£±

1&

fe

mm,

PR*

*8.

fe

-i-^i

5ft

>«

3 0112 049086983

Evidence

FLORENCE-MARRYAT.

^

BY

Florence MAKEYAT,

author op

"love's conflict," " my sister the actress," "gentleman; and
courtier," " a crown op shame," etc., etc.

JN THREE VOL Uses.

vol ITT.

LONDON :

F. V. WHITE & CO.,
31, SOUTHAMPTON Street, Stand, W.C.

1889.

KELLY AND CO., MIDDLE MILL, KINGSTON-ON-TUAMES ;

AND GATE STREET, LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS, Malcontents



CHAP. PAGE

I.— The First Teaix 1

Ii—" Presto ! Change ! " . . . 25

III. — A Woman or the T^'oeld . . .54

IV. — Repulsed. . 88

V. — A Dangerous Confidante . . . 112

VI. — In the Lion's Den 163

VII.— Tapped . . . . . .179

Viii—" Charity begins at Home " . 109

TX.— The Shining Path 23.3

Now Ready, the Seventh Edition of
"ARMY SOCIETY." By JOHN Strange Winter, Author of
Booties' Baby." Cloth gilt, 6j. : also, picture boards, 2s.

Also, Now Ready, in Cloth Gilt, 2s. (id. each.

GARRISON GOSSIP. Gathered in Blankhampton. By JOHN

Strange Winter. Also picture boards, 2s.
A SIEGE BABY. By the same Action. Also picture boards, 2s.
BEAUTIFUL JIM. By the same AUTHOR.
IN THE SHIRES. By SIR RANDAL H. ROBERTS, Bart.
THE GIRL IN THE BROWN HABIT. A Sporting Novel. By

Mrs. Edward Kennard. Also picture boards, 2s.
BY WOMAN'S WIT. By Mrs. ALEXANDER, Author of "The

Wooing O't." Also picture boards, 2s.
MONA'S CHOICE. By the same AUTHOR.
KILLED IN THE OPEN. By Mrs. EDWARD Renard. Also

picture boards, 2s.
IN A GRASS COUNTRY. By Mrs. H. Loveth-Cameron.

Also picture boards, 2*.
A DEVOUT LOVER. By the same AUTHOR,
THE Cast OP A LIE. By the same AUTHOR.
THE OUTSIDER. Bj Hawley Smart. Also picture boards, 2s.
THE MASTER OF RATHKELLY. By the same AUTHOR.
STRAIGHT AS A DIE. By Mrs. Edward Kennard. Also

picture boards, 2s.
TWILIGHT TALES. By Mrs. EDWARD Krnxard. Illustrated.
SHE CAME BETWEEN. By Mrs. ALEXANDER Fraser.
THE CRUSADE OF THE 'EXCELSIOR." By BRET H ARTE. Also

picture boards, 2*.
CURB AND SNAFFLE. By Sir Sandal H. ROBERTS, Bart.
A REAL GOOD THING. By Mrs. EDWARD Renard. Also picture

boards, 2.?.
A CRACK COUNTY. By the same AUTHOR.
DREAM FACES. By THE Hobble. Mrs. Fetherstonhaugh.
THE Hobble. MRS. Verger. By the Author of "Molly

Sawn," &c.

F. V. WHITE & CO. ,
31, Southampton Street, Strand, London, W.C

I

7^

CHAPTER I.

THE First TRAIN.

As soon as Colonel de Crespigny found

himself fairly on the road home, with his

wife, he recovered his usual exuberant spirits,

and behaved as if no cause of annoyance had

ever risen between them. With his small

bump of morality, and very large bump of

self-esteem, it was difficult to persuade him

that any woman could be really offended with

him for such a ridiculous trifle as a lapse

from virtue. He laughed, and talked, and

rallied the two girls sitting opposite to him

upon every possible subject, until Cecil Seton

(who was always nervous in his presence)

shrank into her corner of the carriage, and
VOL. in. 31

Lady Muriel (who had preserved silence ev( r

since she started from Oakley Court) closed

her eyes and pretended to go to sleep. But

sleep, was the last thing likely to visit her.

perplexed and agitated brain. She had given

in — as many wives have done before, and

since — because she dreaded the scandal of an

open rupture, and the breaking up of her

newly-acquired home, but her heart had not,

and never would, forgive the insult which

had been offered to her. When, at last, the

carriage drew up before the stately portals

of the mansion in Queen's Gate, she entered

the house, a different woman from what she

had been when she passed out of it, twelve

hours before. She knew now what she had

to expect from her husband, that he did

not believe in love, or virtue, or honour,

as she understood the words, and that deceit

was the chief stock-in-trade with which he

carried on his dealings with the other sex.

He had called her his "darling," and his

dearest," and " the only woman lie had ever
loved," several times since their apparent
reconciliation, but the words had lost all
meaning for her, and she wished he would
drop them altogether. In fact, his conduct
had revolted her. She had never cared for
him, as she should have done for her husband.
She had been persuaded to marry him
from the dread of poverty, and the unpleasant
position in which she found herself at
Oakley Court, and somewhat also, from the
force of his own passionate pleading, and
evident admiration of her beauty. But she
had never esteemed him from the first day of
their marriage, and now she utterly despised
him. She walked straight through the hall
into the dining-room and stood there before
the fire, with her proud young head erect, and
her furs drawn tightly around her, as though
she were in a strange place, and not her own
home. The colonel tried to disengage her

wrappings, but she only drew them closer.

31—2

You will take off that mantle, my darling.
It will feel too warm in this room," he
argued.

No ! thank you. I am going straight to
my own. James, send Eosette to me."

But you will take a little refreshment
before you retire, Muriel, if it is only a glass
of wine, after your long drive. Do my
dearest."

I am not in want of it, and it is easily
sent for, if required. Come, Cissy dear, I am
sure you are tired and in need of rest. We
will go and have a long sleep together.
Good-night, Arthur."

And accompanied by her maid and her
step-sister. Lady Muriel de Crespigny swept
out of the room, leavings the colonel in a very
crestfallen and bewildered condition. He had
had his cone given him in the politest
manner possible, but he didn't understand it.
It was incredible to him, that any woman
could hold out against his kisses and promises

of amendment. It was absurd, ridiculous, to
make such a mountain out of a molehill, such
a fuss over an unavoidable disagreement that
might have happened to any one. But after
cursing Caroline Lorrimer for having brought
about such an unpleasant state of affairs, and
his own ill-luck for being found out, the
colonel retired to his apartment, perfectly
convinced that a night's reflection was all that
was required to bring his young wife to her
senses, and make her see the folly of going
against her own interests. But, strange to
say, solitude and separation seemed to have
quite a contrary effect upon Lady Muriel de
Crespigny, and as soon as she was beyond the
influence of her husband's animal magnetism,
his conduct assumed its proper proportions in
her eyes, and she saw what a wreck she had
made of her life almost before it had begun.
Cecil Seton was hardly a fit confidante for the
troubles of a married woman, but she was
several years older than her step-sister, and

ardently attached to her, and Muriel found it
an infinite relief to tell her the whole story,
and sob out her indignation and her misery
in her arms. " And it was for this'' she
concluded, " that I gave up my poor Athol,
who was all truth and goodness, and would
have died rather than deceive me. I can
remember how particular he was to speak the
truth exactly as it occurred, in all things, and
how often he reproved me for exaggeration,
or for telling a fib. Oh, Cissy, I feel this is a
judgment on me. I should never have broken
off my engagement with Athol Fergusson
because he is the only man I have ever loved.
I was a poor, pitiful coward to let papa
persuade me to give him up, just because he
was poor, and to send him back the ring,
which I had promised again, and again, to
wear to mv life's end. And now — he thinks
I am a bad, faithless girl, and all I have
got in exchange for him, is this. Oh, Cissy !
my heart will break."

Cecil Seton, who was much more practical
than her sister, saw at once, that indulging in
such dangerous reminiscences, could only do
Lady Muriel harm.

"Hush! dear," she said. "Don't talk of
that now, and try not to think of it. It is
of no use, Muriel. Colonel de Crespigny is
your husband, and the other one can never
be, and so it is wicked to cry about him."

But, I can't help it — I can't help it.
This horrid business seems to have brought it
all back again. Oh ! my poor, poor Athol ! "
But at this juncture, Cecil put her hand
quickly over her sister's mouth. Agnes
Prudhomme had appeared at the dressing-room
door, to ask if her mistress required
anything further from her that night.

What is it ? " cried Muriel, as soon as she
could free herself.

"It is Agnes, dear," replied Miss SetoUj
cautiously ; " shall I dismiss her ? "

No ! No ! I don't mind Agnes," said

Muriel, imprudently. " She knows all about
Atliol and me. She took him my last farewells
when I left Eevranches, didn't you,
Agnes ? "

I did, miladi, and I thought it would
have broken his heart to hear that you were
gone."

Ah ! come here, Agnes," exclaimed her
mistress, holding out her arms. " Come close
to me. It will do me good to feel you here,
for you loved him almost as much as I did."

''Oh, Muriel! be cautious," cried Cecil
Seton, but the Belgian girl had already sunk
on her knees by the fauteuil and wound her
arms about Muriel's form.

Mademoiselle need have no fear," she said,
looking up at Miss Seton with her dark eyes.
*' 3Iiladi and I have known each other from
little children, and whatever miladi may say
will be sacred to me."

And Agnes knows all about this horrid
woman Mrs. Lorrimer, too," interposed Muriel ;

she lived with her before she came here,
and found out the whole truth. The colonel
put her in the situation, and it was almost as
great an insult to her as he has given tome."



Ah ! mon Dieu'' exclaimed Agnes, shrugging
her shoulders, " but it was a situation.
Who could have helped finding out all about
cette femme inflames when monsieur le colonel
was there almost every day. But when I
felt sure of the truth I said, ' Let me go.
Take me out of this house which it is a
wickedness to live in, and let me serve
Mademoiselle Muriel, who is good and pure
as a little child.' But I never thought that
Madame Lorrimer would have the effrontery
to follow us here. Oh! the shame and disgrace
of it. I was dying to tell rniladi all
from the first day of her visit."

Never mind, Agnes. She will never
trouble either of us again. That is quite
certain. But it is a sorry discovery to make

when one has been but six months married.
1 don't think my poor Athol would have
treated me so. Do you, Agnes ? ''

Agnes Tufted her hands and eyes in deprecation
of such an idea.

Monsieur Fergusson do such a thing.
Ah ! miladi, you know him too well for that.
He was the very soul of honour, and virtue,
and all that is best. Monsieur Fergusson was
an angel. How often used Joseph to tell me
of his goodness and his benevolence. All
the world loved him. Ah ! pauvre monsieur,
his heart would be sad to see miladi weep
like this."

I am weeping for him, Agnes, and for
my own folly in giving him up. How I
wish I was back at Eevranches, and had
never come to England at all. It was a
stupid old place, but we were very happy
there, and peaceful, and no one had the
power to insult us."

Ah ! it was a heaven! ij place," cried

Agnes, " and I often think of it with regret.
But cheer up, miladi. There are happier
days in store for you. Marriage does not
make our Ives, remember, and with miladi's
wealth and opportunities, she can have a
thousand distractions to help her shake off
these little annoyances."

Yes, you may be right, Agnes ; but at
present I can only think how mad I was, to
throw away the happiness that was within
my reach in exchange for a life like this —
and all for the sake of a little money. But
it is no use grieving. Go to bed now. You
must be tired, and I want nothing more."

Ah ! if I could but console miladi T

You cannot. No one can console me,
but I know you wish me well, and I
am grateful for your kindness. Good-night,
Agnes. I shall never lose my interest in
you. You are the one link left with my
dear old life at Eevranches."

The girl rose from her knees, and kissing

her mistress's hand (apparently with the utmost
respect) quitted the apartment. But as
soon as she was gone, Cecil Seton exclaimed
in tones that were unusually excited for her
quiet disposition :

Oh, Muriel ! Why do you speak so openly
to that girl ? Are you sure she is trustworthy.
I don't like that cunning look in
her eyes, nor the extreme familiarity in her
manner when she addresses sou."

That is nothing. She is naturally of an
excitable disposition. I don't think there
is any harm in Agnes. I used not to like
her very much at Eevranches, because her
temper was so hasty, but 1 daresay she had
a great deal to try her, and I have never
seen anything of it since she came here."

But you talked to her of that gentleman,
Mr. Fergusson, just as you did to me. Are
you sure she won't go and repeat it ? "

I didn't say anvthini]^ but what she has
heard already," replied Muriel languidly ;

she has known Athol as long as I have,
and I used to tell her all about our engagement.
Poor darling ! he never liked her much,
I remember ; but then I fancy she had a penchant
for him herself, and that made him a
little shy of her."

And might make her a little malicious.
Don't forget that, Muriel."

"I think you are very hard on her," replied
her step-sister fretfully. " Is no one to
be allowed to pity me for falling into this
terrible plight ? "

Oh ! Muriel, darling," cried Cecil, kissing
her fondly, " / pity you, and love you before
all the world. But don't you see, dear, that
Colonel de Crespigny is likely (should any
of your regrets for Mr. Fergusson reach his
ears) to add jealousy to his other virtues, and
that would not increase the comfort of your
home."

"But I told him about Athol before we
were married, Cecil."

Then he is all the more likely to be on
the qui vive to find out something against
.yon, should the subject be revived in his
hearing. He would be charmed (in all probability)
to find a stone to throw at you, in
return for your resentment against him. You
made it public, you see, Muriel, and that is
an error which men seldom forgive. And if I
mistake not, Colonel de Crespigny harbours
a very revengeful disposition. Be careful,
darling, and don't trust your secrets to Agnes
Prudliomme. You may call me hard, but I
don't think she looks like an honest and
truthful girl."

Lady Muriel sighed and answered nothing,
but it seemed sad to her, to be warned
against the only creature, to whom she could
talk with any comfort of her lost lover.
■ Agnes Prudhomme meanwhile, creeping
along the carpeted corridor on her way to
bed, caught sight of the colonel, standing at
his dressing-room door, which was slightly

ajar. He had fancied her light footfall to be
that of his wife, and had opened his door in
anticipation of her paying him a visit. When
his eye fell on Agnes, he looked disappointed,
but said pleasantly all the same :

"So it is you, little one. Good-night."
The girl did not answer his salutation with
a courtesy and pass on as might have been
expected, but stopping short by his side,
turned her handsome bold face up to his
own.

Well, mon clier^' she replied coolly, " and
who did you think it was ? Miladi Muriel
come to ask your forgiveness ? She is not
in the humour for that, / can tell you. She
is too busy abusing you at this moment by
her dressing-room fire."

'' How do you know that, Agnes ? "
"Because I have just left her and Miss
Seton, and heard all they said."

Come in here for a moment and let me
have the benefit of your experience," said de

Crespigny holding the door open. Agnes
passed through without hesitation, and seated
herself on a chair. "And now," continued
the colonel, "what does my lady wife say
of me ? "

Mon Dieu. It would take from now till
tomorrow morning to tell you that. She
has so much to say. Of course, it is all
about this Lorrimer affair. Bah ! but she is
foolish to concern herself about an old pig
like that — a woman of the past century.
One might as well become jealous of one's
grandmother."

And aren't you jealous of her ? " said de
Crespigny, amused at the girl's impertinence.

Agnes's dark eyes opened to their widest
extent.

"I? Monsieur me moque. I am not jealous
even of miladi herself. She is handsome.
Yes, but all men do not care for fair
women ; and I know that I, myself, have
twice her chic''

"You are right there, Agnes' exclaimed
the colonel, laughing at her audacity. " You
are a deuced pretty little girl, and you have
more chic than all the rest put together. But
am I never to be forgiven for having introduced
poor Mrs. Lorrimer to Lady Muriel
de Crespigny ? "

"I think it will be some time first," replied
Agnes, nodding her head oracularly.
You see it has, unfortunately, revived an
old memory in militis breast, and she can
do nothing now but sit and cry for Monsieur
Fergusson."

An oath escaped from between de Cres-pigmy's
clenched teeth ; but he professed
ignorance on the subject.

And who is Monsieur Fergusson, pray ? "'

Ah! don't make pretence to me. I have

spoken of him to you before. The young man

at Eevranches, of whom Mademoiselle Muriel

was so fond. Every night — every night,

without fail, she would go out to meet him
VOL. ni. 32

on the Eamparts, and they would kiss and
make love, and talk of the time when they
should be married ; and, parbleu ! mon cher,
in my opinion, tlie}^ ought to have been
married. What is the good of a woman
when all her heart is gone out like that, to
another man ? "

Colonel de Crespigny ground his teeth
together as he listened to these words. He
had heard of the Eevranches lover from Miss
Rutherford at the commencement of his intimacy
with Lady Muriel, but had thought
nothing of it then. A boy and girl love
affair. What man or woman had not had
a dozen such before settling down to life?
Even when Muriel had spoken to him timidly',
before their marriage, of her first engagement
he had not stopped to consider if it
would have any effect upon their future happiness.
In his arrogant self-conceit he regarded
all younger men as not worthy of
comparison with himself, and would have

spurned the idea of any rivalry between them.
But that was before he had married Lady
Muriel, and when his passion for her was
so strong that he would have wrested her
from the arms of a dozen men, if need be, in
order to make her his own. But a man thinks
very differently six months after marriage
from what he does before. Then the love mist
has cleared away from before his eyes, and
he can see things as they really are ; and the
cropping up of the subject of the Eevranches
lover was sufficient to disturb the colonel's
peace of mind and make him angry. What
relationship did this past story bear to the
episode of Caroline Lorrimer ? and why
should Lady Muriel commence to weep for
Athol Fergusson directly she found out she
had been deceived by himself ? His conscience
answered the question plainly enough,
but he refused to believe it without further
evidence.

Agnes," he exclaimed, seizing her by

32—2

the wrist, " you must tell me everything you
know concerning Lady Muriel and this fellow
at Eevranches. Who was he ? Where
is he now? and how long did they know
each other ? I insist upon hearing it."

"J/a foi, monsieur'' replied the girl, disengaging
herself and rubbing her arm, " you
need not pinch so hard if you are anxious.
And what can I say more than you know
already ? His name is Athol Fergusson, and
he is now away, rniladi says, in India ; and
they were engaged for a whole year before
you fetched her over to England. "

"•' And — and — were they very much attached
to each other, Agnes ? " he demanded
presently.

Attached! Ah, monsieur, they lived only
for each other," cried Agnes, turning up
her eyes. " They were inseparable. And I
thought Monsieur Ferguson would have killed
himself when he lost Mademoiselle Muriel.
But what would you have ? Where there

is no money one cannot afford to love. Maladies
done the wise thing to marry well.
But for love — bah. 1 love monsieur twice
as well as miladi does."

But she shall keep faithful to me,
whether she loves me or not, or I will kill
lier' exclaimed the colonel fiercely.

Agnes Prudhomme recognized the motive
that prompted the words, and smiled inwardly
to recognize the weapon by which
she might turn him at her will. Colonel
de Crespigny was, as Cecil Seton had suggested,
of a most jealous and revengeful disposition,
and always ready to credit other
people with the vices he was conscious of
possessing himself. He was faithless and
deceitful, a man of lax principles and looser
practice, and therefore he believed everybody
must be the same. Especially did he
credit women with the smallest possible
amount of virtue. He spoke of them to
his own sex in the most brutal and lowering

terms, and was ready at any time to cast a
slur upon their character. His was a disposition
therefore inclined to suspect the
worst, and be intensely jealous at the merest
trifle. Agnes perceived her advantage, and
continued to pour oil upon the flame.

Ah, monsieur must not talk in that dreadful
strain. The poor young man is in India.
Bah ! how could miladi be otherwise than
faithful ? 'Tis a pity though that she cannot
dismiss him altogether from her mind ;
for, after all, I suppose people do sometimes
return, even from India."

He had better not come within the reach
of my fist when he does," cried de Crespigny,
*' or I'll teach him to come after my wife.
And she had best be careful, too. / know
what women are ; the whole lot of them not
to be trusted farther than they can be seen.
But, bv Jove! the woman who tries to deceive
me will suffer for it, if I take her life and
my own too."

• Agnes burst out laughing.

Ciel what a storm. One would think I
had come to tell you I had left poor Monsieur
Fergusson in militis dressing-room. But I
am afraid you have been deceiving me mon
cher, and that you have really a greater
interest in miladi than you pretend."

No, no, Agnes ; I assure you I have not.
I can see that she is handsome and spirituelle ;
but she is so cold and unloving that I
really don't care about her a bit. Only
one must keep up appearances, you know,
and since she is my wife, I shall look after
her."

"You are right there," replied Agnes,
rising, " and if I mistake not, you will find
your work cut out for you. Bon soir, monsieur'"



He kissed her as she approached him, and
she accepted the salute as a matter of course.
It was evidently not the first that had passed
between them.

*' I shall expect you to help me, Agnes,
as much as lies in your power, and let me
know everything you may see or hear.
Miladi will find that (whoever she may weep
for) I know how to take care of my own."

He closed the door softly as he spoke,
and Agnes Prudhomme went to her room,
well satisfied to have laid the first train of
gunpowder that might hereafter rase the
house to its foundations.

-^^^^^

Presto ! CHANGE !

j>

Bobby Holmes (one of the numerous arrows
in the quiver of the Protestant clergyman at
Eevranches, who had been shot from Belgium
into a London bank to look after himself as
early as it was possible) was walking down
Regent Street one day at the close of the
London season, admiring the fashionable
crowd around him, the beautiful thoroughbred
women lounging in their luxurious
carriages, drawn by still more beautiful and
thoroughbred horses, when his attention was
attracted towards two ladies who were gazing
into a shop window a few paces in advance
of him.

It Z5," thought Bobby to himself, " and
yet it cant be. It's impossible'"

But his curiosity was so excited, he determined
to gratify it, and so he halted before
another shop window, from which he directed
sidelong glances at the objects of his interest.
There was nothing remarkable about either
of them to strike the ordinary spectator.
They were apparently a mother and daughter,
sauntering leisurely down the street (as ladies
love to do) and commenting on all the novelties
exposed for sale. They were both
dressed in slight mourning, the elder of the
two in a rich black costume profusely
trimmed with black lace and glittering allover
with beads, and the younger in a combination
of soft grey and white, with feathers
of the same tint in the hat that shaded her
brow. Bobby could not catch a good view
of their faces, but something in their manner
and general appearance riveted him to the
spot, until the elder lady turned round and
convinced him that he had not been mistaken.
It was Mrs. Fergusson and her

daughter Helen he had been looking at, but
how on earth they came to be in London,
and attired like women of fashion and means,
made his head dizzy to think of:

"Mrs. Fergusson!" he exclaimed, advancing
upon her with an outstretched hand and
smile of welcome. " Do my eyes really not
deceive me ? I have been watching you and
Helen for the last minute, for I thought it
was impossible it could be yourselves. How
long have you been in England ? "

But Mrs. Fergusson did not appear to have
any sympathy with his surprise. She • drew
her tall and rather angular figure up to its
full height as she put her gloved hand in
his and answered in a simpering tone,
"Eeally, Mr. Holmes, I do not see the impossibility.
Why should we shut ourselves
up in Eevranches all our lives, any more
than yourself? Helen, my dear, this is Mr.
Eobert Holmes ! You must remember him
in Eevranches."

Bobby's face fell. He had always been
Bobby " with the Ferguson, as with everybody
else in the old Belgian town, and the
title of " Mr. Holmes " placed a gulf between
them which he was too much of a gentleman
not to recognize.

I trust you have not quite forgotten
me," he said, shaking hands with Helen,
'' but when I come to think of it, it must be
more than a year since we met. But to
meet you here, quite took my breath away.
My father has never mentioned your removal
to me. Do you stay in England long? And
dear old Athol ! How is he getting on in
Malta ? He promised to write to me, but
he has never done so. Lazy fellow ! "

It is indeed evident, Mr. Holmes, that
you have heard nothing about us," replied
Mrs. Fergusson with a self-satisfied air, as
they recommenced their stroll together, " or
of the change in my dear son's circumstances.
He is not in Malta. He returned

home a month ago. His uncle, Sir Robert,
is dead, and Athol naturally came into the
baronetcy."

And he is Srr Athol Ferguson ! " cried
Bobby, with his mouth open.

He is Sir Athol," repeated the lady
suavely, " and the circumstance obliged us
to return to England. Not that it was
absolutely necessary for my son to leave
the army, but his first thought has ever
been for his mother and sisters, and he was
most anxious to see us settled in our proper
position at Bromieshall."

"Where is that?" asked ignorant Bobby.

"It is the name of my son's estate, near
Eichmond in Surrey ; but of course ive shall
reside in it as long as he remains unmarried."


"Ah! I expect that will soon come to
pass now," exclaimed Bobby.

His remark did not seem to please his
companion, who replied frigidly :

I beg to differ from you, Mr. Holmes.
Sir Athol is not at all likely to make any
mistake of that sort. He has too deep a
sense of what he owes to us, to put us to
any inconvenience in order to gratify a
passing fancy. I should hope he would not
dream of marrying for many years to come."

And what is his address, Mrs. Fergusson?
I should dearly like to see him again. Does
he live at Bromieshall with you ? "

Not entirely, though we see him very
often. He has his own rooms in town.
Helen, my dear, have you one of your
brother's cards ? You mio^ht sive it to Mr.
Holmes."

And may I ask after my old friend
Alice, Mrs. Fergusson? She was always so
jolly and good to me."

Ace is now Madame la Baronne
JD'Aragon,'^ was the measured reply. " She
was married last Christmas and is living in
Brussels, where her husband has a splendid

house in the Quarter Louise. We will tell
her of your kind remembrances when next
we write."

Poor Bobby felt quite crestfallen. Everybody
he asked after seemed to have suddenly
risen to a height quite above his head, where
it was presumption in him even to think of
them. His thoughts flew back to the old
times in Eevranches, when he had helped
Helen to clean her paint brushes and Alice
to patch up her music, and the two girls
had fagged all day, giving music and drawing
lessons, whilst their half-fed mother remained
at home darning their stockings and
repairing their linen by the meagre light of
a petiole lamp. Yes ! times were altered with
them — there was no doubt of that — but
the intelligence had come so suddenly upon
him, he could hardly realize it. And as he
pondered, another thought rose in his mind
of some one who had been much associated
with the Fergusson family in those days.

Do you know," he said suddenly, " it
does seem so strange when I think of it, hut
last night I met another of my old Eevranches
friends — quite by accident, and for the first
time, too — and it surprised me almost as
much as our meeting has done to-day."

And who was that ? " inquired Mrs.
Fergusson pleasantly.

"■ Lady Muriel de Crespigny ! You remember
little Muriel Damer, that old Atliol
used to be so fond of, don't you ? My
faith! how he used to rave about that girl
when we were alone together ! I didn't
know anything about love in those days, and
thought him a regular lunatic, but he was
iron on her! There's no doubt of that. I
wonder if he has forgotten her yet."

Mr. Holmes ! What are you speaking of? "
interposed his listener hurriedly. 'surely
you forget that Lady Muriel is a married

woman."

"Oh, no, I don't, Mrs. Fergusson, and I

don't think her husband would let any man
forget it either. They say he's as jealous
of her as a Turk. But, oh, she is lovely !
You can have no idea what a beautiful
woman she has developed into. There was
a crowd round her all the evening. She
recognized me at once, though, and welcomed
me with her old sweet smile, but I
fancied, somehow, that I reminded her too
painfully of poor old Athol (her eyes looked
so distressed when she glanced at me), and
so I cut the interview shorter than I should
otherwise have done. But, by George ! she
is a beauty, and no mistake ; and they say
her husband. Colonel de Crespigny, is as
rich as Croesus. Wish I had his luck ! "

Mr. Holmes," interposed Mrs. Fergusson
anxiously, " promise me you won't say anything
of this to Sir Athol. Don't mention
Lady Muriel's name before him, please. We
have dropped the subject by mutual consent,
and it is better not alluded to."
VOL. m. 33

Oil ! certainly if it is your wish," replied
Bobby, " but if Sir Atliol goes into
society lie is bound to meet her. She is to
be seen everywhere. What is your reason?
Does he still fret after her ? "

Most decidedly not'' said Mrs. Fergusson
with asperity ; " I should hope he has more
sense than to regret the loss of an empty-headed
frivolous girl like that. Besides,
there never was anything serious between
them, and Sir Athol has assured me (since
his return home) that he has no regrets
whatever on the subject. And therefore I
beg — I especially beg of you, Mr. Holmes,
not to be the means of reviving it."

But if Athol has ceased to care for her
why should you mind his speaking of her ? "
demanded the pertinacious Bobby.

"Because I believe her to have been a
had girl," replied his hearer vehemently,
"and she has probably developed into a
bad wife. London society is at a very low

ebb at present, Mr. Holmes, and the less
young men enter it the better. Muriel
Darner was a bold and artful girl. She tried
to inveigle my poor Athol into an engagement
against the wishes of his friends, and
had it not been for the interposition of
Providence, which separated them, there is
no knowing how it would have ended. And
I should be very sorry to have to answer
for the reputation of Lady Muriel de Cres-pigmy
now, or to see Sir Athol brought within
the circle of her influence."

But Bobby Holmes (although very modest
and unassuming) was too much of a man
to hear a woman needlessly abused without
sticking up for her. He felt and looked
quite fierce as he replied :

Come, come, Mrs. Fergusson ! you are

going too far. You have no right to speak

of Lady Muriel de Crespigny in such terms.

Why, it's slander. I know several of her

acquaintances, and I have never heard 



thing but good of her, so it would be more
generous (in my opinion) to hope that if
the girl had the faults which you describe,
the woman may have amended them."

To this appeal Mrs. Fergusson vouchsafed
no direct reply.

'* I beg your pardon," she said haughtily,
but our carriage is waiting for us at this
corner. Helen, my dear, I shall not walk
any further now. We will drive back to
Peter Robinson's. Good morning, Mr.
Holmes," and with almost imperceptible bows
the two ladies got into their carriage and
drove away.

A most impertinent young man," exclaimed
Mrs. Fergusson indignantly, as soon
as she was out of hearing ; " fancy his having
the assurance to tell me what I said was
slander.' But those Holmes were all ill-bred.
Mind, Helen, I won't have him invited
down to Bromieshall. He doesn't enter my
house."

What are we to do if Athol brings him
down? He was always very partial to the
Holmes' boys," said Helen.

We must invent an excuse for not receiving
him," returned her mother, " for I
will not submit to be talked to in that way.
And his knowing that horrid Lady Muriel
makes him doubly objectionable. We shall
have her at Bromieshall next. It is not to be
endured."

Meanwhile Bobby stood on the pavement
staring after the neatly-appointed carriage
which had whisked his old friends out of
sight. The rencontre was like a fairy dream
to him. Was it really true that he had
been talking to Helen and Mrs. Fergusson,
clad in silks and satins, and holding their
heads as high as if they had never known
such a place as Eevranches, with all the
disagreement of poverty ? As he mused
over the past interview his hand roved
to his waistcoat pocket, and lighted on

Athol's card. He took it out and read the
inscription :

Sir AtJiol Fergusson.

"313, Piccadilly, W,

Bromieshall"

Dear old Athol I " he thought, '* I wonder
if good fortune has changed his heart,
as it has theirs. No, it is impossible. He
was too noble and genuine for that. These
women never had hearts. I can remember
Mrs. Fergusson's peevishness and Helen's
tart remarks, even in Eevranches. Alice
was the only one of the home lot that was
worth anything, and I was awfully spooney
on Alice. Bless her smiling face ! But I
will go and see old Ali at once. If he
is the same good fellow I have always believed
him to be he will know how to welcome
a true friend. Let me see, 313, Piccadilly.
Why, it is not a stone's throw away.
I shall be there in five minutes."

And in effect, five minutes after, Bobby
Holmes had drawn up before the chambers
in Piccadilly. He was just about to ring
the bell, when the door opened and a gentleman
came out. It was Sir Athol Fergusson
himself. Bobby knew him in a moment.
His year's absence in Malta had but slightly
browned his naturally fair complexion, and
the serious dark blue eyes were still looking
forth upon the world, from beneath the
shelter of their long black lashes, with a
solemn searching gaze, as if they were looking
for something which they had never
found. The sensitive mouth, with its clean-cut
lips, was shaded now but not hidden by
-a small moustache, and the youthful figure
was attired in the height of the fashion, as
became such a wealthy young man. And
yet about everything that surrounded Athol
Fergusson — from the expression of his
features to the quiet style of his clothing —
there hung an indescribable something a kind

of premature sobriety, that showed that
suffering had moulded the man before his
time. But as his eyes lit upon Bobby Holmes'
round face and sandy whiskers, their expression
changed, and a soft genial light
came into them, like the moon passing from
behind a summer cloud.

My dear Bobby," he exclaimed in his
quiet genial voice, " were you coming to
see nef How glad I am to meet you again.
How did you fid me out?"

He had closed the door behind him, but
he turned again now, and fixed his latchkey
in the lock.

I met Mrs. and Miss Ferguson in Resent
Street just now, and they gave me your address,"
said Bobby. " But, Athol, you were
fjoinfT out. Don't let me interfere with your
plans. Another day will do just as well forme.


But it won't do as well for me, Bobby,"
returned Athol, with his sweet smile. "I

was only going out for want of something
better to do, and I would greatly prefer
talking to you at home. Come in and see
my den, and we will have a cigar together."

He threw the door open as he spoke, and
they passed into the hall, which led to his
chambers. A front room with an inlaid oak
flooring, strewn with Persian rugs, seemed
to be fitted as an ante-chamber to the rest
of the suite. A luxurious divan occupied
one side of the apartment, and a cottage
piano stood across the wall at the other,
whilst behind it, to fill up the recess, a large
palm-tree fern reared its glossy branches.
The windows that looked upon the street
were of stained glass, and heavy velvet curtains
separated, it from the next chamber.
But beyond a couple of small tables and a
loun£fin(y-chair, there was no other furniture
in the room. Bobby appeared to regard
its arrangement with surprise.

I call this my smoking-room." said Athol,

"but it is a useful place to put visitors whom
I am not prepared to receive. You see that
I have my piano here. It sounds so much
better in an empty room. I still retain that
horrible habit of humming and strummincr
to myself, but fortunately" — with a sigh —
there is no one here to be worried by it,
except my valet, and he's paid to be worried.
I banished my clock here too," he
continued, pointing to a magnificent Louis
XIII. set of clock and candelabra that ornamented
the black marble mantelshelf. " A
clock ticking in my private room is a nuisance
I cannot endure. Sometimes I have thought
it would drive me mad''

He paused for a moment as if some sad
recollection had come over him, but shook
it oil with an effort.

Come along, Bobby ! " he exclaimed
cheerfully, as he pushed aside the heavy
portiere, " this is my sanctum, where I spend
my mornings over the papers and the coffee-pot,

and if ever you feel inclined to look in
upon me, old fellow, you may be sure of a
hearty welcome."

He turned and grasped his friend's hand ashe
spoke, and a mist — that could scarcely be
called moisture — rose to his blue eyes with
the warmth of his greeting.

Oh, Athol," replied Bobby, " or Sir
Athol, as I suppose I should say "

No such thing, Bobby. I'll knock you
down if you ever attempt to call me by anything
but the old name. Why, I wonder
how many games of football and cricket you
and I have had together in the olden days —
those dear old days, Bobby, at Eevranches ? "

Yes, we had a high time of it on occasions
there, but I'm sure you've no need to
regret it, Athol. I have exchanged my
school-life for a worse drudgery, but you
were born with a silver spoon in your mouth,
and no mistake — a good big spoon too."

I suppose most people would say the

same," said Athol, " but money has no power
to buy happiness, Bobby. However, don't
think me ungrateful. Since my poor uncle
was destined to go, I am very thankful I was
his heir, for my mother's and sister's sake, but
it was almost as great a surprise to me as to
you. I knew, of course, after my little cousin
died that I had a chance of coming into the
title, but I looked upon it as a very uncertain
and remote one ; and to tell you the truth, I
didn't seem to care a straw about it. When
the news did come, it was very sudden, and I
was not half so elated as I thought I should
be. However, my dear mother and sister are
provided for, and that is all I care about. I
think they are just as happy as they can be,
down at Bromiesliall, which will always be
their home."

Until you marry, Mrs. Fergusson told
me," said Bobby slily.

I shall never marry," replied Athol
quietly. "And now, Bobby, what will you

take — coffee and curator, or brandy and
soda ? We'll arrange these little matters first,
and then settle down for a good long talk."

"Well, Athol, brandies and sodas being
rather familiar drinks to me, and coffee and
curator being luxuries, I think I'll choose
the latter," said Bobby.

All right, old man ; please yourself and
you'll please me," replied Athol, as he rang
the bell and ordered their wants to be attended
to.

"My bedroom leads out of this room,"
continued Athol. " Come and see how
convenient it is, with my bath room and
dressing-room adjoining. I jumped into these
chambers on the death of Lord Murray
Seville, and thought myself uncommonly
lucky to secure them. They were decorated
and fitted up expressly for him, and I
bought most of the furniture from his executors.
It saved me the trouble of choosing
for myself, you see."

Bobby glanced from the silver and glass
and ivory that decorated the toilet-table to
the luxurious appointments of the bed and
bath room, and sighed a genuine sigh of
envious admiration.

Well, Athol, old fellow, if you're not
contented and happy with all this, why you
never will be — that's all I can say. Why,
man alive, I don't wonder at your saying
you'll never marry. I should just think myself
in Paradise in such a nest."

And yet Adam could not be contented
without an Eve ! Short-sighted fool," said
Athol, with the nearest approach to sarcasm
his voice could manage.

I agree with you," replied Bobby, " for
women are awful nuisances when all's said
and done, and I bet there are not many
married men who don't wish themselves unmarried
again. If your wife's ugly and
stupid, you're ashamed of her, and if she's
beautiful and witty, you're bound to be

jealous of her. There's Colonel de Cres-pigmy,
for example "

Sir Athol flushed darkly red.

Whom did you say ? " he asked quickly.

Bobby bit his lip. He had let the cat
out of the bag ; but he couldn't help it,
so he went boldly on.

Colonel de Crespigny ; only a man I
know who is awfully jealous of his
wife."

Of Lady Muriel — Muriel Darner as she
used to be at Eevranches," replied Athol
between his teeth. " Well, what of it ? Has
he any cause ? "

He spoke so quietly that his friend was deceived
; but had he studied his face, he could
not have failed to recognize the struggle he
was passing through. "Hang it all," thought
Bobby, " Mrs. Fergusson must be mistaken.
He has forgotten all about her."

So you know that Lady Muriel married
de Crespigny ? " he continued. " And here

have I been avoiding her name, for fear of
reviving unpleasant recollections in you."

You need have no fear of that, Bobby.
Everything between Lady Muriel and myself
was over a long time ago."

I thought as much, only your mother
made such a point of my promising not to
mention the subject before you. But as it's
all right, I'll tell you what I know. You
asked if Colonel de Crespigny had any cause
for jealousy ? None, I believe, except his
wife's beauty, and she has turned out a
Venus, and no-mistake."

You know her then, Bobby ? "

I met her yesterday at a party at the
Cranston', and she was awfully nice and
jolly, and asked me to go and see her in
Queen's Gate. Will you go with me, Atliol ?
and then you will see for yourself what a
beauty she has grown. She was always a
pretty little thing at Eevranches, but too
skinny for my taste, but she has developed

wonderfully. All the fellows were talking
about her. Will you come ? "

No, thank you."

Why not ? I hear they have a magnificent
mansion in Queen's Gate, and give large
parties."

I don't care for visiting."

You are not a misanthrope, are you,
Athol ? "

Not exactly ; but I never cared for what
is termed ' society,' and I never shall. It
seems a great waste of time to me. You
stand about the whole evening among a
crowd of strangers, and when you return
home you do not carry away a single word

with you that is worth remembering."

"But you get some very sweet smiles sometimes."


I don't care for such smiles, and I don't
believe in them. They are too liberally distributed,
as a rule, for me. I am much happier
at home with my pipe and a book."
VOL. III. 34

You used not to smoke in Eevranches."

No, and never thought I should. I had
no troubles to blow away then. But I have
found smoking a great comfort since. It is a
sort of mild intoxicant that lulls one's senses
into temporary forgetfulness or resignation."

"My dear old man, you talk as if you had
had a lot of bother. Let me see, Athol. How
old are you ? Not four-and-twenty yet."

Old enough to be sick of the world, my
dear boy. But let us talk a little of yourself
now. How is your dear old father ? How
good he used to be to me in the vacations.
And your brothers — Denis and Alfred and
Tom — are they in London too? And your
sisters ? Tell me everything about your old
home."

Well, Athol, you know our name is
Legion, and if I begin to divulge the family
history I don't know when I shall come to
a full stop. To begin with the ladies, my
dear old mother is well and hearty, thank

God, and she has three daughters still at
home with her — the two eldest, Flore and
Elsie, having been luckily married to two
wretched men, who didn't know what they
were incurring by the deed. The pater is jolly
too, thanks, and still trying hard to convert
the reprobates of Eevranches, and as for my
brothers, Denis and Alfred have gone out to
Manitoba, and Tom is in a mercantile house
at Antwerp, so we are pretty well disposed
of."

And are you comfortable in your situation,
Bobby ? "

So, so, Athol. The salary of a banker's
clerk does not permit of my ' keeping the
pace ' as I should like to do, but it pays for
an occasional cigar, or a pair of gloves, and
I make the best of a bad job. Some day 1
may get something better."

And at an early day if I can effect it,
old boy," said Athol, laying his hand kindly
on the other's shoulder ; " you must let me

34—2

LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY OF lUINOIS

know just what you are fit for, and I will
use all the influence I have in your behalf.
I haven't forgotten the days at Eevranches,
Bobby ; I never shall forget them, they were
the happiest of my life, and in gratitude to
them alone, I would like to do all I can fora
friend who was so intimately associated
with them."

Poor Bobby was so taken aback by the
offer, that he hardly knew how to thank
him for it.

"Dear old Athol!" he ejaculated, growing
very red in the face, " I can't find any words
to say what I want, but it's just like you,
and you're the same as ever, that's all."

And that's more than enough," replied
his friend smiling ; " besides, your thanks
are very premature, Bobby, for I may never
be able to fulfil my desire. What are you
rising for ? "

I've been here more than an hour,"
stammered Bobby.

My dear fellow, I'm not going to let you
leave me to-day, that is, unless you have
something better to do. You must stay and
dine with me at my club, and then we'll goto
a theatre together or a music hall, whichever
you prefer, and make a night of it.
Come, Bob ! I can't take any refusal. I've
a touch of the blues this afternoon, and if
you leave me to myself, I shall be miserable."

So the day finished as he had proposed,
and all the warmth and geniality of their
boyhood was infused into their renewed
intercourse. Though as Bobby took his way
home at last to the furnished apartments
which he called by that name, he could not
help wondering (from several little circumstances
which had struck him during the
evening) whether he had not been a little
bit mistaken when he so hastily concluded
that Mrs. Fergusson must be altogether
wrong.

A WOMAN OF THE WORLD.

It would be difficult in a few brief sentences
to convey an idea of the change
that surely but gradually passed over the
character of Lady Muriel de Crespigny, after
the discovery that her husband had deceived
her. She had never really loved him — that
is to say, she had never esteemed him, which
is the only security for the endurance of
love — because she had never seen any tiling
in his motives, principles, or disposition, to
esteem. But she had believed that as his
wife, and the mistress of his establishment,
he would uphold her honour and dignity
to the world, and he had trampled publicly
upon both. He had cast them on the
ground as a door-mat to wipe his feet upon,

and at the first blush Muriel had thought
she could never forgive him. And when on
the impolicy of her decision being pointed
out to her by her father, she consented to
overlook the outrage done to her feelings,
and return to her home in Queen's Gate,
they were her lips only that uttered " Yes."
Her heart never joined in the affirmative.
And from the moment she re-entered her
own house, she manifested a perceptible
shrinking from her husband. She dreaded
to be left alone with him even for a few
minutes, and kept close to her step-sister, as
though her only safety was by Cecil's side.
When, after a visit of several weeks. Miss
Seton was recalled to Oakley Court by the
mandate of her mother, Lady Muriel filled
her place by Lina Walford, who was only
too delighted to share in all the luxuries of
the Queen's Gate mansion, and accompany
her friend wherever she misjht choose to
go. There were times (of course) when the

husband and wife were naturally alone, when
Colonel de Crespigny indeed insisted upon
having Lady Muriel to himself, but he gained
little by the opportunity. She never reproached
him again, she did not even repulse
his advances, but she never encouraged, and
she never rewarded them. She submitted
to everything passively, but embraced the
earliest chance that presented itself to rid
herself of his society, and to a man of
Colonel de Crespigny's temperament this was
the most galling conduct she could have
pursued. She wounded his vanity and self
love. He saw that she despised him, and
was indifferent to his appreciation of herself,
and he would have been less hurt by open
recrimination, or violent abuse. It piqued
him into taking the worst step he could have
done in order to surmount her indifference.
He attempted to defend his late action by
proving that he had been guilty of far worse
ones. He pulled down with one effort all the

barriers he had erected between her innocence
and his own polluted life, and displayed
it before her horror-stricken eyes in such
naked deformity, that she shrunk from him
with the utmost repugnance. He began to
boast even of the sins he had committed, the
lapses from honour of which he had been
guilty, the deceptions he had practised, until
the poor girl (whose little life at Eevranches
had been hedged in with dulness and propriety)
felt as though she were listening to
the revelations of one of the greatest
criminals that ever walked this earth. And
then de Crespigny, somewhat abashed by
the folly he had committed, and finding
himself powerless to avert the consequences,
or make his young wife regard him with the
favour and deference with which she had
commenced her married life, sought council
from an old enemy of his, the whisky bottle,
and on more than one occasion appeared
before her in a condition that sent her flying

to her bedroom, where she would lock herself
in, in company with Agnes or Eosette,
until the whole establishment was cognizant
of the fact that " the master was drunk and
had nearly frightened her ladyship into fits."

These are the things that break down all
the proprieties of life, and turn the marriage
union into a hell. These public desecrations
of a shrine that should be sacred, this bawling
on the house-tops of a secret that should
be inviolate, and placing it in the power of
one's housemaids and footmen to comment iu
their vulgar fashion on the blow that breaks
the hearts of their employers.

Colonel de Crespigny's half-drunken, half-revengeful
revelations of a past life of infidelity
and dishonour, and which he boasted
of as a career of " good luck," which he
owed entirely to his favour with the fair sex,
so disgusted lady Muriel that all chance of
their coming to a better understanding with
each other vanished.

How was it to be expected (she asked
herself) that a man who allowed that he had
not been faithful to his first wife would remain
true to her ? And what guarantee had
she that the episode of Mrs. Lorrimer might
not be repeated over and over again, until she
no longer knew who were her friends, and who
her enemies in disguise ?

Such a conviction might have sent some
women weeping to their chambers, but it had
a contrary effect on Lady Muriel. It hardened
her. Her disposition was naturally affectionate
and easily led — too easily indeed, or
she would not have been so quickly persuaded
to give up Athol Fergusson for the
sake of Colonel de Crespigny — but she was
also of a very bold and impetuous temper,
and when once convinced of a thing it was
impossible to turn her. And she had arrived
at this point when Lina Walford came to keep
her company.

Many of Lina's sayings had been uttered in

an unknown tongue to Muriel in the days
they spent together at Paris, but she understood
them better now ; although she found
there was still something to be learnt from
this young woman of the world. They had
not been long together before Lady Muriel
had told her companion the whole story of
her wrongs, for she had a frank and open
disposition, and had great difficulty in
keeping anything of importance to herself.
But Lina was not half so astonished and
horrified at the recital as Muriel had anticipated.
She arched her dark brows at
the most telling parts of the recital, but
when it was concluded she burst into a
hearty laugh.

Oh ! Lina," cried Lady Muriel reproachfully,
" what is there to laugh at ? 1 think it
is most disgraceful. Fancy that girl Agnes,
and Eosette knowing all the time chat that
woman was, whilst / was allowing her to
kiss me, and taking notice of her horrid boy.

I thought I should have died of shame and
mortification. And yet you laugh."

I wasn't laughing at you dear, believe me.
I was thinking what that hideous flabby Mrs.
]mortimer must have looked like when you
confronted her. Every colour of the rainbow,
I should imagine. Prismatic Mrs. Lorrimer.
Well, I can't say much for the colonel's taste.
It must be easily satisfied. He could hardly
have found an uglier woman in all London."

But, Lina, fancy his bringing her to stay
in the house. Do you think any other man
has ever presumed to insult his wife so far ? "

"Heaps of them, my dear, only they are
too clever to be found out. But I never did
think Colonel de Crespigny clever. He's a
fine big animal, and in this case he has proved
himself to be a very blundering one."

I shall never foreside him," said Muriel
decisively.

Nonsense, my dear ; you'll be pottering
on all rij^ht a^^ain in a week or two. If

married people kept up a feud for a matter
like this, there wouldn't be a husband and
wife on speaking terms in England. After
all, what does it matter ? Did you expect to
get a man all to yourself? Oh, you little
goose ! "

I certainly expected to have my dignity
upheld in my own establishment," replied
Muriel severely.

Then you must shut your eyes, Muriel,
and everybody else will shut theirs too. My
dear, you must get rid of these old-fashioned
ideas about marriage, or you will make your
life miserable. It isn't what it used to be,
Muriel, if our grandmothers speak the truth.
The whole face of society is changed, and
morality is at a very low ebb. I doubt if you
would find a really faithful husband on the
face of the earth. They've all had their slips
and their trips, for which, doubtless, they are
very sorry, but which they say nothing about
unless they should happen to be discovered."

I don't believe every man would prove to
be so dishonourable," said Muriel thoughtfully.
" I have known one at least, who
I am sure would remain true in every relation
of life."

Ah ! still hankering after the Eevranches
lover, ma belle 1 " cried Miss Walford. " Do
you see him oftener now, then, and is he still
faithful and devoid ? "

I never see him," replied Lady Muriel in a
low voice. " I don't even know where he is,
but I believe his regiment is somewhere
abroad. I don't suppose we shall ever meet
again, and it is best we should not."

Oh, nonsense ! " exclaimed her listener.
I would like to have a nice little sum on
the odds that you knock your heads together
again before long. The world is too
small for eternal separations, and then you
will be the best of friends, and comfort each
other under your mutual afflictions. Both in
romance and reality, the old lover is always

coming to the front again, you know. Colonel
de Crespigny lias had his innings, and it will
be your turn next. Only you must be careful
not to go too far."

What do you mean ? " said Muriel.
"How could I see Athol and be his friend
even if we did meet again? My husband
knows all about him, and that we were
once ensnared to be married to each other.
He would never permit me to ask him to
the house."

Lina shrugged her shoulders.

H your ladyship intends always to ask
your husband's leave before you decide on
a little distraction for yourself, you may as
well give up the idea of having a gentleman
friend at once. It is easy to see that it
would not take much to make Colonel de
Crespigny jealous. Men who are careless
themselves are invariably the most particular
about their wives. But I don't
think he asked your leave before introducing

Mrs. Lorrimer into the house, and my principle
is ' tit for tat.' "

// I should ever meet Athol again (which
is not likely," said Muriel mournfully, " I
certainly shall speak to him, because there is
something which I feel he ous^lit to know injustice
to myself. My father deceived me,
Lina, in order to make me write and give him
up. He told me he was already on the way
to India, when he was all the time at Wool-with,
and had I known that I never would
have written the letter."

It was just as well you didn't, then,

Muriel," rejoined Lina with perfect sang-froid

for it might have prevented your making

the excellent match you have. You must

learn to look on it in that light, my dear.

Take all the pleasure you can in this world.

Enjoy your wealth, and your luxuries, and

your amusements, and regard your husband

as the inevitable disagreement attached to their

possession. That will enable you to bear
VOL. III. 35

with him better than anything else. And
then, when your friend turns up again, you
will find a great solace in his companionship.
There's no friendship, my dear Muriel, like
that between two old lovers. There is so
much romance mixed with it that it retains
its flavour to the very last."

But I have told you that Athol is away
and may not be home for years," replied
Muriel, a little pettishly.

"Well, can't you take another meanwhile,
just to keep your hand in? It won't hurt
the beloved, you know. ' What the eye
doesn't see the heart doesn't grieve for.' You
want excitement, my poor Muriel. A little
flirtation would do you good."

I don't think I quite know how to flirt,
Lina."

Then you'll find plenty of men ready to
teach you, if you will but hold up your
hand. Seriously though, Muriel, the season
is close upon us, and when that has commenced

you will have no time to fret over
such rubbish as this Lorrimer affair. You
should be thankful rather than otherwise
that it has happened. Dorset you see that
it has given you your liberty ? The colonel
can't well complain of anything you do, after
that. You have always got a plaister wherewith
to stop his mouth. If I were married
I should never rest till I had found out my
husband had been unfaithful to me, for then
I should snap my fingers at him for the rest
of my life."

Lady Muriel sighed deeply. This was not
the sort of marriage she had once pictured
to herself, and though it might be true, it
was very painful.

But Lina Walford's advice had its effect

upon her all the same. She grew to believe

that her friend's view of the subject was the

correct one, and the conviction made her

reckless. What did it signify what she did,

if truth and honour were drugs in the matris



menial market, and no one (who knew the
world) would give lier credit for remaining
pure and faithful and true. It is a matter for
speculation if men are aware how much their
own conduct influences that of their wives,
and how many a woman has succumbed to
the temptations afforded her, simply because
she knows her husband to have been first
untrue. I do not believe in the vicious
creatures occasionally portrayed by novelists,
who go wrong for the love of vice, but
I do believe in the unprincipled but warmhearted
woman, who, finding her affections
have been betrayed, rushes from the mere
agony of the discovery into the first pair of
arms held out to comfort her, and in that
other one, who, finding herself impotent to
remedy the evil, or to make it punishable,
takes the bit between her teeth and revenges
herself in the only possible way. I believe
that, could statistics on the subject be obtained,
it would be found that in nine cases

out of ten of a married woman proving
false to her vows, she has had reason to
believe that her husband has been so before
her.

Lady Muriel de Crespigny did not credit
all she heard at first, but little by little it
worked itself into her mind until all her
girlish ideas were altered, and she had lost
faith in everything that was good and true.
Her husband's conduct greatly contributed
to effect this distressing" chancre. He seemed
to take a pleasure at this period in shocking
her with the stories of his past life, as
though he would make the present look almost
pure by the light of that which was gone.
And when he found that she was shocked
no longer, but only showed the most utter
indifference to anything he may have said
or done, he grew brutally enraged, and
blurted out the coarse truth that he had
been faithless to her also, and would be so
again, and defied her to take any action

against him, for the law of England allowed
her no remedy.

If the legislators who passed the law in
so lopsided a condition could only hear the
unworthy use which is sometimes made of
it, they would acknowledge that it admitted
of improvement. No one, who had only seen
Colonel de Crespigny in society, where he
smiled on all around him, as if it were impossible
that he could ever lose his temper,
would have recognized him in one of these
violent outbursts, when he forgot even the
common decencies of humanity.

So, from despising and loathing him. Lady
Muriel grew positively to hate him, and he
read it in her withering looks, and the cold
tone of contempt in which she addressed
him. And when he had satisfied himself
that she no longer cared for him Colonel
de Crespigny began to suspect that she must
care for some one else. There are men, so
intensely conceited, that it is impossible to

make them believe that anything but a
counter attraction can turn a woman's
thoughts away from themselves.

The London season now dawned, and (as
Lina Walford had predicted) Muriel's days
and nights were fully occupied. The end
for which Colonel de Crespigny had married
her was amply realized. Her aristocratic
connections brought a little crowd of titled
men and women to worship at the shrine
erected by her husband's riches, and the
dinners and evening parties given at the
mansion in Queen's Gate began to be quoted
as amongst the best of the season. Not that
the girlish hostess had anything to do with
them. They were settled, and arranged, and
carried out without any reference to herself,
and all she was asked to do, was to look
pretty and be handsomely attired, and affable
to her guests. And so far Lady Muriel
acquitted herself to perfection. Although her
husband could lower himself to swear in her

presence, and indulge in ribaldry, and even
call her by offensive names, lie still maintained
an immense pride in her personal
appearance (or rather, in his own possession
of her), and wanted to hear himself always
credited with having the loveliest and best
dressed wife in town. He took her out
everywhere. Before the season was half over
the beautiful features of Ladv Muriel de
Crespigny were known and recognized alike
in the street, the opera house, the theatre,
and the ball-room. But the more she was
admired and sought after, the more the
colonel's jealousy of her grew, until it almost
amounted to insanity. He could not bear
to see her laufT^hins^ or talkinij^ with anv man,
however old or uninteresting, and the fact
of an acquaintance appearing at her " At
Homes " on two successive occasions, was
sufficient to make him suspicious.

Who is that round-faced, sand-haired
young fellow, who was whispering to you

over the tea table this afternoon, Muriel ? "
he demanded one evening. " Confounded bad
manners in the cad. Where did you pick
him up ? "

His name is Holmes. He is an old Branches
friend of mine whom I met at the
Cranston'. He was not whispering to me,
and he is not a cad," replied Muriel indifferently,
as she returned to her book.

Oh, a Branches friend," sneered the
colonel. " Well, you'd better tell your Branches
friend to behave himself, or I may
take a fancy some day to kick him out of
my house."

"That would hurt no one, I imagine, so
much as yourself. And Bobby is pretty muscular.
He might take a fancy to kick, as
well as you."

It's the second time he's been here within
the fortnight, and / wo?i't have its' exclaimed
the colonel angrily. " I won't have a lot
of young fellows coming here, and sitting in

your pocket all the afternoon. It isn't respectable.
Do you hear what I say ? "

Perfectly. I should think the whole
house might hear you. But if your wishes
are to be carried out, I had better give up
my ' At Homes.' I cannot tell my friends
how often they are to come, and how often
to stay away."

But you needn't call the man ' Bobby,' "
said her husband, pacing up and down the
room.

'' I did so for ten years in Eevranches.
It is too late to change it now."

D — n Eevranches," exclaimed the colonel.
The very name had operated on him, like a
red rag held before a bull, ever since he
had heard Lady Muriel's appeal to her father
for having separated her from Athol Fergusson.
He had begun to suspect that there
was more in that early attachment than he
had ever dreamt of, and that the memory
alone of her first lover might prove a serious

bar between his wife and himself. When
he began to swear Lady Muriel rose and left
the room. It was the usual way now by
which she signified her disapproval of his
behaviour. She was weary of quarrels and
jars. All she wanted was to be left in peace
to live out the remainder of her life as she
best might. When a wife has arrived at this
stage of thinking, it is time to hoist the
danger signal. It is so very unlikely (especially
if she should be young and pretty)
that her male friends will allow her to carry
out her design. All lives need excitement
in their different ways, in order to go on
living, and the natural excitement for the
young is love.

Bobby Holmes had certainly been very
ready to accept and take advantage of Lady
Muriel's cordial invitation to her house. It
was delightful to find that (though raised sofar
above him) she still remembered her old
playmate, and made more of him than she

did of the titled ladies and sprigs of nobility
that crowded her salons. Her " afternoons "
were rather stiff affairs. There was no cosy
tea table to gather round, whilst the hostess
dispensed her little cups of tea, and the
gentlemen handed about the cakes and thin
bread and butter, and let them tumble into
the ladies' laps. Powdered flunkies in gorgeous
liveries, solemnly paraded the rooms,
bearing silver trays of chocolate and coffee,
ices, bonbons, and macaroons, whilst professional
sinf^^ers were ens^ac^ed to sino sons
which no one listened to, and the guests
stood so closely together that their elbows
were sticking into each other's sides. Yet
there was always a little haven to be found
somewhere, formed of a settee and two or
three chairs, where Lady Muriel, surrounded
by her girl friends, held her court, and gave
audience to her most intimate acquaintance.
Bobby generally contrived to find his way
there, and was always warmly welcomed,

and invited to make himself agreeable. But
though Lady Muriel laughed and talked
(sometimes almost hilariously), Bobby fancied
he detected a false ring in her mirth, and
that she was not altogether so happy as one
might imagine her to be. She certainly
seemed to possess everything that women
hold most dear, but he found that, if he
gazed steadily in her eyes, she was unable
to meet his own, and that whenever he spoke
of Eevranches she became nervous, and
laughed in a jerky fashion that was very
unpleasant to listen to. His curiosity became
excited. He had been tliinkincr both
of her and of Athol Fergusson a great deal
since he had encountered the latter, and he
wondered if Lady Muriel knew that her old
friend was in town. Here, at least, no embargo
had been laid on him of silence, and
he became anxious to try the experiment.
But he was too tender-hearted to broach the
subject before her acquaintances, so he

waited until late one afternoon, when the
rooms were nearly empty, and he and she
were sitting apart on an ottoman together,
and out of hearing of the remaining guests.

Do you ever think of Branches now,
Lady Muriel ? " he commenced suddenly.

Often," she answered, in a low voice.

"We used to abuse it when we were
there," continued Bobby, " but I fancy a few
of us would be glad enough to find ourselves
back again. What a grand solemnity
and gloom seemed to hang over the dear
old place, so different from the glare and
noise and constant movement of the modern
Babylon. Do you remember our games at
cricket, Lady Muriel ? What a capital fielder
you were."

"I remember," said Muriel, with glistening
eyes.

What a splendid cricketer old Athol was,
too. I wonder if he has given up his field
sports. He was good at everything of

the kind. Do you see him often, Lady
Muriel ? "

She turned her large grey eyes upon him,
with a look of incredulous amazement.

See him. How can I see him, Bobby ?
He is in India with his regiment."

"Indeed he is not. He is in London,
living in chambers in Piccadilly. He came
into his uncle's baronetcy and left the army
some months ago. Of course you have heard
that he is Sir Athol Fergusson now, but it
hasn't changed him in the least bit. Dear
old Athol."

But long before his sentence was concluded
Bobby felt an unusual pressure on his arm.
Muriel had laid her hand upon it, and was
digging her fingers into his flesh. He turned
towards her. Her face had become ashy-white,
and her eyes were staring at him, as
though they were fixed in her head.

"Don't mind," she ejaculated hurriedly;
I must hold you, or I shall scream." And

then she added in a low, gasping voice,
AtJiol is in England close to me. Does
he know that I am here ? Have you mentioned
my name to him ? "

Bobby felt as if he had sprung a mine.
He had only meant to ascertain if Lady
Muriel were as indifferent to this friend as
his friend affected to be to her ; and here
she was, holding on to him like grim death,
and looking at him with her beautiful face
aglow with excitement, and her eyes over-brimming
with tears.

Well, I am not quite sure," he stammered.
" I think we did speak of you one
day, but I really forget what was said.
Athol has been seeing the world, you know,
since we were all together in Eevranches,
and perhaps he has forgotten "

He didn't know what he was saying.
There was no attempt at deception with him
here. Lady Muriel was evidently as interested
in Athol Fergusson as she had ever been.

He cannot have forgotten 7?i^," she interposed
hastily. " Ah, Bobby, you don't know
how fond we were of one another. But tell
me everything. How does he look ? Is he
the same as ever? And is he rich? Has
the change in his circumstances made any
change in him ? "

"None at all, outwardly. He has the
same pleasant grave look he always had, and
the same genial manner. He is very well
off indeed, I believe, though I don't know
his exact income. But his mother and sister
live at his country seat, Bromieshall, near
Eichmond, and Athol himself has the most
luxurious chambers in town."

Bromieshall ! " exclaimed Lady Muriel,

hysterically. "Does Bromieshall belong to

Athol? Why, it is a magnificent place close

to Oakley Court! And he is rich. And

they made me give him up because he was

so poor! Oh, what a fool I was!"

And here she was in such danger of break-vol.
m. 36

ing down that Bobby became alarmed for
the consequences.

"Dear Lady Muriel," he whispered hurriedly,
" do control yourself, for heaven's
sake ! The colonel is looking this way.
How I wish I had never mentioned the subject
to you."

Muriel left her seat quickly, and passed
out into the balcony, which was sheltered
by an awning, and filled with growing
flowers, and after the delay of a minute,
Bobby followed her there. She was not
crying now. Her eyes were dry and shining
like two stars, and her cheeks were feverishly
red.

"I am all right again, Bobby," she said
in her old girlish way, " and I am very glad
you told me. I might have met him some
day without preparation, and that would
have been much worse. I cannot ask him
to this house," she continued rapidly, ina
very low voice, and with her head bent

close to his, " for many reasons, but I must
see him again. You are his friend, Bobby,
are you not, and you are mine. Tell him I
will be at the Broad Walk, in Kensington
Gardens, tomorrow, at four o'clock, and
he is to be sure and meet me there. Will
you tell him ? "

Bobby did not feel as if he was doing
exactly the right thing, in taking a message
from a married woman to a former lover,
but still there was no real harm in the
appointment, and Athol must please himself
about keeping it. So he promised Lady
Muriel that he would do her bidding. Then
she began to tease him after the fashion
of girls, to say how, and when it would be
done.

"Shall you see him to-night, Bobby? Will

you go directly after you leave here ? Ah !

how I wish I could go with you. And

when shall I have an answer ? Do you think

he will be sure to come? And will you

36—2

tell him everything that I have said and
done ? "

Lady Muriel," replied Bobby gravely, " I
will deliver the message you have trusted
to me, but Athol must take you the answer
himself. I had better not come here again
so soon. I should get into a terrible scrape
with the colonel, if he were to hear of my
interference in the matter."

Oh, the colonel ! " repeated Muriel, with a
scornful curl of her lip. " He has no right
to object to anything / do. Hq never consults
me with regard to his own proceedings,
lout there will be no need for me to see
you again, Bobby. Athol will come and
meet me, and I shall be able to give him
the explanation I have been keeping for him
so long. Oh, dear! what a time it will seem
until tomorrow."

At that moment some of her guests approached
to wish her good-bye, and Lady
Muriel was obliged to return to her duties.

Bobby left the house, rather uneasy in his
mind. He had promised to carry the message
to Athol, and he would do it, but
he was rather uncertain of his friend's
approval of this errand. However, he consoled
himself with the idea that it was not
his fault, and he walked straight down from
Queen's Gate to Piccadilly to get the business
over at once. Sir Athol happened to
be at home, and Bobby, in his nervousness,
blurted out the message without any preparation.


"By the way, old fellow, I've just come
from Queen's Gate — Lady Muriel de Cres-pigmy's,
you know — and we were talking of
you, and she told me to come here, and ask
you to meet her tomorrow afternoon at four
o'clock in the Broad Walk in Kensington
Gardens, as she is very anxious to see you
again." He expected to hear Sir Athol make
some disclaimer at the proposal, but lie did
not utter a word. Dead silence reigned

after the delivery of the message, whilst
Bobby stood, twirling his hat, round and
round in his hands. At last he could bear
it no longer.

That's all," he said hurriedly ; " she made
me promise to bring the message, and I
couldn't well refuse her, and so I've done
it ; but of course you will please yourself,
Athol — and I hope you are not annoyed
with me for having been made the bearer
of it."

"Won't you sit down a minute, Bobby,
and have a seltzer and brandy ? " asked Sir
Athol quietly.

"Well, I don't mind," said Bobby; "but
look here, Athol, you won't think, will you ?
that this is any fault of mine. We began
to talk of Eevranches together, and "

Please to drop the subject, Bobby. Of
course you were quite right to do the lady's
bidding, and now I've heard the message,
and we'll say no more about it. By the

way, I wish you'd come down with me to
Bromieshall next Sunday. You have no idea
how lovely the country is just now. And it
is getting abominably hot in London."

"You're right there, Athol. You should
have felt the heat this afternoon in Lady

Muriel's drawing-rooms 1 mean," cried

Bobby, pulling himself up short, " that I
shall be charmed to visit Bromieshall whenever
you will be so good as to take me
there."

REPULSED.

Lady Muriel spent the remainder of the day
in a state of feverish impatience and excitement.
She had believed that all the interest
of her life was over. She had thought (with
the simplicity of her nineteen years) that
because marriage had pulled the veil that
hid the naked deformity of the world from
before her eyes, the rest of her existence
would be passed in lamenting the false step
she had taken. She had told her friends
Cecil Seton, and Lina Walford, that she
should never care again for dress, or society,
or amusement, and that because one man
had turned out to be totally different from
what she had anticipated, she should never
give a thought to any of his sex again.

But now — suddenly — a great piece of news
had come to her, that seemed to change the
whole aspect of the world at once. Athol
Ferguson was near her assam. He was not
dwelling in that fabulous India, whither she
had in fancy traced his steps. He was not
destined to live, an exile from his native
land, for ten, or perhaps twenty years, and
then return, aged, yellow, and morose, so
as to be unrecocfnizable by the friends of
his youth.

He was here, close at hand — within a
stone's throw of her home — the same dear
Athol, who but a year previously had held
her to his heart, and promised to remain
true to her for ever. She would be able
to see him — to explain away the perfidy of
which he (perhaps) accused her, to make
him understand how her father had forced
her into a marriage with Colonel de Cres-pigmy
on the threat of sending her back to
Eevranches, to pine in solitude for any

number of years. A thousand thoughts
rushed through her brain of what she would
say, and do, when she saw this dear friend of
her maidenhood again, and there was not one
picture mixed with them of an unforgiving
lover, who refused to listen to her explanations,
or to accept her proffered advances.
Colonel de Crespigny was engaged out to a
bachelor's dinner that evening, and Lady
Muriel had all the time to herself to think
over the coming interview in Kensington
Gardens. She hardly slept all night from
excitement, and when the morning broke
she thought the afternoon would never come.
Agnes — whose quick, suspicious nature was
ever on the alert, to note the various
changes in her young mistress's moods — detected
at once the unusual restlessness in
her manner, and the anxiety she displayed
to be dressed to the best advantage.

I think I will wear that new costume of
sad screen, Agnes. No, I won't. I'll dress

in black. But after all, I look best in
white, don't I ? I remember once in Branches
"

What, miladi f "

Nothing — nothing. Only give me the
white costume I wore on Sunday, and the
white hat and feathers. I think it suits me
better than any other dress."

Miladi is doubtless going to make an
important visit."

"That is just it, Agnes, and I want to
look my best. Is the carriage round ? "

"Yes, miladi, it waits."

"Then I will go. What time is it? Five
minutes to four. Oh, how my heart beats.
I think I must take a little sal volatile and
water before I start. I feel as if I were
going to faint." She sat down again for a
minute, and Agnes brought her the desired
remedies.

It would be ten thousand pities for
miladi to be taken ill whilst making an important

visit," she remarked sententiously.
Upon which Lady Muriel (conscience stricken)
knocked the medicine to one side, and declaring
she was quite well again, ran downstairs.
She drove through the park for a
few minutes, and then desired the coachman
to set her down at the entrance of the
Broad Walk, and drive round and wait for
her at the other end. She hardly dared to
raise her eyes while her servants were insight,
but as soon as they had disappeared,
she scanned the place of rendezvous carefully.
She felt sure that Sir Athol would
be there before her — standing a little apart
perhaps under one of the trees to avoid recognition
by any one but herself — and that
in another minute they would meet again.
But though her eyes were sharp, and the atmosphere
was clear, she could not discern
him. Several groups of fancifully dressed
children, with their nurseries, were running
about, playing at ball, or hide and seek, and

one or two young men, apparently students,
with books in their hands, were pacing up
and down, reading to themselves ; but, from
one end of the walk to the other, there was
no Athol Fergusson. Muriel's heart sunk a
little. No woman likes to be kept waiting
for a man, however small her interest in
him may be, and in a case like this each
second seems magnified into an hour. !She
commenced to walk slowly towards the Bays-water
Road, where she had ordered her carriage
to wait for her, sitting down occasionally
on the benches to rest herself, and casting shy
glances around, to see if she was observed.
The young men students certainly did observe
her. Their books could not hold their
own against her fair youthful beauty and
her somewhat striking attire, and they kept
walking in very small circles round the
bench, whilst they wondered who she could
be, and what she wanted there. Lady Muriel
at last becoming conscious of their scrutiny.

left her seat and recommenced her stroll,
but she had nearly reached the end of the
walk, and still there were no signs of Athol.
What could have detained him ? Had Bobby
delivered her message, and if so, had he
made a mistake about the time, or the
place? Bobby was never noted for sharpness,
even in the old Eevranches days.
Muriel blamed herself now for not having
written a note to Athol and sent Bobby to
deliver it. A couple of lines in pencil
would have been sufficient, for she was
certain that if Athol had properly understood
what was required of him, he would
have been there. So she determinately told
herself; but, at the same time, there was a
counter fear knocking at her heart, lest her
old lover should have been offended beyond
conciliation. Oh, it was impossible! Lady
Muriel tried hard to recall the exact words
that had passed between them on the day
they had parted in the presence of her father,

but subsequent events lead completely erased
them from lier memory, and she could only
wonder if they were harsher than she had
imagined them to be.

She lingered in the gardens for a full
hour after the time she had appointed for
the meeting, and then, not knowing what to
think and feeling very much inclined to cry,
she re-entered her carriage and took a drive
out to Finchley, whilst she wrestled with
her thoughts and tried to find a possible
reason for the disappointment she had encountered.
She was unsuccessful, however,
and returned to Queen's Gate, feeling very
mortified and considerably out of temper.
Agnes observed the alteration that had
taken place in her mistress's demeanour,
and remarked on it as she dressed her for
dinner.

Miladi is rather ennuyee by these important
visits," she observed.

"Yes," replied Lady Muriel. "No, I

didn't call anywhere. I drove into the
country, which is more ennuyant still."

But Agnes Prudhomme (who was the
leading lady of the servants' hall, and set
all the liveried hearts on fire) had heard
the whole account of how the carriage had
waited for an hour for her ladyship at the
end of the Broad Walk, before the evening
was over.

Meanwhile Muriel, beinir unable to communicate
with Bobby (of whose bachelor
address she was even ignorant), wrote a note
to Lina Walford begging her to spend the
next day with her, and to this bosom friend
she confided the whole history of her disappointment.


But the lively Lina never regarded a
subject from the same point of view as
Muriel. She passed over the neglected appointment
in Kensington Gardens as a matter
of no consequence, to congratulate herself
on the perspicuity she had shown in prophesying

that the Eevranches lover would
turn up again.

"Didn't I tell you, Muriel, that you and
Mr. Fergusson would knock your heads together
before long ? Oh, my dear, the world
is very small when all's said and done.
And fancy his being a baronet, too, and
wealthy into the bargain. How nice. I
hate to have a poor man dangling after
me. They can never make you a present
without your feeling guilty."

"But, Lina, why shouldn't he have met
me yesterday ? It wasn't such a great thing
to ask of him."

My dear, there may have been a dozen

good reasons to prevent him from doing ashe

wished. He may have had a previous

engagement, or perhaps he was out when

Mr. Holmes called, or the poor fellow may be

ill. Give him a chance, Muriel. He would

have come quick enough if he could. I

shouldn't wonder if Master Bobby was round
VOL. m. 37

here this afternoon with a message, or a note
for you. Anyhow, my dear, I congratulate
you. A little flirtation with the old love will
be a salve for your disappointment over the
new."

Oh ! Lina, it will never go so far as a
flirtation. It wouldn't be right, and I am
sure Athol would not consent to it. You
don't know how good he is."

A bit of a prig, it seems to me, Muriel.
And pray, why shouldn't you have stour
particular friend as well as Lady Lytton
or Mrs. Oscar Norton ? All the world knows
that they are flirts, but no one dares to say
anything worse about them. I can't conceive
any more absorbing interest than that of a
married woman in her former lovers. They
are always so devoted, poor things, and so
grateful for any notice, and they don't grow
tired of you (as husbands do), but are always
on the qui vive for what will happen next.
I am sure they must be quite charming."

I shall never rest," sighed Muriel, '' till I
have cleared myself in Athol's e^^es. He
must think me so heartless — so mercenary.
If I cannot manage to see him alone, and
speak to him, my heart will break."

Nonsense, my dear. It's much tougher
than you give it credit for. And as for meeting
Sir Athol Fergusson, why, you will have
hundreds of opportunities before the season's
over. A young man of fashion is everywhere.
You have only to keep your eyes
open and you'll see him fast enough."

It is not certain that Lady Muriel actually
set to work to act upon her friend's advice,
but there is no doubt that, if we know a person
to be in the same place as ourselves, weare
far more likely to encounter him. Believing
Smith to be in Bengal, we may pass Smith
himself in the street without recognition, but
having met Smith once, and spoken to him,
we find ourselves returning his nod every

other day in the week. So it was with Lady

37—2

Muriel. Bobby Holmes did not come near
lier again, and day after day, she drove about
Eeofent Street and Piccadilly in her victoria
looking eagerly from side to side in order to
catch a glimpse of Athol Fergusson.

At last she saw him. It was in New Bond

Street, and he was walking on the pavement

just in front of her carriage, which had got

into the line for the Park. She recognized

him at once. He was dressed in fashionable

clothes, and there was more of the bearing of

a man about him than in former days, but she

could not mistake the clear-cut profile, nor

the sweet serious mouth, that were turned

towards her for a moment in the block. If

he saw her or not, she never knew, but the

next minute, he turned into a jeweller's shop.

Without one thought for the rashness of the

action, Ladv Muriel drew the check string,

and jumping out of the victoria, rushed after

him. She had only one idea in her head,

that Athol was there, and she must speak

to him. The shop was rather dark after
coming in from the glorious July sunshine,
but she could see him leaning over the
counter at the further end. Without a single,
warning she went up to him, and laid her
hand upon his arm.

Athol ! " she exclaimed breathlessly, " I
want to speak to you."

He turned and looked at her without the
slightest emotion, although all the colour
forsook his face, and his features became set
and stern.

I beg your pardon," he said, with his
hat in his hand, " I am not aware that I have
the honour of your acquaintance."

Lady Muriel stared at him in helpless
amazement. There could be no mistake this
time. She was sure he recognized her, as
perfectly as she recognized him.

Athol," she repeated in a lower tone,
you must know me — Muriel."

There was a plea for pity and forgiveness

in her voice now, but he would not acknowledge
it.

'• I think you must take me for some one
else," he repeated ; "I have not the slightest
recollection of you."

And with a low bow, he turned to the
counter again, and commenced to examine
the ornaments upon it. For a moment
Muriel felt stunned by the open rebuff, and
then she ran out of the shop without another
word.

Her carriage was waiting for her. She
charged it, with blinded eyes, and stumbled
into her seat with ungraceful haste.

Where to, my lady ? " demanded the
footman, as he arranged the rug over her
knees.

Anywhere — anywhere ! " she answered
with a sob in her throat, and then (becoming
conscious of betraying herself) she amended
the order.

"To the Park of course. Didn't I say so

when we started ? " But before they reached
it, Lady Muriel had changed her mind again,
and gave the order for "Home." She was
too well known in the Park, she thought to
herself. People would be stopping to speak
to her, and she had no heart for conversation.
All she wanted was, to be alone, and undisturbed
— to get by herself, and try and solve
this unexpected difficulty that had arisen in
her path. As soon as the carriage stopped at
her own door, she flew upstairs, and locked
herself into her room. She would not admit
either Agnes or Eosette. She had a violent
headache (she declared), and wished for
nothing but solitude and rest. And it was
no untruth. Her head did ache, as it had
seldom ached before ; for her vanity and
selfishness and confidence had received a
shock they had little expected, and which
they were still unwilling to believe.

Could it be possible that Athol Fergusson
had cut her dead in a public place ? — that she

had forced herself into the cruel position of
being openly repulsed, and told to her face
that she was a stranger whilst all the time
she could see by his eyes that he had recognized
her at the first glance?

It was not from an error then that she
had been kept waiting for a whole hour in
the Kensington Gardens. He had received
her invitation (she felt certain of that now),
and he had refused to accept it, because he
did not wish to see or speak to her again,
for the same reason indeed, that he had
denied all knowledge of her that day. Oh,
who had made such mischief between them
that Athol Ferguson should refuse to be
even her friend? Muriel had not taken into
account the great force of her lover's moral
character — the deep-thinking brain which
had made him so different from, and so
superior to most young men of his age —
and the strong views of right and wrong
which he held upon all subjects. She was

trying to treat him as many frivolous
women treat men in the present day — playing
fast and loose with him in fact — snubbing
him one moment, and whistling him
back the next, and Sir Athol Fergusson was
not a man to be played fast and loose with.
He had loved Lady Muriel from the bottom
of his soul — so much so indeed, that he
believed he could never love any woman in
this world again — and she had been false
to him, and destroyed his faith in the
whole of her sex. He had been perfectly
aware she was in London, but he had had
no desire to see her — nor to go in the way
of seeing her — and the idea of her making
a secret appointment with him, just to
prove she retained her former power, was
in his sight a most contemptible thing. He
told himself that if she were free and the
only woman left in the world, he would
never marry her now. Still, he had not
such complete faith in his own strength as

to run the risk of placing himself in her
way again. He had believed that he could
meet her, and speak to her, without pain —
so great was the measure of his scorn for
the weakness she had shown concerning
him — yet the encounter in the jeweller's
shop left its traces upon him, as well as
upon her. When she had appeared in that
bewildering fashion, and spoken to him so
authoritatively, as if her will must be his
law, he had felt strong enough to resist her
in the only way in his power — by professing
complete forgetfulness. But when she
had left him again, he became conscious
that he hed done great violence to his
feelings.

The hand with which he examined the
jeweller's collection had visibly trembled,
and his choice of an ornament for his
sister's birthday had been made at last,
with very little discretion. And after the
purchase was concluded. Sir Athol also had

gone to his home and spent the rest of the
afternoon in painful thought. He forced
himself to go out in the evening (for such
thoughts he knew were not good for him)
and tried to shake off the remembrance of
the day's encounter, and his own depression,
by going to the theatre. But Lady
Muriel would not allow him to reap the
benefit of his own fortitude. When he returned
to his chambers, late at night, a
letter (which had arrived by the last post)
lay upon his table. He took it up mechanically,
but as he glanced at the irregular
girlish handwriting, all the blood
flew into his face, and the old blush (which
had so long deserted him) suffused it from
brow to chin. And yet he frowned. It
was evident the reception of the letter gave
him no pleasure.

"Why has she written to me?" he pondered
as he turned the envelope over andover
in his hands. " What can she have to

say, but what will give her pain to write,
and I to read ? She is married — nothing
can alter that — and I have neither the wish,
nor the strength, to be her friend, or the
friend of the man who took her from me —
who bought her, I should say, over my head.
And what have I in common with a woman
who deserted me in my poverty, and stood
by in silence whilst I was turned out of
her father's house — with my faith wrecked
in all good things. I will not read her
letter. It can only recall the past, and
make the old wound bleed afresh."

He lighted the candle, and was about to
burn the epistle, when something stayed his
hand.

"And yet, after all, have I the right to
burn it unread ? Is it not tantamount to
stopping my ears if she spoke to me? I
repulsed her to-day, it is true ; but that was
in public, and this is in private, and none
of my own seeking. No! I will not be such

a prig as to refuse to read it, and if it
hurts me further — well, I suppose I am
strong enough to bear it."

So he opened Muriel's letter (rather
roughly it must be said), and read as
follows :

Dearest Athol, — I thought Bobby could
not have delivered my message to you last
Tuesday, but your conduct to-day has convinced
me you have some reason for not
wishing to be even my friend. Oh, Athol,
who has set you against me ? I am very,
very unhappy. I know you have cause to
be angry with me — for marrying another
man — but if you knew the pressure that
was put upon me, and how deeply I have
regretted it since, I am sure you would
pity and forgive me. And it is in order to
explain to you something about this very
thing, that I have been anxious to meet
you. Athol! cannot we be friends? I am

sure if you remember the dear old days at
Eevranches, you will not think it too much
for me to ask. I dare not write in a letter
all I would say to you ; but send me a
note by Bobby, to tell me when and where
I can meet you, and I will explain everything
that now perhaps seems hard. — Ever
yours affectionately, Muriel."

It was not a very discreet letter for any
woman to send, who was uncertain how her
sentiments would be received ; but Ladv
Muriel had written it in her trouble, and
Sir Athol saw that it was genuine. But
the more it was so, the more he knew it
behoved him to take no notice of it, even
to himself. But as the dark-blue eyes
perused it for the second time, they were
dimmed with tears.

Poor child," he thought, " can it be
possible that she speaks the truth, and that
her grand marriage has brought her no

happiness? And had she but had the
strength and faith to wait for a little time,
what an alteration she would have seen.
But it is of no use thinking of that now.
She must reap as she has sown. No,
Muriel, we can never be even friends !
There are some hearts that cannot accept
less ' than they are honestly entitled to, and
mine is one of them. You must go through
life as best you can now, without me. I
must have all — or none — and ' all ' is beyond
my reach."

He twisted up the letter, and burned it,
until there remained nothing but ashes.

"It is best so," he said, with a sigh.
"That is what she has done with my love.
She must accept my silence as her answer."

And so Lady Muriel waited, day after
day — without receiving a word or a line
from Athol Fergusson.

A DANGEROUS CONFIDANTE.

It lias been asserted, and with the utmost
truth, that women love more with the head
than the heart, and that their imagination
will hold them captive long after their common
sense bids them go free. It is the
reason that they so much oftener make
mistakes in marriage than men, or that
(having made a mistake) they cannot find
any palliation for it, but sit down, with their
whole lives broken up at once. Alien a
woman falls in love she dreams and dreams,
until every good quality in the man, mental
or physical, is idealized into a hundred times
its real value. She turns her lover into a
god, and when her dream is dispelled there
is no power of consolation for her in his

feet of clay. Some women — the happiest
women of all — never have their eyes opened
to the (lay of their death, but die believing
that Jones, or Brown, or Robinson can never
be improved — not even when they meet
again in Heaven.

When Muriel was convinced at last, by
her former lover's silence and rebuffs, that
he was resolved to break off the acquaintanceship
between them, site began to dream.
She had not done so hitherto. The love
episode in Eevranches she had received as
it really occurred. She had been too simple
and child-like then to lie awake at night
fcr sweet love's sake ; too ignorant of the
world of men to be able to compare her
lover with any other of his sex ; too blissfully
unconscious of trouble to regard him
as a shield against misery, and insult, and
deceit. Jilt now everything was changed
around her. Now she knew what it was

to be linked to a man whom she not only
VOL. III. 38

despised but feared, to be daily subjected
to coarseness from which she shrank, to
blasphemy and abuse such as she had never
heard nor imagined in her young life before.
And in the face of this bitter experience,
the remembrance of Athol Fergusson's pure
and boyish affection, of those passionate
kisses in which no thought of sensuality
was mingled, and those ardent vows of love
which bore the impress of a life's fidelity
came back to torture her for haviusf turned
her heaven to a hell.

No wonder he would neither speak nor
write to her — she who had lied to him with
her lips, and her eyes, and her hands, every
time they strolled together on the dear old
Eamparts of Eevranches !

When the days passed, one after the
other, until they multiplied themselves into
weeks and brought no word nor sign from
Athol Fergusson, Lady Muriel dreamed of
the happy past and the hopeless future,

until she had worked herself into a state
of despair. She would lie for hours on her
sofa — or her bed — thinking over every
trilling minutiae of their acquaintance, from
the day she had met him, a handsome
blushing stripling in his mother's house, to
the evening they had stood together in the
dark, outside the gates of the Chateau des
Lauriers, and exchanged their farewell kisses
for the last, last time. Ah ! if she had only
known that it really was the last ! She retraced
in fancy the misery she had felt at
being borne away from Eevranches ; the
days in Paris, which had first dragged so
heavily and then flown so lightly ; Athos
silence, which had greatly helped ito wean
her from him ; and finally, her return home :
the coldness she experienced at Oakley Court,
and the flattery and incense to her beauty
which had intoxicated her, till she hardly
knew what she was doing until she found

herself the wife of Colonel de Crespigny.

38—2

And then, the awakening — the bitter awakening
from that troubled dream which had
sealed her fate. Why had she ever let go
the dear young hand which had clasped
hers so firmly and promised to keep it so
all through their lives ?

She thought of Atliol as she had seen
him standing in her father's house, proud
and reproachful, too proud to say one word
to make the earl or herself swerve from
the decision at which they had arrived, but
with his deep blue solemn eyes fixed on
hers with a look which she should never
forget assail as lonf^ as she lived — a look
which spoke volumes of reproach and scorn
and unutterable love, all blended together.
Lady Muriel used to tell herself in those
days that she would thankfully die if Athol
could only bend over her with one of his
old Eevranches looks of love and trust, and
seal her death with a kiss of forgiveness.

She nearly wept herself blind, thinking

over these things and hatiDir herself for the
part she had taken in them ; and when her
husband, noticing her altered looks, would
make some rough allusion to her beauty
being the best part of her, she hated him
too.

She could crew no consolation in her trouble
out of any one. Cecil Seton she was ashamed
to confide in, and she had begun to fear the
active tongue of Lina Walford, who had
already made light of several of her confidences.
And Bobby Holmes seemed to
have deserted her. The fact is (although
the matter had not even been alluded to
between them) Bobby had an intuition that
Sir Athol had never kept that appointment
in the Kensington Gardens, and he was
afraid to go near Lady Muriel again for
fear of being questioned on the subject.
And at this juncture an unfortunate contretemps
occurred — unfortunate, that is to say,
for Lady Muriel. Madame Rosette her head

lady's maid, was obliged to leave Queen's
Gate on account of illness, and Agnes Prude
was temporarily promoted to fill
her place. And yet why should one say of
any circumstance in this world that it is
unfortunate," since we have no means of
deciding how much worse our lives miirht
have otherwise been, nor, indeed, if we
have any means at our control of making
or marring our fate? Is not every little
incident (however unimportant in appearance)
but part of a whole? How much
more so, then, the great pains and pleasures
that go to make up our existence ? The
wise man said (though I never could understand
why Solomon should be termed the
wise man par excellence, considering that he
did some of the stupidest things in creation)
that out of the bitter shall come sweet, and
certainly some of the bitterest trials the
world has witnessed have resulted in the
sweetest fruits.

So Madame Rosette left, full of jaundice,
to be nursed at her mistress's expense at a
hospital, and Agnes reigned in her stead,
and after a few days' closer intercourse with
this friend of her childhood Lady Muriel
did a very foolish thing. She confided in
her, and related the whole of her trouble
about Athol Fergusson.

If there ever was an excuse for a woman
placing confidence in her lady's maid, perhaps
it was here. Muriel and Agnes had
been little children together in Eevranches
and associated as equals.

Even when nearly grown up there had
been a certain amount of familiarity between
them, and though when Agnes became her
maid Lady Muriel had tried to keep up the
necessary reserve between a mistress and a
servant, there had been moments when they
were alone, and talked of the past together,
when it had all broken down. Agnes had
seemed, as Muriel once observed, like a little

bit of Eevranches and her childhood mixed
together, and necessarily also, like a little bit
of her happy courting days with Athol Fergusson.
They had not been confidantes in the
old times, for they had not amalf^araated indisposition.
Muriel was frank and ingenuous,
and Agnes cunning and sly ; besides there
had been that little undefined jealousy of the
handsome young Englishman between them
to prevent an unrestrained intercourse. But
now everything was altered ; they no longer
stood on the same around. If Ladv Muriel
spoke it was condescending on her part — all
Agnes had to do was to listen and acquiesce.
But she knew well how to draw the innocent
Muriel out. It was her object to make her
betray herself as much as possible. And so,
betwixt the trouble and the loneliness of the
mistress and the duplicity of the maid, the
history of Muriel's heart was laid bare. How
many women might trace the whole of their
lives' misfortune to the same cause ? The

folly of intrusting one's opinions or intentions
— perhaps one's very reputation — to the
mercy of a dependant, is incalculable, and
yet it is a folly committed every day. Women
are so soft, and so fond of talking, they yearn
so for sympathy and an assurance of relief,
and their servants are about them in their
most solitary and unguarded hours. If no
man is a hero to his valet de chambre, surely
no woman is a heroine to her lady's maid.
It is comparatively easy to keep on the mask
in public, to drive care in the background
whilst we talk, or dance, or sing, but when
we come back and sit down in our own rooms
alone, life and the world will not be baulked
of their prey. Then all the past, with its
bitter memories and its missed sweetness,
rushes back upon our minds, and just because
wee have seemed so merry and happy the reaction
sets in, the flood sluices are unlocked,
and nature will have her way. And that is
the time when a woman's sympathizing glance

real or feigned — and tender touch and softly-spoken
words of consolation leave us helpless
in her hands. After all, we think, she is a
woman, prone to suffer, and to struggle, and
to love, like ourselves, and we forget the
difference in her station, and only remember
that she feels for us. But we forget also
that it is a sympathy that cannot endure,
that the next day or the next hour may see
a cause spring up to part us, and that between
the lower classes and the upper there
dwells a firm and settled antagonism, which
invariably displays itself on the first occasion
for dissension. It may seem a harsh assertion,
but it is a true one, that familiarity
invariably spoils the relationship between a
servant and her employer. Dependants cannot
stand raisin fT. To admit them to your
confidence is to place them on a level with
yourself, and they are not fitted for the
position. They lose their heads. They treat
you as they would their equals, you resent

the impertinence, and they resent being deposed
again. It may be averred with certainty,
that there has never been an instance
of such a friendship lasting, unless the mistress
has descended to the level of the servant.
But few sink so low as that. They
play with their domestics so long as it is
convenient to themselves, and find, when
they are tired of their own complaisance
that they have turned a humble friend into
a dangerous enemy. If all the false oaths
sworn to by servants in the High Courts of
Justice could be brought to light, ladies
would think twice before they pulled off their
society mask before these traitors to the
domestic hearth.

But Muriel knew nothing of all this, and
had long forgotten any little distaste she
might have experienced for Agnes Prude
in the olden days.

Had there been any such feeling between
them, surely the servant had forgotten it also.

Agnes's voice was so low and sympathetic
when she saw that Lady Muriel was fatigued
and out of spirits, her touch was so gentle as
it rested on her ; once or twice she had even
ventured to bend down and kiss the hand
which lay within her reach. Could she fetch
nothing for her lady ? she would ask. Was
there no one she wished to see ? It distressed j
her beyond measure to note her dear Mademoiselle
Muriel's depression. Ah ! miladi
would pardon her for using the dear old
name, but she could not quite forget those
happy days, and she would give all she possessed,
even her very life, to see her smile
and hear her chat again as she used to do
when they were all together in Branches.
And so it happened that one night when
Muriel was unusually miserable, and Agnes
was more tender than before, that Colonel de
Crespigny's wife threw her arms about the
neck of her childhood's friend, and weeping,
told her everything. Agnes wept, too — crocodile

tears, which she could pump up at
will — as she listened to the melancholy
recital.

Ah, mademoiselle'' she cried, kneeling on
the hearth rug at Muriel's feet and clasping her
about the waist, " and is it possible that you
love him still like this? Oh, how resolve,
how grieved I am for you. When I heard
you were married I said to myself, 'But it is
impossible. It is a thing unheard of. What
then has become of ce cher Monsieur Ferguson,
un garçon si brave ? Why, mademoiselle
loves him better than her life.' But I came,
and saw it for myself. I was sorry, but 1
was dumb. It was none of my business — I, a
poor servant. What right had / to grieve ?
But I felt you could not be untrue, and I am
right. You love him still as much as ever.
Ah, mademoiselle, the news will make him
very, very happy."

But, Agnes, that is what distresses me so.
If I thought that Athol loved me still and

thought of me, ever so little, I could bear it,
but he will not even see me, or answer my
letters. He thinks me a wicked and faithless
girl, and so I am. I ought to have had trust
in him, and patience to wait for him. But he
does not know how I was tried. First, he
never answered my letters. I wrote to him
several times from Paris, but I don't even
know if he received them'' And then papa
told me he had sailed for India, and wouldn't
be home for ten years, and that if I didn't
marry the colonel he would send me back to
Eevranches to live with the Grants till Athol
returned. And fancy what that would have
been, Agnes. To return to Eevranches after
I had been introduced into society, and to
wait there without Athol till I was an old
maid. It was a cruel thing of papa to say.
It drove me nearly crazy, and so I decided
to marry Colonel de Crespigny instead, and
you see what has come of it. / am miserable


"My poor dear lady," said Agnes, " I have
seen it for a long time past, ever since that
Madame Lorrimer came into the house. How
could you be happy with so gross a deception
practised on you ? But cheer up. Do
not be so coldhearted. When Sir Athol
comes to hear all this, he will see how you
were pressed, and he will forgive everything
and be your good friend as he was before."

Oh, Agnes ! " cried her mistress, " that is
what I am longing for. To see him, if only
for a few minutes — to tell him all that I
have told to you — to beg him to forgive
me, so that I may have a little peace. If
I don't have peace," continued Muriel excitedly,
with her hands to her head, " I shall
go mad."

Soyez tranquille'' replied Agnes soothingly,
" that will come soon enough. Where
is the difficulty?"

The difficulty is in Sir Athol himself.
He wont see me. I have sent him a message

— and a letter. I have even met and
addressed him, but he refuses to write, or
speak to me. He even pretended not to

recognize me."

Pauvre monsieur ! " laughed Agnes softly.
He loves you so distractedly he dares not
trust himself in your presence, for fear of
betraying himself. That is evident enough."

Much more likely he despises me fora
fickle and false-hearted girl," said Muriel
bitterly.

"Pardon rniladi! but 3'ou know little of
men if you think that. If monsieur were
indifferent, why should he refuse to meet
you ? Would he not come, if only to vent
his displeasure, and upbraid you for your
perfidy ? Men are not so patient as all
that. They can revile and abuse the same
as women. Miladi needs no one to remind
her of that truth. But he is afraid. He
trembles at the idea. He knows that were
he to trust himself in your presence all the

old love would burst forth again, and in half
a minute he would be at your feet."

Muriel's eyes grew soft and humid at the
idea.

Do you really think so, Agnes ? My
poor Athol! Ah, God! if one could only
read the future, and know the strength of
one's own heart. All my life I shall mourn
the loss of my first love. But if I could
only see him for half-an-hour — see him in
private and alone, so that I might say all
that is in my heart, my mind would be at
rest, and I would try and do my duty for
the remainder of my life."

Miladi does not ask much. It should
be easy," remarked Agnes.

But how dear Agnes," said Muriel despairingly,
"when Athol refuses to see me? "

Perhaps monsieur would not refuse to
see me, miladi. We used to be good friends
in Eevranches. Can / not tell him how you

♦) 'J

mourn the estrangement between you ?
VOL. m. 39

But Muriel shrank from the idea of using
her servant as a go-between.

No, no, Agnes ! it is best not. Were it
discovered, you would only get into a scrape,
and perhaps the colonel would insist on your
dismissal."

I do not care that for the colonel," cried
Agnes, snapping her fingers, " and I would
run a much greater risk to serve miladi."

"I am sure you would," said Muriel gratefully,
" and I don't know what I should do
without your sympathy, Agnes. And if — if —
there seems no other way, perhaps I may
ask you to do me the kindness you propose.
Surely (as you say), my darling cannot have
forgotten all about me so soon."

Sir Athol has forgotten nothing I will
answer for that," replied Agnes demurely ;
but miladi does not know where he lives
perhaps ? "

Oh, yes ! I do. Mr. Holmes told me
the address of his chambers, 313, Piccadilly,

and his country seat is at Eichmond, near
the Court. It is called Bromieshall."

Bromieshall^'' echoed Agnes, who had
accompanied her mistress more than once
to Oakley Court, " why, the grounds almost
touch. I should know, for the last time I
went with miladi to Milor Ehylton's there
was a footman at Bromieshall who was very
attentive to me, and I used to walk with
him sometimes of an evening. Does miladi
know the bosquet that runs round the back
of the park ? If you follow it to the end,
it will lead you almost opposite the Bromies-
hall dairy."

I do know it," replied Muriel ; " I used
to walk round there in the morning sometimes
before Lady Ehylton had come down
to breakfast."

Miladi would have grand opportunities
at Oakley Court — much better than in
London, where one cannot stir without being

observed," said Agnes thoughtfully.

39—2

Yes, if Sir Athol happened to be there,"
returned her mistress ; " but how do we
know that he ever goes to Bromieshall ?
He may not like the place."

"Is it probable, miladi, that he never
visits his mother and his sister — he who
was known to be so devoted a son in Branches
? He goes down there often enough,
you may be assured."

But I have no means of ascertaining
wheji he does so," replied Muriel with a sigh.

"Will you leave it to me, miladi? Will
you intrust me to find out Sir Athol's movements
and report them to you ? To know
them can do no one any harm, and you
can make what use of the information you
choose."

But how will you do it, Agnes ? " asked
Muriel curiously.

Never mind, miladi,'" replied the girl,
laughing. "When it is accomplished you
shall learn the secret."

And in effect, a week after lie came and
whispered in Lady Muriel's ear, that Sir
Athol Fergusson had arranged to spend
from the following Saturday to Monday at
Bromieshall.

"And now. miladi, it rests with yourself.
Go down to the Court for the same time
and I'll engage you shall see Sir Athol and
speak to him."

But who told you, Agnes ? How did
you find this out ? "

Bah ! madame ; it was easy enough.
You gave me Sir Athol's address, and Sir
Athol has a man. And where there is a
man, nothing is difficult to a woman. I
had to make the acquaintance of that
man. I chose the evening hour, when his
master would be out. I had not waited
fifteen minutes before the man appeared also
to go out — and the rest was child's play."

And you are sure the information is
correct ? "

As sure as I can be of anything in this
world. Why should the man deceive me ?
He is going too, and he made a little appointment
with me down there. Voila I how
things fit into one another. I can keep the
man quiet, while miladi is engaged with
the master."

*' Oh, Agnes, it sounds very wrong, but I
feel I must see him or my heart will break.
At all events, we will go down to the Court
on Saturday. I am feeling really ill with all
this suspense and trouble, and a little change
will do me good."

Colonel de Crespigny grumbled somewhat
on hearing that his wife intended spending
from Saturday to Monday at Eichmond, but
he had no good excuse to prevent her visiting
her father's house. As for himself, he
did not propose to accompany her. He felt
that he had been in mauvais odeur with the
earl, ever since the little affair about Mrs.
Lorrimer (for however wild a man may have

been himself, he is quick to resent an affront
offered to one of his female relations). The
colonel therefore decided to remain at home,
though he thought it hard that Agnes should
accompany her mistress.

You going too, ma belle'' he exclaimed,
pinching the lady's maid's cheek. " Am I
to be quite deserted then, and left to do
nothing but think over my sins for the
whole of Sunday ? "

It would take you a month of Sundays
to do til at properly," rejoined the girl pertly.
Why, of course I am going. Who else is
there to look after her ladyship, now Madame
Rosette is ill ? "

I hope you will look after her, then,"
said the colonel moodily, "for I don't like
her way of going on of late. There's more
than meets the eye in it. I'm sure of that."

Agnes walked up close to him, with her
finger laid across her nose.

Trust me'' she whispered significantly ;

"I am going down quite as much on your
business as hers, and nothing will happen
without my knowledge. I have my own
suspicions, voyez! monsieur 1 But I am silent
till I am sure. And when I am sure, I will
be silent no longer. Are you satisfied ? "

And she left him, cursing and swearing
at every woman in the world, for being
double-faced, and treacherous, and false.

It was a glorious summer's day in July, one
of the last days of the season, when Lady
Muriel went down to Oakley Court. Richmond
was in the height of its beauty. The
broad, majestic river w-as covered with boats
containing parties of pleasure. The noble
park was clothed in verdure overhead, and
carpeted with green — the country lanes lined
with flowering hedges, redolent of perfume,
and alive with the song of lark and nightingale.
There was no excuse needed for
Muriel wishing to pass a few hours of such
heavenly weather in her father's house.

Cecil Seton was extravagant in her delight
at seeing her ao^ain, and Lord Elton seemed
proud to receive his beautiful daughter.
Only her step-mother held aloof with chilling
courtesy, and made her feel that she was not
entirely welcome. The Countess of Eliylton
(who had never really liked her step-daughter
and been jealous of her from the beginning),
had evinced a decided hostility towards
her, ever since the time that she had rushed
to her father's protection, against the insults
of her husband. She saw that Lady Muriel
was of a very warm and impetuous disposition,
and she had no idea of the Court
being turned into a refuge, each time she had
a difference with Colonel de Crespigny. She
had expressed her opinion on the subject
very strongly on that occasion, and had
treated Lady Muriel coolly ever since. But
Muriel cared nothing for Lady Khylton's
rancour. She had come down to see her
father (so she said), and her heart and mind

were filled with the thought of that other
interview, which she dreaded and longed for,
at one and the same time. Cecil Seton observed
the difference in her sister's manner
at once, and pestered her for the reason of
the change. She wanted Lady Muriel to ride
with her, or drive with her, or come for a
long walk in the park, where they could
exchange confidences without fear of interruption.
But Muriel wanted none of these
things. She preferred to sit on the lawn, or
to rest in her own room — to do anything, in
fact, rather than oho out of ran<Te of the
message which might reach her at any
moment. Cecil declared the London season
had done her no good, that she looked pale
and dispirited and dull, and Muriel refuted
the assertion, and pronounced herself to be
quite well and in the best of spirits, only a
little tired, and disinclined for exertion.

She said this as they were strolling in the
garden (now a mass of bloom) together, and

yet Cecil could not but observe low distraite
she was, and how her head kept turning
every moment towards the shrubbery, where
Agnes had disappeared in search of the valet
who was to give her the necessary information
regarding the movements of Sir Athol
Fergusson. At last she came back again, but
there was no look of triumph in her face.
Muriel's heart sunk. Was it possible she
had been mistaken, and Athol had not comedown
to Eichmond after all ? To satisfy
her anxiety, and without the least regard
for appearances, she left her sister's side
and flew to that of her maid.

Oh, Agnes, what is the matter ? Hasn't
he come ? "

Agnes regarded her in astonishment. She
had always known the English had no finesse,
but such rashness as this was inexplicable
to her. To imitate it, might upset all her
own plans.

Attendez, fiiiladi'^ she answered in a low

voice of reproof, " I cannot speak here. You
inst wait until I dress you for dinner."

Lady Muriel walked back to Cecil's side
like a scolded child. Poor girl! She had
yet to learn that she lead placed herself under
the most dominating of all controls — that
which a servant holds over the mistress, of
whose secrets she is the possessor.

I don't like that maid of yours, Muriel,"
remarked Cecil as her sister rejoined her ;
she is so pert in her speech and manner.
Where is Rosette 1 "

Poor Rosette is ill in hospital with the
jaundice," replied Muriel, " and so Agnes is
my only attendant for the present. But you
are mistaken, Cissy. She does not intend to
be pert. She knows me so well, you know.
We were brought up together at Eevranches."

It seems to me that she knows you too
well," said Cecil curtly.

But that did not prevent Lady Muriel
from flying up to her bedroom, as soon as

ever lie could find a reasonable excuse for
doing so, and summoning her confidante to
her presence.

Oh, Agnes, I am dying of impatience.
Did you see your friend, and what did he
say ? "

It is all right, miladi. Sir Athol is expected
down this evening by the eight o'clock
train. But miladi must not be so rash. You
will spoil everything. You will make your
people to suspect, and then they will watch
as well as myself. It is the extreme of
folly. Please — if this thing is to be done —
to leave it to me to do in my own way."

I am very sorry, Agnes," replied Muriel
humbly, " and I know it was foolish ; but
I am so anxious. And now, what do you
think? Shall I see him to-night?"

Mais, certainenient non'' exclaimed Agnes
emphatically ; " you must wait and be patient,
and act as if there was nothing on your
mind — and then, when the moment has

arrived, I will say to you, ' Now I ' and then
if you would meet him, you must go."

I understand, and I will try and be
patient," said Muriel with a sigh, as she commenced
to dress for dinner.

She acted her part pretty well through the
evening, but she was too excited to sleep,
and rose on Sunday morning with a heart
that palpitated almost to bursting, each time
she remembered that before the day closed,
she might have seen and spoken with Athol
Fergusson again. She refused to go to
church, or leave the house all day, and
Agnes was quite angry with her for having
done so, without consulting her.

"You English spoil everything by overdoing
it," she remarked somewhat rudely ;
miladi must please to say she will attend
evening church, or I may be able to do
nothing to help her."

But, Agnes, if I go to church, how can
I see Sir Athol ? "

"You will agree to go, miladi, and swill
contrive the rest."

Lady Ehylton, having been not too particular
in her early days, made up for it by
being extra particular now, and all her household
were expected to attend church three
times on Sunday. Consequently, when Lady
Muriel proposed to accompany the family
to evening service, it was only considered
the right thing for her to do. Agnes left
it to the very last. She even dressed her
mistress down to her gloves, and when the
carriage waited at the door, and the earl
and countess and Miss Seton were seated
inside, she ran downstairs to say that Lady
Muriel was faint, and she could not allow
her to go with them. Cecil was naturally
anxious to stay at home with her sister, but
Agnes begged she would not do so. "Iter
ladyship wants nothing but quiet," she said,
and company will only make her worse.
The colonel has always cautioned me to

obey his orders in this respect, and insist
upon her being left alone with me."

In the face of such a request, there was
nothing to do but to comply with Colonel
de Crespigny's wishes, and the carriage drove
off to church with the rest of the family.
It had scarcely turned out of the drive before
Agnes was again at Lady Muriel's side.

Now, ma chere' she exclaimed familiarly
(for, alas ! she had grown very familiar of
late with her young mistress), " dress yourself
as you think fit, and go down into the
garden and wait for me under the cedar
tree. I am going down to the bosquet at
once. Sir Athol's family have also gone to
church, and I have reason to believe that he
stays at home by himself. This is an opportunity,
if we are to have one. Courage !
I will be back with cjood news for you ina
very short time." She hurried away as
she spoke, and Muriel having changed her
church-going costume for something simpler.

descended to the lawn, and sat down under
the shade of the dark cedar-tree, to await
Agnes's return. She was not absent more
than ten minutes, and when she came back
she was breathless with the haste she had
made. i

Bravo ! " she exclaimed, " nothing could
have happened more fortunately. The mother
and sister are sone. and he is walking; about
the grounds all by himself. Come, miladi,
at once, and catch him before he enters the
house again."

But Muriel's limbs could hardly support
her. Now that the moment had arrived for
the completion of her wishes, her strength
seemed to have failed. Agnes Prudhomme
had almost to shake her before she could
induce her to move.

"Come, miladi, this is nonsense. Is all

my trouble to be in vain ? Then, never will

I again risk my situation in order to do you

a kindness."

VOL. ni. 40

Oh, no, Agnes. Of course I will go. I
am lonirinof to <zo. But when I think of
seeing him again my courage fails me. Oh,
my heart. Why did I ever love him so
dearly ? "

So that you might experience the great
joy of meeting," replied the maid philosophically,
as she pulled her mistress into
the shrubbery. "Now, miladi, we will not
linger. I will go with you as far as the
turning (for I have promised my valet to
take a little walk with him), and once there
you can do the rest for yourself."

She half pulled, half led her mistress down
to the place of rendezvous as she spoke, and
Lady Muriel (with all her heart in her eyes)
followed her expectantly. The shrubbery
ran round the piece of wooded pasture they
dignified by the name of the park, and at
the end of it was a black wooden gate jutting
on the public road. Opposite to this
gate was a dairy belonging to Bromieshall,

with a cottage occupied by the cowherd,
and a small wicket which led into the back
of the grounds. It was through this wicket
that Agnes proposed that Muriel should seek
her lover. But the girl drew back in consternation.
She could never (she averred)
be bold enough to walk right in without
leave, and on such an errand.

Mais, pourquoi non ? " demanded Agnes
with a shrug of the shoulders. " He is in
there, without doubt. M. Herschel has just
left him. Why do you not go to make a
call upon his mother ? You are not supposed
to know she is at church."

But Mrs. Fergusson was never quite
friendly to me, Agnes — and now "

Ah, well, miladi^ I have done my utmost.
It is for you to complete the work for yourself.
But I had better not stay here with
you. It is not conventicle, and M. Herschel
is waiting for me up higher. Adieu, miladi I

A la bonne fortune "

40—2

She ran away, laughing as she spoke, and
Lady Muriel was left standing by herself in
the lane. She looked wistfully at the little
gate, a hundred times, but she had not the
courage to enter it. Suppose that Athol
should refuse to speak to her in his own
grounds before his own servants, just as he
had done in the jeweller's shop. What an
awful indignity that would be for her. And
yet — and yet — she must see him, and make
him acknowledge her identity. It might bethe
last chance she would ever have. As
she stood there, trembling and undecided,
she heard his voice on the other side of the
high palings that enclosed Bromieshall, and
like a hare to her form, she darted inside
the wooden gate of Oakley Court. Athol
Ferguson had always been noted for the
possession of a peculiarly sweet and musical
voice ; and Muriel could not mistake it. As
she listened to it on the present occasion,
she thought it sounded very sad and subdued.

although he was only talking with the dairyman
about cows and their ailments, and though
his words could not reach her ear, his voice
went through her very heart. All the dreams
which she had been dreaming about him
came back upon her with full force, and
she felt as if her lover had been torn from
her, and she had not given him up of her
own free will. She had just screwed up
her courage to the pitch of confronting him,
and had advanced a little for that purpose,
when he walked straight out into the lane,
and stood before her. The involuntary cry
of " Athol " escaped her lips at once. As Iks,
heard it and became aware of her presence,
he turned round sharply as though to reenter
his own grounds. But Muriel could
not stand that. She flew after him, and
grasped him by the arm.

Athol ! " she exclaimed again, " for God's
sake speak to me. What have I done that
you should not even speak ? You are killing

me by inches. I am dying of this
grief."

Then he did turn, and regard her with
those beautiful, serious eyes, that had begun
to haunt her in her dreams. She gazed up
in his face, wildly and tearfully, but excited
as she was, though it was Athol's face, she
saw that it was marvellously changed. The
wave of suffering which he had passed
through had sharpened his features, and
planted a look of intensity on them which
had not been there before. And he appeared
to be far more of a man. The beautiful boyish
look of simplicity and freshness had gone
for ever, and left a gaze more noble, more
steadfast and more purified, perhaps, but not
so youthful or ingenuous.

What is it that you want of me ? " he
asked in a stifled voice. "Is it to renew
a question that is buried ? If so, I must
refuse to disinter it."

His words sounded cold and prudent, but in

reality his whole frame was so agitated by
the sight of her that he could hardly speaks

want to explain to you," she commenced
hurriedly, " how it was that I became
engaged to Colonel de Crespigny."

Lady Muriel," he interrupted her quickly,
I must decline to hear anything on that
point. In the first place, it is of no interest
to me. You are a married woman, and no
one but your husband has any right to the
explanation you allude to. It concerns no
one but himself, and I must beg you to spare
me the recital."

Then you have no feeling left for me,"
she answered weeping, " you have ceased to
regret the days when we cared for one
another in Eevranches. Perhaps you do not
even remember them."

The blood suffused his face when she mentioned
Eevranches, until his very eyes glowed
under sit, but he would not give way to his
feelings.

I remember only one thing," he answered
gravely, " that you are the wife of Colonel de
Crespigny, and 1 have no part nor lot in you.
And if it were otherwise, it could avail
neither you nor me."

But, Athol, my dearest, / love you still''
she cried in her despair, as she hid her
glowing face in her hands. He did not speak.
The deepest silence reigned around. Had
she again offended him, or was he waiting
till he could find words in which to answer
her? She raised her eyes. He was gone!
Had he sunk through the earth at her feet
he could not have disappeared more unexpectedly.
Lady Muriel's first feeling was one
of blank amazement, the next of indignation
at the way in which he had treated her. She
waited for some minutes to see if he would
return, but when she found he had indeed
gone, she ran back into the shrubbery, with
a heart beating with disappointment and
wounded pride.

IN THE lion's den.

Agnes Prudhomme did not return from her
appointment with M. Herschel the valet until
it was time to undress her mistress for the
night, and then she appeared rosy, laughing
and excited, and quite surprised to find that
Lady Muriel was not in the enjoyment of the
same high spirits as herself. A few minutes,
however, sufficed to put her in possession of
the unfortunate issue of her manoeuvres on
her lady's behalf, at which she seemed almost
as concerned as Muriel.

Quel dommage ! " she cried, shrugging her
shoulders. '* Ah ! ma chere, you English do
not know how to manage these things. A
Frenchwoman would not have let him escape.
And a man too, to refuse to listen to a tale of

love ! Bah ! he does not deserve that you
should break your heart over him. He is
what you call a pig — no, a prig, and is too
cold and proper for anything."

But, Agnes, he never used to be cold
in Eevranches," remonstrated Muriel. " He
used to take me in his arms and kiss me
until I had no breath left. I have often
scolded him for being so fierce. I used to
call him a tiger. And to think that now,"
she added mournfully, " he will not even
look at me."

Miladi has reason," said Agnes. " Now I
come to think of it. Sir Athol cannot be a
prig. His eyes are all flame, and he has a
generous colour in his face that goes with a
warm and ardent temperament. And there is
no doubt he loved miladi. Parbleu! I
should know that. Then, there must be
some other reason. Perhaps he has fallen
in love with another woman ? "

No, no," exclaimed Muriel emphatically.

Oh ! Agnes, do not say that. You destroy
my last hope."

Agnes shrugged her shoulders again. " It
was but a suggestion, ma chere. But it is
not an impossibility. You leave the man for
twelve months to himself. Do you believe
in the fidelity of a man lasting for twelvemonths?
You are very simple. And if
there is not some one else, how can you
account for a young man of four-and-twenty
warm, impressionable and free — not making
love to a beautiful woman who is ready to
fling herself into his arms ? "

But I am not ready," replied Lady Muriel
indignantly, " I have no intentions of the
sort. I only want him for my friend."

Best qa' said Agnes, with a mocking
smile. " You all want them for friends until
they propose to be lovers. But, miladi, it is
one of two things. Either Sir Athol loves
you, or he loves you not. If not let him go.
It is of no use to try and rekindle the ashes

of a dead fire. But if he does (as I believe
he does) love you still, too ardently to trust
himself in your presence, then — then "

What Agnes? " asked Muriel breathlessly.

"You shall have what you wish for," returned
the maid oracularly, as she left her
mistress to her night's repose.

But Muriel could not sleep. For the first
time in her life she was (what is commonly
termed) in love. Opposition had caused the
flame of passion which had hitherto slept
in her breast, to spring up into a glowing
fire, that threatened to consume her peace.
She was passing through that stage of feeling
which a man experiences when he has
conceived an attachment which he has no
certainty of being returned. She tossed for
hours on lier bed, thinking of every trifling
detail of her acquaintance with Athol Fergusson,
wondering what reason he could
possibly have for so pertinaciously avoiding
her, and picturing to herself future meetings,

when the misunderstanding between them
should have passed away. And when at
last she slept, it was to dream of the happy
days that were gone for ever, to feel his
kisses on her lips, his arm about her waist,
and to wake with a cry to remember that
they were estranged.

Agnes Prudhomme did not lie awake so
long as her mistress, but she too had lier
moments of thought and speculation. Was
it possible, she pondered, that what she had
sucrorested was the truth, and some rival had
come between Lady Muriel and her former
lover? It was difficult to account for his
behaviour on any other grounds. Virtue
(amongst young men) was an unknown quality
to Aornes, and did not enter into her argument
at all. The most reasonable explanation
she could arrive at, was that Sir Athol
was so unhappy on the subject of Lady
Muriel's marriage, that despair at the sight of
her caused him to be abrupt and uncommunicative.

But, whatever the reason might be,
Agnes determined that she would find it out
for herself on the very first opportunity, as
she had no idea of wasting her time in
forward inch an intrigue that would result
in nothing. And having arrived at this
satisfactory conclusion, she rolled herself
up in the bedclothes, and went fast
asleep.

The last idea that had struck her was the
riofht one. Athol was indeed so miserable for
the loss of Muriel — so full of love for her —
and so afraid of compromising himself by
speech, that he had not the courage even to
listen to her voice. Her appearance to him
was as the glimpse of Paradise to the Peri
shut outside the irate — the Paradise which he
had once believed to be wholly and solely his
own. And added to this, he had lost faith in
anything she said. Why should he believe
her now, when she declared that she loved
him? Had she not sworn the same thing,

over and over again, upon the Eamparts of
Eevranclies ? Had not Laura Vivian echoed
the cry in Malta ? Women always said so !
They said it to any man, whether they loved
him or not. It was only the outcome of
their insatiable thirst for admiration. When
Muriel had him all to herself — her abject
slave and adorer, with no hope or wish (as
God was his witness) except as it related to
his love for her, she threw him over, without
warning, for the sake of making a wealthy
marriage. What could be more despicable ?
And now that she had lost him — that he had,
as he ardently hoped, in some measure combated
with and overcome the fierce pain
that threatened at one time to upset his
reason — she was trying to whistle him back
again, to steal his honour and his manhood,
and make of him the lowest thing that crawls
a married woman's plaything. This was Sir
Athol's view of the matter — the view of a very
young man who had not seen much of life,

but who was nevertheless thoroughly earnest,
conscientious, and true. The brief interview
he had held with his lost love was sufficient
to spoil more than his night's rest, and he
returned to town the following day with an
air of the deepest depression. His mother and
sister were anxious to persuade him to pass a
few days at Bromieshall ; they didn't think that
London agreed with him, he looked so serious
and so pale ; but he believed Lady Muriel
Crespigny to be making a stay at Oakley
Court, and so no entreaties could persuade
him to remain, and bv luncheon-time he was
in his own rooms again.

M. Herschel, who had naturally heard all
the scandal from Agnes Prudhomme, feared
that his master must have been hit very
badly, as he saw him lying back in an armchair
all the afternoon, with an open book in
his hand and his eyes fixed upon the ceiling.
He was half afraid to suggest to him that it
was long past the usual hour that he took

his dinner at his club, and that he himself
(M. Herschel) began to feel the want of his
ordinary meal.

"Don't wait for me," replied Sir Athol,
I'm not well. I don't know that I shall
dine to-day. I shall probably go out and
get something later on. You can leave as
usual, Herschel, I shall not require your
services again to-night."

But, Sare Athol " expostulated the

valet.

"Do as I bid you," said his master, "I
prefer to be left alone."

He rose, after the man's departure, and

walked into the outer room, and sat down

in the dusk at the piano and played through

a few plaintive melodies to himself. But they

had no power to soothe him, and after a

while Athol returned to his old seat, and

again delivered himself over to thought. He

hardly knew afterwards for how long he had

been day-dreaming, when he heard a tap
VOL. m. 41

upon the door of the outer apartment. His
first feeling was one of annoyance that Herschel
was not there to answer it. It could
only be the laundress, or the bed-maker,
or some other of the various harpies that
collect around an unmarried man in chambers.
He would pretend that he was out.
But the knocking having sounded several
times more without an answer, the handle
of the door was turned and a footstep
entered the room. Sir Athol was about to
resent the intrusion, when the velvet portiere
that screened him was gently pulled aside,
and a woman stood before him. For a
moment he believed her to be Lady Muriel,
and stumbled to his feet, but when he lead
hurriedly lit the gas, the light fell on the face
of Agnes Prudhomme.

Agnes Prudhomme ! " he exclaimed, staggering
backward in his surprise ; " where in
the name of Heaven have you sprung from ? "
(For he had heard nothing of her having

entered the service of Lady Muriel de
Crespigny.)

You are very much astonished to see me,
monsieur ? " she said laughing, as she came
forward and offered him her hand ; " but I
hope you will not take my visit as an impertinence.
I hear that you are a great
gentleman now — a baronet — Sir Athol! — but
that will not prevent your remembering your
old friends at Eevranches — eh?"

"No, no, of course not," he answered,
though uneasily, for Agnes reminded him too
painfully of the past ; " and where are you
living now, Agnes ? When did you come to
England ? "

Ah ! a long time since, monsieur. When

my friends began to leave Eevranches, I, too,

tired of the place. But I am only in service

still, though a great deal better off than

when I worked for those beggarly Grants.

I am maid to a titled lady, who pays me welland

I am content. Voila I "

41—2

1 am glad to hear it, Agnes," said Atliol
languidly, " I always thought your talents
were wasted in Eevranches."

And how is monsieur ? " inquired Agnes,
seating herself. " Is he also well and happy ?
I cannot quite think so. He looks very pale
to me, and his voice is too serious and too
sad."

I am well enough," replied Sir Athos
^' but I suppose you have heard I have had
other changes, besides that of becoming a
wealthy man. Lady Muriel has deserted me,
Agnes. She has married another."

I have heard it, monsieur, and I know the
reason. She was forced into it against her
will."

That is impossible. There is no such
thing as compulsion in such matters nowadays.
Lady Muriel forgot the promise she
had made to a pauper, as soon as a better
match was proposed to her."

You are quite mistaken," cried Agnes

emphatically. " You are wrong, monsieur.
Some one lias lied to you."

The person who lied was herself. Lady
Muriel told me with her own lips that she
was engaged to Colonel de Crespigny, and
that all promises between us must be broken
off."

With her father, Milor Ehylton, standing
beside her, monsieur. You do not know how
he coerced and threatened poor Mademoiselle
Muriel, until she had consented to have no
more to do with you."

No threats or coercion, nor death itself,
should have made me false to her'' said
Athol between his teeth.

Perhaps not. You are a man — courageous
and daring. You fear nothing and no
one. You do not know what it feels like to
be a timid girl, who believes all that is said
to her and is afraid of her own shadow."

You used not to be such a friend of
Lady Muriel's in the old days, Agnes. Why

should you stick up for her now ? " asked
Athol suspiciously.

Perhaps because I know her better, or
am ashamed of my jealousy. For I was
very jealous of her then, Sir Athol, and you
know it."

The young man blushed. The heavenly art
of blushing had not quite deserted him, and
he did know, well enough, that Agnes Prude
had once professed to love himself.

Have you had an opportunity, then, of
knowing her better since you came to England
? " he said presently.

I have, monsieur and I know that her
heart has been nearly broken by her marriage.
I believe that it will break entirely
and kill her if she cannot fid a distraction
from her grief. Her husband is a brute —
voila — un dominie vilain. He curses and
swears at her — he calls her vile names — he
has even brought his mistress into the house
to insult her ! What woidd you have ?

She flies to her father, pauvre cherie, to seek
counsel and protection, and Milor Ehylton
flings her back into the colonel's arms. And
amidst all this insult and perfidy she is ever
crying for you — for you only, monsieur —
for her Athol to come, and save her heart
from breaking."

Agnes ! How do you know all this ? '*
exclaimed Athol excitedly, as he rose and
approached her.

Because I live with her, monsieur — because
she is the lady whom I serve, and I
see her day and night, and am the confidante
of her troubles."

And I cannot help her ! My poor lost
darling. God pity me ! I cannot help her,"
cried the young man, as he flung himself
down upon a couch and buried his face in his
hands. Agnes let him give way to his grief
for a few minutes — it was telling her all
she wished to know, and then she asked
very quietly :

But why not, monsieur f Your society
is all my dear mistress asks for. Why
should you not help her ? "

"Because, Agnes," said Sir Athol, raising
himself, " I cannot do it with honour. I
cannot trust myself. I love her so dearly
still, that the sound of her voice leaves meas
helpless as a child. Between her and
me it must be all or none. I have seen her
once or twice lately, and the sight has completely
unmanned me. Has she told you,"
he added wistful, " that we met at Bromies-
hall last evening ? "

Yes, mon and, she tells me everything.
It is in consequence of that meeting that
I am here. Your coldness nearly killed
her. She was like a mad creature all night,
and is not much calmer now. Ah! monsieur!
cannot you give her a little of the love of
other days, to make her better able to bear
her heavy load ? "

How is that possible ? " he demanded

rather haughtily. "Do you forget that
Muriel is a married woman ? I could only
lighten one load by substituting another,
and a heavier one — a load of remorse — and
that I will never do*'

"You Englishmen are very cold," remarked
Agnes deprecatingly.

"Are we?" rejoined Athol, flushing up.
Sometimes I wish that we were colder.
But whatever I may feel, I would die
before I did anything to compromise the
name of Lady Muriel de Crespigny. I hold
it far too dear."

Then it is of no use my staying here
any longer," said Agnes, as she rose from
her seat. " I came because I saw her misery,
and thought you might try to relieve it. But
if you are implacable — if you are so afraid of
compromising yourself — why, the best advice
I can offer her is to forget you as quickly
as possible. And she will do it, monsieur for
nothing kills a woman's love like contempt."

Compromise myself! " repeated Athol disdainfully
; " what do I care for myself?
Who would blame me for being known as
Lady Muriel de Crespigny's lover ? In the
present state of society it would be a feather
in my cap, rather than otherwise. It is of
her only that I am thinking. I cannot visit
openly at her husband's house, and I would
not do it if I could, and she shall not risk
her reputation by holding private interviews
with me. God is my witness, Agnes," he
continued passionately, " that the resolution
arises from no coldness or prudery on my
part. I would give my life to hold her to
my heart and call her mine (if only for one
hour), but she shall never incur blame for
my sake."

You are rigid, monsieur'' exclaimed
Agnes, affecting admiration for his principles,
" and I will never call you ' cold '
again. You have a noble heart, and Heaven
will reward it. I will try and imitate you.

I will return horae and persuade miladi to
go abroad or into the country for awhile,
and try and conquer the fatal passion which
is consuming her. And so I will wish you
adieu '^

Oh, stay, Agnes ; stay for one moment'*
cried Athol. " Tell me how my darling
looks — what she says — how she amuses herself.
That at least, can do her no harm."

But it will only make monsieur sad,
and it is best I should not speak. It is
enough that her heart is broken, and sometimes
I do not think she will be very long
in this world."

Sir Athol flung his head down suddenly
upon his outstretched arms and burst into
tears, whilst Agnes stood over him patting
his shoulder.

Oh, this is folly ! This is childish of me,'''
he exclaimed abruptly, as he dashed his tears
shamefacedly away. " You have unmanned
me, Agnes, with your news. Leave me now,

I beg of you ; leave me to myself. It
humbles me that you should see me thus."

Adieu, then, monsieur'' said Agnes
mournfully, as she crept out of the room.

But as soon as she had reached the pavement
she hailed a cab and drove rapidly to
Queen's Gate, where she arrived just as the
late dinner was being cleared away.

Colonel de Crespigny had already left
the house in a violent temper (so the footman
informed her), and Lady Muriel had
gone up to her boudoir. Agnes ran after
her mistress at once, and entered the room
without ceremony. She found her reclining
in an arm-chair, with her pocket handkerchief
to her eyes.

In tears, miladi ? " she exclaimed ; " what
is the matter ? "

Matter enough, Agnes," replied Muriel,
with a sob, " though it is nothing new. The
colonel has been calling me all sorts of
names, and I am sure the servants heard

him. He was in an ill-temper because I
went down to the Court yesterday (as if I
couldn't visit my own father when I choose),
and began to accuse me of all sorts of horrid
things, and when I refused to answer him
he banged out of the house in a fury,
swearing in an awful manner. But I will
not stand it any longer, Agnes. I am quite
resolved on that. I will speak to Lord
Ehylton plainly on the matter, and have a
separation."

Oh ! it hasn't come to that yet," said Agnes
soothingly. " Never mind the colonel, miladi.
Every one knows he is a brute. I wonder
you should take the trouble to cry about
him. But it is funny. I leave poor Sir
Athol in tears, and then I come home and
find you in tears. You must be sympaihiques.''

Athol'' exclaimed Muriel starting, " where
have you seen Athol ? "

I have just come from him, ma chere. I
was determined to find out the truth of his

feelings concerning you, and it is just a^ I
said. You English do not know low to
manage these things. You break your hearts
for nothing. You weep for him and he weeps
for you, and yet you have not the courage to
come together. I find him prostrate — desolate
has neither slept, nor ate, nor drank since
yesterday for thinking of miladi.''

Oh ! my poor Athol," cried Muriel, with
clasped hands.

Miladi, if you could see him (as I have)
sobbing like a child for love of you, you could
not have the heart to refuse to go and
comfort him."

But how can I go to him, Agnes ? "

What is more easy ? He is alone. He
has sent M. Herschel away for the night.
And you are free. The colonel will not return
till late."

I should be afraid" said Muriel, shrinking
from the idea. " I have never been out in
London alone at night."

I will go with you, ma chere, and with a
dark cloak, and bonnet and veil, who will
recognize you ? And whilst you speak with
monsieur I will stay outside and watch that
no one interrupts you."

If I only dared," sighed her mistress.

"You do not love him then''

Indeed, indeed, I do ! "

Love will dare anything. Sir Athol said
just now he would dare death for you. And
he is so very miserable."

Yes, yes, I will go," said Muriel hastily,
if you will come with me, Agnes, and wait
outside."

In a few minutes she was attired in a dark
walking dress, and Agnes having ascertained
that the coast was clear, the two women
walked out of the house together, and into
the lamp-lit streets. Here Agnes hailed
another cab (for Lady Muriel was so agitated
she resigned herself entirely into the hands of
her confidante) and ordered it to put them

clown within a few doors of Sir Athol's
chambers. Scarcely half-an-hour had elapsed
since she had left them. The gas was still
visible through the red silk blinds burning
brightly in the sitting-rooms. To all appearance
the young baronet had not quitted his
dwelling-place.

Courage, miladi,'' she whispered as she
led Muriel into the hall. " If you had witnessed
his i^^rief I should not be able to hold
you back from rushing into his arms. See, that
is the door to the ante-chamber. When you
pass through it you will see a velvet portiere.
Sir Athol's private room is within that. I will
only wait to know that he is at home, and
then I will leave you."

She turned the handle of the door as she
spoke and stepped inside, and Lady Muriel
tremblingly followed her. Agnes pushed her
towards the curtain. It was raised, and the
lovers stood face to face once more. The
maid only waited to hear Lady Muriel's cry

of "Athol!" and his responsive *' Muriel!"
when she seized the key from the lock of the
door, and, having softly closed it, locked it on
the outside, and having gained the street
threw the key in again at the open window,
where it fell through the silken blinds with a
dull thud upon the thickly carpeted floor.
And then — with a look of malicious triumph
—Agnes Prudhomme made the utmost haste
she could to the Sybarites' Club, where Colonel
de Crespigny spent all his spare time, and
sent up word that she had an important
message for him.

He descended from the billiard-room at
once, flushed and somewhat thick of speech,
but still quite capable of understanding what
was said to him.

"Well, what is it, little one?" he commenced
with a leer, as he shook her by the
chin.

No nonsense," she replied sharply. " If
you wish to be convinced that my surmises

VOL. HI. 42

are correct, you must come with me at once
to Sir Athol Fergusson's chambers in Piccadilly.
You remember him — militis lover at
Eevranches ? "

Death and thunder ! What of him," roared
the colonel.

Only that your wife and he are locked up
together in his private room. It is true,
monsieur as I am here. I thought her ladyship's
manner was suspicious this evening, and
when she left the house in disguise I followed
her to 313, Piccadilly. When she entered I
heard them lock the door. Come without
delay and you will catch her there."

Colonel de Crespigny's fury would not permit
him to make any further comment on her
news, but seizing the girl's wrist he ran down
the steps of his club and they proceeded to
Sir Athol Fergusson's chambers together.

TRAPPED.

To return to Sir Athol Fergusson and Lady
Muriel de Crespigny.

He was bending over the table trying to
distract his thoughts by a perusal of the daily
papers when she pushed aside the velvet
portiere and stood before him, and taken by
surprise he pronounced her name with a fervency
equal to her own. But his next words
were spoken in a tone of reproach.

"Oh! why have you come here?"

Why have I come f " she echoed. " Because
you are in trouble, Athol. Because
Agnes has told me that she left you here
weeping for me — just as / weep for you''

I am sorry Agnes told you that," he

answered with an averted face. " I considered

42 2

her visit a confidential one, or I should have
been more careful not to betray myself. But
I wept for the remembrance of the past,
Muriel ; not for any hope of remedy in the
present."

Never mind what you wept for," she exclaimed,
advancing to the centre of the room.
We are both miserable. Let us comfort one
another."

But by this time Sir Athol was himself

adam.

It is impossible. Lady Muriel," he said,
and you know it. I beg — I entreat of you
not to allude to the subject again. And you
must not remain here," he continued excitedly.
It was madness of you to come. What would
people say if they found you in my chambers
alone with me at this time of night? Who
was so rash as to advise you to seek me here ? "

No one," replied Muriel boldly. " I came
of my own free will, and I will not go until
you have heard me speak. What do I care

what people say? Let them talk their
tongues off. I see only one person in all
the world, and that is — you'"

Oh, Muriel ! Muriel ! you are cruel !
You set me too hard a task," cried the young
man, as he sank down in his seat again,
and buried his face in his hands.

"Athol," she said, as she tried to pull his
hands away, " you must, you shall listen tome.
This is the fourth time I have tried to
communicate with you, and I will not leave
these rooms till I have done so. I will not
talk of my love for you," she went on ina
trembling voice, "' for perhaps you have
ceased to believe in it, but I must try and
acquit myself of the perfidy of which you
think me guilty. I was not quite unfaithful
to you, Athol. They deceived me. They
told me you had sailed for India without
sending me a word of farewell, and that
you would not return for ten years, and so
I thought you must have forgotten me."

How could I write to you when you
never sent me your address ? " he asked, ina
hoarse voice.

Never sent my address ! " she repeated.
"But I wrote to you constantly. I sent
four or five letters from Paris, but as I never
received an answer, I thought — well, I
didn't know what to think. But your silence
made me very miserable."

"I never had one letter from you," said
Athol, incredulously.

Not even that which I left with Agnes to
deliver to you, the one in which I inclosed
my little cornelian seal ? "

Certainly not. Agnes did not even give
me a message from you. She told me of
your sudden departure, but said you were
too hurried to write a letter, or to think of
anybody but yourself."

"She has deceived me," said Lady Muriel
emphatically.

*' Take care she doesn't deceive you further.

I never thought her trustworthy,
and she has not been your friend in sending
you here to-night. And now, Lady Muriel,
I beg of you to return home, and never
come here again. It is neither safe nor
right that you should do so. You cannot
regret the past more than myself, but no
regrets can bring it back again, and for
the future, we can be nothing to one
another."

Nothing ? " she cried, " when I love you
like my life. " Oh, Athol, you have no
heart. Have you quite forgotten Branches
and the happy times we spent together there ?
Have you forgotten the Ramparts, where we
strolled in the evenings, and talked of
nothing but our mutual love, and what we
should do when we were married ? And to
think that it is all — all — over. That I am
bound to a man whom I hate, and you live
here — alone. Oh, my God ! it breaks my
heart to know it." With this, she began to

cry, and he paced up and down the room
like a mad creature.

"You are driving me out of my mind,"
lie said. " Cannot you see how I suffer, and
how powerless I am to help either you or
myself? I pity you, Muriel, from my very
soul — and because I pity you, I will do
nothing to make your life harder. We
cannot be friends (you must see it for
yourself) and we cannot be — lovers ! "

Then there was nothings to be heard in
the room but her low sobbing, and the sighs
which burst at intervals from his overladen
breast. But presently, he took her hand,
and led her unresisting to the door.

Don't think me unkind," he whispered,
"but I must send you away. It is ioT your
sake, Muriel — not my own''

"Forgive me, Atliol, before I go. Speak
to me kindly — just for once, and say you
forgive me."

I do forgive you, as I hope to be forgiven.

Perhaps I have judged you too harshly. I
have forgotten how young you are, and how
easily persuaded, and I did not know that
they had stooped to deceive you, and make
you believe me to be false. May God
comfort you, Muriel ! There is little comfort
left for either of us, except in doing our
duty."

"Kiss me," she said, in the plaintive tone
of a child asking for pardon.

He gazed at the beautiful face, wet with
tears, which she had upturned to his, and
the sight made him shiver. But after a
moment's hesitation, he bent his head down
and kissed her very gently and tenderly
upon her forehead, and then he laid his
hand upon the door, and said softly ;

Now you must go."

But the lock refused to yield.

What is this ? " he exclaimed. *' The door
is fastened. Who locked it ? Was it you,
Muriel?"

I ? Oh, dear, no ! Agnes came with
me. She is waiting outside. She closed it
after me."

"But where is the key?" said Sir Athol,
as he searched upon the carpet, " and how
can it have fallen out of the lock ? "

Then a sudden inspiration fell upon him
as he exclaimed :

Good heavens ! It must be fastened on
the outside. Muriel, your maid has betrayed
you. She has locked us in together." A
blank look fell upon both their faces, but
Lady Muriel was just about to disclaim the
idea, and declare it to be an impossibility,
when loud voices were suddenly heard in the
hall beyond, accompanied by knocking at the
door, and a rattling at the handle.

Muriel grew white with terror.

It is Colonel de Crespigny," she gasped,
and Amies. What can she have been
thinking of to let him come in here ? "

In all probability she brought him," replied

Sir Atliol, biting this lips until the
blood came. But there was no time for
further parley between them, for the colonel
was thumping loudly on the panels, and demanding
admittance.

Who are you, and what do you want
here ? " said Sir Athol, with all the composure
he could command.

I want my wife, sir. I know Lady
Muriel de Crespigny to be in these rooms,
and I desire that you will give me immediate
access to her."

Muriel was trying all she could (by dumb
show) to make Sir Athol deny the fact of
her presence, but he knew it would be the
worst thing he could do for her.

If you will have a little patience, Colonel
de Crespigny, and not hammer in the panels
of my door, I will open it for you ; but at
present it is locked, and I have unfortunately
lost the key."

I don't believe you," roared the colonel,

in his half-drunken frenzy, " and how dared
you lock yourself into your rooms with my
wife ? Open the door at once, I say, or
I will prise the lock. You are causing this
delay on purpose, in order to give her time
to escape."

I am doing no such thing. I have no
wish or intention of denying that Lady
Muriel is here. She came (with her maid)
to see me on a matter of business."

It's a lie, sir !" replied his opponent, " and
you shall both answer for it. It is not
difficult to understand the meaning of a
married woman being locked up at night
in the chambers of a bachelor, and I have
my witnesses ready to substantiate the
fact."

"Oh, Atliol," cried Muriel in a terrified
whisper, " don't open the door, for God's
sake. Let me throw myself out of the window
first. I would rather die than face the
shame of such a discovery."

My dearest," replied Sir Athol tenderly
(it was the first time he had addressed her by
a caressing title), " any attempt at concealment
would be the worst thing for you.
We have done no wrong. Let us be brave
and tell the truth."

But Muriel had already rushed (with some
wild idea of self-preservation) towards the
window. As she did so, she stepped upon
the key.

Here is the key," she said as she picked
it up. " Now, Athol, you must do as jo\x
think best."

"We have found the key upon the floor,"
he exclaimed ; " but understand me plainly,
Colonel de Crespigny, before I open this door,
that neither I nor Lady Muriel had any hand
in locking it. She has not been here more
than half an-hour, and we had no idea the
door was fastened until I turned the handle
to let her out."

As he spoke, he flung the portal open, and

revealed the forms of Colonel de Crespigny,
Agnes Prudhomme, and — a policeman.

What do you want here ? " demanded
Sir Athol, as soon as he perceived him.
'' You Sit least, do not enter my apartments."


*'I must do as I'm ordered, sir," he
replied.

Most certainly," exclaimed the colonel.
I have brought that officer here as my witness,
and he does not stir until his services
are no longer required."

"Your witness for ichat?'' asked Athol.

That my wife was locked up alone with
you in your rooms at nii^ht, and that she
has disgraced herself as a married woman."

Good God, man ! " exclaimed Sir Athol,
you don't mean to make a public scandal
of this affair ? I swear to you before Heaven
that your wife is as innocent of any thought
of wrong as I have been."

Swear, sir ! You'd swear anything.

Aren't you known as this woman's former
lover, with whom she used to carry on at
Eevranches, and with whom she has been
making assignations for months past. Your
swearing will not go for much in the Divorce
Court, you'll find. You haven't got a leg
to stand upon."

Arthur," screamed Lady Muriel, " you
shall not say such things of him or of me.
We have scarcely spoken to each other since
my marriage. Agnes will tell you "

'' Oh, yes," sneered her husband, " Agnes
will prove an excellent witness for you when
the time comes. Now, officer, you will be
good enough to observe that wee found this
lady and gentleman alone, and locked up together
in these rooms, and that there was
no one else with them — the servants having
been purposely sent out of the way."

It is not true," exclaimed Sir Athol,
'' and if you repeat your assertion. Colonel
de Crespigny, I'll knock you down."

And the young, strongly-knit figure that
advanced upon him, with clenched hands,
looked quite capable of doing it.

Very well," observed the colonel, edging
a little away, " then there'll be assault and
battery added to the other charge. Are
you convinced of the truth of what I said,
officer? "

'• Quite, sir."

And you'll be ready to attest it when
called upon? Very good, then, you can go.
Agnes Prudhomnie, you will also be witness
to the truth of the injury done me."

Never'' cried Muriel indignantly, " Agnes
will be my witness that she came here with
me and heard my intentions, and knew they
were guiltless of blame. You will speak up
for my innocence, won't you, Agnes ? "

But Agnes was silent.

Agnes, why do you not answer me ?
You have known everything about Athol
and me from the beginning, and can bear

witness that we have never had a worse
thought than to love one another as friends."

What miladi says may be very true,"
replied the maid ; " but there is no denying
that appearances are strangely against her."

My God ! she, too, is my enemy," cried
Muriel, bursting into tears.

Now, madam, we have no time for
heroics," said the colonel roughly, " and must
settle this matter without further delay."

"I am ready to go home," said Muriel
meekly.

To go home'' roared her husband, " to
the home you have disgraced ? Not if I
know it, my Lady Muriel. You can go
where you choose, or you can stay here with
your lover, but you never see the inside of
my house again. You may take your oath
of that."

He accompanied this dictum with words

and innuendoes so foul that Athol stepped

forward again to silence him.

VOL. ni. 43

'• You must decide as you choose, sir,
regarding the lady who has the misfortune
to be your wife, but you shall not insult
her in my presence, and you had better understand
that at once." And then he turned
to Muriel, who had sunk into a chair and
was weeping bitterly, and said with the utmost
deference, " Lady Muriel, if Colonel de
Crespigny does not intend to take you back
with him, your best plan will be at once to
seek the protection of your father. Lord
Ehylton. He will believe you, whatever
others may profess to do. Shall I order a
carriage to take you down to Eichmond,
and is there anything you require from
Queen's Gate that I can send your maid
for ? "

I don't wait upon her ladyship anymore,"
interposed Agnes, with a jerk of the

head.

And nothing goes out of my house for
the use of Lady Muriel before this disgraceful

matter is settled," added the colonel. " The
law must decide what she is to have. She
came to me a pauper, and she will leave mein
a still worse condition. But she goes
now with the clothes on her back, and nota
rag more."

Lord Ehylton will doubtless settle all
that with you, sir. He is the proper person
now to look after his daughter's interest,
and I hope to Heaven that you may be
worsted in the fray, for you are the greatest
scoundrel I have ever met."

'' Come, Agnes," said de Crespigny, " we
have finished here now, and we had better
go home. I shall call on my solicitor the
first thing tomorrow morning."

And then they walked out of the room
abruptly, leaving the lovers to themselves.

Oh, whatever shall I do ? " cried Lady
Muriel, in a voice of despair.

The only thing to be done, Muriel, is

to go straight to your father, and tell him

43—2

the whole story. He will advise you better
than I can do. And you must go at once,
dear. You must not stay a moment longer
here than is absolutely necessary."

I will do anything you tell me*' she
answered, rising to her feet.

Let me persuade you to drink a glass
of wine, then, whilst I go and order a carriage.
You are terribly upset, and it will
do you good. I shall not be away above
a few minutes."

He placed the wine before her as he spoke,
but Muriel had no inclination to taste it.
Her brain was whirling with the cruel trial
she had gone through, and she could hardly
understand what had happened to her, excepting
that she had unwittingly fallen into
some terrible disgrace. She was still sitting
before the decanter, shivering though the
night was so warm, when Sir Athol returned
with a private carriage. He insisted on her
drinking the wine, and then dragging her

up, almost by force put her into the vehicle
that was to convey her to her father's home.
She sunk down sobbing in a corner.

Oh ! how shall I tell him ? " she cried.
For answer she felt a warm hand firmly
clasp her own.

You here, Athol?" she said, looking up.
Are you coming with me ? "

Do you think I would let you go alone ? "
he answered reproachfully. "You have incurred
this risk for my sake. It is only
just that I should share it with you."

But it was all my fault ! " she demurred.
You told me to go long before, and now
they will blame you, as well as me."

"Never mind that, Muriel. I am strong
enough to bear it. All we must think of
now is how we can prove the innocence of
your visit to me. I hardly think your father
will be so unkind as to refuse to believe
our version of the story."

Oh, I feel as if I don't care about that,

or any tiling' cried Muriel effusively, " so
long as you are with me." And she seized
his hand in the dark and pressed her lips
upon it. Sir Athol drew it gently, but
decidedly away. It demanded an effort, but
he did it. He felt there was danger for
him in the proximity of Lady Muriel de
Crespigny.

CHARITY BEGINS AT HOME."

Few words passed between them during the
long, dark drive down to Eichmond, but
as the carriage turned into the park gates,
Sir Athol laid his hand again upon Lady
Muriel's, and said :

Shall I leave you here, or shall I
accompany you to the door ? Which will
be best for yourself?"

Oh, don't leave me ! " she exclaimed,
clinging to him like a child in the dark.
Come with me to papa, and tell him
everything about this unfortunate business.
I am too frightened to tell him myself."

In that case, it will be advisable for
you to remain in the carriage until I have
prepared Lord Ehylton for your sudden

appearance' said Athol, as they drew up
before the hall door. The man who answered
their summons looked somewhat astonished
at the advent of such late visitors, but he
admitted the earl was at home that evening,
and consented to carry Sir Athol's card into
his study.

Lord Ehylton did not at first understand
who Sir Athol Fergusson was. He had
heard nothing of the young man's succession
to the baronetcy, and retained but a very
hazy recollection of his Christian name, so
he concluded it must be some relative of
his daughter's former lover, and ordered his
servant to show the gentleman into his
presence. When his eye fell upon his
visitor, however, he remembered him at
once. Athol was not a man to be easily
forgotten, and his personal appearance and
bearing had greatly improved during the
interval of separation. The earl peered at
him above his spectacles with a puzzled air.

You here again ? " lie observed. " Are .
you Sir Athol Fergusson now? And what
may you want of me? I have no more
daughters, sir, to give away."

I " Lord Ehylton, I come on a very serious
errand," replied Athol, " and nothing short
of it would have made me intrude upon
your presence again. I have brought you
your daughter, Lady Muriel de Crespigny,
who seeks your protection from the insults
and brutality of her husband. She is waiting
in the carriage outside, and sent me in
first to prepare you for her arrival."

And may I ask," said the earl, " what
business it is of yours, Sir Athol, to act as
preux-chevalier to my daughter? Your former
relations to each other should have made
you the last person to interfere in her domestic
broils."

"It is the business of every man, Lord
Ehylton, to protect an injured woman. Butin
this instance the office was thrust upon

me. The quarrel (which has separated
Colonel de Crespigny and his wife) took
place at my residence in Piccadilly, and
since her husband left Lady Muriel there, I
had no alternative but to bring her at once
to you."

"And what might my daughter have been
doing at your residence in Piccadilly ? " demanded
Lord Ehylton sternly.

Nothing of which she need be ashamed,
my lord, nor I either. Lady Muriel came
to see me, accompanied by her maid, on a
very simple errand, but an unfortunate accident
occurred during her visit that made it
look suspicious and quite otherwise from
what it was. But I will leave Lady Muriel
to give you the particulars herself. Only
may I entreat that you will be lenient with
her, for I assure you she is entirely free
from blame."

It strikes me you must be the one to
blame. Sir Athol. Are you going to figure

for the second time as the disturber of my
daughter's peace of mind ? "

You can think as you will, Lord Elton,
so long as you acquit Lady Muriel.
My only care is for her. And now, if you
please, I will fetch her to tell her own
story."

"It is all right," he whispered assuringly,
as he helped the trembling girl to alight
from the carriage ; " your father will not
be angry with you'd

But as they entered the study, the earl
(who had been working himself up into a
temper during his guest's absence) addressed
Sir Athol very curtly.

And now, having performed your officious
task, sir, of bringing Lady Muriel to Oakley
Court, perhaps you will return to your own
quarters. I see how this business has arisen
well enough. You have taken a dishonourable
advantage of my daughter's weakness
to undermine her reputation, and I refuse

to know you, sir, or to speak to you again.
Leave my house."

But at this piece of injustice Lady Muriel's
fear evaporated like the morning mist, and
she took up arms bravely in defence of her
injured lover.

It is untrue' she exclaimed. " Papa ! you
have no right to speak to him like that.
He has been the best and sincerest friend that
I ever had. He has combated my weakness
(as you call it) in every possible way. He
has refused to see me, or write to me, or
speak to me, and I forced myself into his
presence this evening when he had no idea
that I was at hand. Whatever happens tome
— whatever may come of this miserable
mistake — I will never hear a word said
against Sir Athol, for it was all my fault,
and I only am to blame."

And I shall never forget you said so,
Lady Muriel, and I thank God to-nii^ht that
your unhappiness is none of my making.

But your father has ordered me to leave
the house and I will go. Some day he
may think differently of me — till then, may
God bless you and bring you safely out of
this trouble."

In another moment he was gone, without
touching the hand of either of them, and
Muriel and her father were left alone.

You have driven the truest friend I
have away from me," she said bursting into
tears.

A nice friend " retorted LordEhylton, " to
lead you into a scrape like this. I suppose
it's a case of divorce, and I shall have your
good name blasted from one end of England
to the other."

I tell you Sir Athol is blameless in the
matter," returned the girl passionately, and
then she sat down and repeated the whole
story to her father from beginning to end.

"I believe now that it was all Agnes's
doing," she said midst her tears ; " she was

always jealous of Athol and me at Branches,
and no one but herself could have
locked the door. Oh ! father, can't you see
now, that it was all her fault, and mine'"

Hearing the circumstances of the case, lead
indeed made a complete revolution in the
opinion of Lord Ehylton. Sir Athol Fergusson
was now a hero, and his daughter (though
very foolish and indiscreet) a most injured
woman. He declared that he should go upto
town and see Colonel de Crespigny on the
subject the first thing in the morning, and
prevent the story becoming public property.

"It will be all right, my dear," he said,
paternally, " you will soon see that. De
Crespigny would not presume to go to law
about such a trifle. I shall insist upon that
woman Agnes Prudhomme being dismissed
without further ceremony, and you must
engage, on your part, to give up the acquaintance
of Sir Athol Fergusson. You
have done a most foolish and risky thing.

Muriel, and you must stand the consequences.
To visit a bachelor in his chambers ! It's
enough to ruin any lady's reputation, and I
don't wonder at de Crespigny's anger. Gad !
I'd like to catch her ladyship at such a game.
It was madness — madness."

Lady Muriel sighed deeply. She felt that
if the resignation of Sir Athol's friendship,
was to be the heavy price of a reconciliation
with her husband, she would rather not be
reconciled at all, but she did not say so.
Her fair fame was as dear to her as to every
woman, and at all risks she would maintain
it. She was thinking thus, when Lady
Ehylton bounced into the room. (To say
she " bounced," is the fittest term to signify
her movements, for though she was a
countess, and a lady of fashion, there was a
suggestiveness of the barmaid about all her
actions, that prevented her associates from
forgetting the stories of her origin.) She had
heard from the servants that Lady Muriel de

Crespigny was closeted with her father, and she
was curious to learn what could have brought
her to the Court again so soon, and at so late
an hour.

Well, I never ! " she exclaimed as she saw
her step-daughter, " and what brings you
back here ? Anything wrong at home ? "

The earl always seemed more than half
afraid of his wealthy wife (who too often
threw the sad fact of his poverty in his
teeth), and on this occasion he positively
trembled, as he related the reason for his
daughter's presence at the Court, so terrified
was he for the way in which she might
interpret it, for Lady Ehylton was not a
generous woman to her own sex. Lady
Muriel (on the contrary) stood by as her
story was being told, with a proudly-carried
head, and flashing defiance in her eye. She
too anticipated her step-mother's verdict, and
was resolved to contend against it.

And so you see, my dear," concluded the

earl, " de Crespigny has treated our poor
girl most shamefully, and I shall call him
severely to account for it. He shall soon
understand that he cannot insult an earl's
daughter with impunity."

Lady Ehylton had remained during the
recital with her big, bold eyes fixed upon
the face of Lady Muriel. She had been loose
and unprincipled in her own youth, and
therefore all the more ready to cast the first
stone at social offenders. The gospel narrative
is turned upside down in these days
Ladies of generous dispositions generally tr}r
to whiten their own characters by blackening
that of some one else ; and of all the
countesses in the peerage Lady Ehylton
was the most sever el}^ virtuous and moral,
when the verdict concerned any one but

herself.

And where does Lady Muriel de Cres-pigmy
propose to stay in the interim, whilst

you are attempting to patch up this most
VOL: ni. 44

disgraceful business with her unfortunate
husband?" she demanded coldly.

Muriel's pride took fire at once.

Not here, madam. You may be assured
of that. The strictness of your ladyship's
principles are well known to me, and I
should not dream of polluting them by my
presence."

Not here, Muriel ? " exclaimed the earl.
"But, my dear child, you must stay here.
The best refutation in the eyes of the world
of the truth of this story will be your remaining
under your father's protection. You
must certainly remain here."

*' Excuse me, Lord Ehylton," interposed
the countess, " but you seem to forget that
I am the mistress of Oakley Court, and the
proper person to decide who shall and who
shall not be a visitor to my house. You forget
also that T have a daughter — an innocent
girl whom I am bound to guard from contamination
; and under these extremely sus

mi

vicious and unpleasant circumstances I will
not allow her to associate with her step-sister.
If you have no care for her character
or mine, it behoves me to look after
them. And, therefore, I say that we have
no room at the Court at present for Lady
Muriel de Crespigny."

It is impossible," exclaimed the earl indignantly,
" that you can wish to turn my
own daughter from my doors."

My doors, if you please, my lord," interposed
her ladyship.

Hang it all. Your doors then, and I
wish to Heaven sometimes that I had never
entered them. But what you propose todo
will be a county scandal."

A much greater scandal, I expect, if she
remained," sneered the countess.

Papa," said Muriel, " I beg of you to

say no more on the subject. I wouldn't

stay under this roof now if Lady Ehylton

asked me on her knees. Order the 



rage for me and I will go to a hotel at
once. You can come and see me in the
morning and then we will decide what is
best to be done in the matter."

At this juncture, she looked up to see the
white, scared face of Cecil Seton, peering in
at the study door.

"Oh, Muriel, darling," she exclaimed,
what is the matter ? and why are you all
so angry ? I could hear your voices in the
drawing-room."

Go back at once, Cecilia," said her
mother. "I will not have you mixed up
with this scandalous affair."

What scandalous affair ? If it is scandalous
I am sure that Muriel has nothings todo
with it," said Miss Seton boldly.

"You had better leave us. Cissy dear,"
urged Lady Muriel, " since your mother
thinks I am not fit to associate with you."

Who dares say so ? " persisted Cecil,
going straight up to her sister's side.

Cecil, you shall not touch her. I order
you to leave the room," screamed Lady
Ehylton.

"And I refuse to obey you, mamma.
If Muriel is in trouble, there is all the
more reason that her friends should stand
up for her, and I, for one, will never desert
her."

Oh, Cissy ! you are a darling," cried
Lady Muriel, throwing herself into her
sister's arms and bursting into tears.

"You are a brave, good girl," said Lord
Ehylton.

You are a disobedient fool," exclaimed
the countess angrily. " You don't even know
the facts of the case, and you are compromising
yourself for nothing."

I don't want to know them," retorted
Cecil. " Muriel is in trouble, and you are
insulting her. That is enough for me."

Then you may reap the reward of your
obstinacy, and since you choose to oppose my

wishes, you can leave the house with Lady
Muriel de Crespigny. I cast you both off
together."

An indescribable look of thankfulness
lighted up the plain face of Cecil Seton.
She had just heard her order of release.

I will take you at your word, mamma ;
and, whether I remain with my sister or not,
I will not trouble you again with my presence.
I am of age, and I am independent, and I
would have proposed a separation between
us long ago, only some foolish notion about
a mother's love for her child kept me silent.
But now I have your voluntary permission,
and I will go."

The sooner the better," replied Lady
Ehylton. " You've been an eyesore to me
from the beginning, with your ugly face and
your awkward manners (the duplicate of your
fool of a father), and I should like to be able
to forget that you were ever born."

And with this parting shot, the countess

bounced " out of the room again, and
left her husband and daughters to themselves.


A shocking exhibition of temper," observed
the earl moodily. He was thinking
(poor man ! ) how he should fare when left
to her tender mercies alone.

"Please to order the carriage at once,
papa," said Lady Muriel. '' I will not stay
in this house one moment longer than is
necessary."

And I shall go with you," exclaimed
Cecil. " I have only to change my dress and
give the necessary instructions to my maid,
and I shall be ready."

Papa, ought she to accompany me ? "
asked Lady Muriel. " know that I am innocent,
but the world may not think so, and
then, what will they say of Cecil ? "

Just what they like, dear Muriel. You
are the only person who has ever been kind
to me — the only person I have ever loved —

and if you cast me ofT too, why I shall be
utterly friendless."

Then we will go together, and keep together
as long as Heaven permits us," replied
Lady Muriel, embracing her again.

In half-an-hour the two girls had left
Oakley Court, and located themselves temporarily
at the Castle Hotel.

Lord Ehylton accompanied them there, and
saw them comfortably settled in a charming
suite of rooms, and then returned rather
crestfallen, and with a heart palpitating with
fear, to the bosom of his countess.

What happened at Oakley Court during
that momentous night never transpired, but
Lady Muriel and Cecil Seton passed it in discussing
the events which have been related,
and in swearing eternal fidelity to one
another.

About three o'clock on the following
afternoon, Lord Ehylton was again admitted
to their presence. He looked portentously

grave — not to say, solemn — as he
took a seat, and announced that he came
straight from an interview with Colonel de
Crespigny. Lady Muriel turned pale as she
observed his manner, and Cecil Seton crept
closer to her, and clasped her hand firmly
in her own.

Papa," commenced the former, " I am
sure that you have bad news for me. Please
tell it at once, and get it over, for I cannot
bear suspense."

I am sorry to say, my dear, that I have.
De Crespigny appears very 'implacable — in
fact he will listen to no arguments in your
defence. Ue believes you to be guilty, and
says his solicitors are of the same opinion,
and certain of the verdict of the law, and he
is determined to proceed to extremities. I
did all I could to move his resolution, but
without effect. I am very much afraid that
you must make up your mind to the worst."

He will divorce me ? " gasped Muriel.

"But how can he, when I am not
guilty ? "

My dear, in a case like this, the law
accepts circumstantial evidence — in fact it
very seldom obtains any other. Unfortunately
your husband has witnesses to prove
you were locked up in Sir Athol Fergusson's
rooms, and the inference is unanswerable."

Divorced ! " repeated Muriel in a low voice
of horror. " Oh, God, it is too hard ! "

You should have thought of that, my
dear, before you committed so reckless a piece
of folly. You see now what it has brought
you to. You have ruined the young man's
reputation with your own."

Will they drag Sir Athol into court too ? "
she demanded with flaming eyes.

Of course they will. How can they condemn
you without him? His name must
appear with your own. He has to suffer for
your sinful imprudence."

Oh, Athol, Athol ! I have never brought

him anything but trouble. Why did you ever
separate us ? " cried Lady Muriel, bursting
into a flood of tears. She wept so bitterly,
and reproached herself so freely, that Lord
Ehylton was thankful to slip away, and leave
her to be consoled by her sister. But it was
long before Muriel was herself again, and as
the days and weeks drained on, and she was
compelled to have interviews with her solicitors
and consultations with her counsel, and
all the wretched mockery of the law was
paraded for her edification, she grew more
and more dispirited. It was the commencement
of the autumn sessions, and her legal
advisers were hopeful of getting the case
called before Christmas. But though they
urged her to defend it, they gave her little
hope of a successful issue. Agnes Prudhomme
(it transpired) had perjured herself to any
extent, in swearing away her mistress's fair
fame, during her private examination by
Colonel de Crespigny's solicitors, and Lady

Muriel had no one to bring forward who would
be accepted as a witness to her innocence. It
rested on the word of Sir Athol Fergusson
and herself, and neither of them would be
admitted in a court of law. She was quite
hopeless, therefore, of gaining her cause, and
in order to divert her mind from its present
misery, Cecil Seton often made her talk of
where they should go, and what they should
do, when the trial was over. Sometimes they
decided to settle in Paris, sometimes in New
York, or they would travel and see the world,
but it was always to be together, for their
friendship had been so cemented by trouble
that they never dreamed of separation. Cecil
Seton was actually happier and more cheerful
than she had ever been in her life before, and
Lady Muriel — even through all the shame and
disgrace of such a period of trouble — could
feel thankful when she remembered that it
would, at least, free her for ever from the
control of a man she so much feared and

despised as Colonel de Crespigny. All this
time she had never seen nor heard from Sir
Athol Fergusson. Whether he was still in
England, or whether he had gone abroad to
escape the disagreement of the scandal concerning
him, Lady Muriel had no opportunity
of ascertaining, for she was too remorseful for
the blame she had innocently brought upon
his head to attempt to drag him into the
quagmire any further. If he ever remembered
her (she thought) it must be with the execration
due to the evil genius of his life. And
yet the last words she had heard him utter
were to pray God to bless her and bring her
safely out of her trouble.

It was a cold damp day in December (the
day before the divorce case was coming off),
and Lady Muriel had refused to accompany
Miss Seton into the park, and sat by
herself in the hotel instead. She shrank
more each day now from going into public.
She fancied that every clod returning from

his labour knew her history, and that her
divorce case was the next upon the list.
She had gained a wide insight to the world's
ways and morals since her story had been
circulated in society. Every minx now —
whether virtuous or vicious — considered herself
justified in thrusting the barbed arrow
deeper home. Even Lina Walford had deserted
her — Lina, who made a common
mock at morality, and expressed her disbelief
in its existence — even she declared that
(sorry as she was for dear Lady Muriel's
misadventure) " auntie " thought it better
that they shouldn't be seen together at so
critical a period. And so Muriel (excepting
for faithful Cecil Seton) had been left
completely alone, and she was wondering
on this afternoon of solitude, how many
real friends a woman ever had, when the
door of her sitting-room was thrown open,
and the waiter announced "Sir Athol Fergusson."
The tell-tale blood rushed in a

crimson flood to Muriel's cheeks, and up to
the very roots of her fair hair, as she rose
to welcome him. But as the servant closed
the door again her hand fell passively from
his, and she sat down by the table and burst
into a storm of tears. Poor Muriel ! she
had wept so much at this period that her
tears required but little to summons them.
They poured forth without effort and without
stint. But the sight of them infinitely
distressed Sir Athol. His own eyes were
moistened as he stood over her.

Oh, Muriel," he whispered, " don't cry
like that. You break my heart. I would
have come to see you sooner, but I dared
not. I have felt that you must hate the
very thought of me, for having been the
means of bringing this misfortune on your
head."

Hate you ! " repeated Muriel, lifting her
stained and swollen face to his. "It is you
who should hate me for having lured you

into such a trap. You, who are the soul of
truth and honour. But, oh, Athol, I didn't
mean it — I didn't mean it."

"I know you didn't mean it, and I have
been blaming myself ever since for having let
you stay with me so long. I should have
forced you to go, for I foresaw (better than
you could do) the danger of discovery for
both of us. But it is done, dear, and we
cannot undo it. Let us forgive each other's
share in it."

I have nothing to forgive," replied Lady
Muriel brokenly. "I have soiled your untarnished
name, and I shall rue it to the
day of my death."

''I hope not, Muriel, for I have forgotten
that part of the business already."

You will remember it tomorrow," she
said with a shudder.

It is because tomorrow is so near
that I ventured to call upon you. My
counsel tells me he has no hope of an acquittal,

and we must be prepared to have
the case so against us. So I thought I
might use the privilege of an old friend to
ask you what you intend to do when the
trial is over ? "

I don't know," replied Muriel sadly.
Cecil talks of Paris, or Brussels, but I
shall have no heart for gaiety."

Do you regret the separation from
Colonel de Crespigny, then ? " he asked in a
low voice.

Oh, no — no ! I rejoice at it. I would
not live with him again for all the world.
But the shame — the disgrace — the remorse
of it all. How can I ever forget them ? "

I think you will. You are very young
still, and life may hold many joys for you.
I wish I thought I might participate in
them, Muriel."

What do you mean ? "

Only this — that if what you have said

to me of late is true, and if the language
VOL. ni. 45

you used in Eevranclies is still the Ian
gage of your heart, mine is open to you,
Muriel, for shelter — to your life's end."

Athol, stop ! Think what sou are saying.
Have you forgotten "

Nothing, my darling — excepting that
you ever gave me any pain. Oh, Muriel,
have you thought so poorly of my love, or
of my powers of self-control? Were you
80 blind that 3'ou could not see my indifference
was assumed for your sake, and
that I was longing all the time to clasp
you to my heart ? "

He would have clasped her then. He had
even advanced a few paces for the purpose,
when something whispered to him to keep
back.

"No," he ejaculated, "not yet. You are
still the wife of another man. But some
day, my dearest, and before long, I will
show you how I love you."

Oh, Athol, would you marry me ? 1,

who will be pointed at all my life as a
divorce 1 It is impossible. Your mother
will prevent it. She will not receive me asher
daughter, and you will regret the rashness
that made me your wife."

Sir Athol drew himself up to his full height.

You mistake me, Muriel. I am not
made of such flimsy material as all that.
I love my mother — yes — and whilst she depended
on me for her support, I should have
felt bound (in mere gratitude) to consider
her wishes with regard to my marriage.
But she is now in a position of independence
— and so am I. You have been the
love of my life, Muriel. From the time I
first knew you, a fair-haired slip of a girl
in Eevranches, till this moment — when you
are passing through the heaviest trial a
woman can be called on to endure — I have
loved you, and you only, and I almost
think that, notwithstanding your marriage

to de Crespigny, you have loved me in the

45—2

.same way. I ask you, therefore, in the
face of everything, when you are once more
free — will you become my wife, and turn
my lonely life into a Paradise ? "

Oh, Athol, I am not worthy," she sobbed.

My dearest, we are none of us worthy
of the good things that God sends us, but
we take them all the same, and this will bethe
very best gift He has ever bestowed
on me."

"You make me so happy. It is too good
to be true," she murmured.

If it is settled, it shall be true," he
answered, " but the law will compel us to
wait for six months first. Where will you
spend those six months, Muriel? After a
while, perhaps, I may see you in an
ordinary way, but it will be safer, for many
reasons, that we reside in different places.
Only if I know you to be hopeful and
happy, and full of love for me, I shall
bear my exile with a grateful heart."

Cecil and I will decide on our plans
to-night, Athol, but wherever we may go
my love will remain at home with you.
You know that now, dearest, don't you?
That I am wholly and solely your own ? "

God be thanked for it," said Sir Athol.
^'•It is hard to leave you thus, Muriel, but I
must go, for I cannot trust myself with you
any longer. To have been separated from
you for such a weary time, never to have
dared to speak a word, or give you a look,
that might tempt you to forget your duty,
and then to find myself here — the holder of
your plighted faith, your promised husband
— and yet to feel you are not yet
really mine. It is too much. Lot me go
away till the day after tomorrow, and then
I will come back, and tell you what I feel."

He raised her hand to his lips and kissed
it passionately as he spoke, and dashed out
of the room as if he could not stand her
presence one moment longer.

Lady Muriel sat where he had left her
in a smiling, happy dream. What were the
shame and exposure of the Divorce Court
to her then? Only the gate by which
she would find her way to Athol's arras
again. The dim, uncertain future had suddenly
been transformed into a path, so
dazzlingly bright, that it blinded her eyes to
contemplate it. Athol! her first and only
lover — the stripling who had awakened her
maiden feelings at Eevranches, the man who
had roused the deepest passion her womanhood
had ever known — he was going to be
her husband, her very own possession, the
haven of all her future life.

Cecil Seton, coming in presently, rather
cold and damp, and disposed to look on the
black side of thin<:fs, could not imagine what
had happened to make her step-sister meet
her, wreathed in smiles. But she was soon
enlightened.

Oh, Cissy," cried the happy Muriel, " he

has been here (Athol, you know), and he
has made me promise to marry him as soon
as the divorce is fairly settled, and I — I don't
care for anything now — I am so happy I
feel as if I should go mad."

I am glad," replied Cecil, with trembling
lips, " very glad, for your sake, my darling
Muriel — though — though — of course it will
separate us''

What do you mean ? " cried Muriel.
Do you think I am such a heartless
wretch as to forget what you have been tome
throughout this trial, or that I could
possibly be happy whilst you were suffering,
even a little bit ? No, no, Cissy ! if ever you
leave me, it must be of your own accord, for
my life (even with Athol) would not be half
a life without you."

And then the two girls wept in each other's
arms, and kissed each other, and vowed an
eternal fidelity, which was never afterwards
broken. Whilst they were still discussing

the wonderful alteration which Sir Athol's
visit had made in Lady Muriel's plans, the
waiter entered to say that a man was waiting
below, who asked for an interview with Lady
Muriel de Crespigny.

What sort of a man, and what is his
name ? " she demanded.

He didn't give his name, my lady, but he
is a foreigner, and he wishes to speak to your
ladyship on important business."

"Shall I see him, Cissy?"

"Yes, dear, why not? I was just going
to my bedroom. Let him be shown up
here."

Very good ! Waiter, you can show the
man up, but come at once if I ring for you.
It may be some begging impositions'"

She was standing; on the heaithiui with
the c^low of love still illuminating her face
when the door opened again to admit Sir
Athol's valet, M. Herschel.

THE SHINING PATH.

Lady Muriel had never met M. Herschel
before. She did not even know of his existence,
and so she greeted him with the
blank look of inquiry, with which we regard
san utter stranger of whose business we are
unaware. But there was nothing in M.
Herschel's appearance to create suspicion.
On the contrary, he was so faultlessly attired
for his position in life, and his
manner was so eminently deferential, that
-all idea of his beings a bef?2^ar vanished at
once.

What is it you want of me ? " demanded
Muriel, sweetly.

"First, my lady, to beg your ladyship's
most humble pardon for this intrusion, and

next, to introduce myself as Achilles Herschel,
inlet to Sir Athol Fergusson."

Sir Athol's valet'' exclaimed Muriel.
Do you come from him ? "

I do come from him, my lady, that is, I
come from his chambers, but not with his
knowledge, for my business concerns you
only."

Make haste and tell it me then, M .
Herschel," she said impatiently, " for I am
pressed for time."

Ah, my lady," he exclaimed, bowing,
with his hand upon his heart, " errant me a
moment, I pray you, for the task I have
set myself is a hard one. I come to confess
an error, which I have too long kept
secret, and one which may work incalculable
mischief in the future."

I don't understand you," said Muriel,
With knitted brows. "If you have done
anything wrong, your master is the proper
person to confess it to."

But it concerns your ladyship more than
Sir Athol. I have tried to keep it to myself
altogether, but it is impossible. I have
a conscience, my lady, and it is pricking
me terribly at the present moment. I understand
that your ladyship has no witness to
appear on your side in court tomorrow."

Lady Muriel blushed scarlet. She knew
that all the world was cognizant that her
divorce case would be tried upon the next
day, but she could not reconcile herself to
hearing it mentioned. She turned upon the
poor man almost fiercely.

What is that to you ? How is it possible
for me to find a witness to the truth, when
Sir Athol and I were alone ? It is an infamous
trumped-up case, but it will succeed
nevertheless. I am quite aware of that."^
And she turned her head haughtily away.

But, pardon me, my lady, you and my
master. Sir Athol, were riot alone," replied
the valet.

Not alone ? What do you mean P "

Ah, m}^ lady, here comes the hard part
of my business with you. I must confess my
own error ; and it is one that a (gentleman''
said M. Herschel, with unconscious satire,
may well be ashamed of. 1 was in the antechamber
all the time that you were locked
in with Sir Athol, and can vouch that the
accusation brought against you is a false
one."

But it is impossible'' replied Muriel, excitedly,
" Sir Athol and I searched the antechamber
thoroughly for the door key. We
must have seen you had you been there."

Pardon me, again, my lady, but I was
there, and had I not been afraid of my
master's answer, I should have told him so
long ago. I entreat your ladyship's patience
whilst I relate the story. Sir Athol was ill
and out of sorts that nii^'ht. lie refused
to go to the club for his dinner as usual,
but desired me to leave him alone. I have

an interest in Sir Athol, my lady — he is a
gentleman with whom I can sympathize—
and as soon as I had taken my dinner I
returned to his chambers to see if I could
do anything for him. I had a lighted
cigarette in my hand at the time, and
when I entered the ante chamber, I went
and stood by the open window behind the
curtains in order to finish it, for Sir Athol
does not permit me to smoke indoors. As
I was standing there your ladyship and your
maid opened the door. I thought at first
that it was (what you call in England) a
/arA:,' and that you would soon depart
again, but when Agnes Prudhomme left your
ladyship there and locked the door upon you.
I saw it was serious, and crept behind the-piano
for concealment. Perhaps your ladyship
may remember that the piano is placed
across one corner of the room in front of a
palm tree. I crouched down there, and it
perfectly concealed me. That is doubtless.

why I did not see the key, which Agnes
must have thrown in at the open window.
That is also why I have had no courage
to confess the truth to my master. He
would never forgive me for having played
the eavesdropper. But on my honour, my
lady," continued M. Herschel, with his hand
again upon his heart, '' on the honour of a
Frenchman, I cannot remember a word of
what passed between you and Sir Athol —
only I can swear that you were conversing
together all the time, and that it was Agnes
Prudhomme who locked the door upon you,
and I am ready to do that in court tomorrow,
if your ladyship gives me permission."


Muriel had listened to the vaiefs narrative
with a flushed face and a beatings heart. She
had hardly known till then hoc dear her good
name was to her, and she accepted his offer to
come forward on her belial with avidity.

Of course, of course you must do it. You

are the only person who can substantiate the
claim of Sir Athol and myself to innocence in
this matter. M. Herschel, I cannot thank
you sufficiently for this visit. You have
"saved us both. Best assured that Sir Athol
will never blame you for the part you took in
the matter. This is the address of my lawyer.
Please to go to him at once, without a moment's
delay, and tell him just what you have
told me ; and here," she added, drawing a
bank note from her purse, "is something to
defray the expenses of your journey."

But M. Herschel drew back with a deprecating
action.

"No, my lady. I thank you, but I cannot
accept your bounty. As it has turned out, it
is providential I was present, but I had no
right to be there, and I do not know low I
shall tell Sir Athol of the fact. But for the
sake of your ladyship, I would dare anything."


Very well, M. Herschel," she answered

smiliiif^ ; " your services shall not be forgotten
in the future, and I extend you a
free pardon, in the name of Sir Athol,
beforehand."

The valet bowed himself out of the room,
and Muriel was still standing* on the ',
thinking how Athol and she would
reward him for defending their characters
in the coming time, when they should be
happily married to each other — when a
sudden, unexpected, and awful thought struck
her : if M. Herschel's witness established her
innocence, there would be no divorce, and
if there were no divorce, she and Athol
would never be married to each other !

In the first shock of this discovery she
was about to rush after the valet and forbid
his visit to the solicitor, but she was in a
public hotel, and she could not have confided
her reasons for chano'ino- her mind to
M, Herschel, and so the fear of publicity
and the shame of confession deterred her.

and she ran up-stairs instead, to tell the
mistake she had made to Cecil Seton. But
Cecil did not see it in the same light. She
considered that (at all hazards) it was Lady
Murders duty, to herself and others, to clear
her name from such a suspicion.

"How often have you told me, Muriel,"
she said, " that Sir Athol's favourite adage
is, ' Fais ce que dois, advienne que pourra'
Don't you think he would repeat it now,
and tell you to do only what seems right,
without any heed to the possible consequences
? And surely you would rather live
a lonely life free from blame than be married,
to him, with a slur upon your reputation ? "

I am not sure," replied Muriel sadly ;:

nothing could have looked brighter than

my prospects this afternoon, but now they

have all faded away. And yet how could I

have let my good name be unfairly wrested

from me, when I knew it was in my power

to prevent it ? "

VOL. ni. 46

You would have repented it all your
life, dear Muriel ; besides it was not only
your name that was in peril, it was Sir xVthol's
also, and surely your love for him would
make you relinquish your own wishes sooner
than needlessly smirch his character."

"Yes, yes," said Muriel brightening up.
' Fais ce que dois, advienne que pourra.'
Athol is always right, and I feel sure he
would have advised me as you have. And
perhaps after all the Court will not accept
Herschel's testimony, and then there will
still be balm in Gilead."

Her buoyant nature kept her spirits up
during the evening, but between excitement
and hope and fear, she passed a sleepless night,
and rose miserably depressed in the morning.
Everything was wrong then. She lamented
a thousand times, that she had authorized M.
Herschel's visit to her solicitor. She was certain
she should lose her reputation, and her
lover, and her position, all at one stroke.

Colonel de Crespigny would not obtain his
divorce, but she could never return to his
protection, neither could she accept the solace
of Sir Athol's affection, and so she must live
for the rest of her long life lonely, and unloved,
and unable to have any enjoyment.
It was useless for Cecil to try and console
her. She was beyond the reach of consolation.
She had lost her Athol, and as she had
said yesterday, that the loss of her reputation
seemed to be nothing beside the joy of his
possession, so was she ready to affirm to-day,
that she would rather wilfully part with her
good name than give up the only man she
had ever loved. Cecil reminded her that she
had done her duty, and she should take comfort
from that thought ; but she received,
metaphorically speaking, such a slap in the
face for the suggestion, that she retreated
into her shell, and sat by in silence for the
remainder of the time watching her sister's

eccentricities. Poor Lady Muriel was like a

46—2

mad creature in those hours of suspense,
during which the trial was supposed to be
going on. Clad in "a claret-coloured tea-gown,
which she had just flung around her,
with all her fair hair streaming down her
back, her beautiful face flushed with anxiety,
and her hands nervously clenching and unclenching
themselves, she paced up and down
her room with the look of a hunted animal
that is only waiting for its death. Her
lawyers had promised to telegraph to her
as soon as the case was concluded, but no
telegram had come. Several times she exclaimed
excitedly to Cecil, " This will kill me.
I cannot stand the suspense any longer. I
shall die before the messai]fe arrives." And
more than once her step-sister had to use
force to prevent her from rushing up to
London, and into the Divorce Court, to learn
the verdict for herself. The time drao^nred
heavily. The case had been on for hearing
at ten o'clock that morning, but it was now

five in the afternoon, and still no news of its
progress had reached them. Cecil observed
that divorce cases often took several days to
finish, but Lady Muriel would not even allow
the possibility of such a thing.

"You are thinking of defended suits," she
said impatiently, " but here, there are at the
most but three witnesses to examine. I
wonder if Athol is there. He might have
telegraphed to me. No one thinks of what
I am suffering down in this place alone."

She was just about to abandon herself
afresh to her grief when Miss Seton's maid
tapped at the door.

His lordship, if you please, miss, for Lady
Muriel."

My father," cried Muriel ; " he has
brought news for me. Let me go to him."

And flying down-stairs just as she was,
she entered the sitting-room to confront Lord
Ehylton and Sir Athol Fergusson. Both men
were looking very grave, but both could see '

how she suffered and was suffering, and their
concern was immediately for her.

My dear girl," exclaimed Lord Ehylton,
advancing to meet her, " you mustn't excite
yourself Hke this. The case is well over,
and you are acquitted of all blame, excepta
little indiscretion."

Lady Muriel stared at her father for a
moment, and then sat down and burst into
tears.

The suspense was ended and the reaction
had set in ; but she wasn't quite sure whether
she was glad or sorry for the result. One
misfortune was very palpable to her. She
had asrain lost her lover.

But I am the bearer of sad news to
you, my dear Muriel, and that is why I
asked Sir Athol to accompany me and help
me to break it to you."

I suppose Colonel de Crespigny wants
me to live with him again," she said, dashing
her tears away, " but I won't. Nothing

on earth shall induce me to do it. When
did the case end, papa ? "

'' Before twelve, my dear. There was
nothing to detain us. M. Herschel's testimony
knocked Agnes Prudhomme's into
cocked hats. She utterly broke down under
cross-examination."

Then why didn't you come to me before,
papa, or send me word of the issue ?
Couldn't you guess what I was feeling ?
Was Colonel de Crespigny present ? "

Oh, yes ! he was present," replied the
earl gravely.

Is it anything to do with him that you
have come to tell me ? Papa, nothing will
make me return to him. I will die first ! "

You will never be asked to return,
Muriel. It is impossible. Prepare yourself
for a shock, my dear. Your husband has
left us. He is dead."

Dead / " •

There was only that one word heard to

issue from her lips, and then she was silent
paralyzed by the suddenness of the intelligence.


Yes, my dear, dead and by a terrible
accident."

^'Howf'' she whispered after a long
pause.

By his lawyer's account, he has been
drinking very heavily lately, and he was
the worse for liquor when he entered the
court this morning. The judge observed it
and ordered him to sit down (more than
once) very sharply. When he understood
that the case was m.YQn against him he became
excited and violent, and had to betaken
home. When his witness, Agnes Prude
returned to the house, it appears
that she went at once to his private room,
where she found him sitting moodily, with
his loaded pistols on the table before him.
They had a quarrel over the breaking down
of her evidence, and she says that (in his

passion) he pointed a pistol at her, with his
finger on the trif^G^er, and that in knocking
it to one side to save herself, it exploded,
and the ball lodged in his brain. Whether
the girl's story is true or not will come out
at the inquest, but the fact remains that
your husband is gone."

There was such a loncc silence after he
had concluded his recital, that Lord Ehylton
observed :

*' Have you nothing to say, my dear ? "

No, papa, I have nothing to say. But
I would like, please, to be alone."

The two men rose at once and passed
out of the room. Only one lingered outside,
with a hope that he might hear his
name recalled.

Lady Muriel stood by the table in the
gloaming, half leaning against it, with her
eyes (in which a certain horror lingered)
fixed upon the dull grey sky. So he had
left her then — he had spoilt her sacrifice of

Self to Duty — he had released her for ever
from his presence. The fire had burned
low and she felt chilly. The room seemed
full of weird shadows, and she almost
screamed as some one crept softly to her
side. But the firm hand laid upon hers was
one of flesh and blood — the warm lips that
stole gently to her own were full of love
and passion; and the arm that held her
round the waist was a support she might
lean against for life.

And so," she sighed softly, " it is aU
over."

No, my darling ! " replied Athol, " it is
just begun."

THE END.

KELLY AND CO., MIDDLE MILL, KINGSTON-ON-THAMES ;

AND GATE STREET, LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS, W.C.

March, 1889.

F. V. WHITE & Co's

LIST OF

PUBLICATIONS.

NOVELS AT ALL LIBRARIES IN TOWN AND COUNTRY.

BEAUTIFUL JIM.

By JOHN STRANGE WINTER, Author of "Booties' Baby," " Mignonne
Husband," " Booties' Children," &c. 2 Vols.
A story that has the merits of movement and liveliness"— academy.
'Beautiful Jim' is as fresh and engaging a work as this charming writer baa
produced, while the structure of its plot has a peculiar strength which adds much to
the effect of the story as a whole. — Scotsman,"

PUEPLE AND FINE LINEN.

By Mrs. ALEXANDER ERASER. 3 Vols.

LONG ODDS.

By HAWLEY SMART. 3 Vols.

LANDING A Prize.

By Mrs. EDWARD Renard, Author of " The Girl in the Brown Habit."
3 Vols.

ON Circumstantial EVIDENCE.

By FLORENCE MARRYAT. Author of " My Sister the Actress." 3 Vols.

THIS WICKED WOELD.

By Mrs. H. LOVETT CAMERON, Author of " In a Grass Country," " A
North Country Maid," &c. 3 Vols. (2nd Edition.)

HEE LAST Ein.

By the Honble. Mrs. WALTER R. D. FORBES (Eveline Michell Farwell), Author
of " Fingers and Fortune," " The Man in Cords," &c. 2 Vols.

Severed TIES.

By Mrs. HENRY WYLDE. 3 Vols.

A Dangerous Experiment.

By Lady DUFFUS HARDY, Author of "Paul Wynter's Sacrifice," "In Sight
of Land," &c. 3 Vols.

A Distracting GUEST.

By Mrs. ROBERT JOCELYN. 2 Vols.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31. Southampton Street, Strand.

THE WORKS OF JOHN STRANGE WINTER,

UNIFORM IN STYLE AND PRICE.
Each in Paper Covers, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6. At all Booksellers & Bookstalls.

MY POOE DICK.

(4th Edition.) Illustrated by MAURICE G-REIFFENHAGEN.

BOOTLES' CHILDEEN.

(5th Edition.) Illustrated by J. BERNARD Partridges

Strange Winter is never more thoroughly at home than when delineating
the characters of children, and everyone will be delighted with the dignified Made
and the quaint Pearl. The book is mainly occupied with the love affairs of Terry
(the soldier servant who appears in many of the preceding books), but the children
buzz in and out of its pages much as they would come in and out of a room in real
life, pervading and brightening the house in which they dwell." — Leicester Daily
Post.

THE CONFESSIONS OF A PUBLISHER.

'* The much discussed question of the relations between a publisher and his clients
furnishes Mr. John Strange Winter with material for one of the brightest tales of the
season. Abel Drinkwater's autobiography is written from a humorous point of
view ; yet here, as elsewhere, ' many a true word is spoken in jest,' and in the conversations
of the publisher and his too ingenuous son facts come to light that are
worthy of the attention of aspirants to literary fame." — Morning Post.

MIGNON'S HUSBAND. (8th Edition.)

It is a capital love story, full of high spirits, and written in a dashing style that
will charm the most melancholy of readers into hearty enjoyment of its fun." —
Scotsman.

The name of John Strange Winter is enough to tell the reader that ' Mignon's
Husband ' is a brisk, lively tale, with a little pathos but more fun." — Graphic.

THAT IMP. (7th Edition.)

Barrack life is abandoned for the nonce, and the author of ' Booties' Baby '
introduces readers to a country home replete with every comfort, and containing
men and women whose acquaintanceship we can only regret can never blossom into
friendship." — Whitehall Review.

This charming little book is bright and breezy, and has the ring of supreme
truth about it." — Vanity Fair.

MIGNON'S SECRET, (nth Edition.)

In ' Mignon's Secret ' Mr. Winter has supplied a continuation to the never-to-be-forgotten
' Booties' Baby.' . . . The story is gracefully and touchingly
told"— /o^n Bull.

A clever little story. . . . It is lightly touched, and has somewhat a tragic
termination. It is easy to imagine we have not seen the last of ' Mignon ' yet by a
long way." — Punch.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

THE WORKS OF JOHN STRANGE VHHTER-( Continued).

ON MAECH. (6th Edition.)

"This short story is characterised by Mr. Winter's customary truth in detail
humour, and pathos." — Academy.

"By publishing ' On March,' Mr. J. S. Winter has added another little gem to his
well-known store of regimental sketches. The story is written with humour and a
deal of feeling." — Ar-mis and Navy Gazette.

IN QUAETEES. cth Edition.)

' In Quarters ' is one of those rattling tales of soldiers' life which the public have
learned to thoroughly appreciate." — The Graphic.

"The author of 'Booties' Baby' gives us here another story of military life, which
few have better described." — British Quarterly Review.

AEMY SOCIETY: Life in a Garrison Town.

Cloth, 6/- ; also in Picture Boards, 2/-. (8th Edition.)

This discursive story, dealing with life in a garrison town, is full of the pleasant
go' and movement which has distinguished ' Booties' Baby,' ' Pluck,' or in fact a
majority of some half-dozen novelettes which the author has submitted to the eyes
of railway bookstall patronisers. "—DaiZ^/ Telegraph.

GAEEISON GOSSIP, Gathered in Blankhampton.

(A Sequel to " Army Society") Cloth, 2/6; also in Picture Boards, 2/-.
(4th Edition.)

' Garrison Gossip ' may fairly rank with ' Cavalry Life," and the various other
books with which Mr. Winter has so agreeably beguiled our leisure hours"— &i??/;'dflw
Review.

The novel fully maintains the reputation which its author has been fortunate
enough to gain in a special line of his ovnx.-graphic.

A SIEGE BABY. Cloth, 2/6 ; picture boards, 2,-

The story which gives its title to this new sheaf of stories by the popular author
of ' Booties' Baby ' is a very touching and pathetic one. . . . Amongst the other
stories, the one entitled, ' Out of the Mists ' is, perhaps, the best written, although
the tale of true love it embodies comes to a most melancholy ending." — County
Gentleman,

BEAUTIFUL JIM. cloth gut, 2 «.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

MRS. EDWARD Renard's SPORTING NOVELS,

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

A Crack COUNTY, cloth gnt, 2/6.

THE Girl IN THE Brown HABIT.

Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-. (4th Edition.)

' ' Nell Fitzgerald ' is an irreproachable heroine, full of gentle womanliness, and
rich in all virtues that make her kind estimable.— Any Telegraph.

There is a wonderful freshness about this novel which cannot fail to charm even
those who have never ridden to hounds." — Court Journal.

KILLED IN THE OPEN.

Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards. 2/-, (.3rd Edition.)

'Killed in the Open ' is a book that cannot fail to excite interest. Its tone is
thoroughly healths"— Illustrated London News.

"It is in truth a very good love story set in a framework of hounds and horses,
but one that could be read with pleasure independently of any such attractions." —
Fortnightly Review.

' Killed in the Open ' is a very superior sort of hunting novel indeed." — Graphic*

Straight AS A DIE.

Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-. (3rd Edition.)

"If you like sporting novels I can recommend to you Mrs. Kennard's ' Straight asa
Die.' "truth.

Mrs. Edward Kennard can write, and write well. Her descriptions of country
life are many of them admirable, and her story will be read to the end. Some of the
love passages between Dulcie and Bob are full of beauty and pathos." — Pictorial
World.

A Real GOOD THING.

Cloth gilt, 2/6. (3rd Edition.)

There are some good country scenes and country spins in ' A Real Good Thins,'
The hero, poor old Hopkins, is a strong character." — Academy.

TWILIGHT TALES. Castrated.) Cloth gUt, 2/6. . •

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
In Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6. The Second Edition of

A GLOEIOUS GALLOP.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

HAWLEY SMART'S SPORTING NOVELS.

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

THE MASTEE OF EATHKELLY.

Cloth gilt, 2/6.

THE Outside.

Cloth gilt, 2/6; Picture Boards, 2/-. (4th Edition.)

"Since the deaths of Surtees and Whyte Melville, Captain Hawley Smart has
worthily held his place at the head of those writers who devote themselves to sporting
subjects . . . his readers know precisely what to expect when they take up
one of his books, and they are never disappointed"— .S«^t/?-day Retieu.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
Each in Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6.

THE LAST COUP.

THE PEIDE OF THE PADDOCK.

CLEVEELY WON.

THE HONOURABLE MRS. FETHERSTONHAUCH S

NEW NOVEL.

Cloth, 2/6.

DEEAM FACES.

By the Author of "Kilcorran," " Robin Adair, " &c.

BRET HARTE'S NEW NOVEL.

Cloth, 2/6.

THE CEUSADE OF THE Excelsior.

By the Author of "The Luck of Bearing Camp," &c.

«

As a sketcher of the life of the Far West lie is still unrivalled. . . . Mr. Bred
Harte's readers will greatly enjoy the amusing account of the travellers' life at the
Mexican outpost, and the very clever way in which at last the castaways are extricated.
In this story the author shows a faculties invention and a literary tact so
noteworthy that we may even venture to expect another romance as superior in permanent
value to the delightful crusade of the 'Excelsior' as the latter, is to its
lengthy predecessor ' Gabriel Conroy.' " — Academy.

SIR RANDAL ROBERTS' NEW SPORTING NOVEL.

Cloth gilt, 2/6.

CUEB AND SNAFFLE.

By the Author of "In the Shires." itc.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand,

MRS. H. LOVETT CAMERON'S NOVELS,

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

IN A GEASS COUNTEY.

(A Story of Love and Sport. ) (7th Edition. ) Cloth gilt, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-.

We turn with pleasure to the green covers of ' In a Grass Country.' The three
heroines are charming each in her own way. It is well sketched, full of character,
with sharp observations of men and women — not too hard on anybody — a clear story
carefully written, and therefore easily read. . . . recommended." — Punch,

When the days are short and there is an hour or two to be disposed of indoors
before dressing time, one is glad to be able to recommend a good and amusing novel.
In a Grass Country ' may be said to come under this description." — Saturday
Review.

A NOETH COUNTEY MAID.

(3rd Edition. ) Cloth, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-.

A DEAD PAST.

(3rd Edition.) Cloth, 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-.

A DEVOUT LOYEE. cioth,2/6.

Without doubt, one of Mrs. Loveth Cameron's best and prettiest stories. The
character of Rose de Brefour is admirably drawn. . . . Mrs. Loveth Cameron
deserves great credit for having made a good woman interesting." — Ladies' Pictorial.

THE COST OF A LIE. cioth,2/6.

BY THE SAME Author.
Each in Paper Cover, cloth 1/6.

NECK OE NOTHING.

. it is pleasant, easy reading, and the characters act in a way one can
understand." — Saturday Review.

. is really very bright and readable from first to last." — Academy.

. is a capital story of hunting and love-making combined. . . .
Nothing prettier or more natural has been smitten for some time than the scene in
which Lucy Netterville betrays her cherished secret with such happy results." —
Pictorial World.

THE MADNESS OF MAEEIAGE.

Mrs. Loveth Cameron's books are never devoid of merit. . . . The interest in
Daisy Carew's fate is well sustained. . . . " — Morning Post.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

MRS. ALEXANDER'S NOVELS

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

A FALSE SCENT.

Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/G.

BY WOMAN'S WIT.

(3rd Edition.) Cloth 2/6 ; Picture Boards, 2/-.

'• Mrs. Alexander deserves credit for keeping her readers mystified for some time in
the matter of Mrs. Kuthven's rubles. . . How the widow's wit discovers the
treachery of the man she loves in spite of it ; how she avenges herself, and the terrible
straits Nora is involved in for a season, when she has accepted the wrong man
because the right man has been slow to declare himself ; and how all ends well for
her and her gentle stepmother, not to mention the old shinar whom she weds, is
written in Mrs. Alexander's book, and very readable." — Athenaeum.

In Mrs. Alexander's tale
Much art she clearly shows
In keeping dark the mystery
Until the story's close ! "punch.

MONA'S CHOICE. cioth2/6.

"Mrs. Alexander has written a novel quite worthy of her." — Athenaeum.
". . . it is pleasant and unaffected." — Saturday Review,

"Rite's" NEW NOVELS.

Each in Paper Cover, 1/- ; Cloth, 1/6. At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

THE MYSTEEY OF A TUEKISH BATH.

(2nd Edition.)

Every fresh piece of work which ' Rita ' publishes, shows an increase of power,
and a decided advance on the last. The booklet contains some very smart voting
indeed"— Whitehall Review.

'The Mystery of a Turkish Bath ' has a well-wrought out plot of slightly sensational
interest, and is \\Titteu \\1th this author's well-known grace of style." —
Scotsman.

THE SEVENTH DEEAM. A Romance.

. is a powerful and interesting study in weird effects of fiction. It will
hold the close attention of its readers from first to last, and keep them entertained
with changing sensations of wonder." — Scotsman.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

POPULAR WORKS AT ALL BOOKSELLERS AND

BOOKSTALLS.

A NEW ONE SHILLING NOVEL,

OE IN CLOTH, 1/6.

THE MYSTERY ofBELGRAVE SQUARE.

By CURTIS YORKE,

Author of "Hush,"&c.

By SAMUEL LAING.

A MODERN ZOROASTRIAN.

By the Author of " Modern Science and Modern Thought, "
"A Sporting Quixote," &c.

1 Vol. Cloth, 2/6. (second Edition,)

By W. H. DAVENPORT ADAMS.

CELEBRATED ENGLISHWOMEN of the VICTORIAN ERA.

By the Author of " England on the Sea," &c.
1 Vol. Cloth, 2/6.

By PERCY THORPE.

HISTORY OF JAPAN.

1 Vol. Cloth, 3/6.

F. V. WHITE & Co., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

c i

SELECT" NOVELS

Crown 8vo., Cloth, 2s. 6d. each.
AT ALL BOOKSELLERS AND BOOKSTALLS.

BY FLORENCE MARRYAT.

1 THE HEIE Presumptive.

2 THE HEAET OF JANE Warner.

3 UNDEE THE LILIES AND EOSES.

4 HEE WOELD AGAINST A LIE.

5 FACING THE FOOTLIGHTS.

BY ANNIE THOMAS (Mrs. Pender Cudlip).

6 HEE SUCCESS.

7 Friends AND Loveless

JENIFEE.

9 KATE VALLIANT.

10 ALLEETON Towers.

BY LADY CONSTANCE HOWARD.

11 MATED WITH A CLOWN.

12 MOLLIE Darling.

13 ONLY A VILLAGE MAIDEN.

BY MRS. Houston,

Author of " Recommended to Mercy."

14 Barbara's Warning.

BY MRS. ALEXANDER ERASER.

15 A Professional BEAUTY.

p. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

SELECT" HOVELS-continued).

BY HARRIETT JAY.

16 A MAEEIAGE OF CONVENIENCE.

BY IZA DUFFUS HARDY.

17 LOVE, Honour, AND OBEY.

18 NOT EASILY JEALOUS.

19 ONLY A LOVE STOEY.

BY JEAN Middlemost.

20 POISONED AEEOWS

BY MRS. H. LOVETT CAMERON.

21 A NOETH COUNTEY MAID.

22 A DEAD PAST.

23 THE COST OF A LIE.

BY LADY VIOLET GREVILLE.

24 KEITH'S WIFE.

BY NELLIE Fortescue HARRISON,

Author of " So Runs My Dream."

25 FOE ONE MAN'S PLEASUEE.

BY EDMUND Leather.

26 THE ACTOE's WIFE.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

It

POPULAR" NOVELS.

Picture Boards, 2s. each.
AT ALL BOOKSELLERS AND BOOKSTALLS.

1 Garrison GOSSIP. By John Strange

Winter, Author of "A Siege Baby," "In
Quarters," " On March," " Mignon's Secret'*
"That Imp," "Mignon's Husband," &c.
(Fourth Edition.)

2 AEMY SOCIETY; Or, Life in a Garrison

Town. By the same Author. (Eighth Edition.)

3 THE OUTSIDER. By Hawley Smart,

Author of "The Pride of the Paddock,"
"Cleverly Won," "Bad to Beat," "Lightly
Lost," &c.

4 BY WOMAN'S WIT. By Mrs. Alexander,

Author of " Mona's Choice," " The Wooing O't,"
The Executor," " The Admiral's Ward," &c.

5 THE GIRL IN THE BROWN HABIT. By

Mrs. Edward Kennard, Author of " Straight as a
Die," " Twilight Tales," " A Real Good Thing,"
A Glorious Gallop," " A Crack County," &c.

6 KILLED IN THE OPEN. By the same

Author.

7 STRAIGHT AS A DIE. By Mrs. Edward

Kennard, Author of " A Real Good Thing," Sec.

8 IN A GRxiSS COUNTRY: A Story of

Love and Sport. By Mrs. H. Loveth Cameron,
(Seventh Edition.)

9 A NORTH COUNTRY MAID. By the

same Author.
10 A DEAD PAST. By the same Author.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

n

POPULAR" HOy/ELS-CConiinued).

11 POISONED AEEOWS. By Jean Middle-mass,

Author of " Wild Greorgie," " Dandy."

12 ONLY A LOVE STOEY. By Iza Duffus

Hardy, Author of " Love, Honour, and Obey."

13 THE HEAET OF JANE WAENEE. By

Florence Marryat, Author of "Facing the
Footlights," " Her World against a Lie," « The
Heir Presumptive," " My own Child," &c.

14 UNDEE THE LILIES AND EOSES. By

the same Author.

15 KATE VALLIANT. By Annie Thomas

(Mrs. Pender Cudlip), Author of " Her Success."

16 KEITH'S WIFE. By Lady Violet Greville,

Author of " Zoe : A Girl of Genius,"
Creatures of Clay."

17 MATED WITH A CLOWN. By Lady

Constance Howard, Author of " Only a Village
Maiden," " Mollie Darling."

18 NOT EASILY JEALOUS. By Iza Duffus

Hardy, Author of " Love, Honour, and Obey,"
&c.

19 FOE ONE MAN'S PLEASUEE. By

Nellie Fortescue Harrison, Author of "So
Euns My Dream," &c.

20 THE CEUSADE OF " THE Excelsior."

By Bred Harte.

21 A SIEGE BABY. By John Strange

Winter.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31 Southampton Street, Strand.

ONE SHILLING NOVELS.

In Paper Cover.

THOSE MARKED » CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED IN CLOTH (1/6.)

At all Booksellers and Bookstalls.

1 *MY POOE DICK. (Fourth Edition.)

By John Strange Winter, Author of *' Booties'
Baby," " Houp La," &c. (With Illustrations by
Maurice Gtreiffenhagen.)

2 *BOOTLES' CHILDEEN. (Fifth Edition.)

By the same Author. (With Illustrations by
J. Bernard Partridge.)

3 *THE CONFESSIONS OF A Published.

By the same Author.

4 *MIGNON'S HUSBAND. (Eighth Edition.)

By the same Author.

5 *THAT IMP. (Seventh Edition.) By the

same Author.

6 *MIGNON'S SECEET. (Eleventh Edition.)

By the same Author.

7 *0N MAECH. (Sixth Edition.) By the

same Author.

8 *IN QUAETEES. (Seventh Edition.) By

the same Author.

9 *A GLOEIOUS GALLOP. (Second Edition.)

By Mrs. Edward Kennard, Author of
The Girl in the Brown Habit," " A Real Good
Thing," &c.

10 *THE MYSTEEY OF A TUEKISH BATH.

(Second Edition.) By *' Rita," Author of " Dame
Burden," " Sheba," " My Lord Conceit," &c.

11 *THE SEVENTH DEEAM. A Romance.

By the same Author.

12 *THE PEIDE OF THE PADDOCK. By

Hawley Smart, Author of "The Outsider,"
The Master of Rathkelly," &c.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

ONE SHILLING HOVELS-continued).

13 *CLEVEELY WON. By Hawley smart

14 *A Millionaire OF EOUGH AND

READY. By Bred Harte, Author of "The
Luck of Roaring Camp," &c.

15 *DEVIL'S FOED. By Bred Harte.

16 *NECK OE NOTHING : A Hunting Story.

By Mrs. H. Loveth Cameron, Author of " Ina
Grass Country," &c. second Edition.)

17 *THE MADNESS OF MAEEIAGE. By

Mrs. H. Loveth Cameron.

18 *THE FASHION OF THIS WOELD. By

Helen Mathers, Author of " Comin' thro' the
Rye," &c.

19 *A PLAYWRIGHT'S DAUGHTEE. By

Mrs. Annie Edwardes, Author of " Archie
Lovell," &c.

20 NO MEDIUM. By Annie Thomas (Mrs.

Pender Cudlip), Author of " Her Success," &c.

21 A MOMENT OF MADNESS. By Florence

Marryat, Author of " My Sister the Actress,"
&c.

22 SAVED IN TIME. By Mrs. Houston,

Author of " Recommended to Mercy," &c.

23 EVERY INCH A WOMAN. By Mrs.

Houston.

24 A PAUPEE PEEE. By Major Arthur

Griffiths, Author of " Fast and Loose," &c.

25 *THE WESTHOEPE MYSTEEY. By Iza

DuFFUS Hardy, Author of " Love, Honour, and
Obey," &c.

26 *Stories OF "THE WOELD." (Reprinted

by Permission.)

27 TWO BLACK PEAELS. By Marie Condor,

Author of " A Morganatic Marriage," " Beauty's
Queen," &c.

F. V. WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

AT ALL NEWSAGENTS, BOOKSELLERS, AND BOOKSTALLS.

^onbon ^ocicfg:

A MONTHLY MAGAZINE. PRICE is.

ESTABLISHED 1862.

"Rite's" New Three-volume Novel, " She A," commenced in
the OCTOBER NUMBER, and SARAH Titles Novel.
"DUCHESS FRANCES," in the NOVEMBER NUMBER.

'SOCIAL ECHOES," edited by Mrs. Humphrey, appear each
Month ; also Articles by-well-kno-wn "Writers.

"There is a marked elevation in the literary character of 'London Society'
since it changed hands." — Evening Standard.

. is an excellent number, full of the • light and amusing literature ' it professes
to supply." — Literary Wo?-ld.

. this attractive magazine . . . remarkable for variety of subject and
excellence of its light literature." — Public Opinion.

' London Society ' deserves great credit for the evenness with which it keeps upto
a high standard of excellence in its particular line, that, namely, of wholesome
fiction and magazine miscellanea." — Pictorial World.

This gayest of the magazines shows no sign of failing to preserve the tone it has
taken from the first. It is above all entertaining, and goes in largely for good
fiction by well-known authors." — Life.

. this favourite magazine . . . " — Society Herald.

THE CHRISTMAS NUMBER of

(ILLUSTRATED),
At all Newsag-ents, Booksellers, and Bookstalls. Price containing

Contributions BY THE FOLLOWING AUTHORS :—

MRS. CASHEL HOE Y— FLORENCE MARRYAT— THE AUTHOR OF "MOLLY
BAWN"— THE COUNTESS DE BREMONT— THE AUTHOR OF " WHO IS
SYLVIA ?-mrs. H. LOVETT CAMERON— JESSIE SALE LLOYD—
W. W. FENN— THE AUTHOR OF "MISS MOLLY "sand ELLA CURTIS
(Shirley Smith).

At all Booksellers, Vol. LIV. of LONDON SOCIETY, 780 pages,
handsomely bound in cloth gilt, gilt edges, 10s. 6d. Also Cases
for Binding, 2s. each.

F. V. "WHITE & CO., 31, Southampton Street, Strand.

.v-5;*

iv#.-jiv>l->.

-S^:4:^}^:h

^^3^.

^4Ss^'

'/^t

'>.\-

m

^/0'»-1 -

.j's:

'rC'

n



j:-^.ii,

3 0112 049086975

II
