JA DIAMOND IN [j

■tii-ijj i Ljmjuinmu

^^

THE ROUGH

ALICE 0' HANLON

University of Illinois Library

L161 — JUl

,(,¥■

fl' illo



YOL. I.

AT ALL THE LIBRARIES.

LOVE, THE PILGRIM. By May Crommelin, author

of 'Queene,' ' Orange Lily,' 'A Jewel of a Girl &c. 3 vols.

THE FAVOURITE OF FORTUNE. By Ella Curtis,

(Shirley Smith), author of ' All for Herself,' &c. 3 vols.

VENGEANCE IS MINE. By Eliza F. Pollard, author

of ' Hope Deferred,' 'Lady Superior,' &c. 3 vols.

UNTIL THE DAY BREAKS. By Emily Spender,

author of 'Restored,' ' A True Marriage,' &c. 3 vols.

A FAIR MAID. By F. W. Robinson, author of 'Grandmother's
Money,' 'No Church,' &c. 3 vols.

HURST & BLACKETT, 13, GREAT ilARLBOROUGH STREET

BY

ALICE O'HANLON

Author OF

5?

THE UNFORESEEN.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

LONDON:
HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,

13. Great MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1886.

All rights reserved.

in 2009 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/diamondinrough01ohan

A DIAMOND K THE ROUGH.

CHAPTER I.

SNOWBOUND.

I SAY, young man, waken up ! "What a
heavy sleeper you are, to be sure ! I
knocked twice at your door before coming
in. Do rouse yourself!'

This adoration was accompanied by a
shake of the shoulder. Charlie Nunnery,
the speaker's cousin, turned over and
sleepily rubbed his eyes.

'Hello, Victor — time to get up?' he
asked, yawning.

I should think so, rather, at a quarter
""^ to ten !'

O. VOL. I. B

No ! Is that possible ?' Charlie started
to a sitting posture. ' I'll be dressed ina
trice ; but don't wait breakfast for me,
my boy. Really, I'm sorry to be so late,'
he added, apologetically ; ' but the fact is I
sat up reading that novel, " The Golden
Butterfly," till after three. What kind of
a morning is it, Victor ?'

There was a window near the bed.
Victor McNicoll approached it and drew
up the blind.

You shall see for yourself,' he rejoined,
with peculiar emphasis. ' Look ! What
do you think of that ?'

Snow ! Surely not ?' An accent of
dismay marked the query.

Yes, snow,' repeated the other. ' A
foot deep already, and coming down still
as fast as it can whirl.'

What an awful nuisance ! That
accounts for it being so chilly last night.'

Charlie was on the floor now, looking
through the casement by his friend's side.

The view whereon he gazed Alas by no
means extensive. It consisted of a small
plateau immediately beneath the window,
the trees which bordered it, and the garden-benches
and tables disposed about it, all
thickly covered with snow ; beyond that,
a couple of narrow ledges, or terrace-walks;
then, apparently, a sheer precipice. Where
the ground ended a grey mist began,
seething up, as it were, from the abyss
below to meet and engulph the dancing,
gyrating white crystals that floated downwards
into it with an effect that, after
long gazing, made the brain feel dizzy and
bewildered.

Uncommonly awkward, isn't it ?' resumed
Nunnery. ' You'll feel vexed now
that you let me persuade you to come up
here at all.'

'Nonsense! You don't suppose I shall
blame you for the snow ?' returned his
cousin.

'But what on earth are we to do ?' ao^ain

questioned Charlie. * There is nothing to
be seen here beyond our noses. We had
better go on to Interlaken this morning
instead of this afternoon, as we intended,
hadn't we ? I know you are anxious about
your letters.'

^ Certainly I am,' assented Victor ; ^ but
we are not likely to get down the mountain
either morning or afternoon to-day.'

How so ? We might not be able to
walk, perhaps, in this storm, but there are
the mules w^ came up on yesterday. The
guide stopped here all night, you know.
Why shouldn't we let the beasts carry us
down?'

*For a very simple reason — that they
have already carried some other people
down, or their luggage.'

^ You don't say so ?'

^ Yes. We told the driver, you remember,
that we should, of course, not want
them again ourselves, and it appears the
mules were engaged over-night by that

old gentleman and his son, the doctor,
with whom we were talking in the 
last evening. They went off at
seven o'clock this morning. The landlord
tells me, however, that the guide was very-reluctant
to venture in the snow, though
the downfall was not nearly so heavy at
that hour as it is now, and that he asked
three times his usual charges for the
journey.'

Humph ! And you really think we
couldn't walk? The pray up seemed
straight and plain enough.'

But the way down, my dear fellow,
would scarcely be very plain now, I imagine,'
answered his companion. ^ In fact,
the landlord protests that it would simply
be madness for us to attempt the descent.
He never remembers, he says, such a fall
of snow taking place here before so early
in the year.'

Well, I suppose we must resign ourselves
to our fate with the best grace we

can,' said Charlie, moving away from the
window as he spoke ; ' but I must say it's
very tiresome when we are so pressed for
time.'

To this observation his cousin made no
reply. A slight frown, however, contracted
his brow as he continued to gaze forth
at the eddying tornado of dazzling white
flakes.

That Victor McNicoll was of Scottish
descent mays be gathered from his name ;
but, having been born and lived all his life
in a West-of-England county, he could
scarcely be considered a Scotchman.

In figure tall and spare, he possessed a
nervous, energetic constitution. His eyes
and hair were dark, his skin sallow, his
features strongly marked and prominent.
A firm, well-moulded mouth and chin
completed a face far from handsome, yet
to the perceptive eye full of character, and
by no means unpleasant to look upon.

Without his 'vesture tissue' — the clothes-wych,

as the erudite philosopher Teufels-
crock maintains, 'make the man' — it
might scarcely seem fair to introduce the
other young fellow, were it not that, even
in a condition so nearly that of the aboriginal
savage, he could well bear comparison
with his correctly tailored companion.

Charles Nunnerley, in sooth, was remarkably
good-looking ; also he was fully aware
of the fact, and sufficiently appreciative of
its advantages. Of the blond Adonis type,
he had a fair, silky moustache, bright blue
eyes, and a clear healthy complexion. He
possessed, moreover, a finely-developed
muscular frame, and a pair of shapely
white hands. In age the cousins were not
far apart. Victor had just reached his
twenty-fifth year ; Charlie was nine months
his junior.

The two young men, it may here be
explained, were just completing a walking
tour which they had been making together
in Switzerland. Within the last fortnight

they had penetrated to many out-of-the-way
districts, but they had now returned
to the more beaten tracks of this
much be-travelled land. From Grinder
on the previous day, they had walked
over the Western Alp, and had afterwards
ridden up the Miirren, with the
design of merely passing one night in their
present location. This was a huge hotel on
the summit of a mountain, crowded a Aveek
ago by over a hundred of people, but now
almost deserted. That grey mist rolling
below filled the narrow valley of Latter
The falling snow hid the magnificent
range of the Bernese Alps, which,
on a fine day, stretched in an intoxicating
beautiful panorama just across the
valley, almost, as it seemed, within a stone's
throw.

sand since we are to be kept prisoners
here,' re-commenced Charlie, who appeared
inclined to grumble at the aspect of events,
^ it makes matters worse that there should

Le so little society in the house. Let's
see : now that the doctor and his father
have gone, there will be only those tvfo
old maids, the widow and her little girl,
and that crusty German professor — if he is
a professor.'

Nay, by-the-by, there are two other
persons,' returned Victor :• ' an American
and his daughter. They were not in the
drawing-room last evening, but that young
fellow the doctor was just beginning to
speak to me about them when some one
came up and interrupted him. I'd forgotten
the circumstance till you reminded
me of it ; but he said, I recollect, that they
were a most extraordinary and interesting
pair.'

Ah ! well, that's a trifle more encouraging.
Now, if you'll make yourself
scarce, old fellow, I'll hurry up, and be
down directly.'

All right ; I'll go and order breakfast,
then. Chops, shall we say, and eggs?'

that'll do capitally. Shan't be long, I
assure you.'

Charlie was not long. Descending
below, he found his cousin pacing backwards
and forwards in the great salle-manger
capable of dining some three hundred
people, whilst a couple of waiters
were bustling about the corner of a long
table, where breakfast was already spread
for the two.

On perceiving him, Victor at once
approached.

I've seen the Americans, Charlie,' he
began, with quite an air of excitement.
And, upon my word, the doctor was
justified in describing them as wonderful.
You may congratulate yourself as an artist
on having come up here. If only you
could paint that girl's face as it ought
to be painted, you'd immortalise yourself


Dear me ! What's the matter with the
girl's face? Is it pretty?'

^ Pretty ?' echoed the other, with a gesture
of impatience. ' Pretty is not the
word. Do you remember, Charlie, what
you were saying yesterday?'

'At which particular moment ? I fancy
I made several observations during the
course of the day.'

You know what I mean — about the
beauty of young women in novels. You
were saying that one never meets in real
life that ideal perfection dealt with in
fiction. But you may abandon your conclusion
now. This girl is lovely — indescribably
lovely ; neither pen nor pencil
could do her justice.'

Good gracious ! — there must be something
extraordinary about her indeed to
arouse a passionless, 7iil admiration fellow
like you to such a pitch of enthusiasm.'

'/ passionless?' — with a shrug of the
shoulders. 'what a profound judge of
character you are, Charlie ! — so keen and
penetrative in your observations ! But

come to the table ; that garçon is waxing
impatient.'

Charlie followed. When, however, the
covers were removed, and the servants had
retired to a distance, he resumed the
conversation.

• And where did you see her, Victor ?'
he asked — ' this Peri, who has " snatched a
grace beyond the reach of art" ?'

'Here. They had just finished breakfast,
she and her father, when I came in,
and they both bade me good-morning as
they left the room. And the father,
Charlie, is as wonderful as the daughter —
quite as wonderful, only in a different way.
If they are Americans, they are of an
entirely new type to me. I have met
Americans from north, south, east, and
west, I believe ; but I never met any like
these before.'

'Vulgarians?' concisely demanded young
Nunnerley.

No, no — at least, not the daughter. If

I had not heard her call him father, I
should not have believed in the relationship.
It is a perfect mystery,' protested
Victor. * She, the girl, moves and looks
like a queen : it's no exaggeration to say
it. But the man — well, I don't know.
He may be a successful gold-digger, or
perhaps a backwoodsman, or a farmer from
some central wilds ; any way, he is a vara
avis, even for a Swiss hotel. But I won't
say any more. It is a pity to spoil your
first impression by my descriptions. They
have gone into the salon ; we can join them
there after breakfast.'

So be it. You have raised my curiosity

considerably, I confess,' returned Nunnery.

' Possibly this unlucky business of the

snow may turn out less vexatious than we

'imagined. Another chop, please ?'

CHAPTER 11.

Fellow-prisoners.

However much it had been excited, Mr.
Charles Nunnerley's curiosity did not
prove injurious to his appetite.

There !' he interjected presently, setting
down his empty breakfast-cup, and stretching
himself contentedly. ' Unless they pile
up the damage pretty high, they won't
make much out of me by that meal !'

Well, no ; you have certainly done
tolerable justice to it,' acquiesced his
cousin, who had himself eaten sparingly.
Pray don't hurry, on any account, over
the arrangement of your moustache,' he
subjoined, pushing back his chair; ^ but

when* you have quite finished with it,
we'll adjourn to the drawing-room, shall
we r

Hem ! — he's as jealous of my moustache
as a Barbary pigeon,' remarked Charlie,
addressing space, and continuing, after
he had laid aside the serviette wherewith
he had been wiping it, deliberately to
caress the golden appendage referred to.
^ His own, you see, is such a scrubby little
object ! Xow, my dear fellow, I am entirely
at your service.'

The hotel boasted two public salons,
divided by folding doors, one of them only
being at present in use for the limited number
of guests. Unclosing the door of the
latter, Victor stood aside and allowed his
companion to precede him.

The room, on first entrance, presented a
delightful glow of light and comfort. In
an open grate blazed and crackled a huge
fire of resinous pine-logs. Crimson rugs
were spread here and there over the

polished floor, and the warmth and colour
within afforded altogether an agreeable
contrast with the wintry aspect of the
falling snow without.

At this moment all the visitors at the
hotel — to the number already specified —
were in occupation of the apartment.

Upon a couch by one side of the fireplace
sat together two middle-aged maiden
ladies. Of these one was a showily dressed
individual, with a large nose, red-tipped,
and suggestive of obtrusive curiosity —
an incessant and exasperating talker.
The other was a mild, washed-out little
woman, shy and silent, with an air of perpetually
apologising for her own existence.
The two were not in any way related;
neither had they long enjoyed each other's
intimacy. They had met only a few weeks
ago, before which time each had been
travelling separately with a maid, and had
then, on the principle of ^ extremes meet,'
struck up a cordial friendship. The talking

woman, who was supposed to be in delicate
health, had been recommended by her
physician to remain abroad for the autumn
and winter, and to keep as much as possible
in the higher latitudes ; and she had persuaded
the shadowy little lady to accompany
her to the top of the Miirren. Here
both proposed to stay until the hotel
closed, on the 1st of October.

Opposite to them, on the other side of
the hearth, a little girl sat, nursing a doll.
Her mother, a young widow, who took a
good deal of trouble to look younger than
she really was, had drawn her chair to a
centre table, by which sat also an obese,
ill-tempered-looking man in spectacles.
This man — he whom Charlie had dubbed
the professor ' — had collected together all
the latest newspapers, and, having secured
them for future use by placing them under
his elbow, was skimming an article in
one of the current monthlies.

Upon entering the room, young Nunnery.

I. c

ley had paused likewise by this table, just
behind the widow's chair, and, on perceiving
him, the professor (he actually was a
professor) drew closer his store of literature,
and glanced up with a low growl, and a
look on his face like that of a dog who
fancies another dog wishes to possess himself
of his bone.

Charlie, however, neither coveted the
literature nor did he notice the glance.
With an amused smile on his lips, he was
looking after McNicoll. For the latter
having passed onwards towards the fire,
had instantly been seized upon by the loquacious
lady, who lay in wait like an all-devouring
octopus, ready to cast out her
tenacious tentacles of speech round any
prey that presented itself. Gifted with a
loud rasping voice, this vivacious lady had
furthermore an agreeable habit of repeating
the same sentence over and over asrain,
as though she were practising a transposition

lesson, such as is given to schools


Taking up a guide-book, Charlie turned
over its pages at random, and listened.

Yes, I awoke at six this morning — I
usually av\^aken about six. And I could
scarcely believe it — when I saw the snow.
For yesterday, though it was cold — yes,
certainly it tuas cold yesterday — one could
never have expected snow. I went into
my friend's room at once. It was about
six o'clock, I know, because it is usually
about six when I awaken. I don't sleep
very well. And my friend was as much
surprised as I was when she saw the
snow. It is such a heavy fall, you see —
such a very heavy fall ! And although
yesterday was cold — yes, certainly cold — yet
one doesn't expect snow in September — '

Each ! slash me out dat woman's tongue,
somebody, or I lose de senses !' muttered
the professor, below his breath.

c2

Did you speak, sir ?' inquired Charlie,
who, though he had not quite caught the
remark, fancied, from the direction of the
gentleman's gaze, that he might be the
somebody addressed.

^Hein!'

Beyond this polite expletive, the professor
vouchsafed no immediate response.

The young widow, however, regarding
Charlie with a confidential smile, whispered,


This gentleman, Herr Jacob ' (she had
ventured yesterday to inquire his names
and had been gruffly answered, ' Jacob ')
has christened these two ladies " The
Windmill" and "The Victim'"

Ja, ja ! Words, words, words !' broke in
the professor, again looking up from his
book, and moving one hand round and
round as though turning an organ.
^ Words ground out like a mill — no sense,
all vint ; clack, jabber, babble — gabble ;
pah r

Thereupon, hatching forward his chair
nth a savage jerk, the amiable man settled
himself emphatically to his reading,
and subsided into silence.

Meanwhile, disregarding another sottovoce
confidence on the young widow's part
and an inviting gesture of her hand towards
a seat by her side, Charlie Nunnerley
was now staring hard in the direction of a
vv^indow, in the embrasure of which, apart
from the rest of the company, sat the two
Americans. The 2:irl about whom Victor
had waxed so enthusiastic occupied an easy-chair,
with its back towards him. Charlie,
therefore, was unable to see her face.
From where he stood, however, the father
was distinctly visible, and it did not require
much study to convince him that his
cousin was rio'ht in describing; him as a
phenomenal specimen of the American
traveller.

An under-sized man of middle-age, he
seemed to have been cast in a rough iron

mould. His figure was stout, but one
received at once the impression that he
must have been much stouter, for somehow
he had a shrunken look. His clothes vere
of fine texture, glossy and new. They did
not, however, appear to fit him, and
(possibly from the way they were worn)
were given to wrinkling up in odd and
abnormal places. His patent leather boots
were unexceptionable, but of a huge size ;
and, to complete his toilet, there sparkled
on his breast an enormous diamond
pin.

In buckskin breeches and a blue striped
shirt, with sleeves rolled up to the elbow,
the poor man would have looked, Charlie
thought, homogeneous and comfortable ; in
his present costume he appeared very
much the reverse. Like his feet, his
hands were unusually large. They were,
moreover, horny and labour-hardened.
Eddy in colour, his skin hung loosely
about the cheeks, and Alas elsewhere much

wrinkled and seamed. His blue-grey
eyes lead an absent look in them, and the
expression of his face was anxious — so
anxious, indeed, as to be well-nigh
pathetic. Once or twice, however, when
addressing; his daughter, Charlie noticed
that it lighted up with a smile of rare
sweetness.

Having thus taken in the father's
appearance, young Nunnery felt his
curiosity more than ever tickled in respect
of the daughter. Guide-book in hand, he
ventured presently to stroll towards the
window, as though to look forth.

The American, observing his approach,
nodded. Then, somewhat nervously clearing
his throat, he added,

Good morning, mister.'

Charlie returned the greeting, and
managed to include in his bow the girl,
who had turned to see whom her father
was addressing.

Her father ! Was it really possible ?

The idea of such a relationship struck
Charlie as even more incongruous than it
had done his cousin. His artist's eye was,
at the first glance, fascinated by her face.
The delicate oval curves — the clear, rich,
brunette complexion — the large dark-blue
eyes, so innocent and frank in their expression
— made up altogether a beauty
which, as Victor had truly said, was indescribable.
In figure, too, the girl was
almost perfect ; and the dress which
clung to her well-rounded supple form
was, though costly in fabric, quiet and
lady-like in tone.

Becoming aware that he was regarding
her rather too intently, Charlie averted his
gaze with a slightly heightened colour, and
remarked to her father,

'This sudden fall of snow is a little
awkward, is it not ?'

'That's so, mister,' rejoined the man,
with alacrity, evidently pleased to bespoken
with. 'Yes, that's so. An' it's

particular awkward for me an' my daughter,
because we'd fixed fur to go down the
mountain to-day, an' now taint possible
nohow. It'll be sorter dull, too, I'm afeard
for everybody, through not been' able to
git out of doors

'Oh, I daresay we shall survive a day's
imprisonment,' laughed Charlie. ' Have
you been here long?'

In putting this inquiry he glanced
ao;ain at the o-irl and she it was who
replied.

Five days, and I should be glad to stay
longer. I call it j must lovely up here when
the air is clear.' There was a curious
accent or drawl in her speech, very slight
the faintest reflex of her parent's.
Charlie thought it deliciously piquant.
And until to-day we have had very good
weather; haven't we, father?'

Yes ; oh, yes, Idalia — the weather's bin
fine, I 'low. An' the views is grand.' A
slight sigh, nevertheless, accompanied the

admission. 'But your brother, now,' he
went on : ' I don't guess he'd keep much
for here, Idalia. He likes it gayer, does
Peley. I've a son, mister, as we was expecting'
to meet down to Interlaken to-day.
He's bin travelling' around a spell by himself,
but we was to meet him to-day down
there at the Hotel Yungfraublick.'

Oh ? I see.'

The last word had been ludicrously
mispronounced. But Charlie did not
smile ; he Alas thinking — ' Her name, then,
is Idalia. It is a beautiful name ; it suits
her exactly.'

We've been at that hotel before, me an'
Idalia,' resumed the American, communicating
the information with the frank
simplicity of a child. ' We'd fixed to wait
there fur Peleus — that's my son ; but some
ladies as we got a bit sociable with, they
advised us to come up here fur a spell.
They said we should be sot up with the

views. An' Idalia, she has been a good-deal
pleased, bless her !'

But, father ' (Idalia bent forward with
a troubled look, and touched his horny
hand), ' I thought you had been enjoying
yourself too. You said you were.'

flor, yes! Enjyingmyself? — to be sure
I have, honey !'

The sweet smile which Charlie had before
remarked once more illuminated his plain
and wrinkled visage.

His daughter, however, continued to
regard him wistfully for some moments
longer, stroking the while his large red
fingers, with a caress so utterly unaffected
that she might have forgotten the stranger's
presence.

Looking on, young Nunnery thought
that he had never seen greater ease or
grace of manner. No duchess, he told
himself, could show a more perfect self-possession,
yet at the same time a finer
lack of self-consciousness.

Italia,' said her father, glancing towards
the 'window and changing the subject,
evidently with design, ' I've bin a-
wondering' how 'tis that when you look up
inter it when it's a-comin'' down the snow
'pears sorter dirty an' black, an' all the
while it's as white as kin be. It's powerful
curious, the is. What's the reason of
it, Idalia ?'

'I don't know, indeed, father,' rejoined
Idalia, after a moment's consideration ; ' I
can't explain it.'

Kin ye not now ?' he asked. ' Well, ina
general way she does know most things,
does Idalia. She's hed a powerful good
education, you see, mister. But you iii
tell about the snow, I essay?'

Charlie reflected. He felt an eager
desire — he could scarcely have told why —
to be able to elucidate the phenomenon,
and yet he could think of no explanation.
He was not, it may here be confessed, a
very studious or well-read young fellow,

and his schoolboy knowledge had long since
ozone to the doors.

'Um — no,' he acknowledged at length.
'I'm ashamed to say that I really do not
know how to account for the fact.'

His shapely white hand, as he made the
reluctant admission, went up to his moustache,
and he was twisting the corners of
it disconcertedly when, his regard once
more falling upon her, he caught Idalia
looking up at him, with a glimmer of
amusement in her face.

Steer mind,' she said, laughing ; ' you
don't aim to be a walking encyclopaedia of
knowledge, I suppose ? We can find it
out another time. It doesn't signify. You
are English, are you not ?'

English ? Oh, yes, I am English, of
course,' he answered, stammering slightly.

The unabashed, straightforward gaze of
those laro;e lustrous eves seemed to affect
him for the moment with a kind of mental
vertigo.

^ What part of England do you come
from?' lie questioned again, with the
same naive directness.

^ From London. I am an artist. I have
a studio there.' He added these particulars
without any accountable reason.

An artist — are ye now rally ?' put in the
father, with lively interest. ' Wall, the's
smart. An' ye make picture?'

eyes, of people mostly. I take
portraits.'

'Do tell! Ye look smart, though —
right down smart, ye look. I aimed fur to
lev Idalia's picture' tuk when we was down
to Some,' he subjoined, ' but someways
she wouldn't give in to setting' fur it there.
She 'lord she'd lev it tuk in England.'

That artist will be highly fortunate,
whoever-he may be,' observed Charlie,
gallantly, ' who shall be permitted to take
Miss — the young lady's portrait.'

lie had made a pause after the ' Miss,'
but the surname he had hoped for was not

supplied. As for the compliment — insinuated
as much by the tone as the words
of his speech — Idalia took no notice of it
whatsoever. Her thoughts appeared to be
occupied with another subject.

Is High Radstow far from London, can
you tell ?' she asked presently.

High Radstow ?' The young man repeated
the name in accents of extreme
surprise. ^ Why, yes, it is a considerable
distance. It is a small market-town in one
of our western counties. Do you — you
don't know anything of it?'

No,' she answered, quietly ; 'but weare
going there to live in about a fortnight.'


'To High Radstow Peto lives he
echoed again. * Excuse my astonishment,
please, but I know the place well. My
cousin Victor McNicoll — the gentleman
by the chimney-piece there — lives at High
Radstow, or at least in the neighbourhood
of the town.'

Is the so ? Now the's curious, tliet's
powerful curious, ain't it, Idalia ? I wonder
now lie continued, with an eager, yet
diffident, air, ' ef he might happen to be
acquainted with a place about thar called
Monks wood Hall?'

^ Of course, he is — very well acquainted
with it ! And so am I,' exclaimed Charlie.
Why, my cousin has lived at High Rad-stow
all his life. Shall I call him ?
Victor!' He turned without awaiting
assent, and emphasized his summons with
a raised finger. ,

CHAPTER III.

SURPRISING INTELLIGENCE.

Although by no means a lady's man
Victor McXicoll was incapable of anything
approaching to discourtesy in ibis
demeanour towards the opposite sex.
Held mercilessly by the talkative lady's
incessant babble, he had all this while been
writhing under the infliction like a cock-chafer
with a pin through its body. Yet,
"without a hrusquerie on which he did not
care to venture, he had felt unable to extricate
himself His replies, however, had
grown monosyllabic, and his distracted
gaze wandered constantly towards his

VOL. I. D

cousin at the window. Charlie, he saw,
was making acquaintance with the Americans
about whom his own interest and
curiosity were so largely excited. For the
nonce he envied young Nunnerley that
free-and-easy confidence of manner which
he was wont upon occasions to stigmatise
as ' uprightness.' Charlie, he reflected,
never lost anything through shyness, and
Charlie, he knew, would certainly never
have allowed himself to be thus detained
against his will through undue politeness
to an elderly spinster. Victor had just
resolved to take his courage in hand and
to effect an escape, when his cousin's call
expedited his deliverance.

Murmuring a relieved 'Excuse me!' he
crossed the room.

'Victor, this gentleman wishes to make
some inquiries about High Radstow,' began
Charlie. ' He is going there ; and I have
just mentioned that you live in the neighbourhood.'


'Indeed !' The exclamation indicated a
surprise equal to that which his cousin had
already betrayed. High Radstow was nota
place usually favoured by the visits of
strangers. ' I shall be happy to give you
any information in my power, sir,' he
appended, after a second or two.

Thank ye, mister ; the thar's very
kind o' ye, an' civil. But won't ye set?'

Yes, pray do sit down,' put in Idalia,
supporting the invitation with the quiet
assurance of one who was accustomed to
find her word law.

The young men obeyed with no feigned
alacrity. Bringing forward two chairs,
they settled themselves vis-a-vis to their
new acquaintances.

Well, now, that looks friendly an'
clever,' (clever, in this dialect, meant
amiable); 'don't it, Idalia?' observed the
American, smiling round the little circle
in frank gratification. * My name is
Bretherton, gentlemen — Abner Bretherton,

dan'

I come from North Carolina. I suppose
' — his expression altered here, and he
leaned eagerly forward, smoothing out the
knees of his trousers : a favourite habit of
his — ^ I suppose, now, there ain't no North
Carolina folks anywhere around them
parts ?'

About High Radstow, do you mean ?'
asked Victor, who could scarcely forbear a
smile at the interrogation. * No, I should
think not — in fact, I feel sure not.'

No, 'ain't likely — come to think of it,
'ain't at all likely,' assented Mr. Brethren,
the eager light dying out of his
eyes.

Once more Idalia laid a caressing touch
on his hand.

You were going to ask the gentleman
about Monkswood Hall, weren't you,
father ?' she suggested.

'The's so, honey. He saj^s, mister,
that you know the place, an' ef you
wouldn't take no exceptions at me troubling

you, I'd like to put a question or two. I'm
afeared now, it's rather a gorgeous house,
am t it r^

Monkshood is a fine estate, certainly,
but not particularly grand,' answered
McXicoU, with raised eyebrows. ' The
house is old and picturesque, and the
grounds are, or rather we-re, beautifully
kept. There is a little wood at the back
of the Hall from whence it takes its name.
I knew Mrs. Curtis, the widow lady to
whom it belonged, pretty well ; but she
has been dead now some eighteen months,
and the house has been unoccupied ever
since. You — you were not thinking of
renting it ?' The inquiry was made with
hesitancy.

Well, no ; it's our own, you see ; so we
don't need fur to rent it. An' ye really
know'd Mrs. Curtis, did ye ? Lord ! I feel
quite uplifted, mister, to make your acquaintance
! Ef you wouldn't mind it, I'd
like to shake hands.'

Abner extended his horny pain as he
spoke ; and when Victor, with increased
astonishment, had responded to the advance
he continued,

An' so ye know'd Hypatia ? Was she
anyways like Idalia ?'

^By George! I beg your pardon,' he
apologised, hastily. 'But I have been
puzzling myself to discover who the young
lady reminded me of, and now I understand
it is Mrs. Curtis !'

'Thar ! I alius 'low'd so !' exclaimed Mr.
Bretherton, ' It's nigh upon thirty year
since I saw Hypatia, an' then she was
only a girl of fourteen or fifteen ; but I've
alius allowed that Idaly was her very pictor
an' image. I've never went back on the
opinion.'

'Were they Was Mrs. Curtis a

relative of yours ?' demanded McMcoll.

She was my sister, mister.'

Oh, indeed !' Victor's amazement was
more genuine than complimentary. ' Yes ;,

I recollect now that she was an American
by birth. But no one could have guessed
it from her speech or manner. She was a
perfect lady. I mean she was quite like an
English lady,' he amended, in confusion.
You have met Mrs. Curtis, have you not,
Charlie ?'

'No, I don't think I ever had that
pleasure,' answered his cousin ; ' but I recollect
you telling me, when I was down in
the spring, that the lady had left her house
and property to her brother, who lived in
the States somewhere.'

North Carolina. Yes, mister ; that's
me. I'm her brother,' affirmed Mr.
Bretherton, nervously rubbing his knees.
But I don't wonder that you look kinder
dumb foundered ; I don't Wonder at that a
bit. Patty, now ; I essay she was a good
deal polished, wasn't she? We used,' he
explained, ' to call her Patty when a
girl.'

'Certainly; Mrs. Curtis moved in the

best society in the country,' rejoined
Victor ; ' and lier manners, as I said before,
were perfect.'

Mr. Bretberton smiled.

'You wouldn't lie guessed, then, that
she'd bin raised in North Carolina, or
that she'd a brother like me ?' he asked.
'Well, you see, it' was this way, mister:
My father, he'd a sister ez kept a store in
New York city; an' when Patty was
fourteen year old, or thereabouts, she was
sent to live with her aunt. The was
mother's coin's, the was. She'd a heap of
pride, mother bed ; an', you see, she wanted
Hypatia to learn town ways an' get
polished. Mother, she'd a powerful ambition,
poor thing ! after educating an' polishing
folks, through been' a superior woman
herself. Once — once' (with a profound
sigh) ' she even aimed fur to lev me
polished too. But, bless you ! it warn'tno
manner of use ; I jest couldn't polish, gentlemen,
no modern the sole of an old boot.

That's so. I tuk after father, you see, who
eras a rouo;hish sort — not after mother.
An' though I'd be 'mazing glad to do it
no^Y, fur Peley's sake an' Idalia's, I've jest
had to give it up. Even this tour, tho'
I've tried hard to learn hong tong as they
call it, it haven't Been of no mortal use.
I ain't one bit more polished than I was at
the beginning' ; an' we've bin travelling'
around now fur nine months or more.
ain't in me, ye see ; thar's where it is.
Why, no ! you might as well try to polish
a mule,' he concluded, in deep humility.

Father, don't ! — please don't!' entreated
his daughter, a vivid crimson suffusing
her lovely face. ' Who wants you different
from what you are ? / don't,' she
repeated, passionately. ' You are polished
inside, whatever you may be on the surface.
But these gentlemen don't know,
father — they don't know you ; and they
don't know how you are respected by all
the folks at home — by everybody who

knows you. They may think, if you talk
like that, that you want improving someway
; but you don't — you doiiHF

The girl's head was held proudly erect ;
and whilst speaking she had thrown a
searching, somewhat defiant enhance at the
two young men. Both, fortunately, bore
the scrutiny Avell. Charlie Nunnerley,
though inwardly much diverted, managed
to suppress all sign of amusement. Victor
McNicoll, for his part (possibly because he
possessed a less keen sense of humour than
his cousin), had found nothing in the
situation to tickle him. The Arcadian
simplicity of the father ; his frank yet
humble acknowledgment of want of
fashionable cultivation, taken in conjunction
with his anxious and troubled air,
struck him rather as pathetic than ludicrous.
As for the daughter's little outbreak
of distress at her father's self-depreciation,
and her loyal refusal to allow of any
deficiency in him, this touched Victor in a

peculiar manner. As Idalia's large violet-blue
eyes met his with a gleam of fire in
their depths, he seemed to obtain a glimpse
into a strong and uncommon character.
Intensely interested by this passing revelation
as to her nature, and thrilled with
admiration of the girl's rare beauty
enhanced by the warm glow on her cheeks,
Victor remained silent, his absorbed regard
rivetted upon her face ; and the crisis
might have become decidedly embarrassing
but for young Nunnery's ready savoir-faire.


'Well, I quite agree, sir, with your
daughter — with Miss Bretherton,' he said,
gravely affecting to misunderstand the
question at issue. ' I don't see Vv'hy
European polish, as you call it, should be
any better than North Carolina ditto ; and
if / came from the Xew World I would not
trouble myself in the least about acquiring
the usages and conventionalities of the old
one. But may I bring you back to your

subject ?' he went on, with cheerful ease.
You were going to tell us, I think, how
jour sister, Mrs. Curtis, came to marry an
Englishman ?'

But Mrs. Cartes, I understood, was
married twice,' interposed Victor, now
recovering himself. ' General Curtis was
not her first husband, was he, sir ?'

Well, no, he wasn't. No, Hypatia she
was married twice ; that's so,' returned Mr.
Bretherton, manifestly flattered by this
show of interest. ' Her first husband, he
was a young feller by the name of Arthur
Coverley. They was grand folks, the
Coverley was, an' rich. The father he
owned a big warehouse in London, an'
another in New York city. An' young
Coverley, you see, he was living' a spell in
New York, a-larnin' the business there.
Wall, he used to meet Hypatia every
morning' a-going' to the school as mother hed
bed her sent to. An' by-an-by he struck
up an acquaintance with the girl, an' with

her aunt as kept the store. An' though
she was only fifteen, an' him twenty-four,
he you'd he'd fell in love with her, an'
"wouldn't never marry no one else. Seems
sorter romantic, don't it?' he asked
smiling.

Both young men assented to this proposition.
And, placidly rubbing his knees,
the brood man resumed :

'Well, been' grand folks, an' an old
family, as they say, the Coverley was a
good deal riled at first when they learn
tell of it all. An' old 3.1r. Coverley he
went over to Xew York city to try an'
stop the thing. But it wasn't of no use.
Young Coverley he wouldn't go back on
Hypatia. So when the father hed seen
her, an' how powerful good-lookin' she
was, he 'lowed to give in ef mother 'd
agree to him a-takin' her ]pack vrith him to
London, and putting' her to a first-rate
boarding-school there. So the's how 'twas,
you see ! An' they was married when

Hypatia was seventeen,' he concluded,
smiling again in his simple, ingenuous
fashion.

'And did you never see her again, sir?'
Charlie asked.

The young artist was not very curious
on this or any other point of Mrs. Curtis's
history, but he wished to prolong the conversation,
and to enjoy further opportunity
for the study of Idalia's exquisite face.
The latter had by this time recovered her
equanimity. There still, however, seemed
to linger about her a slight air of confusion,
a passing shyness, engendered of
the consciousness of her recent impetuosity.


No, I never seed her again — never ;
an' yet we'd alius aimed, both Patty an'
me, fur to meet one another some day.
But somehow it never fell out as we could
fix things rightly ; an' maybe 'twas better
so, after all. Mother, though, she seed
Patty twice when she was Mis' Coverley,

down to Xew York,' lie went on. • She
went over there o' purpose, Patty did, an'
they stayed together in a big hotel for a
spell. An' Yv'hen mother got back home,
you may believe she was pretty full of her
visit. 'Seemed like she kinder couldn't
talk of nothing else but how fine Hypatia
was fixed, an' what a grand lady she'd
growed, an' how polished she was. An'
after that, you see, she 'feared to put more
store by polish than ever, mother did.'
He paused for a second or two reflectively,
and then continued : ' Howsomever,
young Coverley he didn't live modern ten
years after they was married. Hypatia,
she was left a mow at twenty-seven, poor
thing I with a for tin of forty thousand
pounds, as her husband had willed to
her. They'd no children, you understand.
Hypatia, she never did have no
children.'

'I suppose not. And afterwards, of
course, she married General Curtis. He

was a fine-looking man, but a good deal
older, I should say, than she ! '

Mr. Bretherton nodded. 'Well, yes, I
believe that was so.'

I only remember seeing him once or
twice,' pursued Victor. ' He vas a confirmed
invalid when first they came to live
at Monks wood, and he died shortly afterwards.
The climate of India, I was told,
had tried him much in his later years.'

I essay — yes, I essay,' acquiesced Mr.
Bretherton. 'They both lived in India
a longish spell, you see. Well, how
curious it seems !' he continued, with
childlike expansiveness. ' How curious it
do seem that you should have know'd my
sister ! You can't think, Idalia,' turning
to smile at his daughter, ' how uplifted I
feel. Fur all I hevn't seen her of so long,
I've thought a heap of Aunt Patty through
your been' so like her, honey. An' it's
kinder comforting', mister, to meet someone
as has know'd one o' your belongings.

It's like a breath of mountain air from
home. You see, when a man's a-travellin'
around like this, so fur from where he
was raised an' has lived all his life, he gets
to feel a bit lonesome-like. An' it's a
pleasure, this is, having' a chat nth you two
young fellers,' he concluded.

As a matter of course, the young men
protested in a breath that the pleasure was
all on their side ; and Victor went on to
add that he felt delighted to make the
acquaintance of any relative of Mrs. Curtis,
a lady whom he had always greatly admired.


But is it true ?' he asked, addressing
Idalia, with a sparkle in his dark
eyes and subdued eagerness in his
tone. 'Is it true that you are really
thinking of going to live at Monks wood?'

"Well, yes — at all events, for a time weare,'
she answered. *And, if father can
feel happy there, we may settle in England
altogether.'

VOL. I. E

It's this way, mister,' observed Mr.
Bretherton, explanatorily. ' Monkswood
Hall, it's our'n. General Curtis, he left it
to Hypatia; an' Hypatia, having' no kith
nor kin but us, why, naturally, she left it
to us — that is, to me — fur my life, an'
afterwards to Peleus ; an' the property is
to be divided equally betwixt Idalia and
him. There's over six thousand pounds a
year — take it roughly at thirty-five thousand
dollars — from the property as Hypatia
had through her two husbands. That's a
pile of money, ain't it ?'

^ A consummately delightful pile, I
should consider it,' remarked young Nunnerley.


But, besides that, I'm a rich man myself
— a very rich man,' went on Mr. Brethren,
mentioning the fact in the most
natural and unostentatious manner, apparently
without the smallest pride in it.
" Folks in England," mother used to say,

"think a heap of money." Is that so,
now? '

Charlie laughed.

Well, yes ; I am afraid it is a true
bill,' he owned. 'ATe pretend, of course,
to set a higher value on birth and education,
and so forth. But "money makes
the mare to go." In the end there's nothing
like a golden key for unlocking the
portals of society.'

Now that thar is jest what poor
mother alius upheld !' j^^-^i'sned ]mr. Brethren,
heaving a sigh and resuming the
friction of his knees. '" Take the children
to England, Abner," she kep' on saying' tome
over an' over again, when she was dying'.

"Take them to England, an' " Was

you wanting' any thin', my lad ?'

The last words were addressed to a
sleek-looking waiter, who had just entered
the room and drawn himself up behind
Victor McNicoll's chair.

e2

^ I beg your pardon, monsieur,' was the
polite rejoinder, 'I've been desired to inform
the gentlemen that a fire has been
lighted in the billiard-room, in case they
might wish for a game

CHAPTER IV.

Abner IS CONFIDENTIAL.

Engrossed in the conversation they had
been holding, the little party by the window
had almost forgotten the fact that
they were in the public room. The interruption,
however, that had just occurred
having served to recall to their notice the
presence of others, it now became apparent
that in a furtive way they were being
made the centre of observation. The talkative
lady's tongue, for once, had grown
silent, the activity of that member being
usurped, pro tempore by her eyes and ears.
Leaning' well forward in her seat, she

seemed to be straining her attention to
catch something of the subject which was
so obviously interesting the quartet in the
embrasure.

The young widow, moreover, whether
with a view to eaves-dropping or not, had
changed her place. She had left the centre
table to the taciturn professor, and
was at present seated upon a couch only a
few yards' distant from the window. The
contents of a small work-basket which she
was re-arranging lay upon her knee, and she
was looking somewhat cross. By her side
stood also her little girl. The child held
in her hand a piece of bright blue satin,
and whilst whispering to her mother she
was glancing askance at Idalia.

Why, Daisy, I declare I had quite forgotten
!' exclaimed the latter, catching
sight of the child at this juncture. ' I
promised to cut out Dolly's jacket for
you this morning, didn't I ? Come along
here, dear,' she went on, speaking with the

faint dravvi which Charlie had found so
piquant, and which Victor remarked now
for the first time. * You want it doing
straight off, I guess, don't you?'

'Oh, thank you! But not if you are
busy?' returned the little girl, approaching
slowly and shyly. ' I yeas just asking
mother if I might remind you; but she said
no, you were too busy talking with those
gentlemen.'

As the child blurted out this quotation
the mother blushed. But Idaho, in noway
discomposed by the observation,
serenely rejoined.

Oh, that don't signify ; I can talk to
them again by-and-by. Come right along
to that little table over there, Daisy, and
we'll-^:^ the jacket splendidly. I'll help
you sew it too, shall I? Father, you
won't mind me leaving you for a while,
will you ? It does him good,' she added,
significantly addressing a half-commanding,
half-supplicatory glance to the two

young men as she rose from her seat — ' it
does him good sometimes to have a chat
with strangers. Father enjoys society.'

Bowing, as though to promise that her
father should still enjoy his society, Charlie
Nunnerley rose also and kept his feet
Whilst Idalia crossed the room. And again,
as he watched her free step and graceful
carriage, he endorsed in his own mind the
correctness of Victor's report concerning
her. His cousin had declared that she
looked and moved like a queen, and unquestionably
there was something regal
about the girl's air — a curious blending of
dignity and simplicity.

The widow, too, watched Idalia's transit
across the apartment, and her countenance
cleared. If the truth must be told, she
had been secretly looking to these two
young gentlemen to lighten for herself the
tedium of her enforced detention within
doors. She had hoped at least to enjoy
some agreeable conversation with them, if

not to get up an incipient flirtation.
Flirtation, incipient or otherwise, was the
widow's favourite pastime. And she had
accordingly felt annoyed and disgusted to
find the attention of both already monopolised,
as it appeared to her, by that singular
American girl and her utterly plebeian
father.

Now, however, that the girl had voluntarily
withdrawn from their company, she
trusted there would be a chance for bringing
her own charms into operation upon
one or other of the young men.

But, alas, these revived hopes were
doomed to speedy disappointment.

'I say, governor, do you smoke?' inquired
Charlie, dropping back into his chair.

Well, yes, I do,' Mr. Bretherton returned,
beaming amiably under the impression
that the term ' governor ' was a title of
respect. ' Yes, I take a pipe now an' again
twice a day, say.'

And perhaps you play billiards ?'

Billiards ? Bless you, no. The thar
ain't a likely diversion fur a North
Carolina farmer — not with hands like
these here ' — spreading them out to view.
Once I did lev a try at it ; but I couldn't
hit the balls right no-how. It's a sorter
delicate an' ticklish job handling' them
sticks is. But Peley, now, he's fond of the
game, Peley is.'

'Well, come, at any rate, and have a
smoke with us whilst we play,' rejoined
young Nunnerley. ' I say, Victor, let's go
and have a game ?'

'All right !' acquiesced his cousin, starting
slightly, and bringing his gaze back
from a fascinating view of Idalia's side
face presented to his vision across the
room. ' All right, I'm quite agreeable,' he
repeated.

And in another moment, without so
much as a glance at the disconcerted
Avidow, the three men had quitted the
salon.

•

In the billiard-room they found another
glorious pine-fire, as bright and cheerful as
that they had left behind.

Drawing an arm-chair to one side of it,
Charlie invited Mr. Bretherton to occupy
the comfortable seat. His courtesy, however,
was marked by a kind of condescending
familiarity of manner. In the
daughter's absence, the young artist's
demeanour towards the father had undergone
a considerable change. This change
Victor noticed with disapproval. In his
opinion Charlie's easy air, displayed
towards a man so much his senior, savoured
of disrespect, and was altogether bad
form.

But Mr. Bretherton did not appear to
observe anything amiss. On the contrary,
he seemed more pleasantly impressed
than ever with the young man's companionableness.


It's real good now of you young fellers
to be. so friendly,' he remarked, rubbing

his hands over the blaze. ' I haven't met
no one so friendly not fur a right smart
spell. English folks, you see, they're different
that-away from Americans. They
ain't neighbourly — not to call neighbourly.
In a general way I don't seem to git on
with them myself not so well as I could
wish. But Idalia, now — it's different nth
Idalia, and Peleus, through them being
educated an' polished an' ureter to society
an' hong tong'

Ah, yes ! capital thing that hong tong
isn't it?' said Charlie, gravely imitating
poor Abner's pronunciation, but bestowing
nt the same time a surreptitious wink upon
Victor — who, however, merely rewarded
the grimace with a frown. Then, selecting
his cue, Nunnerley commenced, by a
judicious leading question, a course of
pumping,' which, continued throughout
ih.Q game, put himself and his cousin in
possession of certain facts respecting the
antecedents and present position of the

Bretherton family, which facts, without
reporting the conversation containing
them, may be briefly recapitulated. Not,
however, that in giving them forth Mr.
Bretherton really needed any special
pumping.' The unsophisticated man,
having evidently nothing in his life to
hide, and no notion of disguise or evasion,
answered all queries put to him with the
most patent reserve.

Summed up, then, the information now
acquired by the young men was this : —

At an early age Mr. Bretherton had
inherited from his father a farm, situated
among the Appalachian mountains, at that
easterly portion termed the Blue Ridge.
The farm — a very extensive one — was
called (from the circumstance that it overlooked
a splendid cataract) Whitehall
Prospect, whilst the name of the surrounding
district was Clear Water Valley. On
the beauty, healthfulness, and general
delectability of this spot, poor Mr.

Bretlierton (who was plainly much attached
to his home and ' natal land ') dwelt
with warm enthusiasm and the occasional
wiping away of a furtive tear.

In his father's time, the farm-lands
surrounding the house had, it appeared,
been chiefly devoted to the cultivation of
Indian corn, whilst a large portion of the
estate lying higher up among the mountains
had been made of comparatively
little use. On coming into possession,
however, Abner, besides continuing the
cultivation of grain, had turned those
neglected and less fertile tracts of his
demesne to service by breeding upon them
an immense number of swine ; and through
the sale of these animals to South Carolina
pork-exporters he had gradually grown
rich. Seeing, moreover, that he had had
little opportunity of spending it in that
primitive country district, his money had
accumulated, so that, in addition to the
property recently acquired through his

sister, lie now possessed a handsome
fortune invested in various stocks and
shares.

That among' his neighbours and friends
in that far-off mountain vale, Abner Brethren
had been a man of high note was
easily to be gathered from his artless
admissions. Indeed, as a matter of fact —
although, despite his wealth, he had continued
to labour with his own hands upon
his farm, and had in no way set himself
above his associates — he had, by their
common consent, been elected a kind of
honorary magistrate, and made an umpire
and referee in all matters of local dispute
or interest.

Having lost his wife soon after the birth
of Idalia, who was now eighteen years
of age, his family had consisted, up to
fifteen months ago, of his mother, his son,
and daughter. It was by their grandmother
that the children had been brought
up, by her influence that their ideas

and characters had been more or less
moulded. So far as the young men
could judge from Mr. B re ther ton's respectful
references to her, she had been a
woman of some little education and a
great deal of ambition. Furthermore, she
had been remarkably handsome (a slight
admixture of Spanish blood running in
her veins), and it was from her that her
daughter Hypatia and grand-daughter
Idalia had derived their dark beauty.

Whilst herself in her teens, Mrs Brethren
had once spent a year in London,
whither she had accompanied a family
from New York in the temporary capacity
of lady's-maid. From that visit she had
imbibed a strong taste for high life and
fashionable manners. Aiming, in the first
place, to elevate her own children by
education and culture, and having met
with such unexpected success in Hypatia's
case, she had afterwards yearned for a
similar improvement) in her grand-children's

social status, and had determined, if
possible, to effect it.

So long, however, as the children were
still young, and their father was amassing
the fortune requisite to her schemes, she
had not desired that he should leave his
farm to settle in a more civilised district.
But she had always insisted that, in due
course, this must be done. Meanwhile, in
order to lit them for their higher sphere,
both boy and girl had been well educated —
more especially so Peleus. This name, by-the-by,
as Mr. Bretherton informed his interlocutor,
was a source of much annoyance to
its owner. It had been his mother's choice,
culled by her from an ancient mythological
treatise, and for some time past the lad
had been most anxious to change it for
Percival.

'An' we'd order strive to call him so,'
admitted the father, vdih a sigh, and a
deepening of those anxious lines about his
face. ' Fur, maybe, it was sorter hard on

VOL. I. F

him to give him such an outlandish name.
Anyways, when he hates it so, we'd order
be cheerful to say " Percival," an' I'm train'
to learn. Only, been' so used to it — Peley,
you see, it ivill keep slipping' out now an'
agin'.'

A second sigh concluded this parenthetical
remark ; and something in Mr. Brethren's
aspect, as he made it, caused
Victor McNicoll to surmise that this son
of his was not in every respect a comfort
to the worthy man.

But, to return from this digression,
Peleus, or Percival, had, at his grandmother's
instance (the old lady had evidently
held the reins of government in her
son's household) been sent, from the age of
six, to school ; first to Raleigh, then to a
more advanced academy in Boston, and
finally to Hazard University. A very
small portion only of the youth's life had
been spent at home, for, even in the vacations,
he had usually been prevented from

returning thither. His grandmother, at
such times, had been wont to meet him,
taking with her his sister, and to carry the
two off to some fashionable spa, or other
resort where good society was to be had.

As for Idalia, she, too, had been banished
from home by her resolute-minded grand-parent.
On three several occasions she
had been sent to a distant educational
establishment. Each time, however, she
had been obliged to return to Clear Water
Valley at the end of a few weeks — ill
with fretting and home-sickness. sand
each time she had found her father suffering
also, mentally and physically, through
the separation which neither of them could
endure, for between Mr. Bretherton and
his daughter there existed a passionate
attachment. After that third failure both
had obstinately refused to submit to any
further experiments in the boarding-school
direction. Mrs. Bretherton, therefore,
had been obliged to content 



self with engaging for Idalia's private instruction
at home the most competent
governess that money could hire, and
with taking her, as often as possible, on
those brief travelling and polishing expeditions.


It was now some eighteen months since
the old lady — in her seventy-ninth year —
had been seized with an illness, which,
after twelve or thirteen weeks of painless
decay, had resulted in her death. In the
meantime there had reached Mr. Brethren
the news of his sister's demise, and of
his own inheritance of her property and
estate of Monkswood ; and this news had,
of course, been communicated to the sick
woman. Now, even before this event, the
latter had decided in her own mind that
the time had fully come for Abner to quit
his quiet valley. Daily, almost hourly,
from that time forth, she had, accordingly,
importuned her son to give up his farm, to
take the young people to travel for a space

in Europe, and afterwards to reside with
them upon their English estate. Eventually,
wearied by her solicitations, and
satisfied also that it would be to his
children's advantage, Abner had given to
his mother the promise she required, and
had only waited to lay her ashes beneath
the shadow of his much-loved mountains
before setting oiF on its fulfilment.

But, though he had left his farm, Mr.
Bretherton had not sold it. He had
merely committed it and his two or three
thousand ho2:s to the care of an ao;ent.
That agent was a second cousin of his, an
honest man named Jabez Dean, in whose
capacity as well as probity he had the
utmost confidence. The usual returns,
therefore, would, he expected, continue to
flow in from this source, and it was easy
to see that the almost too ingenuous
American was a little oppressed b}^ the
burden of his riches. It was also easy to
see that his present life was not to his

taste ; although he made no open complaint,
he was suffering from that melancholy
disease, nostalgia, or ,as our neighbours
across the channel term it, .


CHAPTER Y.

COUSINLY COMPLIMENTS.

To the particulars this freely imparted to
them, both young men had listened With
close attention. Even as an utter stranger
Mr. Bretherton had awakened their
interest. How, indeed, could they avoid
feeling interested in the father of so lovely
a daughter? Still, as a stranger, or a
mere passing acquaintance, they would
scarcely have cared to listen to the story
of his life. It was the reflection that
future intercourse with him would be in
one case possible, in the other almost a
dead certainty, that had given import to

the worthy man's account of this antecedents
and present position.

And in Charlie Niinnerley's eyes the
fact that this ' elderly bumped ;' this
rustic bourgeois ' (so he would have
described him) — actually possessed coffers
bursting with gold, did, in truth, appear a
very interesting fact. Gradually, as he
had come to realise the opulence of the
frank American (involving, as it did, the
substantial heiress-ship of his beautiful
daughter), the young artist's manner had
grown a little less affably patronising, and
rather more deferential. Already, within
himself, Charlie was beginning to plan how
the acquaintanceship, so unexpectedly
commenced on this Swiss mountain, might
be renewed and cultivated in England.

Upon Victor McNicoll's part there was
no need for such planning. Since they
were about to become his neighbours in a
small country place, the difficulty with
him, were such his wish, would be to

avoid meeting Mr. and Miss Bretherton
asrain ; and such certainly was not his wish.
On the contrary, Yictor was conscious of
a singular satisfaction in the knowledge
that Idalia and her father were not to pass
like shadows out of his life alone With

o

other nomads of humanity encountered
upon his travels.

As for Mr. Bretherton, he was moved by
a similar consideration to quite a pleasurable
excitement.

It don't seem one-half so lonesome-like
to think of going' to that thar place as it
did, now Tve made your acquaintance,
mister he presently observed. 'An' might
you live anywhere near by?'

Well, not very near. Our house is
about twenty minutes' walk from Monks-wood
Hall ; but that is nothing,' said
Victor.

Why, no — not fur young legs, it ain't
nothing'. An' maybe,' he suggested, timidly,
' there's a family of ye ?'

Victor explained that he had a father,,
mother, and two sisters.

Two sisters ? Hev you now, really ?'
repeated Mr. Bretton, in a tone of much
interest. ' An' they'll be young, I guess ?'

Oh, yes ; they are both younger than I.
Dora is twenty and Jessie eighteen.
When Miss Bretherton comes to Monks-wood,
I hope she will allow them to call
upon her?'

Mr. Bretherton administered a gratified
rub to his knees before replying.

Now, that's cheerful ! Thank you,
mister ! Idalia she'll be quite sot up having*
young folks around ; an' so shall I,' he
added ; ' I'm powerful fond of young folks.
An' your sisters, now ; I essay they'll be
tender-hearted girls an' friendly?'

Victor smiled.

Yes,' he said, ' I believe they are tolerably
amiable. But a man shouldn't crack
up his own family, I suppose. By-the-by,
I think I ought to tell you, sir, in return

for your own candour, what our position in
life is. My father is not an independent
squire, as you will be, living on your own
property at Monkswood. He is a business
man.'

Mr. Bretherton nodded.

'Keeps a store, does he?' he asked.

'Well, no; not exactly,' laughed the
young man. 'He owns two large cloth
mills — at least, he and a gentleman who
is his partner do. The firm is styled
Courteney, McNicoU," and the mills —
Upton Brook Mills," they are called — are
situated about two miles from Hio-h
Raison.'

And capital good paying concerns they
are !' put in Charlie Nunnery. ' His
father is awfully rich, governor; and I
expect my cousin will be made a partner
before long. I wish I had half as good
prospects as he has ! . . . Hello ! — will
that honor be for luncheon ? I must have
a wash, Victor, before I eat.'

^ So must I,' returned his cousin. And,
waiting only to exchange, at Mr. Brethren's
request, another hearty hand-shake,
the two young men ran upstairs to perform
their ablutions.

I say, did you ever know a queerer
thing in your life?' exclaimed Charlie,
turning uninvited into his cousin's room,
and proceeding to make himself at home at
the wash-stand. ' You little imagined, Vic,
when you were telling me about them at
breakfast this morning, that our wonderful
Peri and her old oddity of a father
were actually on their way to High Rad-son
— of all places in the world ! Upon my
word, *' that thar fact is stranger than
fiction anyhow," ' he concluded, imitation
Mr. Bretherton's tone.

It is strange — yes,' assented Victor,
curtly. Somehow it grated upon him to
hear Idalia described as a ' Peri,' or her
father as an ' oddity.' ' I feel sure, Charlie,'

he subjoined presently, ' that Mr. Brethren
is a man to be esteemed.'

'Oh, no doubt of that! I feel the
strongest veneration for him already — and
for his purse also, and his hog farm, and
his stocks and shares. Bless the man !
may his shadow never be less ! I suppose
I may use your brush ?'

Certainly ; don't be bashful, pray,
about helping yourself to anything you
may require.'

Is that meant to be satirical ? No
matter! — I can stand it,' said Charlie,
laughing. ' Xow be quick, my boy ! — I'm
in a hurry to join the fair Idalia.'

'Are you, indeed? Well, you needn't
wait for me,' retorted Victor, who, so far,
had been kept from performing his own
toilet by his cousin's obtrusion into his
room.

^ Nonsense ! Of course, I shall wait for
you,' protested the other, generously. ' I

say, Victor, isn't she enough to carry a
fellow off his feet at a glance ?'

she! Who?' demanded Victor, affecting
ignorance.

Those delicious eyes ! those exquisitely
long lashes !' pursued Charlie. * Lor !'
(again mimicking Mr. Bretherton's drawl)
there is a beauty to dream of — to drive a
man distracted ! My heart goes pit-a-pat
at the very thought of it !'

'Humph! I'm pretty sure of one thing,
my dear fellow,' sneered Victor ; ' and that
is, that sou will never be driven distracted
by love or admiration of anyone, unless it
be of Charlie Nunnerley. I wouldn't
warrant you against going mad of self-conceit.'


What a confounded libel ! By George,
you are in a sweet temper ! What is the
meaning of it?'

Victor laughed. He could not Avell
have explained the reason, but he certainly
did feel unusually irritated just now,

both by Charlie's assurance of manner and
style of conversation.

Your rhapsodies sound so uncommonly
cheeky,' he observed ; ' and I wonder,' he
added, suddenly, ' what Miss Hester
Courteney would say to them.'

Charlie looked startled and a little displeased.


Miss Hester Courteney?' he repeated.
sand pray why should you suppose that
she would have anything to say to them ?'

Nay, you may answer that question for
yourself,' rejoined Victor, shrugging his
shoulders.

'I never puzzle myself to guess riddles,'
answered his cousin. • Are you ready
now ?'

At the luncheon-table the young men
found themselves placed directly opposite
to Mr. and Miss Bretherton. The latter
welcomed them both with a frank smile,
and the conversation throughout the meal
Alas mostly confined to the three. Idalia,

it is true, made several efforts to induce a
more general sociality, and the young men
politely followed her lead ; but the company
was not composed of very congenial
elements, and did not appear inclined to
consort.

The talkative lady certainly chattered
incessantly ; but the ' flow of her soul ^
(her conversation was, assuredly, not a
feast of reason ') was chiefly directed
towards her friend, ' the victim.' The
churlish professor only opened his lips to
animadvert upon the cookery ; and the
Avidow, who was looking decidedly sulky,
replied to the remarks addressed to her as
nearly as possible in monosyllables.

On the conclusion of this repast Victor
McNicoU retired again for a time to his
own chamber. Although there was no
prospect of dispatching it to-day, he was
anxious to write a letter which might be
sent off on the first available opportunity.

This letter was to his father, and the

tone of it was somewhat apologetic. "When
at home, Victor filled the post of head-cashier
at the mills, and the three weeks'
leave of absence from his duties which had
been granted him would expire tomorrow.
That the prolongation of his holiday by a
few days would occasion any serious difficulty
in business matters, the young man
did not for a moment suppose. But he
was sufficiently conversant with his father's
temper and disposition to feel the advisability
of acquainting him without delay
with the cause of his present detention.
Also, he desired that this explanation
should precede his own arrival at home.

His letter finished, Victor repaired to
the drawing-room. There the first persons
his eye lighted upon were his cousin and
Miss Bretherton seated apart at a small
table, whereon lay a chess-board. Approaching
them he learned that Charlie
had proffered to teach the young lady
this game ; and it appeared to him that

VOL. I. G

Idalia was enjoying lier lesson. Further,
it struck him that his cousin, at all events,
considered his presence and superintendence
of the amusement de trop. Withdrawing,
therefore, to a distance, he took
up a book ; but for some reason or other
he found it impossible to read. His gaze
kept wandering constantly towards the
chess-table, and he found himself furtively
watching the progress of the instruction.
That instruction — with intervals devoted
to what seemed to be very interesting conversation
— lasted throughout the greater
part of the afternoon ; and, by the time the
table was at length pushed away, Victor
had grown so strangely and unaccountably
restless that he could with difficulty keep
his seat.

CHAPTER YI.

THE MACXICOLL FAMILY.

'Anyone here to meet me, Carter?'

'Yes, sir; there's your coachman outside
nth the brougham. He has been waiting
a goodish while.'

Oh, has he ? Well, bring my portmanteau
along, please.'

And, gathering up a railway-rug and
other stray belongings scattered about a
first-class compartment, Victor McXicoU
walked off towards the exit from the High
Radston station, followed by the porter
whom he had addressed by name.

'This is your last down-train, isn't it,

g2

Carter ?' he asked, looking back. ' I had
a near shave to catch it in London.'

Yes sir ; yes. It's the last as stops
here — the 9.40 is. Thank you, sir ; much
obliged.'

The expression of gratitude bore reference
to a small gratuity dropped into the
porter's hand as he closed the carriage-door.


Since Victor's introduction to the reader
on the summit of the Miirren, eve days
had now elapsed. Three of those days
had been spent on the mountain ; the last
two, with an intervening night, the young
man had passed in travelling homewards
at express speed, without rest or intermission.


Pale and jaded, he now flung himself
back against the cushions of the brougham
as he was driven off, and closed his eyes :
not, however, to sleep. Victor had enjoyed
no sleep since he had set out upon this
journey. A certain unvaried sequence of

thoughts, memories, anticipations, had
occupied his mind and driven away all
inclination for slumber ; and no sooner
did he once more find himself alone, than
his weary brain set to Avork anew, going
over and over ao;ain the same oTound it
had so incessantly traversed during the
past thirty-eight or thirty-nine hours.
Haunted by these persistent and, it maybe
added, agitating reflections, the young
man's tedious journey had passed like an
uneasy dream, and the exhaustion from
which he was at present suffering was due
as much to the mental as to the physical
strain.

High Radston station was built quite
in an outskirt of the small market-town.
It was not, however, the same outskirt as
that wherein young McNicoll's home was
situated, and he had a considerable
distance to drive.

The carriage at first rolled smoothly
along a level road, bordered by trees and

not too well lighted ; but, on reaching the
town, the horse fell into a walk, for in the
town itself there was scarcely a level yard.
Most of the streets sloped either up
or down, the majority of them converging
towards one point as a focus. This
was the ' market-place ' — a huge irregular
square, where each Saturday a number of
portable stalls were set up for the sale of
country produce, in the shape of butter,
eggs, fruit, and vegetables, brought thither
by the wives and daughters of neighbouring
farmers. On one side of the square,
moreover, was a large covered building,
erected also for market purposes, but
seldom used, excepting on the occasion
of the great annual agricultural show.
Behind this, again (the civic authorities
were evidently not economical of space),
lay a good-sized piece of ground, enclosed
by white-painted palings and divided by
hurdles. Here it was that the monthly
cattle-market was held, and the fat

sheep and cows exposed for view and
purchase.

On his way to the market square
Victor had to pass by these cattle-pens,
and though it was growing too dark for a
stranger to have distinguished any special
features of the town, they were marked
enough to his recognition by their white
railings.

After crossing the square, the carriage
began to crawl up a broad, rather steep,
thoroughfare. This was the principal
street of the town, where all the best shops
were located. Those shops, however, had
long since been closed. Ten o'clock in
High Radston was considered a very late
hour. It was a sleepy little place, and not,
as a rule, much given to dissipation, even
in the mild form of visiting and tea-drinking.
The number of lights which glimmered
in the upper storeys showed Victor that
its inhabitants were already retiring to their
nightly rest.

Having lived in the neighbourhood all
his life, lie knew most of the dwellers in
this chief street, at least by sight, and
could, had he so desired, have drawn
pretty correct pictures to himself of the
various inmates of those blind-shrouded
chambers. But, although his gaze wandered
over the lighted casements, Victor
was thinking nothing of what lay behind
them ; and when presently the shops
came to an end, and the town was left
behind, he once more subsided into a
corner.

Then followed a long country drive of
nearly seven miles, over a dark road,
unilluminated by moon or gas. But at
length the carriage turned in at an open
gateway, and drew up before a handsome
portal.

Roused from the reverie into which he
had again fallen, and almost dazzled by the
light from a couple of lamps that stood on

either side of the portico, Victor sprang to
the ground.

Scarcely had he done so before the door
was thrown open, and the interior of a
square hall disclosed to his familiar vision.

In the style of its appointments this
entrance-hall was both luxurious and elegant.
A thick Persian carpet, with a
predominance of crimson amongst its
many-blended tints, covered the floor.
There were benches and tables of dark oak,
beautifully carved, whilst bronzes, statues,
stands of flowers and ferns were arranged
about it in appropriate and effective positions.
Thus, on its threshold, the house
was, as it were, stamped as the abode of
wealth. From the fact, however, that
everything was modern and fashionable —
that nothing time-worn or antiquated met
the eye — one might have guessed that the
wealth was of comparatively recent acquirement,
and that the owner of this

house, though rich, belonged to the comfortable
middle class, and not to any
higher order of society.

Passing in, Victor surrendered his wraps
to a servant, and the next instant was
being drawn by two young ladies into a
room to the left of the hall, from which
they had just burst forth in breathless
haste.

My dear girls ! don't smother me,
please !' he remonstrated presently, releasing
himself from their rather too-demonstrative
embraces, and turning towards
a third and older lady, who had
stepped forward to meet him. ' And how
is the dear little mother ?'

The tone of the inquiry was tenderly
affectionate, and so was the caress whereby
it was accompanied.

Little, indeed !'

Mrs. McNicoll drew herself up and
laughed, as though she considered the
term inappropriate, which in truth it was ;

for, although beside her son's tall figure
she scarcely looked it, Mrs. McMcoll was
considerably above the medium height.
Her form, too, was slight and thin, and
the simple, clinging dress she usually
affected added to the impression of her
stature. Her face, however, was one that
invited endearments. She was a gentle,
sweet-tempered woman, and her placid,
yet thoughtful expression, bore witness to
her disposition. In complexion she was
pale; her features were delicate and refined;
her dark eyes were just the colour of
Victor's own, but they possessed neither
the keenness nor depth which characterised
his. Although not yet forty-six, Mrs.
McNicoll's hair was silver-grey, and she
wore it smoothly arranged beneath a
dainty lace cap that became her to
perfection.

As regarded personal appearance, the
Misses McNicoU were not, either in their
brother's opinion or that of their general

acquaintances, to be compared with their
mother. They were, in fact, rather plain
girls, both of them ; and they were much
alike. Their features, derived from their
father, were large and a little clumsy.
They had pale reddish hair (Jessie's being
a shade deeper in tint than that of her
sister), and eyebrows of the same colour.
Their eyes were blue, and their complexions,
but for an unstinted adornment of
freckles, would have been fair.

Nevertheless, though common-place
young women, as this common-place description
shows, the sisters were not unpleasant
to look upon. No face behind
which beats a heart can ever be absolutely
ugly ; and, whatever their faults, both
Dora and Jessie McNicoll possessed warm
hearts and kindly natures. Souls, fortunately,
are not always made to match the
features, and a fair soul may exist without
Madonna-like graces of form ; also,
thank God ! love discovers beauties everywhere,

and always, in the coarse and
homely faces belonging to the every-day
men and women of whom the world is
full. It would be a bad business indeed
for the majority of mankind, beauty being
so extremely rare, if love had to wait for
it, instead of creating it, as it does, out of
its own sweetness.

Looking on whilst their mother and
brother embraced, the two girls were
struck simultaneously by the same
impression.

Oh, Victor, how pale you are !' said
Dora.

Hoar ill you look !* exclaimed Jessie, in
the same breath.

111 !' echoed Mrs. McXicoll, drawings
to scan his face in swift anxiety.
'My dearest boy, are you ill?'

'Xot at all, mother,' rejoined her son,
smiHng ; ' but I daresay I do look seedy
enough, for I am fearfully tired. I have
travelled from Lauterbrunnen, you know,

without stopping. Of course I need not
Ptsk if you got my telegram, since you sent
to meet me.'

IMo ; it reached us yesterday. But sit
down, dear ; you really do look wretched.
And you must be hungry as well as tired.'
She bustled forward to draw a chair to the
end of a long table spread with the preparations
for a repast. 'What will you
take, Victor ? There are some chops being
cooked, and here is a cold partridge, you
see. But you must have a cup of hot tea
or coffee ; which shall it be ? Please ring
the bell, jessie.'

'Thanks ; I'll take coffee. But I'm not
particularly hungry, mother. Sit down
yourself, and don't bother about me, there's
a dear.'

The young man dropped, as he spoke,
into the seat she had placed for him by
the table, and, when the coffee and chops
had been brought in, the three ladies seated
themselves near him.

The room was a dining-room. It was
an apartment, however, meant to sit in as
well as to eat in, and it had the comfortable
aspect imparted by habitual occupancy.
The furniture was substantial and
good, the drapery of the three large
windows was heavy and handsome, the
ornaments were chaste and in good taste,
and the walls where hung With well-selected
oil-paintings (principally landscapes) in
massive gilt frames. Over the mantelpiece
appeared a likeness of the master of
house, but other family portraits were conspicuous
by their absence.

You got the telegram yesterday, you
say ?' Victor inquired, taking from Dora's
hand the cup she had filled for him ; 'but
my letter — I am afraid that has not arrived.
I wrote it several days ago, but was
not able to post it until a few hours before
I set off for home myself. The letter was
to my father.'

'Yes; it came by this evening's post,'

said Dora. ' We asked father what was in
it, but he said there was '' nothing " in it ;
so we dared not make any further
inquiries.'

Oh ! Well, I am glad it has reached
him before my return. I wrote to explain
how it was that I had been detained
beyond my time. By the way, where is
he? — in the library, I suppose. But he
must have heard me come in.'

^ I hope he didn't — at least, I hope he
won't present himself here just yet,' put
in Jessie ; ' for I may inform you, my dear,
that he is in one of his most cantankerous
moods this evening : a bear with a sorehead
would be mildness personified by
comparison.'

'- Jessie ! Jessie, my child !'

All right, mother ; but it is true, isn't
it ? The new book-case came to-day,
Victor — the one to fill up that corner, you
know — and father insists on arranging the
books in it himself I suppose he is busy

about that now — too busy to come and
ask how you are ; so let us make hay
while the sun shines. You must have
oceans of things to tell us ; but I am
afraid we shall have to pump you, as usual,
to get them out. To begin with, how is
Charlie ? And where did you leave him ?
in London, of course.'

No ; I left him in Switzerland,' answered
Victor. ' He stayed behind for another
day at Interlaken, although he ought to
have been at home some time ago to fulfil
an eno:ao;ement he had made.'

Victor, you have not referred to poor
Sir Jonathan Ledsom,' interposed Dora,
changing the subject. ' Were you not
awfully shocked to hear about him?'

Sir Jonathan Ledsom ?' repeated her
brother. ' Xo ; what is the matter nth
him ? I haven't heard anything. I called
at the Poste Restante at Interlaken,
expecting letters from you there, but they
told me there were none.'

VOL. I. H

Of course not. Why, Victor, you
told us to direct to the Hotel des Alpes.'

To be sure I did !' he exclaimed. ^ How
stupid of me to forget 1 But I passed
through the place in such ^ harry. Well,
Dora, what is amiss with the old gentleman
?'

He is dead, Victor. He died last Friday,
and he is to be buried tomorrow,'
answered his sister.

Dead !' Victor laid down his knife
and fork with a start. ^ Dead !' he interjected
again. ' Dear me! How did it
happen ?'

'You. should not have told him so
abruptly, Dora,' remonstrated Mrs. Mc-coll.
'My dear boy, you really are
not well.'

A slightly impatient gesture escaped the
young man.

I assure you, mother, that there is
nothing whatever the matter with me but
fatigue,' he protested; 'I shall be all

right tomorrow. Go on, Dora. AVhat
did he die of? It seems dreadfully
sudden.'

It was dreadfully sudden,' affirmed
Dora. ' It was apoplexy — a fit, Victor — and
he died within half-an-hour. Lady Ledsom
is in great distress, naturally. She
has shut herself up and refused to see anyone.
Arthur is here, of course,' she added,
with a faint rise of colour — ^ Sir Arthur
now, you know.'

Yes, poor fellow ! And he has called
here every day since he arrived,' observed
Jessie. ' He is so troubled about his aunt.
Would you believe it, Victor, she — ha, here
is father !'

Victor rose to his feet and turned towards
the door.

The gentleman who had just entered
was indubitably a fine man. He stood six
feet in his boots, and was stout in proportion.
His hair and the long brown beard
he wore had a decided tino-e of red in them.

a

h2

His features were pronounced, his eyes
grey and sharply observant. The expression
of his countenance (this no stranger
could fail at once to notice) was habitually
surly and ill-tempered. At the present
moment his brows were knit into two deep
upright furrows, and he looked more ill-tempered
than usual.

How do you do, father?' There was a
deprecating but not unmanly tone in his
son's voice as he advanced, with outstretched
hand, to offer his greeting.

^ No, I can't shake hands,' said Mr. Mc-coll,
waving him off ; ' my hands are
perfectly black.' (They did not look so ashe
exhibited them.) ' Those books, Helen,
are in a filthy condition, full of dust.
And yet you profess, forsooth, to be a
model house-keeper? But it's the way
with women, I know — those of them, at
least, who make a pretence of caring for
cleanliness at all. They are quite content
if the outside of the platter be clean. There

is no thoroughness about them. They
haven't a notion of thoroughness.'

• But those books are so old, William,'
expostulated his wife, softly ; ' and on
shelves without glass it is impossible to
avoid a little dust accumulating. Had
you allowed it, I should have told Jane to
take them outside and beat them before
they were put into a new case.'

'Yes, no doubt you would. And let
her tear them to tatters, the unhandy
bungler !' snapped her husband. ' Oh,
yes, IVe no doubt you would. Well, sir,
so you have condescended to return at
last?'

You received my letter, father, this
evening, I understand,' said Victor. ' That
explains the cause of my delay.'

'And a very lame explanation, I consider
it,' rejoined Mr. McNicoll, dropping
into the easy-chair which was always reserved
for his especial use. ' In the first
place, you had no business to go up the

mountain at all when your time was so
nearly run out ; and, in the second, it's
ridiculous to tell me that you were kept
there three days by a little snow. It
wouldn't have kept me, I know. But you
young fellows are such milksops — so afraid
of wetting your feet or soiling your dainty
little boots — bah !'

A quick, angry flush spread over Victor
McNicoll's face. He made no reply, however,
until he had mastered his rising indignation.
Then he said,

It was not by "a little snow," sir, that
I was detained : I thought I had made that
sufficiently clear in my letter. For two
days I could only have attempted the
descent — so, at all events, I was assured —
at the risk of life or limb. The third day
was Sunday, and, knowing that my mother
strongly disapproves of travelling upon
that day, I put ois commencing my journey
until the following morning.'

^ Model of virtue ! How convenient it

is when duty and inclination run in accord,
is it not?' sneered his father.

That sneer Alas almost too much for
poor Victor. Weary and out of sorts ashe
was, he felt less fitted than usual to
bear with patience his amiable parent's
buffets. Moreover, this scoffing suggestion
irritated him more, from the fact that there
was an element of truth in it. Still, by a
strong effort, he kept back the resentful
words that burned on his tongue. As
regarded his father, this young man had
already learned the difficult lesson of self-control.
If that Scripture adage be true
' He that ruleth his spirit is greater than
he that taketh a city ' — he had also earned
his patent of nobility. At any rate, he
had proved himself, often enough, a victorious
general over forces other than those
of war and bloodshed.

It was once remarked, by an observant
visitor at his house, that to live with the
elder McNicoU was enough to make either

a saint or a devil of a man. Of his son,
however, it had made neither the one nor
the other. For one reason, there were
in his case counter-influences at work,
whereof the observer in question had taken
no account. Association with his father
had added no happiness to Victor's life,
but it had been the means of invino; moral
strength and vigour to his character. The
tenderness which was required to modify
that vigour, and which was also to be
found in the young fellow's nature, had
been developed through the influence of
his mother. That influence had formed
his ballast and mainstay ; for Victor was
(Conscious of possessing some taint of his
father's hot and cynical temper — which
fact made his manful self-government in
all relationships with him the more meritorious.


As for Mr. McMcoll, his disposition
might at times be described as positively
vicious. Not only did he take no care to

avoid treading on the mental corns of his
family and dependents, but lie was at pains
to seek out those corns, in order — so it
really appeared — that he might have the
satisfaction of stamping on them. Fortunately
for the members of his home-circle,
his habits were solitary, and he petit
much of his time alone. Ashen he did
inflict his presence upon wife or children,
the effect was either that of a cold douche-bath
or a pungent blister. And the consciousness
that he was disagreeable —
Mr. McXicoll was fully aware of this
truth — the knowledge that his children
feared, and his employees at the mill detested
him, only re-acted in making him more
savage and morose. Year by year, almost
month by month, his unchecked ill-humours
had grown upon him. Yet Mr.
McXicoll was not a bad man, nor, at the
bottom of his heart, an unkind one. In
all his business dealings he was just and
honourable. Further, so far as money-giving

was concerned, lie was generous.
His name stood high on the list of many
public charities, and his work-peoples
though they did not know it, owed every
rise in their wages, and such liberalities asa
Christmas dinner and midsummer treat,
to him rather than to the partner whom
they so much preferred. Thoroughly
moral, too, Mr. McMcoll did not drink,
gamble, or indulge in any other such propensity.
Whilst they did not love him,
therefore, his children were not wholly
without respect for him. For her part, his
wife, notwithstanding the constant rebuffs
which her affection had received, still
loved him more than she dared venture to
show.

There are many men who, like Mr.
McNicoll, sit as incubus on their own
hearthstones, clouding the happiness and
marring the lives of all around them.
Verily, such men have their reward.

^ I suppose, father said Victor, venturing

at length to speak, ' that Harry
Bentham has managed the books
satisfactorily ?'

So far as I know, he has,' was the
grumbling admission.

Then my absence has not really caused
any particular inconvenience?'

Xo, nor any general inconvenience
either, for that matter,' snarled his father.
In your place, however, I should not be
so ready to admit or to j^^^ove that I could
be so easily done without. You are satisfied,
it appears, to be a nonentity in the
business, and yet you have the assumption
to consider yourself injured because you
are not made a partner.'

Victor pushed away his coffee-cup and
rose from the table.

That I am not a nonentity in the business,
sir, you are very well aware,' he
remarked, in a low tone of suppressed
annoyance. ' Also you are aware that, although
you and Mr. Courteney have con-suited

together with reference to giving mea
partnership, I myself have never pressed
the question.'

'Too proud, I suppose — eh?'

Victor did not reply.

Did you hear me, sir ?' angrily queried
Mr. McMcoll. ' I ask, were you too proud
to seek a favour from your father, as any
other son might ?'

It was not pride, father, that kept me
from pressing the matter, I think.'

• But 1 think it was !' retorted the other.
You're just as full of pride as you can
hold, though what you have to be proud
of it would be difficult to say. Why are
you standing there ? Sit down, pray.'

I am going to bed, sir. Good-night,
mother.'

Humph ! Very courteous and dutiful
to march off to bed directly I come into
the room, after an absence of three weeks
or more,' observed his father.

'Victor is very tired, William,' put in

his wife. ^ He has been travelling you
must consider, without stopping, for two
days.'

Dear me ! And his organisation is too
delicate to stand the strain of so tremendous
a journey? Well, by all means let
him take himself off.'

Oh, Victor ! and you have not told usa
single word about your adventures !'
exclaimed Jessie, darting a resentful glance
at her sire. ' It is too bad ! Please, don't
go yet.'

^ My adventures will keep till tomorrow,
Jessie,' rejoined her brother. ' I am, as
mother says, very tired. Moreover, the
domestic atmosphere is not very breath-able
this evening:. I can't stand it anv
looser.' And with this Parthian shaft
the young man hurried from the room.

After his departure, Mr. McXicoll subsided
into a grim taciturnity, and addressed
no further word to any of his family. It
was Victor's impression sometimes that his

father absolutely hated him. How surprised
he would have been could he have
known the truth ! That truth was, that
in the secret depths of his haughty and
contentious nature Mr. McNicoll almost
idolised his son — that he loved him with a
passionate fervour of affection and admiration,
all the more ardent in that he would
not allow it expression.

CHAPTER VII.

REVEALS AN IMPORTANT SECRET.

For some minutes after he had shut himself
in his own chamber Victor stood leaning
against the mantel-shelf, pondering
with a chafed and troubled air over the
injustice and unkindness of his father's
reception.

But his disturbance on this score did
not last long. That grievance was too
old — the skeleton of the household too
familiar to excite him greatly. He was
accustomed to it. One can get used to
anything, even to wearing a hair shirt or
to the excruciating noises of a machinists'
factory.

Sitting down to pull off his boots,.
Victor dismissed the vexed subject, and,
with a quick rebound, his mind reverted
to those engrossing reflections which had
occupied him throughout his homeward
journey. As a consequence, his perception
of objective realities grew dim, his consciousness
ceasing to take subjective note
of them. Oblivious, to all intents and purposes,
of where he was, he mechanically
prepared for rest, and was soon tossing
sleeplessly upon his pillows.

To confess the truth — a truth which, as
yet, the young fellow himself hardly
realised — Victor McNicoll had been laid
hold upon by that one supreme passion,
before which (especially at its first onslaught)
all other human sentiments and
affections dwarf and pale. He had fallen
in love with Idalia Bretherton — deeply and
passionately in love. It is true that he
had only known her for three days, but
they had been days of almost constant

companionship, and, short though the
time may appear, it had been long enough
for the purpose.

A sharp line seemed to him now to
have divided his life in two. That line cut
across at the foot of the Miirren — henceforth
to him a mountain of sacred mystery,
as Sinai or Tabor to the Israelites. Before
ascending that mountain he had been one
man, when he came down it he was another.
His life, with all its hopes and interests,
had there been transformed by mastic
more potent than that of a necromancer's
wand.

That Idalia's beauty — a beauty so
singular and exceptional — was the fons et
orig of young McXicoll's passion need not
be denied.

Who, indeed, can deny that beauty of
person is an enormous power ? And why
should it not be so ? One has as much
right to delight in the beauty of a lovely
face as of a lovely view, or in the harmony

VOL. I. I

of a graceful figure as that of music and
rhythm.

A man can no more help the vibrations
of joy he experiences in contemplation of
a smooth rounded cheek, of long lashes
framing eyes of liquid depth, of delicate
lips taking exquisite curves, of dimpled
chins, or any of the other numerous notes
of beauty whose charms poor words fail to
portray, than he can help being touched
by the sweet cadence of a song, or the
mystic entrancement of a fair landscape
seen by moonlight.

And it is often the noblest nature that
is most sensitive to this subtle influence of
personal beauty. A sensuous man sensualist
what he looks upon. His imagination,
piercing through the outer veil of loveliness,
sees, or fancies it sees, impurity
within. With the good man, on the contrary,
beauty seems naturally the correlative
of goodness. To him it is the expression
of something beyond and above

itself. It is the embodiment of his
spiritual yearnings after innocence, truth,
tenderness, and all virtue.

It is for this reason — because of the
mystery which underlies it, and which
claims kindred with the deeper mysteries
of his own soul — that a true and pure man
may prove most susceptible to that power
which ^ itself doth of itself persuade the
eyes of men, without an orator.'

That Victor McNicoll was by any means a
perfect young man is not pretended, but
unquestionably he was pure and true, and
unquestionably, also, Idalia Bretherton's
rare loveliness had found its way to the 
ofhisnature, andhadtouched
the chords of his deepest faith andsympathy.
But in this case personal attraction, though
it was the beo^inninof, was not the end of
the matter.

Victor was fully persuaded that here, at
all events, the jewel was worthy of the
casket. He had talked with Idalia, and

I 2

had discovered that she possessed a refined
mind. He had watched her, and had seen
that she had a noble nature.

But that, perhaps, which had aroused
his admiration most of all was her devotion
to her father. That devotion was so
utterly unaffected and simple, yet so
patent, that all who ran might read. It
was evident that the girl was not troubled
with even the shadow of shame in his regard.
Her tender love for him covered all
defects in his speech and manner, and
bridged over the gulf which her superior
education, natural refinement, and adaptability
to circumstances had set between
them. That sharp contrast, which was so
marked to others as to make them marvel
at the relationship, appeared to have no
existence in Idalia's own consciousness.

And what would have been touching in
this passionate affection as exhibited by an
uninteresting elderly woman, or a plain,
freckled girl like Jessie McNicoll, became

infinitely lovely in Idalia. To Victor she
seemed a thing apart — a wonder of creation
in her adorable perfection.

In her presence he had been content to
gaze and sigh, to watch and worship ; or,
at least, he would have been so content
but for the restless element of jealousy
which had already been introduced into
his love. Not, howcA^er, that Victor had
3'et definitely acknowledged to himself
either the love or the jealousy. He only
knew that he hated to see Charlie Runners
seated by Miss Bretherton's side, and
that he abhorred the lively ease of his
cousin's manner towards her.

Yet he had been forced to see Charlie a
good deal by her side. The lessons in
chess, begun on that first afternoon, had
been several times repeated. Idalia had
seemed really anxious to learn the game,
and Charlie had shown himself equally
anxious to continue the instructions ; and,
naturally, the conversation over the chessboard

lead not been entirely confined to
the movements of castles and pawns.

Looking on from a distance, and feeding
his incipient jealousy with each glance,
Victor had seen the two laughing and
talking together, sometimes to the neglect
for a considerable time of the pieces before
them.

Moreover, he had frequently surprised
Charlie gazing with furtive, but unmistakable
admiration at the lovely features
opposite to him, pulling the while at his
fair moustache ; and, forgetful of the
fact that he had himself suggested that
the young artist should make a study of
those features, to his professional advantage,
Victor, inconsistently enough, had
been moved by the sight to indignant
annoyance.

Knowing something that he did about
Charlie in relation to another young lady,
and guessing more than he knew, it had
struck him as the height of impertinence

that he should direct his admiration to, or
force his attentions upon, Idalia.

Then, to crown what in Victor's eyes
was, even if nothing worse, an audacity of
assurance in his conduct, Charlie had
remained behind on the Miirren for another
day after he had himself been forced to
leave. He had remained behind with
the express object of accompanying the
Brethertons to Interlaken on the following
morning, when they purposed to make the
journey there.

Furthermore, both the father and daughter
had frankly avowed their pleasure in
this arrangement, and separately they had
confided to Victor their mutual opinion
that his cousin was an ' exceedingly nice
young fellow.'

AVith that ' nice young fellow ' Actor
had not parted on particularly cordial
terms. Xot having much in common, the
two had never been strongly attached (although
till now their intercourse had

always proved amicable), and, on Charlie's
side as well as his, a coolness had
sprung up during their stay upon the
mountain.

So far, therefore, as the loss of his
company was concerned, Victor might
not have objected very strongly to this
unfriendly desertion of himself; but all
the way home — through that dream-like
journey which had followed their separation
— he had been tortured with visions of
Charlie and Idalia seated together over
their chess-board, or travelling in each
other's company.

With these unpleasant impressions, however
(he had not sought to analyse fully
ivy they were so unpleasant), there had
mingled more agreeable, but scarcely less
exciting, thoughts.

Over and over again he had lived
through the history of those three days.
Every word that Idalia had spoken in his
hearing seemed to be stamped upon his

brain ; each attitude and movement of her
graceful figure he remembered ; every
particular in her dress (he had never
before been used to notice ladies' dresses)
had fixed itself upon his mind.

Without difficulty his active memory
recalled all the turns of the quiet little
talks he had held with her. Sweet
reminiscences thrilled him of smiles which
she had seven him, of moments when her
lovely eyes had looked with frank kindliness
into his own, of rapturous accidents
whereby her dress or her hand had chanced
to touch him.

Poor Victor ! He had never, it is true,
been in love before, yet one might have
thought that the signs of his present condition
were too plain to have escaped his
own recognition.

Even now, ' thoughts, dreams, and sighs,
wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers,'
kept him long from the slumber he so
much needed. k.t length, however, utterly

worn out, he dropped off into unconsciousness,
and slept soundly until what
was for him a late hour of the morning.

CHAPTER YIIL

A DOMESTIC CHAT.

Despite his spare frame and sallow complexion,
Victor McNicoU possessed a
capital constitution. A good night's rest
sufficed to restore him to his usual health,
and in much better spirits than on the previous
evening he descended to the .


At Upton Lodge — so Mr. McNicoll's
house was named — the customary hour for
the morning meal was 8.30. As yet it
was not much past nine, but already,
Victor found, his father had left the house.
The rest of the family, however, still
lingered around the table ; and, after

returning their affectionate salutations,
Victor took his place, apologising as he
did so for the lateness of his appearance.

^ You know, mother, I have had to makeup
my arrears of sleep,' he added.

'To be sure you have!' answered his
mother. ' You did right to take a good
rest. I was just going to send up to
inquire whether you would breakfast in
bed.'

'And so earn the appellation of " milksop
" which my father applied to me last
night? No, thank you, mother.'

We were obliged to begin our own
breakfast very punctually this morning,'
resumed Mrs. McNicoll, deprecating by
a glance his reference to that remark.
Your father has a good deal of business
to look after at the mill before twelve.
The funeral is to be at that hour, and Mr.
Courteney and he have both been invited
to attend it. You will be at the grave, too,
mil you not ?'

Of course I shall !' returned the young
man. ' But, dear me ! I have hardly had
time to realise that awful business yet.
So poor Sir Jonathan is actually dead ?
Though he has been an invalid so long,
one never looked for him to die. But let
me hear the particulars now, please. We
were interrupted last evening when you
were speaking of it, Dora.'

I should think we were interrupted !'
broke in Miss Jessie. ' Did you ever know
our three-tailed bashaw more abominably
fractious? I was rejoiced when he took
himself off so early this morning. Xow
we can have a good talk, Victor, and you
can tell us all your news.'

Victor took a drink of tea. Then, with
a rising colour and a quickened beating of
heart, he observed,

^ Well, yes ; I have a small piece of news
which I expect will interest you all. But
first, about Sir Jonathan. Didn't you say,.
Dora, that it was a stroke of some kind?'

Yes, an apoplectic fit,' replied his sister.
^ Poor man, he had gone into the stable-yard,
immediately after luncheon, to say
something to one of the grooms, and, whilst
he was in the act of speaking, he fell down
on the pavement. The seizure did not last
a quarter-of-an-hour, and he was carried
back to the house dead !'

What a terrible shock for his wife !'

Indeed yes ! she has not left her room
since,' said Dora. ' But really, Victor, she
is such a dreadful woman ! One can't feel
so much sympathy with her as one ought.'

dreadful?' echoed her brother. 'Why,
what has she done that is dreadful ?'

Oh, Victor ! you know how she hates
poor Arthur,' said Dora.

And it is such unreasonable, such unnatural
malice !' added Jessie. ' Is it his
fault that he is heir to the estate, or that
he is so like her dead son ?'

Or that he was born in the same year,
and bears the same name,' supplemented

Victor. ' Xo, it is not this fault ; and he is
the finest young fellow I know. Still,
one can make some allowance for Lady
Ledsom's feelings. Arthur's death was a
dreadful blow to her ; and, the two boys
having been together when he was drowned,
she naturally '

Forgets that his cousin risked his own
life to save him,' broke in impetuous Jessie ;
That Arthur would have been drowned
too, if it had not been for that boatman.
How can you make excuses for her,
Victor? Is there any justice in her dislike
of Arthur ?'

^ Certainly not, my dear. But then,
women, you know, are not always just.
They sometimes allow their feelings to o-et
the better of their judgments.'

'And don't men? Fie, Victor! That
is just like one of father's remarks. Don't
emulate his style of complimenting our
sex, or you will get sat upon, I can tell
you !' laughed Jessie. ' But about Lady

Ledsom ; even mother admits that she is
treating her nephew shamefully ; don't you,
mother ?'

Poor woman !' sighed Mrs. McMcolL
Yes, it is to her own loss that she closes
her heart against him. If she would only
let him, Arthur Avould be a true son to
her.'

But she has actually refused to see
him !' said Dora. ' He was sent for on the
day of his uncle's death, and he has been
at Feldhurst Court now nearly a week
without having once been admitted to her
presence. It has made him so unhappy,
Victor. I really don't know what he would
have done without mother.'

'And Dora' subjoined Jessie, significantly.
' He has been here every day to
pour out his sorrows in their sympathetic
cars.'

'I suppose,' said Victor, without any
thought of satire in the suggestion, ' I
suppose he will come in for almost everything?

The estate is principally in land,
and strictly entailed.'

Yes, that is the worst of it,' returned
Mrs. McNicoll. ' Lady Ledsom, poor thing,
will only have eight hundred pounds a
year now — her jointure money — and that
pretty little cottage ornee^ " Frenchified,"
which her husband made her a present of
by deed of gift. She is going to leave the
Court and live there.'

^ Humph ! there ought to be no necessity
for that so long as Arthur is unmarried,*
commented Victor. ' ^^^hy should she
leave the Court?'

It is entirely her own doing,' protested
Dora. ' Sir Arthur — I think we ought to
give him his title '

But you know he won't let you, Dora,'
interposed her sister. ' He says it is ridiculous
and unkind, when we have known
him all his life, to begin making a stranger
of him now. And — ahem ! I don't Lavish to
call up your blushes, my dear — but I

VOL. I. K

observed him emphasising the remonstrance
in your case by a tender squeeze
of the hand.'

Jessie, how absurd you are !' expostulated
Dora, the deprecated blushes spreading
hotly over her face. ' Of course he
looks on us both almost as sisters.'

Does he ? Ah, well ! I can't say that he
is strictly impartial in his brotherly attentions.
But proceed, please, with what you
were about to remark. I am anxious to
hear Victor's news.'

'And T also,' returned Dora. \1 was
only going to tell him about that letter.
As she would not see him, Victor, Arthur
wrote to his aunt, begging her to remain
at the Court, and to look upon it still asher
own property. He told her that
rather than she should go away he would
himself live elsewhere. He said that for a
young fellow like him to occupy a great
house like that alone would be wretched ;

and he ended by entreating lier to alloa
him to live with her, and to try to be a
food son to her, in remembrance of the
time when she was a good mother to him,
when she had taken him as an orphan boy
to live in her house. Of course, his going
to live at Feldhurst Court was Sir Jonathan's
doing,' pursued Dora, ' whereas his
banishment after her son's death was hers ;
but that was how he put it. It was a
noble letter, wasn't it, Victor? and just
like him. But how do you think Lady
Ledsom answered it?'

Can't tell, I'm sure. How ?'

^ Actually in the third person ! And
such a curt, cruel note. Mother, can you
remember the words ?'

It is a pity that anyone should remember
them, my dear,' said gentle Mrs. McXicoll;
sand I am ashamed to think that a woman
of Lady Ledsom's education and position
could be so hard. But perhaps, poor thing,

k2

when the first brunt of her affliction is
over, she may begin to view matters in a
happier and more reasonable light.'

I don't think it is in her to be either
reasonable or happy,' observed Jessie.
'Her disposition is not altogether unlike
that of the three-tailed '

Jessie ! Jessie !' reproved her mother,
with a shake of the head ; * you are speaking
of your father, recollect.'

The good lady was wont to enter an
occasional protest against her daughter's
irreverence.

Of course I am, mother,' laughed the
girl. ' It is a great relief to the mortal
dread I suffer in his presence to be able to
get a little fun out of him behind his back.
Don't, for pity's sake, try to dam up that
escape-pipe for my emotions. But now
let us dismiss the Ledsom topic. Arthur
will tell you everything himself, Vic, I'm
sure ; and I am on thorns to know what
this news is that you say will interest us.

Has it anything to do vrith Cousin
Charge ?'

No,' returned Victor, drawing forth
his watch as he stoke, and comparing it
with a handsome gilt timepiece on the
mantel-shelf. ' Xo, it has nothing to do
With Charlie. But I must be off in a few
minutes, so there won't be much time to
dwell on the news, Jessie. This is it : —
Last week I met and made acquaintance
with the people who are coming to live at
Monkswood.'

'Dear me! Do you mean Mrs. Curtis'
brother ?' demanded Mrs. McXicoll.

Yes. His name is Bretherton. I met
him and his daughter. There is a son,
too ; but I did not see the son.'

How very curious ! How did you get
to know them, Vic ? And where did you
meet them?' asked Dora.

What are they like ? Do tell us,' said
Jessie. ' Is the girl nice ? Are they coming
soon ? And why upon earth have they

been so long in taking possession of the
place ?'

Any more questions ?' laughed Victor ;
or will these do to be going on with ?
Thanks. Then I'll endeavour to answer
them seriatim. I met Mr. and Miss Brethren
at the hotel on the Murren, and
through being kept there by the snow, I
had the pleasure of seeing a good deal of
them. For the last nine months or a year
I forget which — they have been travelling
about the Continent prior to settling
down in England. At present they are, I
expect, in Belgium ; but early next week —
on Tuesday, I think — they hope to arrive
at Monks wood.'

Next Tuesday ? Really, this is interesting
! To have new neighbours in a
quiet country place like this is an affair of
moment, with a capital M. But you
didn't answer the questions seriatim sir ;
and you missed the most important of
them all : what are they like ? Brethren

sounds rather a grand name ; are they
grand people ?'

Victor smiled.

'They are levy rich people,' he replied,
'but certainly not 'grand." The epithet
sounds rather absurd as applied to Mr.
Bretherton.'

Whv, what kind of a man is he ?'

The most ingenuous man I ever met in
my life,' asserted her brother. ' After all,
there is a kind of grandeur about him — the
grandeur of extreme simplicity.'

Really ? He seems to have impressed
you favourably, at any rate. But about
his appearance : is he at all like Mrs.

Curtis ?;

Xo, Jessie ; he is about as unlike her
as he can well be. I'm afraid you'll be
prejudiced against him when I tell you
that he looks like a common, rough farm-labourer,
and that, in point of fact, he has
been a farmer all his life.'

'You don't say so? And Mrs. Curtis'

brother ? But surely he is an educated
man ?' questioned Dora.

No, my dear, he is not educated,' rejoined
Victor; 'nor, in the ordinary sense
of the term, is he even a gentleman. Still,
I hope you won't consider it infra dig. to
associate with him, because, if you do, I
think you will make a great mistake.'

But, Victor, you astonish me,' said his
mother. ' Mrs. Curtis was one of the most
ladylike Avoient I ever knew.'

True ; but, at the same time, she was
not horn a lady, mother. Did she ever tell
you anything of her early life?'

Mrs. McNicoll reflected for a moment.

'Nothing about her childhood that I
remember,' she answered. 'But of course
I knew a great deal respecting her first
husband ; she often spoke of him.'

'Well, her mother was a lady's-maid,
and her father a farmer, living in an
out-of-the-way corner of North Carolina.
But I'll just tell you in a few words

all that I have learned concerning the
family.'

And thereupon he proceeded to repeat,
in a condensed form, the particulars which
Mr. Bretherton had so frankly communicated
to Charlie Nunnery and himself in
the hotel billiard-room on that first morning
of their acquaintance.

The ladies listened with deep attention.


'Then the son and daughter are educated,
at any rate, if the father is not,'
remarked Dora, when he had concluded.

'Decidedly they are,' Victor protested.
*Miss Bretherton is remarkably like her
aunt, Mrs. Curtis, as you will see, and
every bit as sweet and ladylike. You will
call on her, will you not ? Of course you
must. In fact,' he continued, a little
nervously, ' 1 have already promised that
you should ; and I expect that you will
become great friends.'

Query,' rejoined Jessie. ' But, as a

matter of course, we shall call. How old
is she, Victor?'

Just your own age — eighteen. But I
think she looks older rather than you do,
Jessie.' Victor rose whilst making this
observation. Somehow, though it was so
sweet to think of Idalia, he felt strangely
shy about speaking of her. ' I must go
now.'

^ Oh, wait a minute !' begged Jessie. ' I
want to know a host more things. Is Miss
Bretherton as good-looking; as I am ?'
Jessie's plainness was, secretly, a very sore
point with her, and she greatly exaggerated
to herself its extent. Nevertheless,
she was given to being jocular upon the
subject. ' I can't do with any rival to my
claims as belle of Upton and High Radston,
you know. Don't tell me she is pretty.'

Victor laughed.

I won't,' he answered ; 'I'll say nothing
about her appearance at all. I will leave

you to judge of it for yourselves when you
see her.'

But you forget. You have said something
about it abbacy,' put in Dora. ' You
said she was remarkably like Mrs. Curtis,
and Mrs. Curtis was a remarkably handsome
woman.'

Ah, well I Wait till you see her niece !
Wait till you see Miss Idalia Bretherton !
But now I really must run off to the mill,
or I shall be getting into trouble.'

Stay, Victor — whisper a moment,' said
his mother, following him to the door and
onvino: him a loving: huo-. ' Your father's
bark is always worse than his bite. He
let out a secret to me last night. Perhaps
I ought not to tell it you. But the deeds
of partnership are actually drawn out,
Victor ! Before the end of the week the
firm will be '• Courteney, McXicoll, and
Sony I knew you would be pleased. God
bless you, dear I'

CHAPTER IX.

UPTON BROOK MILLS.

Victor McNicoll was indeed pleased by
his mother's confidential tidings — more
pleased than he could well have expressed.

At twenty-five, a man, especially one of
any strength of character, begins to long
for an assured position in life — a position
of independence and standing.

For six years now Victor had gone
regularly to the mill, and had worked
there industriously, giving his time and
his best energies in return for a salary
barely sufficient to cover his personal
expenditure. As his father's only son, he
had felt this treatment to be illiberal, if

not actually unjust. But lie had not
thought proper to make any strong protest
against it. He had been willing' to wait,
in the hope that right would eventually be
done him. ^\''ith Mr. Courteney, his
father's partner, he was, he was aware, a
prime favourite ; and Mr. Courteney, he
knew, had been urging his father, on and
off, for the last three years to give him
some share in the concern. To this proposition
— generously disinterested on Mr.
Courteney 's part — Mr. McXicoll had never
exactly refused to listen, but he had kept
putting off the step, from motives that
Victor guessed — viz., that it would elevate
his son from a position of subserviency, and
render him in some measure independent
of himself and his capricious ill-humours
and small tyrannies.

Yet now, it seemed, he had actually
brought himself to do, in his absence, far
more than Victor had ever anticipated he
would do, and far more than he felt he

Iliad any right to expect. The utmost he
had looked for — at all events, for sometime
to come — had been a small interest
in the business. He had not dreamt of
anything like a full partnership, or such a
partnership as would entitle him to have
his name added to that of the firm. From
what his mother had said, however, this
was to be done — it was to be a hona-jide
partnership ; and to be a partner in such a
lucrative and flourishing business as this
had proved for long years past would,
Victor reflected, give him at once a certain
standing in local society. He was glad of
it— doubly glad, somehow, to be able to
take that standing before Idalia Brethren's
arrival in the neighbourhood.

As he left the house, Victor's heart
warmed towards his father. Always dutiful
in his regard, both in thought and
conduct, he was conscious this morning of
the birth within him of grateful feeling
that was almost akin to affection.

His way to the mill took the young man,
first, clown a narrow lane, which ran off
from the road close by the side of the
house. It was a very quiet and shady
little lane, with tall hedges on either side,
shutting out the view beyond — just the
kind of place where one naturally lingers
to ponder over the joys or sorrows of
life. Actor walked alone it very slowly,
swinging a cane in his hand, and scarcely
noticing how fresh and sweet was the air
on this bright September morning. For
the time being, his thoughts were entirely
taken up with the anticipated change in
his own prospects. The human mind
(fortunately, at times, for us all) is so
limited in its operations that it cannot
occupy itself with more than one idea at
the same moment.

On coming to the end of the lane, however
— and, as it was only a very short one,
he did soon come to the end — Victor's reflections
were turned into a different

channel. He had mounted a stile, v.hichy
together with a five-barred gate, terminated
the lane and led into some fields
beyond, when his eye chanced to fall upon
a fine old mansion conspicuously situated
on a hill-side at only a short distance.
Pausing upon the top of the stile, Victor
stood for a while gazing at this mansion.
From his present joint of view it was
plainly visible, rising above a sloping
stretch of green park-land, and flanked on
either side by woods which seemed to
promise some ' boundless contiguity of
shade,' and which, on a glaring, sultry day,
were refreshing even to look upon.

The house was built of grey stone, and
belonged to one of the simpler orders of
that mixed, irregular style of architecture
known as Elizabethan. The windows were
exceedingly numerous and closely put
together, and were divided by mullions
and ransome into many compartments,
the monotony of the plan-line being broken

by semi-circular projections, thrown out
as smaller bays from the larger ones — after
the manner of ' the Duke's House,' in
Bradford, Wiltshire. An air of picturesque
magnificence was imparted by embellished
parapets above the windows and
at the top of the house, and by balustrade
terraces running along the lower part of
the building.

With the interior of Feldhurst Court,
Victor was nearly as well acquainted as
with its exterior, and his face assumed a
grave aspect as he now stood regarding it.
The white blinds shrouding those many
windows had reminded him again, with a
renewed shock, that its late owner lay
dead within. It is true that, for the last
year or so, the young man had seen but
little of Sir Jonathan Ledsom from the fact
that the baronet's invalid condition had
prevented him from wandering much
beyond his o^m grounds.

But, unlike most representatives of a

VOL. I. L

lineage so ancient and honourable as his
own, Sir Jonathan had possessed little
pride of caste. He had married a lady
from the middle ranks of life, and he had
never disdained to associate on terms of
equality with his well-to-do neighbours,
whose gold he knew to be contaminated
by trade.

In his boyhood Victor McNicoll had
been a close and chosen friend of young
Arthur — Sir Jonathan's only son — and
also (when he was taken to live with them
at the Court) of Arthur's cousin and namesake
— the orphan child of Sir Jonathan's
younger brother.

As may have been gathered from the
conversation reported in the last chapter,
the son and heir — a bright, fair-haired
youth, just eighteen at the time — had lost
his life through a boating accident. That
accident had taken place at the Scotch
lakes, whither the cousins had been permitted
to go alone — independent, for the

first time, of parents or tutors. In company
with a couple of boatmen, the two
boys had been fishing on Loch Katrine,
when the elder arthur, stooping over the
boat's side in some manipulation of his
line, had suddenly lost his balance and
fallen overboard. How it happened, whether
from cramp or some other cause,
could never be clearly ascertained, but the
poor boy had not risen again to the surface.
His cousin, frantic with alarm and
distress, had plunged into the water after
him.

Being unable, however, to swim more
than a few strokes, his gallant efforts towards
a rescue would infallible have re-suited
in his own death, had it not been
for one of the boatmen, who, in his turn,
had gone in after the second boy.

As it was, his half-drowning, together
with the shock of his cousin's loss, had
brought on a severe illness, from which
Arthur had been long in recovering.

L 2

When eventually he did recover, and was
able to return to Feldhurst Court — of which
he was now the legal heir — the poor lad
had found his home miserably changed. His
aunt, Lady Ledsom, by whom hitherto he
had been treated with every kindness and
consideration, appeared, to his surprise, to
have conceived a distressing aversion to
him. And that aversion, instead of diminishing
with time, had seemed only to increase
as the months went by. In fact,
before the end of a year after the fatal
event, the unhappy lady had become almost
unable to endure the sight of him dio reminded
her so strikingly of her own son,
and who, she never ceased bitterly to reflect,
had gained so much through that
son's death.

At length, out of regard to his wife's
feelings (though he condemned them, at
the same time, as both wicked and unjust).
Sir Jonathan had sent his nephew off to
Cambridge.

There at the university — albeit that
he was by no means very studiously
inclined — Arthur had remained ever since,
paying only short visits in each vacation
to his uncle's house and his own future
inheritance.

During those vacation visits the young
fellow had always been a frequent and
welcome guest at Mrs. McNicoU's hospitable
board, and he had taken pains to keep
up his old friendship with Victor, as well
as to cultivate that of Victor's family.

So matters had stood until now. But
now Arthur would go away no more. He
had come into his inheritance and his title.

Feldhurst Court was his, together vvdth
an unencumbered estate and an income
of twelve thousand a year. For a moment
Victor experienced a twinge of
envy of this fortunate young man, who
was yet only twenty-three years of age —
two years his own junior.

The unworthy sentiment, however, was

swiftly banished, and, heaving a tributary
sigh in remembrance of the dead baronet,
Victor descended the stile. Losing sight of
the Court, which now lay behind him to
the left, he faced the Upton Brook Mill, or
Mills. The singular or plural term was
used indiscriminately, because, although but
one concern, there were in reality two
distinct mills — each a large square building,
four storeys in height. Between the
two, and uniting them by an interior communication,
appeared a range of counting-houses.
The whole mass of buildings was
of red brick, with facings of stone ; but,
from the colour of the bricks, it was evident
that one of the mills, as well as the
range of offices, was of a later date than
the other.

Notwithstanding the name 'Upton Brook,'
which might seem to indicate an elevated
situation, the mills, as regarded the adjacent
country, stood low. Approaching
them now, Victor had to descend by a

sloping field-path through a couple of
meadows. In one of these, a number of
short-horned cows were grazing on the soft
long grass ; in the other, sheaves of yellow
corn stood ready to be carted away. This
little walk to the mill was one of which
Victor never tired. The young man
delighted in the country sights and sounds.
The glory of fruit-blossom, the delicious
scent of hay-making, the cooing of
wood-pigeons, the reposeful aspect of long
shadows lying athwart the tender green
herbage — these and a hundred other
things were a constant joy to him, yet one
to which he rarely gave expression in
words. As already hinted, he was not of a
demonstrative nature, and many of his
feelings were manifested only by the kindling
of his dark eyes, or the softening or
hardening of the lines about his firm
mouth.

The only manufactory of any sort
within a radius often miles, these woollen

cloth mills, standing as tliev did in a

'to

ey

hollow, offered little or no detriment to
the beauty of the undulating and well-wooded
landscape.

The site for them had been chosen, no
doubt, on account of a river which ran
past on the other side, and which supplied
the necessary water for working purposes.
In that river there were fish — fat perch
and speckled trout — and Victor had passed
many happy hours of his rare holidays in
angling for them in company with Arthur
Ledsom.

Hurrying a little as he drew nearer, the
young man crossed a narrow cart-road,
separating the fields from the mill, and
passed in at an open door in the centre of
the range of offices.

A second open door at the end of the
entrance-passage gave view upon a large
paved yard which filled up the square
space between the two mills.

Victor walked to the end of this passage
and looked forth.

His father Tvas often to be found in the
yard, whence he could take a sort of exterior
supervision of the whole premises,
and throw a glance over the long rows of
Windows from which issued the busy sound
of whirring and clanging machinery. The
private office, too, which he and Jlr.
Courteney shared, opened from the yard,
and adjoined the huge "packing-room,'
where the finished cloth was made up into
bales ready for carting away.

Mr. McNicoll, however, was not at
present visible, either crossing the yard,
or superintending the loading of a waggon
that Alas going forward in front of the
packing-room door. Victor hesitated a
moment, undecided as to whether he would
go in search of him. Then, turning back,
he entered a room to the right of the
passage, bestowed a curt but friendly

greeting upon four or five clerks who were
seated around it before their desks, and
passed on to an inner apartment. This
was his own private office — ^by virtue of
his occupying the post of head cashier — to
which he had been promoted some eighteen
months previously.

It was tenanted at present by only one
person — a man some twenty-six or tAventy-
seven years of age — who was stooping industriously
over a ledger.

'Well, Harry, my boy, how are you?'
asked Victor, touching his shoulder.

The other started. He had the misfortune
to be somewhat deaf, and had not
heard Victor come in.

Oh ! how do you do ? I'm tremendously
glad to see you back !' he exclaimed,
raising a pleasant, intelligent face, flushed
with the eagerness of his welcome, and
grasping Victor's proffered hand in a hearty
shake.

Although not the sort of man to be a

universal favourite (it is seldom the highest
type of men that are), Victor McNicoll
was capable of inspiring very warm attachments,
both amongst his equals and inferiors.
All the clerks and every workman
about the place, respected him, and
there were many among them that loved
him.

Harry Bentham, his present companion,
certainly did so, and, notwithstanding the
fact that they seldom met out of business
hours, a real friendship subsisted between
the two young men.

The son of a deceased clergyman, once
vicar of High Radston, Bentham still lived
in that town with his widowed mother, of
whom he was now almost the sole support.
For several years he had been in the
employment of Messrs. Courteney and
McXicoll, and for a considerable time he
had acted as Victor's special assistant, in
the capacity of sub-cashier.

'You can't imagine how dismal the

office lias seemed without yon he subjoined.


But you have managed splendidly, I
hear. I believe, Harry, you could now
take my place altogether.'

'Well, I suppose I am to have the
opportunity of trying. You know, don't
you, that I have been offered the post?'

'What — of cashier ?' Victor demanded,
in surprise.

Yes, with a salary, to begin with, of
two hundred and fifty pounds a year, and
promises of advance. Ah ! I can't tell you
how thankful I am, for my mother's sake.
But Mr. McNicoll says you will continue
to take a general supervision of the financial
department. And now let me congratulate
you with all my heart on '

No, Harry ; you had better not, please,'
interposed Victor. 'My father has not
spoken to me yet about any projected
changes. I fancy he wishes to surprise
me. I'd rather you didn't say anything

more at present. Come, let's have a look
at the books.'

And, mounting upon a stool, Victor
settled to work in silence.

The silence, however, was presently interrupted
by the entrance into the office
of a gentleman. That gentleman was Mr.
Courteney.

He was a tall, robust man, With light,
tow-coloured hair, a broad, flat-nosed, clean-shaven
face, and a genial smile.

Hello ! young man — here you are !
Back from your racketing and dissipation.
Well, you've had a jolly time of it, haven't
you ? My girl Hester has kept me posted
np about your wanderings. Heard of
them from your sisters, 1 suppose — unless
you have been sending her the news
direct ! If so, the sly puss has kept the
secret.'

Victor blushed — not with pleasure, but
with annoyance at the insinuation ; and
Mr. Courteney, with a graver air, resumed :

'But this is a sad thing that has happened
in your absence — isn't it ? — about Sir
Jonathan. Your father and I are just
going off to the funeral in a few moments.
You know, of course, that we have been
specially invited by Lady Ledsom to attendit,
though I should have gone to the church
in any case. Poor man ! he was always a
friendly neighbour, and one is glad to show
respect to his memory.'

I intend also to be at the grave,' said
Victor.

'Yes, do, my lad. And, by the way, I
want you to dine With me this evening, if
you will. Your father is coming also, and
Mr. Trent.' (Mr. Trent was the principal
solicitor in High Radston.) 'There is a
little business that we shall want your
assistance about settling. Dinner at seven
prompt. You'll come, I suppose ?'

Certainly I will, Mr. Courteney. Thank
you.'

CHAPTER X.

IX THE CnURCH-YARD.

The slow strokes of a tolling-bell vibrated
through the clear atmosphere as Victor
McNicoU approached the ancient little
church of Upton parish. He had walked
thither across the meadows by a foot-path,
into which he had struck from the road
that ran past the mill. This short cut, ashe
was well aware, had brought him out
close by Monkswood Hall, and the bare
thought of being so near the place that
was to be Idalia Bretherton's future home
was quickening his pulses with a strange
excitement. Without turning a bend of

the highway into Which he had emerged —
in that direction which led away from the
church — Victor could not see the house ;
but he determined to pay it a visit when
the funeral was over. During the life of
its late owner he had, it is true, been inside
the Hall several times, whilst the outside
(seeing that he had ridden or walked past
it oftener than he could count) was tolerably
familiar to him. But Victor, possessed
now by a new kind of interest in it,
wanted to <2:o and look at it attain with a
new kind of observation. He wanted to
try to realise Idalia's presence in connection
with it. It was so difficult to
believe that she was really coming there
and coming so soon ! The young man
longed for some visible sign of the delightful
and wonderful fact ; and it was possible,
he thought, that he might at least detect
some evidence of preparation for the expected
arrival of the ncAv proprietors.
In the meantime, however, he directed

Ms steps towards the church. The funeral
cortege, as he expected, had not yet
arrived; but scattered about the graveyard
appeared a goodly number of people.
These were standing in groups — most
of them with expectant faces turned towards
that point of the road whence the
hearse and mourning procession might
first be caught sight of. As their bucolic
appearance indicated, the majority of the
company were farmers or agricultural
labourers, and nearly all of them were
tenants of the great man to whose remains
they had come to do honour. As a
matter of course, Sir Jonathan's sudden
demise had created considerable excitement
in the quiet district, where events of
any kind were rare. There was a sense of
holiday-making mingling with the sympathy
felt by those who had put on their
best clothes to render this last tribute of
respect to the dead baronet by their presence
at his funeral Also few of them had

VOL. I. il

objected to add a spice of horror to their
emotions by prying into the dread mysteries
of the tomb. In parties of threes or
fours, they had nearly all descended by
turns into the open vault of the Ledsom
family, and had stood bare-headed and open-mouthed
in the three long chambers which
composed it, spelling out the inscriptions on
the brass plates that marked each bricked-up
niche where the sacred dead reposed in tiers.
The sexton, however, had now forbidden
that anyone else should go down, and that
important functionary was guarding the
head of the portable ladder when Victor
McNicoU approached.

Several men, young and old, were
gathered around the grave, and, with one
exception, they all touched their hats in
respectful recognition. The personage who
omitted that mark of deference — customarily
paid to the gentry of the locality — was
a short, sturdy-looking fellow, with a

florid complexion, shiny bald pate, and a
placid physiognomy. And that he had a
perfect right to keep both hands in his
pockets, and merely to nod good-humoured
at young McNicoll, would have been
admitted by all his neighbours ; for
Farmer Basset could base that right on
the fact of his possessing the only freehold
property in the neighbourhood, sith the
exception of his farm, 'Bedford,' or, as
it was usually called, 'The Fold Farm,'
all the land for miles around belonged
either to the proprietors of Feldhurst
Court or Monkshood Hall. His family,
moreover, was as old, and, in its way, as respectable
as that of the Ledsoms. So long
as there had been a Baronet Ledsom of
Feldhurst Court (and even, it was thought,
longer), there had been a Basset of Red-fold
Farm. With money in High Radstow
bank, and well-stocked barns and slippers,
the present owner of the Fold Farm was in

M 2

the habit of holding his head pretty high
and was quite sensible of the dignity
derived from that long line of yeoman
ancestry.

^ Morning', sir,' he observed, about a minute
after he had executed his nod. (Though
a great talker when fairly started, the
farmer was habitually slow in opening a
conversation.) ' I cannot seed ee down
our way, Mester Victor, not ov a long
time.'

'No,' rejoined the young man. 'I have
been from home, Mr. Basset, for several
weeks — taking a holiday. I only returned
last evening, and I had not heard before
then of Sir Jonathan's death.'

Dear-aime ! Had' ee ? Well, well, 'tis
a waarld o' change and trouble, this be.
Aw never seed like to un !' Mr. Basset
shook his head, as if making a disparaging
contrast with other worlds of which he had
had experience.

Ay, ay ; " a mon's born to trouble as

the sparks fly upwards'" quoted the sexton.
* There's Scripture for it — so 'tis like
to be.'

And, as I was saying a while since, he
weren't but a few years older nor me, poor
chap !' resumed the worthy farmer. ' It
do seem out o' nature' as he should ha' bin
took so soon. Look ee now at my rather
a man ov eighty-nine — and as spry on
his pins as area young fellow. Lauk-a-
massy ! what he that rattled fool o' mine
a-thinking' ov ?'

This question was asked apropos of a
voice which had risen close by from some
invisible singer.

The voice was a high-pitched tenor, and
it was trolling forth a verse of a decidedly
vulgar local sono :

Says I — '• My stars and garters !
This here's a pretty go,
Vor a vine young may as never vos
To sar all mankind zo." '

Luke ! Luke !' shouted the farmer,

wrathfully. But the voice, regardless of
this expostulation, continued :

But t' other young maiden looked sly at me,

And from her seat she rise,
Says she — " Let thee and I go our way,
And we'll let she go she's n." '

'Well, rather, what do ee want?'
Round now from the back of the Ledsom
monument, which represented two
weeping angels with arms entwined around
a broken pillar, there appeared a countenance
shaped like an obtuse angle, whereof
the nose was the vertex. The receding
chin and forehead, the half-open mouth,
the vacant expression in the wandering
grey eyes told their own tale.

Want ? What do I want ?' exclaimed
his father. ' I want ee to keep that fool's
tongue o' thine quiet, and not be cracking'
vols' ears wi' that rubbish in a graveyard.
Eh, soavIs ! but 'tis a hard matter
that I should have a son like he, bent it?
They foolish words be the only thing he

ever could get into 's memorandum, and
he's at it for everlasting', train' to sing 'em.'

'Sees, 'tis hard on ee, sure assented one
of the bystanders ; ' but 't might be arse.
A's an innocent, an' main short o' sense,
but no-ways dangerous.'

No, he be no-ways dangerous, 'tis
true,' rejoined Mr. Basset, looking with
knit brows after the object of the conversation,
who had sauntered off, with a
slouching gait, towards another part of the
yard ; ' but he's a sore cross to me. There
never was an idiot in the Basset family
afore — never ; and 'tis a darned shame as
I should have he for a son !' he concluded,
thrusting his hands deeper into his breeches'
pockets ; ' and no other son.'

But you have a daughter, Mr. Basset,
and a very good and pretty one,' put in
Victor, consolingly ; 'and Luke is useful
to you sometimes, is he not ? I saw him
dio:orino; once, I remember, when I called at
the farm.'

Oh, ay ; lie can delve, and delve, and
delve a' day lung, and make no account o'
it neither. He be strong as a loss wi' his
hands and his legs ; but you couldn't set
un to a bit o' waark, sir, as wanted a headpiece,
no morn ee could set a cat to 't.'

Well, well, Warmer Basset, ,a man
didn't ought to grumble against the Almighty's
will, ee know,' remarked the
sexton, didactically ; ' and, poor chap,
'wasn't his own fault as he wur born so.'

Who said 'twas ?' snapped Mr. Basset.
No, friends ; ye all know how his mother
was frighted by an idiot man, with just
such another face as his'n, afore he was
born, and how her brooded and brooded

and brooded over his looks till Lor !

there they be coming at last. Us had
better form into lines for they to pass betwixt
to the church. Look ee — there be
parson coming' out in his white gown.'

Leading the way, Mr. Basset, followed
by his companions, walked off to where

the rest of the watchers in the rave-yard
were already ranging themselves on either
side of the travelled walk conducting to
the church porch.

Making his wav towards the latter,
Victor took his stand there ; and, when the
funeral procession had passed into the
church, he followed closely behind. Again,
at the conclusion of a short service, he
joined the mourners on their way to the
grave, and presently found himself standing
opposite to Sir Arthur Ledsom, with the
open vault between.

As yet the young baronet had not
noticed him, and Victor looked across at
him with that frank admiration which his
friend's appearance always inspired within
him.

A broad-shouldered, clear-complexioned
young Englishman, Arthur Ledsom looked
as though he could floor an adversary with
one well-delivered blow from his muscular
right arm; as if, even well handicapped,

there would be a good chance of his winning
in a race. Nevertheless, his hands
were white, with shapely filbert nails, carefully
pared, and his features were high-bred
and refined. He was the type, in short, of
a thoroughly gentlemanly, as well as manly,
young fellow — the sort of young fellow
whom, meeting abroad, one would be proud
to point out as a fair representative of the
nation's best blood.

His expression just now was grave and
sad — not because such an expression befitted
the occasion, but because it truly
corresponded with his feelings.

Absorbed in attention to the solemn
ceremonial, he stood with his head bowed
and his fair locks uncovered ; and it was
only when the rites Averse at an end
that,' lifting his hazel eyes, glistening
with unshed tears, he perceived Victor
McNicoll.

The next instant the friends were grasping
hands, and respectively giving and

receiving appropriate condolences in reference
to Sir Jonathan's sudden demise.

No, don't, Victor ! Don't speak of
that,' begged Sir Arthur, when by-and-by
the other had ventured upon some allusion
to the consequent change in his own
position. ' I assure you I would Willingly
give five years of my life to have poor
uncle back at the Court, or to be able to
make some arrangement by which my
aunt might be induced to remain there.
Do you know, Victor, she is actually
leaving tomorrow — the day after the
funeral.'

'But, my dear fellow, it is her own
choice to do so. You cannot blame yourself
for the way in which Lady Ledsom
chooses to behave.'

No ; but think how hard it is for her
to turn out of such a place as the Court —
which has been her home for thirty years
and to go to a small cottage-house like
Frenchified ; to come down also to an

income of eight hundred pounds, after
having had command of twelve thousand.
However, as you say, it is not my fault.
I have even offered to give the place up to
her altogether.'

Rather a Quixotic piece of generosity,'
commented Victor, smiling. ' The property
is legitimately yours.'

All the same, I feel like a robber and
an interloper,' protested Arthur ; ' and I'd
sacrifice anything rather than that the
poor old lady should suffer. She was very
kind to me once, although she detests me
so heartily now.'

I don't know how anybody can detest
you, Arthur,' declared Victor, with
warmth ; ' and you are a right good fellow
to take it so well, and to show yourself so
forgiving.'

'• Ah well ! I hope things may work
themselves right in time,' said Arthur,
more cheerfully. ' At any rate, it takes
two to quarrel, and I shan't be one of the

two in this case. Good-bye, old fellow —
they are waiting for me, you see. I'll be
down at your place tomorrow some time.
By the way,' he added, turning back when
he had taken a step or two after the dozen
or so of gentlemen who were slowly walking
off towards the carriages, ^ you understand
why I don't ask you to go back with
us to luncheon : the invitations are all
Lady Ledsom's, and I should not like to
presume in any way on my position as
master there to-day.'

Glad that his friend's delicacy had prevented
his pressing the invitation in
question, which he would have been loth to
accept, Victor was soon posting along the
road in a direction contrary to that taken
by the retiring carriages.

Five minutes' quick walking brought
him to the gates of Monkswood Hall. A
semi-circular carriage-drive, bordered by
fine elm and chestnut-trees, led to the
house ; but, striking into a foot-path close

by the untenanted lodge, Victor gained
the front of it by a shorter way.

As we have said, the young man had
hoped to see some signs of preparation
for the home-coming of the new proprietors,
and in this hope he was not disappointed.

Those signs, indeed, proved more numerous
than he had anticipated. Nearly
every window of the mansion stood open,
and it was plain that a great bustle of
cleaning and re-arrangement was in progress.
From one casement in the upper
storey depended some crimson bed-drapery;
in a second a heap of pillows appeared,
airing themselves in the sun ; a workman
in a paper cap was mending the sash of a
third, and gossiping at the same time with
a maid whose head was projected from a
fourth.

On the lawn, a couple of other maids
were stretching some curtains upon a
wooden drying-frame.

These servants were all strangers to
Victor, and were evidently an importation
from London. He recognised the stamp
as differing considerably from that of the
west country domestic, and he concluded
rightly that they must have been engaged,
under instruction, by the respectable
middle-aged housekeeper in Avhose charge
the Hall had been left since the death of
Mrs. Curtis. Drawing further back behind
some tall rhododendron bushes, which,
planted in a symmetrical curve, closed in
the lawn, Victor, himself unseen, stood fora
long; time o^azino; at the house. The
date of its erection was but little later
than that of Feldhurst Court. Unlike the
latter estate, however, Monkswood had not
remained as the family seat of its original
founder. It had passed several times into
new hands, and had finally been purchased
by an elder brother of the late General
Curtis. It occurred to Victor to wonder,

with a smile, ,what either of the latter
gentlemen would have thought of Abner
Bretherton, could they have seen him as
their successor. Of Idalia Bretherton
there could be no question what anyone
would think ! She was fit to succeed to a
crown and to inhabit a palace.

As compared with ' The Court,' Monks-wood
was only a small building ; but it
was, if not so impressive, even more
picturesque.

The characteristic gables of the Elizabethan
style, absent from the architecture
of the former, were well represented here.
The house, in fact, was one gloriously confused
mass of angles and gables of various
shapes and sizes. Small domed turrets,
curiously assorted chimney-shafts, ornamental
balconies of fretted stone-work,
further added to the general effect of the
outline. The materials of the building-were
brick and stone, and the pleasing contrast
of colour seemed natural to the style

of the erection, and well adapted for
showing off its different parts more distinctly.


Behind the house, but allowing space
between, as Victor was aware, for a ranee
of outbuildings and two large kitchen-gardens,
rose a gentle acclivity, covered
with the wood from which the Hall
derived its name. It had been Victor's
intention to walk round the house, and
to g<^\ into the wood by a way he
knew of. Seeing so many people about,
however — for he had now descried a
couple of gardeners at work in different
parts of the somewhat neglected grounds
the young man relinquished this design.

Some day, he thought — yes, perhaps,
some day — he might be allowed to wander
in that wood, not dreaming of her, as now,
but in Idalia's actual company ! This
idea, as it flashed through his brain, communicated
such a delicious thrill of delight
to every nerve and fibre of his frame, that

VOL. I. N

Victor could not longer shut his eyes to
the truth. All at once that secret, which
he had half-consciously been hiding in his
heart, sprang forth to confront him in no
doubtful guise. The absorbing interest
which he felt in the beautiful American
was not, as he tried to fancy, mere admiration
or friendship. It was love — true undying
love !

Victor staggered backwards, faint for a
moment with the emotion entailed by this
discovery.

^ Oh, Idalia !' he murmured; 'yes, I do
love you — I do indeed love you ! How
blind I have been not to have understood
myself before !'

CHAPTER XI.

HESTER COURTENEY.

Ldtgerixg for some minutes longer, Victor
strove to regain his composure. Then, casting
a last comprehensive glance around, he
turned away, and, quitting the Monkswood
grounds, set oiF to walk homewards.

Swift on the heels of that self-acknowledgement,
other thoughts had come crowding
tumultuously into the young man's
mind. Was there any chance, any possibility,
that his passion might find a return
? Could Idalia ever learn to love
him ? Eagerly once more he reviewed her
behaviour towards him during those days of
their brief intercourse, searching for evidence
of favourable feeling;. Yes, truly, she

N 2

had been very friendly — with a naive, unreserved
kind of friendliness, to which, as an
Englishman, he was not much accustomed
in his intercourse with the other sex. He
had met, certainly, many American women
before — having enjoyed several trips abroad
but he had not felt much drawn to them.
His insular prejudice had caused him to
set down their manners as a little too free-and-easy.
In Idalia's case, however, there
had been nothing to shock his taste. Her
frankness had seemed to him like the
divine simplicity of a child, her unabashed
straightforwardness, as not the outcome
of boldness, but the expression of dignified
self-reliance. In her glorious dark eyes
every emotion of her innocent girlish heart
had mirrored itself without disguise. And
in this fact, the delightful mobility and
vivaciousness of her expression rather than
even in her great beauty, lay the secret, as
Victor only yet dimly recognised, of her
wonderful fascination.

Yes, Miss Bretherton lead certainly
been very friendly Tvith him. But then —
Victor felt it with a sickening; assurance —
she had been still more friendly with
Charlie Nunnery. And, after he had left
them together, inio;ht not that friendliness
have even increased ? Stronger than ever
now that he understood his own sentiments,
waxed his uneasiness on his score. Yet
it was not to be wondered at, he told himself,
that she should, on first acquaintance,
prefer Charlie. His appearance was so
much more attractive, his manner so
much more pleasing, than his own. For
the first time in his life, Victor coveted the
possession of a handsome person, and
envied Charlie his good looks. Still, on
reflection, he would not, if he could, have
changed places with him ; for Charlie
would not, like himself, have the privilege
of living in Idalia's neighbourhood, and
Charlie, he believed, was not honourably
free to seek her affections. It has already

been insinuated that there had been something
in the way of love-making on young
Nunnerley's part in a different direction,
of which Victor was cognisant. The circumstances
were these.

Early in May of the present year the
young artist had been invited to Upton
Lodge for a week's visit. That term, however,
he had out-stayed to the extent of
nearly two months. From his uncle, Mr.
McNicoll, several pretty broad hints had
rewarded this trespass upon his hospitality.
These, howbeit, had always been
blushingly covered by some other member
of the family ; and the young man, who
was not troubled with a hyper-sensitive
disposition, had stayed on until it suited
his convenience to depart. The excuse he
had offered for this lengthened encroachment
had been that he wished to take
certain sketches in the neighbourhood.
But, although he had unquestionably spent
much of his time out-of-doors, Charlie had

had very few sketches to show as a result,
and Victor — not without reason — had presently
come to the conclusion that there
was more of pretext than reality about his
work.

As a matter of fact, he, Victor, had on
three several occasions, during those pleasant
summer weeks, surprised his cousin
walking alone in the company of Miss
Hester Courteney, the only child and
presumable heiress of his father's partner.
Each of these times he had come upon
the two in a different, but always a retired,
locality, and each time he had become
more convinced that they had met each
other there not by accident, but by appointment.
The third and last of these
unintentional surprises had settled this
question in his mind beyond a doubt, and
had also convinced him that Charlie was
making unequivocal love to the girl. The
attitude in which he had caught them, at
all events, was unequivocal enough — for

Charlie had had his arm round Hester's
waist and his lips pressed against her
cheek.

Glad on this occasion to have been able
to slip away without attracting the observation
of either, Victor had afterwards told
his cousin what he had seen, and had taxed
him severely in reference to his conduct.
Why, Victor wanted to know, was he thus
carrying on a surreptitious courtship in
holes and corners, instead of doing it boldly
under the eye of Hester's father ? That
Mr. Courteney was not very partial to
Charlie, Victor (although he did not know
the cause of his disfavour) was, he acknowledged,
aware. But, on the other hand,
that gentleman was passionately attached
to his daughter ; and, if Charlie had gained
her love, it would be his best wisdom,
Victor urged, as well as his duty, to confess
the fact openly and honestly.

This remonstrance, however, had been
met by young Nunnerley with an angry

denial of the assumption on which it was
based. No eno^ao^ement or understanding:
of any sort, tie lead protested, existed between
himself and Miss Courteney, and
there had been nothing on his part that
could be properly called love-making. Asa
matter of course, Victor, after this declaration,
could make no further allusion
to what he had seen, out of respect to Miss
Courteney. But he had been by no means
convinced by his cousin's asseveration.
Charlie had denied too much, and had
denied it too vehemently. Besides, had
he not had the testimony of his own eyes
in respect to the love-making? Victor did
not believe, from what he knew of her,
that Miss Courteney was the kind of girl
to let herself be kissed unless by an avowed
and accepted lover. Moreover, on Charlie's
part there existed every inducement that
interested motives could afford towards
marriage with the young lady. She was
pretty and accomplished, and she was the

only child of a man whose wealth was a
matter beyond question. As for Charlie,
his sole income, in addition to what he
could make by his profession, was two
hundred pounds a year, inherited from his
parents, both of whom had been dead some
years.

Putting one thing with another, therefore,
Victor had arrived at the conclusion
in his own mind that, notwithstanding his
cousin s positive assertion to the contrary,
the two had become secretly engaged, but
that, for reasons of their own, they desired
to defer acknowledging the fact to Mr.
Courteney. Now, such a course was one
naturally repulsive to Victor McMcoH's
mind. In Charlie's place, he knew that he
would himself have risked even the probability
of refusal by her father rather than
have involved any girl he cared for in a
clandestine love-affair with all its attendant
deceits.

Still, in face of Charlie's stubborn denial

of any serious intention, and because he
had discovered it by accident, Victor had
not felt at liberty to let the secret out of
his own keeping. Indeed, until he had
observed his cousin's admiring glances and
marked attentions to Miss Bretherton, he
had not thought-^t even to allude to the
subject again in Charlie's private hearing.

During the last ten days, however, his
reflections had been much exercised in the
matter; and this mornings he walked
homewards from Monkswood Hall, Victor
felt as though he would give anything
almost to ' oft to the bottom of that affair'
to find out ' exactly how things stood
between those two.'

In these very words he had just formulated
his desire (for, as wee all know, it
is impossible to think without putting our
thoughts into language), when, with a
slight start of surprise, he recognised one
of the two in question at a distance of not
very many yards in front of him.

This was, of course, Miss Hester
Courteney. Turning sni angle of the
road, Victor perceived her emerging from
a little country shop, which formed the
only habitation for nearly a mile along
the highway.

This shop was also a post-office, and it
was kept by a young woman who had
formerly been a servant in Mr. Courteney 's
house, but who was now married to one of
the employees at the mill.

A suspicion, which amounted almost to
a conviction, suddenly took possession of
Victor's mind as he saw the young lady
draw a letter from her pocket and proceed
to open it.

Impelled by an irresistible curiosity, he
hastened his steps, and, unheard by Hester
(by reason of the fact that a cart containing
some agricultural implements, which
rattled noisily against one another, was
.approaching from the opposite direction),

he drew near enough to peep for a moment
over her shoulder.

That moment sufficed for the information
he wanted, and, until he was thus in
possession of it, Victor had no time to consider
that he had scarcely gained it in a
strictly honourable fashion.

The letter he had seen was from hi>>
cousin ! Hester had come in search of it
to this country post-office, not waiting for,
or not allowing, it to be delivered at her
home.

The data was enough, in the young
man's idea, to establish the presumption of
a surreptitious correspondence, and so to
confirm his suspicion. Yet, as he had
noticed, the letter was very short — a mere
note, in fact, of a few lines. Actor had
taken that in at a glance. Further, he had
caught the way in which the letter commenced
: he had read ' Dear Hetty,' in hi
cousin's clear, bold hand — a sufficiently

familiar, if not a particularly lover-like,
style of address.

Falling back a little way, Victor called
out her name ; and, hastily concealing the
letter. Miss Courteney turned. As yet he
had not seen her face, but he was shocked
now to observe that she looked unusually
pale, and was evidently in distress. Before
she had shaken hands with him, however,
Hester had mastered her emotion, whatever
its nature or cause, and her countenance
had resumed its customary impassibility.
For, as a rule, Hester's countenance
was impassive, not given, like Idalia
Bretherton's, to express every mood and
tense of her mind. Victor had often wondered
within himself whether or not the
girl was capable of any strong feeling or
passion; and a better judge of physiognomy
than he might well have had doubts
on the point.

A fair, statuesque young woman, with a
Juno-like kind of beauty, Hester was now

HESTER COURTENEY. 191

in her twentieth year. She had a well-formed
figure, which she made the most of
through the adventitious assistance of
dress. (Miss Hester's clothes must have
cost her father, annually, a small fortune.)
In colour her hair was golden, and she
wore it in a soft, wavy fringe about her
low forehead.

Her large, almond-shaped, blue eyes were
somewhat sleepy-looking ; yet a close
observer mio^ht have noticed them waking
up now and then into a keen watchfulness.
Her mouth, which was Hester's least
mobile and least attractive feature, was
small and thin-lipped, and she had a habit
of pursing it, when silent, in a demure,
determined-looking style, as though she
were buttoning up her thoughts.

Greeting young McNicoll now with a
smile (very manifestly forced), she observed :

'How do you do, Mr. Victor? I am
very glad to see you back. Papa told us
you were expected yesterday.'

Thank you. Yes, I reached home late
last night,' he returned.

'And we are to have the pleasure of
your company for dinner this evening, I
suppose?' resumed Hester. 'Papa says,
however, that you are coming chiefly for
business reasons.'

Victor bowed a little stiffly.

Yes, I believe so,' he answered. ' Your
aunt, Mrs. Perriam, is well, I hope ?'

'Perfectly, thanks. Did you enjoy your
holiday ?'

'Very much indeed. Charlie Nunnerley
was with me, you know.'

Victor emphasised the name slightly,
glancing at his companion as he uttered it.
But Miss Courteney betrayed no confusion.

So I understood,' she said ; ' and I have
heard a good deal about your travels from
Dora and Jessie. You have done a considerable
amount of climbing, have you
not ? They told me you had been up the
Bel Alp, and the Aletschorn, and the ,

and I don't know how many
other " horns." '

Yell, on the whole, I think we did
exert ourselves pretty fairly,' he admitted.
Charlie proved more ambitious than I
expected him to do, I must confess. From
the lazy way in which he dawdled about
here in the early summer, I hadn't looked
for so much energy.'

He is fond of Switzerland. I fancy,'
remarked Hester, with an unmoved countenance.
'Did you return together ?'

Victor hesitated for an instant, find
looked hard at the girl, sith that letter
from Charlie in her pocket, could she
possibly be asking this question in ignore,

Miss Courteney ; I left him behind
he answered.

Oh ! Perhaps he remained to do some
sketching?'

She put the inquiry as though feeling
little interest in the reply.

VOL. I.

ance :

'I believe not. On the contrary, he
had, I know, an engagement in London to
take a gentleman's portrait, which he
ought to have commenced a week ago.
However, I expect he will be in England
by this time — unless — ' He paused for a
second ; then, with an involuntary contraction
of the brow, added — ' unless he finds
it too hard to tear himself away from Miss
from the Brethertons.'

the Brethertons?' repeated Hester.
(Her tone was no longer without animation.)
' Who are the Brethertons, may I
ask?'

You have not heard ? Mr. Bretherton
is the brother of Mrs. Curtis — the brother
to whom she left Monkswood, you know,
and the rest of her property. He will be
here next Tuesday, I expect, to take possession
of the place. Charlie and I met
them on the Miirren — Miss Bretherton and
her father.'

Ha !' The pupils of Hester's eyes suddenly

enlarged, like those of a cat in the
dark. * That is sphere you were kept by
the snow-storm ?'

'Yes. It is where I left my cousin
also.'

'And are they agreeable people? Is
Miss Bretherton attractive?'

If every grace and charm that could
possibly be united in a woman can render
her attractive, she is so.'

Oh ! she is pretty then ?'

She is beautiful as a dream !' responded
Victor, with intentional enthusiasm.

A bright flush spread suddenly over
Hester's colourless face, and her lips
quivered.

'Ah!' she exclaimed. ' That accounts,
then, for — I mean — Really, I don't quite
know what I was going to say.' She
laughed confusedly for an instant ; then,
buttoning up her mouth, collected herself
with marvellous celerity, and changed the
subject.

o2

'What lovely weather we are having
are eve not ? But those changing tints
alas ! show that autumn is upon us. How
I wish it could be always summer ! Don't
you V'

Victor bowed, and gave vent to some
inarticulate murmur. He had been watching
his companion's face closely, and none of
those singular and unaccustomed indications
of disturbance on her part had escaped
his notice. Her nature, he began to
think, was not quite so cold and insensible
as he had sometimes imagined. She could
feel a prick, though she might be stoical
enough to hide the pain it gave her.
Strange to say, however, although self-command
was a quality which he strenuously
cultivated in himself, and always
admired in others, the present exhibition
of it in Miss Courteney's case moved
him to irritation and dislike rather than
approval. He had never, in point of fact,
liked Hester Courteney ; and the sentiment

was mutual, for Hester did not like
him. Their dispositions "were instinctively
anti pathetical — albeit that neither of them
could have explained clearly on what precise
grounds that antipathy was founded.
Her remark on the weather having
fallen so flat, Hester now introduced another
topic — Sir Jonathan Ledsom's funeral ;
and, talking: for talking sake, the two
walked on, discussing the baronet's sudden
death, Sir Arthur's accession to the
estate, and other relative matters. It was
only when they were drawing near to
Upton Lodge (Mr. Courteney's house
stood on the same road, scarcely a hundred
yards beyond, so that the young people's
way had been the same) that Hester recurred
carelessly to the subject of their
new neighbours, and asked Victor a few
seemingly indifferent, but decidedly pertinent,
questions concerning them. To
Charlie Nunnery, however, no further
allusion was made, either in this or any

other connection. Nevertheless, on what
he had found out this morning about that
letter, and what he had seen of Miss
Courteney's subdued excitement, Victor
had formed his own hypothesis. That
hypothesis by no means altogether displeased
him.

At the appointed hour in the evening
Mr. McMcoll and his son presented themselves
at Mr. Courteney's house. The
latter was neither quite so large nor quite
so luxuriously furnished an establishment
as that of Victor's father. Mr. McNicoU
had built his present habitation some
fifteen years ago, Whilst Mr. Courteney,
about the same time, had been content to
alter and improve one which already stood
conveniently near the mill. Before that
date both partners had lived in very much
smaller houses, situated on the other side
of the river. But, though his residence
might not be so elegant or commodious,
Mr. Courteney was generally known to bethe

warmer man of the two — since, in
addition to possessing an equal share in
that flourishing business, he had, about
-Q.ye years since, come into a large private
fortune. Why he did not now retire from
commercial labours was a mystery to most of
his acquaintances. But, after thirty years
of active business life (he was just fifty),
Mr. Courteneyfelt that he could not enjoy
an idle existence. Moreover, he loved money,
and wanted to make more ; and he loved
his daughter, and wanted to make it for her.

In assenting, or rather, urging upon his
father that Victor should be taken into
partnership, Mr. Courteney did not intend
to lose anything.

It had been arranged that Mr. McNicoll
Alas to pay a fair sum into the concern,
and that a new branch of business — the
manufacture of sail-cloth — was to be commenced
on certain premises which had
already been secured in another outskirts t of
High Radston.

^ We'll die missionaries yet, McNicoll/
observed Mr. Courteney this evening,
when the deeds which had turned the
firm into ^ Courteney, McNicoll and Son,'
had been duly signed and sealed, and the
junior partner had left the room to show
out the lawyer who had been entrusted
with the execution of that business. ' And
I'll tell you what : if we could make a
match of it between your boy and my girl,
I should be thoroughly well pleased. I've
always liked Victor, and if Hetty marries
him she shall have every penny of my
fortune. I could not wish her a better
husband, and I've set my heart on her
having him.'

Then, by George ! she shall have him, if
I've any say in the matter !' exclaimed
Mr. McMcoll. ' The scheme has my full
approbation, and I'll give him a hint to that
effect as we go home.'

CHAPTER XII.

MR. PERCIVAL BRETIIERTOX.

The moment had come; at last : lie was o'o-
inof to see her assail !

Like a school-boy impatient for the
holidays, Victor had been counting the
days and the hours up to this time. The
family, he knew, had arrived, as expected,
on Tuesday evening. Victor had forced
himself to trait over Wednesday — giving
them opportunity to rest and set settled
in their new abode ; and now, on the
Thursday afternoon, he stood once more
before the gates of Monkswood Hall.

The day was bright and fine, but the
wind a little chilly. Victor, however, did

not feel cold. On a close calculation, it
took twenty minutes' quick walking to
cover the ground between here and Upton
Lodge ; to-day he had done it in fifteen.

Taking off his hat, he wiped the perspiration
from his brow, and proceeded at a
slow, almost laggard pace up the avenue.

Curiously enough (at least, it might
appear curious to one unacquainted with
the workings of that strange, contradictory-seeming
passion which swayed him), the
young fellovk^, now that he was so near the
house, found the eagerness that had driven
him here at railway speed overtaken by a
singular shyness.

How,' he wondered, ' would she receive
him ? Would she '

All at once his heart stood still, then
went pit-a-pat with violence. The tones
of her well-remembered voice had struck
upon his ear.

Turning hastily in the direction whence
they had sounded, Victor peered through

the low-growing, interlaced branches of the
trees. Yes, she — Idalia — was there upon
the lawn. Her tall, supple figure was
wrapped about by a white shawl, soft and
downy-looking, but she wore no covering
upon her head.

Her face was turned away from him,
and towards the back of a young man who
was looking in an opposite direction. The
form reminded him of Charlie Nunnery's.
For an instant Victor believed that it was
his cousin, but the ne!s:t moment undeceived
him.

The young man, wheeled round, and, to
his intense relief, disclosed the features of
a stranger.

It is her brother — the fellow vrith the
queer name,' said Victor to himself. ' And
how alike they are !'

Until he had. thus seen them together,
he had scarcely given a thought to the fact
that Idalia had a brother.

But now, should he make his way

straight to them, or should lie go round ina
more formal fashion by the house ?

After a brief hesitation, Victor settled
the question by stooping under the trees,
squeezing himself between some azalea
bushes, and appearing before Miss Brethren
with outstretched hand and a
glowing cheek.

You, Mr. McMcoll? Why, how glad I
am to see you !' she exclaimed, with that
slight, American twang in her voice which
he had learned to love, as he loved all else
about her. ' Do you know, I was just
thinking of you. I have been hoping you
might call to-day.'

Have you really ? Oh, thank you !' he
managed to stammer in delight, pressing
the hand she had given him. * Then you
had not forgotten me ?'

Well, no ; I haven't quite such a short
memory as that,' she laughed. 'This is
my brother Pele — Percival, I mean.'

Idalia had not blushed on her meeting

with Victor, though that gentleman had
done so himself, but she coloured a little
now.

'My. McXicoll is Mr. Nunnery's cousin,
YOU know, Percival,' she subjoined to her
brother.

Ah, yes ! I recollect. How do you do ?
Very pleased to make your acquaintance.'

Mr. Percival Bretherton executed, as he
spoke, a faultless bow, and Victor observed
that his utterance was entirely free from
accent. Xo one could have told whether
he had been brought up in Xew York orin
London.

The exchange of a few commonplaces
ensued, and it was some moments before
Victor bethought himself to inquire after
Mr. Bretherton.

He is well, I hope, and recovered from
the effects of his journey ?'

Father ? Oh, yes. He is in the house ;
let us go to him. Hell be real pleased to
meet you again.'

She began to move forward as she spoke ;
but, laying a detaining hand on her arm,
her brother interposed.

'He is asleep just now, I believe, my
dear. There's no particular hurry, is there?'

Idalia stopped obediently.

'No,' she assented; 'if he is resting, we
won't disturb him. It is delightful out
here, is it not?' Turning to Victor: 'I
call this garden just delicious.'

Victor felt disposed to call it delicious
too — the most delicious spot on the face of
the earth. But he contented himself with
simply acquiescing, t

It is indeed — charming !'

'And the house, too, is charming,' resumed
Idalia. 'I consider it the loveliest
old house imaginable. Yet you said it
was not grand.'

Did I say so ?' he rejoined. ' I don't remember.
I must have meant, I suppose, that
it was not very large — not so large, for instance,
as Feldhurst Court.' The young man

was conscious that this observation was
somewhat stupid. But Idalia had been looking
straight at him, with her bewitching face
upturned, her magnificent eyes aglow with
animation, and the effect was decidedly-decomposing.
He felt so shy and so
happy that he hardly knew Avhat he was
saying. 'I am delighted,' he finished, with
fervour, ' that you like your new home.' .

Indeed, yes ; who could help liking it ?'
she answered. ' If only poor father can
feel happy here — '

She paused, and the light began to fade
a little from her features.

^ Is Feldhurst Court that big place on
the hill?' put in Mr. Percival.

^ Yes,' returned Victor.

And who lives there ? What is the
owner's name ?'

Victor gave the desired information, and
as he did so he bestowed a more careful
notice upon Mr. Percival Bretherton's
appearance.

On the whole, Peleus was rather a strike
person, and unquestionably
handsome. Victor's first impression, as we
have seen, had been that he was remarkably
like his sister. Upon further inspection,
however, this impression vanished, and
he now began to perceive that there were
more points of contrast than of resemblance.
The eyes of both were dark, but they were
not the same colour — Idalia's being of
that deep soft blue Which it has become
fashionable to describe as violet, whilst
those of her brother were brown, and
much smaller in size. In complexion,
Peleus was pale, with just a suspicion of
blotchiness about his face. Idalia's skin
on the contrary, was smooth as satin, and
of a clear dark cream-colour, showing
through the transparent cheeks the warm
glow of a healthful crimson ■ — like the
bloom of a peach, rich, yet at the same
delicate in its soft beauty. Again, whilst
the cut of their features was somewhat

similar, the expression was totally unlike.
For a vouno' fellow of twenty, Victor
thought that there was something singularly
hard and cold about the eyes of his
new acquaintance. The mouth, on the
other hand, struck him as somewhat coarse
and sensual.

'They are a good family, then, these
Ledsoms ?' he remarked, when his interlocutor
paused. 'Xot that we Americans
profess to think much of aristocratic birth,
though, you know,' he added, laughing.

I fancy I have heard, however, that asa
nation you don't undervalue titles,' rejoined
Victor, with a smile.

Well, perhaps not, as a nation' admitted
Peleus ; ' but, for myself, I wouldn't
toady to a man if he had fifty handles to
his name. sly notion is that with plenty
of money and a good education, any fellow
may be as much a gentleman as the son of
an earl.'

'Certainly: I agree with you that a

VOL. I. P

title does not make the gentleman returned
Victor. ' But neither, I am sure, does
money''

'No, no — not in itself, of course. But
it goes a good way towards it, you'll
admit? And blue blood is not worth
much, in my opinion, without a little gilding.
Bother these gnats !'

Percival paused, and made a snatch
among the little crowd of insects buzzing
overhead, but without entrapping any.

I should like,' he resumed, ' to be introduced
to this Sir Arthur Ledsom. It
will be pretty dull here if one can't get
into some society. Do you happen to know
him?'

I know him extremely well, and shall
be happy to bring him to call upon you,'
said Victor.

'Oh, will you? Thanks; that's good.
How old did you say he was?'

He is twenty-three.'

Only twenty-three ? And he has that

splendid place all to himself, Avitli a lara-e
income, no doubt, and no one to dictate to
or interfere, with him in any way? By
Jove ! what a fortunate young fellow ! I
only wish I stood in his shoes !'

Victor began to think that, notwithstanding
the fact that he spoke correct
English; and had been educated at Hazard
University, Mr. Percival Bretherton was a
somewhat vulgar-minded voun::: man.

'My friend's o'reat reset.' he returned,
coldly, 'is that he Las the place all to
himself He feels his uncle's death much,
and selfish, lonely grandeur is not at all
the kind of thing he cares for.'

Oh ! I did not mean exactly that he
was to be envied for living alone,' explained
the other, hastily, 'but for his independence,
and all that. By-the-by,' he went
on, changing the subject, ' your cousin
Nunnery has kindly offered to show me
about London a bit. I am going up in a
week or so to stay with him for a few

p 2

days, and, afterwards, lie is coming back
with me here

Coming here ?' echoed Victor. ' Do
you mean to Monkswood?'

Yes ; it is arranged that he shoukl
take my sister's portrait. That will he
partly the object of his visit.'

Father, you see, is quite bent upon
having my likeness,' put in Idalia, looking
at the visitor with a frank smile, and failing
to perceive (for the sun was in her
eyes) that he had grown very pale. ' I
feel glad now that I did not consent to betaken
in Italy. It will be so much pleas-after
sitting to a friend : and, really, Mr.
Nunnerley does seem almost an old friend
now. Travelling together, I think, helps
one to get intimate sooner than anything
else.'

Victor replied only by an inaudible
murmur.

'Ah, yes! he is a jolly kind of fellow,
Nunnerley is, and easy to get on with,'

affirmed the brother, flicking now at the
gnats with a scented cambric handkerchief.
(Mr. Peleus Bretherton affected scents and
kindred effeminate.) ' Having him with
us at Brussels certainly made it much
pleasant.'

'Was my cousin with you in Brussels?'
demanded Victor. His voice, as he asked
the question, sounded to himself unnaturally
constrained. ' I did not know that
he had thought of going there.'

I don't suppose he had thought of it
dien you left,' Idalia returned. ' He only
make up his mind, I believe, when we
were at Interlaken that he would take that
route home, through Delirium.'

'Oh? And — then, when did you part
with him ?'

Only on Tuesday morning. AYe had
his company, you see, all the way to
London.'

Idalia spoke as though it had all been
the most natural thing in the world. Xo

consciousness in her manner appeared to
indicate that she looked upon the young
artist's change of plan as bearing any
special significance in her own regard. To
Victor, however, who knew that his cousin
had had a pressing engagement at home
the fact that he had lingered for a full
week longer than he had hitherto supposed
in Miss Bretherton's company did seem
very significant. He turned sick and cold
with the shock which this information had
given him. The day seemed all at once
to have lost its brightness. The bliss of
this happy re-union was for the time being
effectually clouded. He felt sure now —
surer than ever — that Charlie was his rival.
And that he should have succumbed to
attractions such as no man could see unmoved
was not, Victor would have been
ready to admit, surprising. It was only
the circumstances of the case, he thought,
which rendered him so indignant and so
disturbed. For, although not, as a rule

given to jumping to conclusions, Victor
had arrived at very definite conclusions in
respect to Ms cousin and Hester Courteney.
He could, it is true, have brought forward
no decisive proof in support of these conclusions
; but no proofs could have enhanced
the implicit certainty of his belief in
them. By-and-by, however, he began to
take comfort. However great his love or
admiration of Idalia, Charlie, it was plain,
had made as vet no verbal acknowledgement
of his sentiments; otherwise, Idalia's
lack of embarrassment in referring to him
could scarcely have been so complete.
But would he, Victor wondered, have the
o^race to refrain alton-ether ? Would he
have the manliness to continue faithful, at
least in word and deed, to the girl whose
affections he had secretly entangled?
Victor hoped he might. At any rate, he
resolved he would give him the benefit of
the doubt. He would not condemn him
before he had proved himself guilty.

Shaking himself free of these disquieting
reflections, Victor turned again to Idalia.

Did you not stay in London at all,
Miss Bretherton ? or visit any of the
lions ?' he asked. ' It seems to me that
you must have come straight through
without stopping.'

So we did. We crossed from Ostend
to Dover on Monday : slept there that
night, and came direct here on Tuesday.
It was my doing. I thought father was
tired of travelling and sight-seeing, and
that it would be better to put ofl' seeing
anything of England, and especially of
London, until he had had a little rest.'

It was a wise plan,' commented Victor ;
and for yourself, I think, as well. You
will be all the more likely to do our
country justice after an interval of quiet
life ; and I hope that you mai do it justice
or, at least, that you may come to like it
so much that you will never wish to leave
it.'

Well, I am pretty well satisfied' with it
already,' she returned. ' If this lovely
country place is to be taken as a

sample But, look ! there is father at

the window. He sees you, Mr. McNicoU.
Do come right on in and speak to him,
won't you r'

CHAPTER XIII.

NEIGHBOURLY ATTENTIONS.

Victor, of course, followed. What man —
especially what young man — would have
refused to follow, at her lightest word,
wheresoever she chose to bid him ? Such
a question Idalia had certainly never put
into form, even in her own mind. Had it
occurred to her, however, she would have
felt quite satisfied as to the answer. From
her earliest girlhood she had been accustomed
to find herself a centre of attraction to
the other sex. Her experience in those
American hotels and boarding-houses
whither her grandmother had carried her
in search of society and ^ polish ' had long

ago taught her the truth ^vhich her
subsequent travels had only served to
confirm.

Idalia, in short, knew that she was
irresistible. She could not help knowing
it ; and the knowledge was one of the
things that made her so charming.

Her easy grace of manner and quiet self-possession
arose in a great measure from
this assured consciousness of her power to
please; yet for anyone to have remained
more utterly unspoiled b}' the flattering
homage everywhere rendered to her would
have been impossible. The fact of her own
attractiveness she seemed to take as a
matter of course, T\dthout dwelling on it,
and her simple naturalness was untarnished
by even the shadow of conceit. Neither
seeking nor repulsing them, she had hitherto
accepted the attentions of admirers
with a philosophic calmness which showed
her own heart to be untroubled by sentiment,
and which had happily prevented

several young men from confessing a passion
which would have proved hopeless of
return.

• In his untutored native politeness, Mr.
Bretherton had left the windows and come
to meet his visitor at the hall-door.

• Now, this is friendly of you, an' it's
neighbourly, a-droppin' in like this so
soon !' he exclaimed, extending his horny
palm, whilst a smile of hearty welcome
beamed all over his lined and wrinkled
countenance. ' I take it real kind. But
come in an' set ye down, do.'

Indeed, Mr. Bretherton,' affirmed Victor,
laughing, ' I am only afraid that my inclination
may lead me perhaps to drop in
oftener than you may wish.'

^ Now, the's foolishness. You can't
come oftener 'n we'd like. The's just
foolishness !' protested Abner, standing aside
to let the young man precede him into the
apartment he had before been occupying.
It was one which Victor recognised as

having been used by Mrs. Curtis as a
morning-room. He made a remark to
that effect.

I essay — yes, I essay.'

Mr. Bretherton looked around him reflectively,
and, as it seemed to Victor,
rather sadly.

You see, it ain't such a gorges room,
this ain't, as the others,' he added presently,
' an' someways I feel more comfortable
a-settin' in it.'

But you are not disappointed, I hope,
in Monks^vood? Miss Bretherton, I am
glad to say, appears delighted T^^ith the
house.'

The father s face suddenly brightened.

That's so. Yes, Idaly, she is powerful
pleased ^vith it,' he returned ; ' an' so's
Peleus — Percival, I'd order said.'

He turned an apologetic glance towards
his son, who, having leisurely followed the
others in, at this moment entered the
room.

But yourself?' persisted Victor. ^ I
hope you too are pleased ?'

Yes. "Lor, yes ! to be sure I am !'

The admission was a relief to young
McMcoll.

That's right !' he interjected. ' I trust,
then, that you will be likely to make this
your permanent home?'

We shall not go back to North Carolina
at all events,' broke in Mr. Percival.
We shall never go back there. So it
would be just as well to learn to be contented
elsewhere.'

The last sentences were spoken in a lower
key, and were evidently addressed by the
young man to his father's private ear.

Victor observed poor Mr. Bretherton
wince, as though from a physical blow.
Leaning forward, however, the next instant
to rub his knees, he answered, meekly,

Yes, Percival, the's true. It's Avell to
be contented. The thar's true.'

'Father,' said Idalia, advancing from

the further end of the room, where she had
stopped to throw ois her white shawl and
to caress a tiny spaniel, which she now
carried in her arms — 'Father, have you
asked Mr. McNicoll to stay and take dinner
with us ?'

Not yet, I haven't. But you may be
sure I will, honey ! Do mister, ef you
please ' — with eager warmth — ' Do, if it
ain't inconvenient. We dine at six ;
though I'm ureter myself to eaten' in the
middle of the day,' he subjoined. ' At
Prospect Farm, now, we sealed at twelve.
But things is altered all ways. The folks
to home, they wouldn't believe how
aristocratic we've grown : would they,
Idalia?'

Mr. Percival's face had reddened with
manifest shame and anger.

The immediate point, sir, is,' he interposed,
hastily, ' whether your friend will
give us his company for dinner. Your interesting
reminiscences '

He stopped short, glanced at his sister,,
who had suddenly lifted her eyes to his,
and walked away towards the Window.

Thank you most heartily, Mr. Brethren,'
rejoined Victor, with marked impressment.
' Unfortunately, I am engaged for
this evening, or I should have been delighted
to remain.' (There was not much
doubt of that.) ' I have promised, however,
to dine with my friend. Sir Arthur
Ledsom. By-the-by, I was almost forgetting,
Miss Bretherton : my mother and
sisters wished me to say that they would
do themselves the pleasure of calling upon
you very soon. They would have accompanied
me to-days indeed, if they
had felt sure that it was not too soon to
intrude.'

Id alia was in the act of making some
appropriate reply, to which Victor was
listening all eyes and ears, when Percival
observed from the window,

There's a carriage coming up the drive

now, Tvdtli two ladies in it. Can they be
your mother and sister ?'

Victor sprang to his feet and looked
forth.

Oh no !' he ejaculated, recognising with
surprise the occupants of the elegant
landau that was approaching. ' Xo ; that
is Miss Courteney : Mrs. Perriam and Miss
Courteney.'

soh?' rejoined Percival, drawing back
from observation. ' And v/ho may they be,
if you please ? The girl looks uncommonly
pretty.'

Victor hastened to supply the intelligence
required ; and he had scarcely finished
speaking before the new visitors were
ushered into the room. Perceiving him
immediately upon her entrance, the elder
lady claimed his good offices in introducing
herself and her niece.

Though, of course, Miss Bretherton,'
she continued, nervously, addressing that
young lady, ' we came with the intention

VOL. I. Q

of introducing ourselves. Our call, I fear,
is unceremoniously early, but Hester was
so anxious to make your acquaintance
that I could not persuade her to defer it.'

Well, now, I call that right friendly of
the young lady !' exclaimed Mr. Brethren,
stepping forward, and beginning
cordially to shake Mrs. Perriam's hand up
and down in the pump-handle fashion.
I'm obliged to her, ma'am, an' I'm obliged
to you. You see, having' come so far from
where she was reared, it would be sorter
lonesome fur Idalia ef '

He paused suddenly, becoming conscious
that his visitor was tugging violently to
release her hand. Then, after a moment's
surprised scrutiny of her face, he motioned
the lady to a chair, and sat down himself
with a crestfallen countenance, over which
a brick-red flush was slowly stealing.

The fact was that Mrs. Perriam — unprepared
to find in a brother of Mrs. Curtis
a man who spoke and looked like poor

Abner — had betrayed by her expression
that she was unutterably shocked by this
first view of him. Unlike her niece, the
worthy lady possessed no power of dissembling
her sentiments. On the contrary,
she was a weak little woman, singularly
deficient in self-control. Like most weak
people, also, she was narrow in her ideas
and prejudiced in her opinions. Mr. Brethren,
of course, did not accord with her
notions of a gentleman. His appearance
shocked her taste ; his speech bewildered
her ; the heartiness of his welcome frightened
her. Sinking into the chair he had
indicated, she sat for several seconds lost
in her own sensations, and regarded the
new owner of Monkswood as though he
were some curious wild animal of a species
she had never before seen.

Standing near, Victor had observed this
little contretemps ; but he was glad to hope
that no one else had, since, at the moment,
both Idalia and her brother were enirai^ed

in exchanging greetings with Miss Hester
Courteney.

Blaming himself for not having prepared
Mrs. Perriam hy some previous description
of simple, kindly Mr. Bretherton, and so
prevented her from wounding his. honest
feelings by her stupidly undisguised amazement,
he proceeded to administer a mental
shake to the lady by addressing her in a
trenchant and significant tone. Then,
turning to Mr. Bretherton, he strove to
efface, by redoubled politeness on his own
part, the painful impression which this involuntary
rudeness had so evidently left
upon him.

As for Mrs. Perriam, she remained silent,
covered presently with confused blushes,
but unable, apparently, to rally from her
condition of mental confiscation.

A clergyman's widow, and Mr. Courteney's
only sister, Mrs. Perriam was a permanent
resident in that gentleman's house.
She was a spare, weak-eyed, loose-mouthed,

timid little woman of fifty. On the
death of his wife (which had occurred when
Hester was a baby), Mr. Courteney had
invited her to take the head of his establishment
and the care of his child. There
she had remained ever since, manacrino;
household matters, in which Miss Hester
took little interest, but certainly not 
Miss Hester herself.

Very soon, indeed, by virtue of her
stronger ^^'ill, the little girl had learned to
control her aunt instead of being controlled
by her. And, now that she was no
looser a little crirl Mrs. Perriam would as
soon have dreamt of exerting authority
over her niece as of offering; herself as a
candidate for a seat in Parliament.

On the present occasion — in reference
to this call at Monks wood, which she herself
had not desired to make so hurriedly
she had, as usual, yielded to her niece's
quiet, but peremptory, mandate.

After the check that had been given to his

iii sophisticated friendliness, poor Mr. Brethren,
greatly to his son's satisfaction,
sat in silence, rubbing his knees with a
perturbed air.

Between the rest of the party the conversation
dragged. Mr. Percival, it i&
true, made valiant efforts to keep up the
ball between himself and Miss Courteney.
Highly susceptible to the influence of good
looks, he was somewhat struck by the
young lady's fair, pale prettiness, and probably
the effect of her cold attractions was
heightened for him by the fact that she
appeared rather bored than otherwise by
his attempts to entertain her.

So far as Victor McMcoll — who was taking
attentive stock cf her demeanour —
could judge, Hester had come here this
afternoon with the sole object of studying
Miss Bretherton's appearance. At any
rate, her gaze seldom wandered from that
young lady's person.

Her own mouth buttoned up with an
aspect of even more determined self-repression
than usual, and only unclosed to
emit an occasional observation, she looked
Idalia over from head to foot, taking in
every minutes of her attire, as well as every
perfection of her face and figure. A slight
embarrassment in her mien testified, at
length, that Idalia was becoming conscious
of this too flattering attention. Stooping
to lift to her lap the silky-haired little dog
which lay curled up at her feet, she began
to play with it, and to call Miss Courteney's
attention to its Ions; ears and other canine
beauties.

Hester rendered the meed of admiration
invited from her.

I suppose you brought him with you
from America ?' she then inquired, in an
indifferent tone.

Oh, no ! I have only had him a very
short time,' Idalia answered. ' But we

have grown tremendously fond of each
other already : haven't we, Pippin ?'

The dog responded to the question by a
leisurely wag of his tail and an affectionate
lick from his smooth little tongue.

His proper name is Pepin,' resumed his
mistress. 'He is a French doggy, and
only understands that language. But we
have Anglicized his name, and I am trying
to teach him English.'

'He is a Blenheim, is he not?' asked
Victor, whose knowledge on the subject of
dogs was not very discriminative, venturing
to put out his hand to caress the
spaniel as he lay on Idalia's knee.

No : he is a King Charlie, I believe,'
she returned. ' Your cousin, Mr. Nunnery,
gave him to me. Why, did he snap at
you?'

Victor had drawn his iino;ers back
suddenly, as though he had been bitten.

Oh, no !' he stammered, colouring.
No, certainly not. He did not touch me.

And so Charlie o-ave him to you ?' he
appended, airily.

Yes ; he bought him in Brussels from a
man we met in the street, because I happened
to admire him. It was very kind,
wasn't it? Do you know Mr. Nunnery,
Miss Courteney ?'

Hester smoothed out an imaginary
crease in her dress before replying.

Yes — oh, yes ! I know him pretty well.
You are fond of dogs, I suppose?'

I am fond of large dogs — very — of Newfoundland
and retrieve especially. But
I don't believe I ever cared for a lap-dog
before. I do Hke Pippin, though, immensely.
He is such a spry, knowing little
fellow. He can sit up, too, and beg.
Come, Pippin ; sit up, sir !'

Hester looked on for a few moments in
silence whilst the dog exhibited his accomplishments.
Then, when Idalia had released
him, she casually inquired,

'Did you see much of Mr. Nunnery

abroad? Mr. Victor McNicoll mentioned
to me that you had met him there.'

Yes, indeed, eve had a very good time
together ; hadn't we, father ?' she appealed
in happy unconsciousness of her interlocutor's
deep interest in the topic. ' He
travelled around with us all the time after
we made his acquaintance until we parted
in London.'

Oh, indeed !' was the only immediate
comment which Miss Courteney offered
upon this intelligence ; and, breaking in at
this juncture with some irrelevant remark,,
Mr. Percival ao;ain strove to engross her
attention.

By-and-by, however, just before rising to
take her leave, Hester again contrived to
introduce Charlie Nunnerley's name ; and
in a roundabout fashion, by dint of
suggestions rather than direct queries, she
seemed to be trying to arrive at the exact
extent of Miss Bretherton's intimacy with
the young man.

To all her hints, so far as she understood
them, Idalia replied with the most
straightforward simplicity ; and, looking
on in silent apprehension of the onesided
game, Victor drew mental comparisons
between these two girls. Yet his
father had proposed that he should think
of Hester Courteney as a wife ! — had not
only proposed, but insisted upon it with
arguments, persuasions, and threats !
Victor was perfectly satisfied that if he
were to make any advances to Hester his
suit would not be acceptable : but he felt
that in any case he would sooner die than
make them.

The call did not last long — not longer,
certainly, than fifteen minutes. For the
last ten of those minutes, however, Mrs.
Perriam (who had been sitting throughout
the whole interview on thorns of discomfort)
had been impatiently watching for
her niece to make the initiatory move
towards departure. When Hester did at

length rise, she followed her example with
alacrity ; and Victor, feeling it incumbent
upon him to take his leave at the same
time, accompanied the ladies to their
carriage — in which, however, he courteously
declined to take a seat.

I say, don't forget, you know, that you
have promised to bring young Ledsom to
call here,' were Mr. Percival Bretherton's
last words to him as they shook hands.

CHAPTER Xii.

THE FOLD FAR:\r.

You pere quite sure, father, that you won't
feel lonely?'

Idalia stood T^dth her riding-skirts gathered
up in one hand, and the other passed
through her father's arm, whilst she put
this question with tender anxiety.

It was the morning; following; Victor
McMcoll's call ; her brother and she were
about to set off for a ride, and Mr. Brethren
had accompanied them to the
door to see them mount. A pair of fine
saddle-horses were somewhat restive
pawing the gravel in front of the porch

and Peleus was occupied about the girths
of one of them.

Presently, turning round, he called his
sister to come, that he might put her up.
Their love of horses and horse exercise
formed one strong point of common interest
between the brother and sister, and it
would have been hard to say which was
the more accomplished or graceful rider.

Well, good-bye, father,' repeated Idalia,
kissing him ; ' we shall not be away long.
And this afternoon, remember, you and I
are to have a nice drive together in the
pony-carriage.'

Bless you, honey ! So we will. But
enjoy your ride, child, and don't you hurry
back for me on no account. I ain't a-going'
to feel lonesome. Dear, no ! Why should
I?'

This assurance was emphasised by his
sweetest smile.

Nevertheless, scarcely had the sounds

of the horses' hoofs died from his ear
before Abner did begin to feel lonely —
very lonely indeed.

Accustomed all his life to active labour
and an outdoor existence, confinement to
the house Alas naturally irksome to him.
To sit alone in an unfamiliar room proved
doubly irksome ; and, after enduring the
experience for nearly half-an-hour, he took
his hat and left the house.

For some time he wandered about the
grounds ; then, passing round to the back
of the Hall, he entered the stable-yard.
Two grooms were at work there, busily
engaged in polishing some silver-plated
harness which had become tarnished with
neglect. Mr. Bretherton stopped to speak
with them ; but his manner was constrained
and unnatural, and his words came outwith
hesitation.

The fact was, that this morning, whilst
his sister had been conning; her ridins;-

habit, Mr. Percival Bretherton had seized
the opportunity of repeating to his father
certain instructions respecting his conduct
towards the servants, to which he had
more than once before given utterance.
The burden of these reiterated instructions
was that poor Abner was carefully to avoid
undue familiarity with any of his domestic
staff. And, in order to ensure such avoidance,
his amiable son wished him to make
it a rule never to address man or maid
excepting upon necessary business, and
then with as much brevity as possible.
Now, feeling that in penalty for having
brought him up in so superior a fashion to
himself, he owed consideration in all such
matters as this to his son's ideas, Mr.
Bretherton had half given the promise
Peleus sought to extract from him. The
consequence was that, under a sense of
being curbed and restrained from all spontaneity,
the worthy man lost now the
remnants of a certain simple dignity which,

under happier circumstances, had always
characterised him in his intercourse with
his employed.

The cockney grooms, who spoke in a
finiky, word-chopping style, which Mr.
Bretherton found it difficult to comprehend,
fancied that their new master was
afraid of them — that he felt uneasy beneath
their critical inspection, from the
very proper conviction that he was not ^t
to occupy such a relationship towards
them. Ha^dno; both, as they could boast,
served the ' aristocracy ' in their time,
they had strictly correct notions as to
what a gentleman ought to be. x\s a
matter of course, poor Abner did not
coincide with these notions, and they
had set him down in their own minds as
entirely without claim to that title. The
exchange of a surreptitious wink presently
conveyed from one to the other an
appropriate expression of this their mutual
opinion.

VOL. I. B

Mr. Bretherton did not catch the wink,
but he felt that the men were quizzing
him in a not very friendly or respectful
fashion, and with a hasty parting remark
he walked away. Before, however, he had
quitted the yard, or at all events before he
had got well out of earshot, a rude laugh
reached him, and instinctively he guessed
that his hired lackeys were amusing their
small wits at his expense.

A flush of anger mounted to his brow.
For an instant he halted and half turned.
But the brief resentment quickly passed,
giving place to pain — a secret aching pain
from which he was rarely free, though
he strove with patient unselfishness to hide
its existence from his children. More sad
and ' lonesome ' now than before, he
wandered back to the front of the house.
Ah ! how his heart yearned for his old
home, for his old associates, his old occupations
! In that far-off land, in those

dear bygone clays, no one had ever laughed
at or ridiculed him, and he had been
happily unconscious of anything in himself
calculated to excite such ridicule.
There, in ' Clear Water Valley,' he had
been a man of consequence, a man looked
up to and honoured. He had gone about
accordingly vdth that sense of dignity and
self-respect always enjoyed by one who
feels himself to be in good repute with his
fellows. His life had been a useful and a
happy one. But now, alas ! all was
changed.

Entirely out of his element, Abner began
to feel as though he were scarcely the
same man that he had been ; and in a
measure this was true. He had been
transplanted to a foreign soil — an unsuitable
habitat — and the bleeding roots, torn
from his native earth, seemed to be draining
him of life-blood and energy. He felt
as though all that was most of worth and

K 2

use in him was dying o slow death through
the inaction of his present strange, uncongenial
existence.

Absorbed in these sorrowful thoughts,
which he only permitted himself to indulge
in when alone, Mr. Bretherton
grew heedless of whither his steps carried
him. Hardly conscious of the fact, he
passed out of his own grounds, and strolled
for a short distance along the highway.
By-and-by he found himself standing in
front of a white gate. The gate opened
upon a cart road, or lane, which led upto
an ancient-looking, straggling-built
house. This house at once arrested
Abner's attention, and lifted him out of
his unpleasant reflections. It was evidently
a farm ; and though there was not
much resemblance between the buildings
excepting that both covered a good deal
of ground, and were two-storied, rambling-looking
places — it reminded him somehow
of White-falls Prospect.

A singular desire took possession of
poor Abner. He felt as though he should
like very much to go and call at this
house. Its owner being a farmer, like
himself, might perhaps feel inclined to be
neighbourly. Yet he hesitated to carry
out this impulse, and remained for a longtime
leaning over the gate, wistfully gazing
around him. A year ago, in his own
country, he would have marched boldly
forward, without crivino- a second thought
to the question. Ceremony in the matter
of making acquaintances was not fashionable
among the Appalachian mountains ;
but now Abner had to contend against
a new diffidence, born of his late
experiences.

At length, however, he opened the gate,
and, taking his courage in hand, beo:an to
walk slowly up the lane. It led past a
front entrance round to a yard at the back
of the house. A second gate closed in the
farm-yard. Just through it, to the left?

stretched a small pond of muddy watery
wherein a family of yellow-billed ducks
were disporting themselves. Cocks and
hens were pecking about among the straw
Which littered the premises, and a fat
gander, standing on the top of a manure
heap, was contemplating his small world
with an imbecile eye. Abner hesitated
again for some minutes ; then, lifting the
bar of this second gate, he attempted to
open it. A noisy creaking sound was the
result, and springing from a kennel, which
he had not before noticed, a large bulldog
set up a loud barking, accompanied by
a vicious straining at his chain. The
barking was taken up in chorus by two
other dogs, invisible from where he stood,,
and, repelled by the inhospitable clamour,
Mr. Bretherton once more paused.

A moment later, there appeared round
a corner of the house a man with a
pipe in his mouth and his hands in his
pockets.

How d'ye do, mister ?' asked Abner,
smiling and nodding affably.

Morning' to ee,' returned the other, removing
his pipe, and surveying the visitor
curiously.

I was passion', ' resumed Mr. Bretherton,
explanatorily and a little nervously — ' I
was jest assassin', an' I thought I'd step
in an' see ye. You're the owner, I reckon
of this yere farm, ain't ye ?'

Less, I be. I be a Farmer Basset — John
Basset, by your leave.' Then, after a
pause, devoted to puffing hard at his pipe,
he subjoined — ' Stranger i' these parts,
bent ee?'

The's so. Yes, mister, I'm a stranger
in a strange land, so to speak. I was
raised in North Carolina.'

North Carolina ? And where med
that be ? Toward Scotland, or that way
somewheres, I repose ?

Mr. Bretherton was too polite to smile
at this sad display of ignorance.

'Well, no; it's in the States. North
Carolina is — America, you know,' he added;
suggestively.

Mr. Basset lifted his hat and scratched
the bald pate.

Oh, a}^, I see now, sure !' he exclaimed
in a relieved tone. ' You be one o' the
nev squire's men. 'A 's from America,
they tell I. And, to be sure, anyone
could have tell from your speech that
you was a foreigner.'

Well, I essay — they could,' admitted
Mr. Bretherton. Then, in order to correct
the mistake under which his companion
was evidently labouring, he continued,
Monkswood Hall, you see, it's mine now.
My sister, Mrs. Curtis, she left it to me.
Maybe ye know'd her?'

The puzzled expression which it had
before worn returned in full force to Mr.
Basset's florid countenance.

Lor' !' he ejaculated. ' Be you Squire
Bretherton himself?'

^Thet's my name, Mister — Abiier Breaths
is.'

Mr. Basset stood for a full minute with
his mouth open, as though unable to
swallow this intelligence. Then, looking
Mr. Bretherton straight in the face, he
broke into a little laugh, which sounded
neither unpleasant nor impertinent, and
said,

^ Why dont ee step forrud, squire ?
Come into the house and take a drop of
cider.'

swell, now, the's friendly, that is; an'
I will,' rejoined Abner, ^^'itIl heartiness.
But ef you wouldn't mind it, I'd like first
to look around a bit. You see, I'm a farmer
myself, an' it's sorter home-like being in the
yard here is.'

'A warmer? Do ee tell, now?' exclaimed
Mr. Basset, much interested. sand —
make so bold — what med you warm, cattle
or grain ?'

Mr. Bretherton proceeded to explain that

lie had been both an agricultural and a
cattle farmer, but that the principal and
most lucrative part of his business had
been the breeding of hogs on the mountains
at some distance from his homestead.


Mr. Basset listened attentively, beating
into his hand the ashes of his pipe, Which
had now gone out. Both men were conscious
that a friendly freemasonry of feeling
had even already been established
between them. This, however, did not
arise altogether from the discovery that
they possessed a common interest through
this community of occupation, although
it was undoubtedly heightened by that
circumstance.

I liked the look o' un, some ways, fro'
the moment I first seed un,' remarked
Farmer Basset afterwards to a confidential
friend. ' 'A looks you straight i' the face
like a true man, and 'a 's a kindly soul, a&
you can see in 's eye.'

For somewhat similar reasons, and also
because the affectionate warmth of his
guileless nature inclined him to like and
think well of everyone with whom he
came in contact, Mr. Bretherton felt
likewise much drawn to the honest
farmer.

And so you breeder pegs ?' remarked
the latter, when his companion paused.
Yell, well, step this way, friend, and I'll
show ee as vine a sow as ever ee seen !'

Mr. Bretherton followed with happy
alacrity towards a row of well-built,
cleanly-looking styes at the further end of
the yard.

Xow then, look ee there ! Her 's fourteen
stun, if her 's a pound !'

Mr. Bretherton duly admired the mountain
of shapeless flesh pointed out to him.
Then, putting over his stick, he gave the
somnolent swine a gentle scratch on the
head. A loud and contented irruption
immediately ensued, and thereupon, from.

under cover, there came pelting out a dozen
small pigs, tumbling helter-skelter over one
another.

Ha, ha ! 'Tis her last brood, they 'n,'
remarked the farmer ; ' and I'll tell ee a
joke. My girl, Susan — her 's a good may,
and pretty, Susan is, and I'd like you to
see her, squire ' — he glanced round towards
the house, as though to look whether
his daughter vere visible ; but, seeing
nothing of her, he turned back, and resumed
— ' There's just twelve o' they young
pegs, you see, and Susan, her 's christened
'em by the names o' the twelve Apostles ;
and that little black un wi' the curly tail
('a 's the only black un i' the batch) that's
Judas.'

The farmer stopped to laugh, and Abner
joined him.

And would ee believe it ? 'A 's turned
out the dangdest, quarrelsome beast in
the years. 'A '11 ketch his little brothers
and sisters by the legs, and 'a '11 tipple 'em

over, and 'a '11 lieve from them turnips and
what not, and alton-ether 'a 's a reo-alar bad
un !'

Maybe it was sorter rough on him a-
given' him that thar name,' suggested Mr.
Bretherton, with a beaming countenance.

Never, since he had turned his back on
Clear slater Yalley,' had he felt so
thoroughly at home in anyone's society
as he now began to feel in that of the
worthy owner of Bedford Farm. And to
come across so congenial an associate in
the midst of that crushing sense of desolation
from which he had suffered this morning;
made it all the more delightful.

After some further inspection of the
styes and their occupants, Mr. Basset conducted
his visitor round to his barns,
shipping, and other out-houses. Then inviting
him to climb a hillock, just outside
the yard, he pointed out the extent of
his property, proudly explaining at the
same time that this exact amount of land

lead belonged to his father, his grand-father,
his great-grandfather, and that the Bassets
had lived here from generation to generation
— as far back, he believed, as the
Flood, or well-nigh it.

But now, do ee come into the house,
squire, and see our folks.'

Although with a slight sentiment of
drollery in according it, Mr. Basset had
continued to address his new acquaintance
by this title of squire.

'I've a rather turned eighty-nine — a
wonderful man I call un — as nimble nigh on
his legs as area young fellow : in a general
way 'tis, I mean, for to-day he bent well.
'A 's all out o' sorts, wi' rheumatiz in's pints,
and what not. I had ought to ha' been
down now in the sixteen-acres, where they
be rapin' barley, only I stayed to chat wi'
un a bit. Then there's the missus and
Susan.'

Ye ain't a large family, then, an' only
one child,' commented Mr. Bretherton.

The farmer walked on for some moments
in silence, thrusting both hands into his
pockets. Then, plainly with effort, he
rejoined,

Nay, her's not the only child. I've a
son besides, but 'a 's a sore cross to me. 'A 's
an idiot ; and there never wur an idiot in
the Basset family afore, never ! I often
wish he'd never been born, that I do !'

Feeling that this was indeed a distressing
affliction, and one which it required some
delicacy to handle, Mr. Bretherton offered
his condolences in very few words, and the
two men exchanged no further remarks
until the farmer had ushered his guest
into a huge kitchen. This was the principal
living-room of the family, cooking and
other such business being carried on elsewhere.


And a brighter or pleasant apartment
no one need have wished to sit in. The
floor was spotless, and everything that
could take a polish — from the mahogany

clock-case to the smallest article in brass or
pewter that hung on the walls, or stood on
the high mantel-shelf — glittered and shone
so that you might have seen your face in
them. Under a long low window, with
diamond-cut panes, stood a deal dresser,,
scoured to a marvellous whiteness, and just
opposite, beneath a plate-rack covered with
an ancient dinner-service in wedgwood, that
would have fetched a large sum from the
china fanciers, appeared a second dresser.
Close by this, on a low rocking-chair, sat
a woman scraping carrots. She was an
elderly woman, rather past sixty, with
a comely face and a gentle, apathetic
expression. Her attire consisted of a
brown merino dress, a blue checked apron
of ample dimensions, and a snowy lawn
cap.

This individual was Mrs. Basset, and her
husband — who both was and looked several
years younger than herself — proceeded to
introduce her to his visitor. Setting down

her dish of carrots, Mrs. Basset carefully
wiped her fingers upon her apron before
accepting the hand Mr. Bretherton offered
her. Then, with that unflattering air of
surprise to which he was becoming accustomed
whenever the fact was mentioned,
she asked,

What ! are ee the master o' Monks-wood
? I thought it wur an own brother
of Mrs. Curtis was to get un.'

Abner mildly deposed to the fact that
he was Mrs. Curtis's own brother.

'Well, you dont favour her, sir, no
ways at all,' affirmed Mrs. Basset, with
candour. ' She was an elegant sort of
body to look at ; but main good, too, and
friendly like. We seed a deal of her when
she was alive, poor lady : what with been'
neighbours, and what with my brother's
widow a-livin' so long with her as housekeeper.'


^ Lor', I'd forgotten that !' interposed
Mr. Basset. ' Did ee know, squire, as

VOL. I. s

Mrs. Briscoe was my wife's sister-in-law ?
lier as has had charge of the Hall ever
since the mistress died ?'

Mr. Bretherton disclaimed any previous
knowledge of the relationship in question,
but showed himself courteously interested
in learning of it now.

Why, Susan, she's just gone down there
now to see her aunt, and to take her some
eggs,' observed Mrs. Basset. ' We've allays
been used to let the Hall have butter and
eggs from our farm.'

^ Well, now, I be vexed the little may's
not in !' said her husband. 'The squire,
he's got a daughter too, and 'a says she's
particular beautiful ; but I'd like he to see
our Susan !'

It was very evident that the proud
father believed any comparison would be
to the advantage of his own child.

How long has she been gone ? I never
seed her go.'
^ Not above half-an-hour. She slipt out

the front way, so's Luke shouldn't see, for
she didn't want him a-following this
morning; but I'm afeard he's gone after
her, for all that. The poor lad — '

Bother the poor lad !'

Mr. Basset turned away with an
impatient grunt and a frown, which
instantly cleared from his brow, hovv'ever,
as his eyes lighted on an old man sitting
in an easy-chair by the chimney-corner.

'See, 'tis my rather, squire,' he remarked,
with an air of proud satisfaction.
'Why, rather, old chap, you've letter your
pillow drop again !'

He stooped to lift a cushion from the
ground, and, whilst arranging it comfortably
at the back of the chair, continued,

Bless us all ! he's such a hearty, active
man as no one, go where 'a would, could
beat ! Even so bad as 'a is, he'll scarce
consent to lie back in his seat and twiddle
his thumbs.'

Ha ! ha ! I'm a gate as has held long

son

its hinges, 'tis true, Holm, but 'tis full
time I began creaking' a bit now ;' and the
old man, who seemed to regard this remark
as a good joke, indulged in a series of
chuckles. His son patted him on the
shoulder, and chuckled in concert.

Look ee, rather,' he then said : * this-gentleman
he be Squire Bretherton, as
ee have heard tell wur come to live at the
Hall.'

Ay, sure, sure.'

There was no surprise manifested here.
The old man regarded Abner with a genial
smile, and a feeble, senile curiosity. His
physical strength might, as his admiring
son boasted, be extraordinary, but to a
stranger, at least, it was evident that the
old gentleman had attained his second
childhood.

Such a cheerful, happy old child, however,
did he seem, and such an air of untroubled
contentment did his withered
countenance present, that to look at him

was almost enouo'li to make one in love
with old ao'e. With him the tmnnoil
and bustle of life were over, and the sun
of his existence was evidently setting in a
peaceful sky.

And well he deserved that it should,
for old John Basset had ever been one of
those loveable, joyous-natured souls, who
see good in everything and everybody,
and who bless the world by the mere
fact of their cheery existence. To his
son he had always appeared the perfection
of a father and a man, and since,
some ten years ago, he had made over to
him his farm and lands, John had treated
him ^^dth even more consideration and
affection, if possible, than before.

Leaving' his ffuest now to chat with the
old man, Mr. Basset hastened to draw with
his own hands a jug of cider. Further, he
instructed a brawny servant-maid to bring
a pair of wine-decanters from an old ebony
cabinet which stood in a corner of a

parlour adjacent to the living-room. A
very interesting room that parlour was,
with its antique, high-backed chairs, its
carved oak chimney-piece, tapestry pictures,
curious old settees, and antiquated ornaments.
The Bassets hardly knew the
value of the many ancient possessions
which had accumulated about their house;
but, had they done so, they would certainly
not have parted with them for gold.

Mr. Bretherton found the cider very
pleasant, but the company of his new
acquaintances still pleasant, and it was
a considerable time before he rose to take
his leave.

Now, squire, do ee come again, please,
and afore long,' pressed Mr. Basset, accompanying
him to the door.

'The I will!' responded Abner, warmly,
and with a lighter feeling at his heart than
he had known for months. ' I'll drop in
often, and lev a word with you, an' a
look around the farm. Why, ef it ain't

raining! It's come on sudden, haven't
it ? No, no ; I don't never carry an
umbrella. Thank you kindly, and goodbye.'


CHAPTER XV.

SUSAN BASSET.

The rain had not come on quite so suddenly
as Mr. Bretherton supposed. His son
and daughter, at all events, had noted signs
of its approach, and, galloping home, had
managed to avoid it. The first drops
only were beginning to fall as Peleus, having
dismounted his sister at the hall door,
was leading the horses round towards the
stables. Having reached home a little
earlier than was anticipated, he had found
no groom in attendance. Unreasonably
displeased by this fact (Mr. Percival Brethren
was one of those people who

expect of the world that it should be ever
in waiting on their convenience), he was
mentally engaged in framing a stinging reprimand
for his servant, when, on turning
an angle of the house, he came suddenly
upon an object which served to distract
his ideas.

This object was a very pretty, kittenish-looking
young damsel, v»ath round pink
cheeks and remarkably blue eyes. Over
her arm the damsel carried a basket, and,
as she passed him, she coloured and dropped
a half-curtsey. When she had gone by,
Peleus turned to look after her, and found
that she also had turned to look after him.
Moreover, that backward glance discovered
to him another charm, in the shape of
a cluster of bright golden curls tied behind
her head, and floating down to the girl's
waist.

Peleus never could resist beauty. Half
an invitation where it was concerned was
enough, and that glance of simple curiosity

seemed to him a kind of invitation.
Hurrying forward, he gave the horses into
charge of the first servant he met, a stableboy,
and, deferring his scolding to the
groom, sprang after the girl. As he had
already reflected, he possessed a good excuse,
were such excuse needed, for addressing
her. But having, at first view, decided
that she was not a lady, he did not really
conceive that any excuse was needed.
Nevertheless, on coming up to her, the
young fellow raised his hat apologetically.

Pardon me,' he began; 'I see you have
no umbrella, and it is beginning to rain.
Will you not return to the house and
shelter ?'

A start, followed by a deep blush,
rewarded his interference. Then lifting
her eyes shyly, but without any evidence
of displeasure, the girl answered,

No, thank you, sir, I don't care for the
rain, and I must make haste home. It — it
be nigh our dinner-time.' She stammered

a little in her bashfulness, and blushed
again.

Peleus found her prettier than he had
imagined.

Oh, it is dinner-time, is it? And you
are hungry ?' he said, smiling. ' Well, at
any rate you must have an umbrella.
Come back, and let me get you one.'

But, again shaking her head, the girl
declined his courtesy.

Sto, thank you,' she repeated, at the
same time quickening her steps slightly.

'But you will get wet,' he persisted,
keeping by her side.

Oh, I don't mind — I shall run home
now.' She paused timidly, giving him the
opportunity to leave her.

Peleus, however, did not take the hint.

Have you far to go ?' he questioned,
walking on slowly.

Not very. No, only a short way,' she
faltered.

Peleus studied the long lashes of her

downcast eyes for a few moments ; then
lowering his voice to a soft and pleading
tone, he once more pressed his request.

^ Do, please, have an umbrella. I don't
like you to get wet.'

The girl was very young and very
innocent. She had all the confidence of a
petted child in the intentions of her fellow-creatures,
and the bashfulness which she
had so far felt, and which she might have
exhibited to any stranger, had been wholly
unmixed with alarm. JSfow, however, the
insistance of her companion began to affect
her curiously. The low tones of his voice,
as he had last spoken, thrilled through her,
stirring something in the depths of her
nature that had never been stirred before.
Why was he so very kind to her? (In his
behaviour her unsophisticated mind saw
nothing but friendly considerateness.)
And what a handsome young gentleman
he was ! What nice clothes he wore !
And what a pretty sparkling ring he had

on bis little finger! She stole another
glance at him. Then, with a smile dimpling
her cheeks and a little toss of her
head, in which was the first birth of
coquetry, she submitted to his request.

Well, if you be so set upon it, I can
borrow one from Maofo^ie Blaire at the
lodge

That's right. But perhaps Maggie
Blaire at the lodge may not have one — I
must go with you there to see.'

This suggestion was received in silence,
but not a silence of the sort that betokened
objection. Peleus drew a little
nearer.

Is your basket heavy ?' he asked, touching
it.

Oh, no ; 'tis empty now.'

'Empty? so it is!' He had playfully
lifted the lid to look inside. * Nav, I see
some money!' he added.

Oh, yes ! that be the pay for the eggs
I brought t^vo dozen to-days

Ah, I see, you've been selling eggs ?
You are a little market-woman, eh ?'

Indeed, no !' a quick flush of indignation
•sufEnsed the girl's face ; * I never go to
market, and I never sell eggs ; at least, I
only bring them here to aunt. Rebecca
and Molly, our servants, they do go to
market with the butter and fruit and
things.'

Oh, I beg your pardon, I'm sure ! I'm
afraid I've put my foot in it ! . Suppose
you tell me who you are, and then I shall
not make any more mistakes. I'm awfully
sorry if I have offended you ; I really am !'

You haven't — not particularly,' she rejoined,
pouting slightly, however ; ' I'm
Susan Basset !'

What a pretty name !'

Susan dimpled, mollified by the compliment.


'And where does Miss Susan Basset
live ?'

*We live at the Fold Farm. Father

owns it ; and it do have belonged to the
Bassets always, for hundreds and thousands
of years.' Susan inherited the
family pride, and had this tradition respecting
her ancient lineage duly instilled
into her.

Dear me ! Thousands of years !
That's a longish time,' laughed Peleus.
I wonder how many of them you have
lived ?'

Do you mean how old be I ?'

If it wouldn't be rude to ask ?'

I be nearly seventeen. My birthday,
'tis next month

^ Is it ? What a charming age ! And
how pretty you are !'

Am I ?' she asked, with childish
naivete, blushing again as she spoke.

Adorably pretty ! Did no one ever
tell you so before ?'

I don't know. Yes, I think father has
sometimes.'
'And no one else?' The young man

bent over her as be put this question, and
there was something in bis tone which
now awakened a vague uneasiness in the
child's mind.

I don't know she repeated, drawing
away from him. ' I think I'd rather not
talk about myself.'

Peleus recognised and accepted the
warning. He did not wish to startle the
girl.

'Well, we won't talk about anything
you don't like,' he protested, keeping at
a distance. ' But why don't you ask me
some questions now ? Don't you want to
know who I am ?'

'I know without asking,' she replied,
lifting her blue eyes in returning confidence
; *I can guess.'

You clever little girl ! Well ?'

You be Squire Bretherton's son.'

Oh ! people call him squire, do they ?'
murmured Peleus to himself. ^ Hallo !
What do you mean, fellow, by hiding

about in these grounds ?' This inquiry was
addressed to the owner of a face which had
just been protruded from behind a tree,
a face with no chin and very little forehead.


Tis Luke explained Susan. ' Come
out, Luke, you tiresome thing !'

'Thought I should find ee !' remarked
the idiot, with a broad and cunning o^rin.
I always finds ee, Sue, don't I ?'

"Who the — who on earth is he ?' demanded
Peleus, looking from one to the
other, from the pretty, blooming girl to
the prematurely old and hideous young
man.

Tis my brother ' (Susan confessed the
fact with shame-faced reluctance). * Hebe
a softy ; not right in his head.'

Indeed ? What a pity !' rejoined
Peleus, making an effort not to betray the
disgust wherewith he felt himself inspired
towards the unfortunate fellow. * Nowhere
we are at the lodge ! I suppose

VOL. I. T

Maggie (isn't that her name?) will be
inside T

The personage in question, a girl of
fourteen (daughter of the head gardener,
to whom the lodge had been assigned as a
residence), did prove to be inside, and a
huge cotton umbrella was speedily borrowed
from her.

But now,' said Peleus, when they came
out with it, * I shall be obliged to walk
home with you. You could never carry
this great umbrella yourself. It would
make your poor little arms ache.'

Oh, no, it wouldn't. I can carry it
quite easily,' protested Susan, stretching
out her hand to take it. ' Or I could
make Luke hold it. Come along, Luke.'

The idiot, however, paid no attention to
her call. He had slunk away to some
distance, and was now eyeing her companion
with an expression of furtive dislike
and suspicion.

Why,' resumed Peleus, * this is very

"unkind. Do you really object to me walking
with you a little further ? Is my company
so very disagreeable ?' Once more
the young fellow softened his voice to a
tone of insinuating entreaty ; and once
more the simple-minded girl gave way.

Allowing him to carry the umbrella over
her head, she stepped forward by his side,
her young heart in a flutter of strange
excitement. The moment seemed, somehow,
like the opening of a new era in her
existence. Never before had she walked
so with a gentleman. How, indeed, should
she ? And where was there such another
gentleman to be found in the world ?
One who was so kind and handsome, so
tall and elegant, and who talked so
prettily ?

For Peleus was doing all the talking
now, letting his speech flow on in soft
nothings, quite content with receiving a
good many shy glances and an occasional
monosyllable in return.

t2

The rain, what there was of it (the
downfall was not really heavy) beat
towards their faces. With a great parade
of sheltering his companion, the young
fellow was holding the umbrella low in
front of her, and it was only upon hearing
himself accosted by name that he presently
became aware that they had met some one
on the narrow parapet. Lifting the
umbrella, he found himself face to face
with his father.

I thought so !' exclaimed the latter.
I thought it was you, Percival. I 'low 1
know'd the pattern o' them — them garments,'
delicately. ' An' where are you
a going', my boy ? An' who might this pretty
young woman be ?'

Mr. Bretherton regarded Susan, as he
made the inquiry, with an interested and
kindly air. The sight of a young face
always moved the worthy man to a fatherly
affectionately of feeling, and there
were few young people who failed to

respond, in some measure, to bis genial
good-will.

Susan, at all events, returned very
readily the smile lie had bestowed upon
her. But, conceiving that the question as
to whom she was had been directed to
young Bretherton, she waited for him to
reply.

Finding, however, that Peleus remained
silent, she glanced round at him, and was
surprised, in fact, startled, by the change
which had taken place in his expression.
All the brightness and amiability seemed
suddenly to have vanished from his countenance,
and he was gazing at the newcomer
with a dark scowl on his brow and
a forbidding look in his eyes.

Sensible of having sustained a shock,
Susan turned back to Mr. Bretherton, and
began hastily to introduce herself.

My name is Susan Basset,' she said.
That is our house, behind you, sir, close
by. 'Tis called the Fold Farm.'

'Do tell! Why, I've must come from
there, my dear ! I've bin having a long
talk with your father. You're his little
girl, then, are you ? He told me a heap
about you. He 'pears mighty set on yean'
no wonder !'

Susan opened her eyes at this unfamiliar
dialect, and looked wonderingly at the
speaker. Notwithstanding that he had
spoken to her escort by name, she did not
yet guess at the relationship which existed
between the two.

The next words, however, revealed it.

An' so you've made acquaintance with
my son, lev you? Well, that's right!
Young folks, they'd daughter be friendly
with young folks. Are you in the notion
of going' any further, Percival ?'

Can't say. Probably I may,' replied
Peleus, sharply. ' But we need not detain
yoii any longer.'

The accent was something more than
ungracious. Poor Mr. Bretherton cast a

reproachful glance at his son, and a momentary
spasm, as of pain, crossed his besprinkled
visage. Almost before it could
be noticed, however, it was gone.

'No he returned, cheerfully. 'No, I
ain't a-going' to be in the way, Percival.
Young folks, they'd rather be by themselves.
That's nat'ral snuff, that is I
Well, my dear, good-day, an' I'll be glad
to see you again. You'll be stepping' in
often, I essay, to see Tdalia an' Percival.
An' you'll be alius welcome.'

The old man threw the last words over
his shoulder, as he was walking off.
Then the kindly smile it had worn faded
sadly from his face, and setting it the
other way, he for the first time perceived
the idiot youth, who had been following a
few yards behind the pair. Poor Luke !
he adored his pretty sister with the unreasoning,
uncritical passion of a dumb
animal. She was his divinity, and it was
his delight to follow her whithersoever

she went, like a dog or a shadow. As
for Susan, she treated him sometimes as
the one, and sometimes as the other, as a
shadow, a nonentity, or a dog to fetch
and carry at her biding.

Now and then she threw him a bone in
the shape of a little notice or a few kind
words.

Guessing without difficulty that this
was the imbecile son of whom Mr. Basset
had told him, Abner gave him a pitiful
glance and a friendly nod in passing.
Little dreaming, however, that his life, or
the lives of those connected with him,
could ever be affected in any special
manner by either the childish little sister
or the witless, irresponsible brother, he
had very soon dismissed the thought of
both from his mind.

Meanwhile, carrying the umbrella now
in silence, Peleus had moved on with his
companion. For several reasons, the
young man had felt greatly annoyed by

this encounter with his father. To amuse
himself with a pretty farmer-girl was one
thing, but to have Mr. Bretherton surprise
him in her company was another. As he
had quickly reflected, the circumstance
would afford a bad example and a bad
precedent.

It was Mr. Percival Bretherton's intention
that none of the family, at all events,
neither his sister nor himself, should cultivate
any but the first people in the neighbourhood.
Yet, on meeting him with
this little Susan, his father, with his
levelling plebeian tendencies, had at once
put them on an equality. Further, he had
irritated him by suggesting that she might
be suffered to associate with Idalia.
Peleus felt that he would, if necessary,
have to correct the mistake by giving the
child a lesson against presumption.

Still, he did not wish to offend her;
quite the reverse. And she did not look
presumptuous. (He had bent to study

again her half-averted face.) She looked
troubled and uneasy ; and what a soft,
charming little kitten she was ! Percival's
ill-humour melted away.

You are keeping quite dry, aren't you
Susan ?' he asked. * I may call you Susan,
may I not ?'

There was no response for some
moments. Then, suddenly turning to
him, the girl asked a question in her turn.

Is he your father ?'

The gentleman who has just passed ?
Well, I have been given to understand
so.'

^ But you don't love him ?'

Don't I ? What makes you say
that?'

I saw you look at him as if you didn't.
You looked at him just like father does
at poor Luke sometimes.'

How is that ?'

Susan coloured violently ; but after an
instant's hesitation she answered,

Well, you see, father he be ashamed of
Luke, and he hates him.'

And you think I looked as though I
was ashamed of my father, and as though
I hated him ?' asked Peleus.

Susan nodded, still blushing.
And you are not inclined to be so
friendly with me in consequence, eh ?'

I don't know.' A faint smile, nevertheless,
crossed her face, breaking, like a
gleam of sunshine, through the clouds that
had overcast it. * He did look so nice and
kind,' she continued. * And you did look
so cross, it almost scared me.'

You fanciful little thing ! But that is
all nonsense. It is all a mistake.*

Be it ?' she asked, evidently ready to
be convinced against the evidence of her
senses.

Of course it is ! My father and I have
seen very little of each other since I was
a boy, and we are not much alike ;
but '

No, you don't favour him a bit !' interposed
Susan, as the young fellow paused,
stealing an admiring glance at him.

Thank the gods, no !' ejaculated Peleus,
piously. * But is this your gate ? Well,
Susan, I suppose I must say good-bye to
you here ?'

^ If you like. I don't want the umbrella
^ny longer.'

Oh, but you must take it with you up
the lane. And, mind, don't you bring it
back to the lodge, Susan, on any account !
/ shall call for it at your house. I shall
want to see you again, tremendously, and
it will serve as an excuse, don't you see ?
You won't be sorry to see me again, will
you ?'

Susan made no reply in words, but her
blue eyes gleamed at him for a moment
beneath their long lashes, and Peleus was
satisfied. During the interview now drawing
to an end, the girl had been by turns
startled, flattered, offended, elated, shocked

; but, with it all, excited in a way such
as she had never been in her life before.
Still she felt that she would like to be so
excited again. After this new experience
of hers, things could never, she vaguely
recognised, be exactly as they where before.
Not to see Mr. Percival Bretherton again

would somehow, the very idea seemed

to create a sort of blank disquietude in her
mind. No, certainly she would not be
sorry to see him again.

Where is that your brother ? Ah,

there he is behind. By the way, Miss
Susan, talking of feeling ashamed of one's
kindred, don't you think you ought to
plead guilty to the sin yourself? If so,
you know, you can't throw stones at me.'

Oh, but that be quite different !' protested
Susan. ' Poor Luke, he's a softy.
And if, by times, I do feel a bit ashamed
of him, I don't dislike him. I hadn't
ought to neither, for he be main fond of
me. If anyone hunted me. I do believe

he'd kill them. Why, 'tis only a month
ago that he strangled a dog because it
tried to bite me. 'Twas a great big dog ;
but Luke, he's so strong, and he just
took ib by the throat and strangled it
dead.'

Dear me ! what a powerful champion !
And you keep him about you always as a
body-guard?' said Peleus, glancing rather
uneasily at the idiot, who had now
shambled up to them, and who, the young
fellow perceived, was regarding his own
handsome physiognomy with apparent disfavour.
' I trust he is not dangerous to
your friends, as well as to ill-behaved
dogs? Because, in that case, I should
suggest that he ought to be placed under
restraint.'

Indeed, no !' exclaimed Susan. ' He
bennet dangerous at all. 'Twas the first
time he ever harmed living thing, was that
dog.'

Well, I don't wonder at him for being

devoted to you, little Susan ; who could
help it? But now, good-bye, again.'
And with a lingering pressure of the hand,
he turned away.

But, though he set off in that direction
at a great speed, Mr. Percival Bretherton
did not appear very anxious to arrive at
home ; for, on reaching the entrance-gate,
he passed on and continued his walk to
some distance beyond it.

The fact was, that the young fellow had
felt somewhat startled by that childishly
frank accusation which Susan Basset had
just brought against him, and that he
wished to think over the ideas it suggested.
Had he really looked at his father as
though he 'hated' him? And was it true
that he actually did so ?

That he should feel ' ashamed ' of him,
went of course, Peleus considered, without
saying. How could he help feeling
ashamed of him ; and, naturally, feeling
ashamed of him, he could not very well

love him. But was there anything worse
than this ? Peering now into the depths
of his inner consciousness, Peleus was
somewhat dismayed by what he there discovered.
Up to the time of old Mrs.
Bretherton's death, he had, it will be
remembered, seen but little of his father.
After the lapse of many years, the latter
and he had met, a few months back,
almost as strangers. And strangers, to
all intents and purposes, they still continued.
Diverse, to begin with, in natural
character, the unlikeness between them
had been increased to the highest point,
through the influence of contrasted
education and surroundings; and not a
single aim, idea, or sentiment did they
now seem to possess in common. Peleus'
taste, such as it was, revolted continually
at his father's dress and appearance, at his
broad dialect and arcadian manners. Mr.
Bretherton might be a ' diamond,' but in
his son's opinion he was a remarkably

rough ' one ; and, had the option been
allowed him, it is to be feared that the
young man would infinitely have preferred
a polished sham to the most precious
jewel in such a state of barbaric uncouthness.


Yes, unquestionably he was ashamed,
wretchedly ashamed of his father !

The yoke of their relationship, he knew,
had been growing, month by month, more
galling to him. Further, the thought, he
was aware, had, of late, very often suggested
itself to him, that, hut for their father,
his sister and he (Peleus was inversely as
fond of Idalia as he was ashamed of his
father) might take a very different standing
in this new country to which they had
come. But for their father, no one need
know of their humble origin, or suspect
them of having occupied a lower position
than that they now held. Handsome, rich,
and educated, they might, but for him,
find admission into any society. To

VOL. I. u

Peleus, in short, his father was a ' wet-blanket'
on his happiness; a spoke in the
wheels of his prosperity ; a mill-stone round
the neck of his ambition !

But did he really go so far as to ' hate '
him ? Did he really wish the old man
was — gone? Peleus shrank a little from
pressing upon himself this unnatural question.
Before he re-entered Monkswood
Hall, however, he had faced and answered
it. But the conclusion to which he
had come was one that, he resolved,
must be kept carefully concealed in his
bosom ; above all, one that must be guarded
as a strict secret from Idalia's suspicion.


CHAPTER XVI.

AN Interrupted LOVE SCENE.

■'* The ladies are dressing for dinner, Sir
Arthur. I will tell them you are here.'

'No, no, don't mind telling them. I
am not expected this evening, Eliza. I'll
announce myself when they come down.'

Oh, very well, sir !' And, smiling to
herself as she withdrew, Mrs. McNicoll's
trim housemaid left Sir Arthur Leonora
alone in the drawing-room of Upton
Lodge.

A very bright and pretty room it was ;

and just now it looked especially pleasant,

for the evenings were growing a little

chilly, and a clear fire blazed in the grate.

u2

A couple of moderator-lamps had also
been already lighted. Their flames,
however, were turned low, for twilight
still lingered and the blinds had not
been drawn to exclude it. Coming in
from the autumnal air, the young baronet
was conscious of a luxurious sense of
warmth and comfort stealing over him.
Stationing himself with his back to the fire,
he stood there for some minutes glancing
around with an aspect of serene contentment.
Then, beginning softly to human
air from a well-known opera, he approached
a window and drew aside a
curtain of rich yellowish lace. This
window, the centre one of three, all situated
on the same side of the room, formed
also a door, leading out by a couple of
steps into the garden. Of his garden Mr.
McNicoll was very proud. And not without
reason, for it was both well laid-out and
well tended.

Looking forth now, Sir Arthur observed

that in distant corners everything was
beginning to melt into vague shadow.
Nearer at hand, however, stretches of
green lawn, elegant fountains, palm-like
shrubs, and even the shapes of the flowerbeds
could be plainly distinguished. Moreover,
a bright half-moon, hanging low in
the horizon, was mingling its silvery rays
with the fading daylight, and imparting a
mystic, fairy-like beauty to the scene.
Still humming to himself the soft strains
of his air, Arthur had stood there but a
few seconds, when he perceived a figure
flitting from the direction of the house
down one of the garden paths. The figure
was that of a girl, and Arthur at once recognised
Dora McNicoll.

Stopping suddenly in the midst of a bar,
he bent forward to watch her. Dora had
approached a flower-bed which she claimed
as her own special property. At the corner
of that bed grew a fine damask-rose
tree. It was one that he had himself grafted,

some two or three years ago, from a
cutting which he had begged from the
head-gardener at the Court.

Pausing before this standard, Dora
seemed to be searching about it for a few
moments. Then Arthur saw her turn
away and come towards the drawing-room,
carrying a flower in her hand. As she
drew nearer, he saw her raise the flower
and press it to her lips.

That action set the young man's heart
beating fast. Hardly conscious of what
he was doing, he drew back, as though
to conceal himself behind the curtains.
Dora entered without perceiving him ; and,
advancing to the hearth, she was proceeding
to pin the rose into her bosom,
when he stepped forward and softly
uttered her name.

Startled by the unexpected address, the
girl gave a little cry and dropped her
flower.

Arthur !' she exclaimed. * It is really

you ? Why, when did you get back from
Scotland ?'

Sir Arthur stooped to pick up the rose
before replying.

Only this afternoon,' he then said.

This afternoon ?' she repeated, blushing
with pleasure. ' And you have actually
come to see us so soon ? This is very good
of you.'

Oh, very good !' he rejoined, laughing.

Should you consider it virtuous of a
man to eat when he is hungry, Dora ?'

What do you mean ?' she demanded.

I don't see the point of that . . .' All
at once she stopped, stammering and
confused.

Don't you know that I would rather be
here than anywhere else in the world?*
The words were spoken in a low key, and,
taking her hand, the young man held it
with a warm pressure, as if disinclined to
release it.

What he had seen this evening had

served to confirm, into almost absolute
certainty, a belief which he had already
entertained for some little time past. And
that confirmation had sent a wave of
tenderness welling from his heart into
every part of his being.

No coxcomb to fancy such a thing without
foundation, Farther Ledsom felt assured
— fully assured now — that Dora McNicoll
loved him. And, whatever his grounds for
this assurance, the fact was so. Dora did
love him — with a depth and intensity of
passion whereof few of her friends would
have believed so quiet and undemonstrative
a girl capable.

As for himself, Arthur believed that he,
too, loved her. He had loved her, he told
himself, ever since they had been children
together.

Nevertheless, it was true, that until
within the last few weeks he had never
once thought of her in the light of a future
wife. The idea had dawned on him only

since his uncle's death — when, beings continually
at her home, he had found Dora's
sympathy with all his sentiments and in all
his affairs very sweet. Since it had occurred
to him, however, Arthur had encouraged
the idea as a good and happy one.

Is human love,' it has been asked, ' the
growth of human will?' Yes, sometimes
it is, or seems to be so ; and there is little
doubt but that the will to love may nearly
always be successful in creating a certain
amount of affection. During the last ten
days — whilst absent in Scotland (whither
he had gone on some business relative to a
small estate and shooting-box he possessed
there) — Arthur had been thinking constantly
of Dora. He had dwelt upon all
her good qualities : upon her sweetness of
disposition; her honourable, high-minded
principles ; her gentleness and cutis fulness
to her parents, even to the ill-natured
father, of whom she never, like her sister,
made game or spoke disrespectfully.

And last but not least, he had reflected
much over that truth which he believed
himself to have discovered — Le.^ that she
loved Mm.

As far as possible from being conceited,
this reflection had not served merely to
tickle his vanity — as might have been the
case with many young men. Father, it
had awakened his humility and excited his
gratitude. And for love — that best of all
human gifts — all worthy and noble natures
must ever feel grateful. So, during those
days of absence, Arthur had made up his
mind that some day he would ask Dora to
become his wife.

What he felt towards her must, he was
sure, be love. True, it was not a very
vehement or romantic passion ; but for
that reason, he had argued with himself, it
was all the more likely to be real and lasting.
It was founded on common-sense, on
a knowledge of the girl's character, on
admiration of her goodness. He loved her

because she was lovable, not for such
adventitious charms as beauty, accomplishments,
wealth, or fashion.

Even now some such thoughts were
repeating themselves in the young mans
mind, as he stood gazing down upon her,
with her hand in his. And just at this
moment Dora was looking her very best.
The dark silk dress she wore fitted well
her neat little figure, and was relieved
about the neck and wrists by soft lace
ruffles. In the firelight her reddish hair
caught a gleam of gold, and the numerous
freckles about her face seemed to have
faded away. Arthur — in the new access of
tenderness which now possessed him in
her regard — thought she looked absolutely
pretty. Yes, with her for a companion
through life, how happy he would be ! Ashe
came to this conclusion, the young
baronet gave vent to a faint sigh, and
Dora becoming conscious at the same
instant that he had held her hand quite

sufficiently long, withdrew it with a
heightened colour.

Thank you for picking up my rose,'
she remarked, offering to take it.

Sir Arthur, however, made no movement
towards restoring the flower.

Please give it to me?' she pressed.

He shook his head.

No, I want it for myself.'

Do you really ? Then, you can't have
it!' she retorted, laughing.

Can't I ?' he held it out of her reach.
Why, it is off my own tree !'

Dora made no coquettish effort to possess
herself of the rose. Neither did she deny
her knowledge of the fact he alluded to.

Yes,' she admitted, ' it is from the tree
you planted. But that is the last flower,
Arthur — the last rose of summer.'

Humph ! That makes me seem very
selfish, no doubt. But still I want it —
this particular rose. Dora, won't you give
at me ?'

Dora glanced up at him. Had he . : .
Could he have seen her in the garden ?
Did he guess . . . ?

Ah, well,' she stammered, in confused
assent. ' If you are so conceited
that you want adorning, by all means keep

it;

Thank you — dear !' He added the last
word under his breath. Then, deliberately
kissing the flower in his turn, he placed it
in his button-hole.

Dora, trembling and blushing, hastened
to change the subject.

Did you do any shooting when you
were in Scotland, Arthur?' she asked.

A little. Yes ; there is a hamper
of game coming down from the Court this
evening, if Mrs. McNicoll will accept
it.'

How very kind ! Mamma will be
delighted, I'm sure,' Dora responded, a
nervous quiver still in her voice. ' Were
the servants expecting you, Arthur ? We

did not think you were to be back for
several days yet.'

No, I took them by surprise, as well as
you,' replied the young man. but I got
through my business rather sooner than
I expected. And, somehow, Dora, I was
wonderfully anxious to get home.'

Dora, afraid lest he might notice how
she was trembling, here moved away, and
seated herself in an easy-chair.

I don't wonder,' she said, ' that you
should love so beautiful a home as the
Court !'

Do you love it, Dora ?' Arthur had
followed and was standing close by her
chair. He put the question on the impulse
of the moment.

If it was my home . I mean, if all
my family lived there, I should consider ita
perfect paradise.'

And if your family lived there, /, too,
should consider it a paradise. If only a
imit of your family . . . Dora !'

Bending suddenly over her chair, the
young man put out his hand towards hers.
Before, however, their fingers had met, he
started upright, and drew hurriedly backwards.


Choosing this inopportune juncture, Miss
Jessie had just burst into the room, in
that energetic fashion which characterised
most of her movements, and scarcely had
she exhausted her expressions of astonishment
at finding Sir Arthur here, when
she had supposed him to be in Scotland,
before her mamma, also, made her appearance.
A few moments later, Mr. McNicoll
and Victor came in from the mill — where
they had remained this evening considerably
beyond their usual time — and almost
immediately afterwards dinner was announced.


Poor Dora had barely time to recover
some measure oE outward composure before
she found herself seated at table directly
opposite to Sir Arthur Ledsom. And

certainly so abrupt a transition from that
dimly-lighted drawing-room and the sweets
of a love-scene — or what seemed very like
one — to the commonplace atmosphere of a
dining-room, smelling of soup and brilliantly
illuminated by gas, was a little trying.
For some time, Dora sat motionless
and silent, not daring even to raise her
eyes from her plate, Her mind was in a
whirl of agitation. She kept thinking,
yet trying at the same time, not to think,
about that interrupted interview — feeling
that the interruption had both, vexed and
relieved her. ' What had Arthur been
going to say ?' Could it — could it be what
she suspected? Oh, if Jessie had but
stayed away a moment longer ! And yet,
even from that great happiness, on the
verge of which she imagined herself to
have stood, Dora shrank trembling and
half alarmed. That joy was so intense, so
overwhelming, that, for the moment, it
almost oppressed her. She wanted to

know the whole truth — to have a perfect
assurance of her beatitude. Still she
was scarcely sorry to put off, for just a
little while, receiving that assurance. Too
much rapture is akin to pain. The entrancing
prospect which had opened out
before her this evening dazzled her mental
vision. It was as well, perhaps, that fora
brief space that faint shadow of doubt
should hang above and obscure its
brilliancy.

Even as matters stood, the girl felt
too excited, too tremulously happy to
eat. She made a great pretence, however,
of swallowing a few mouthfuls, and
was thankful to find that her want of
appetite escaped observation and comment.

Sir Arthur, for his part, made an excellent
dinner. He had taken but little
luncheon, and was, he declared, hungry
after his travelling. Moreover, whilst Dora
scarcely opened her lips throughout the
meal, he talked a great deal more than was

VOL. I. X

his wont — showing no signs of special excitement.
Nevertheless, the young baronet
was inwardly a good deal moved out of his
ordinary serenity.

Carried away by a sudden impulse, he
had, in truth (as she most naturally conjectured),
been in the very act, when Jessie
had broken in upon their solitude, of begging
Dora to be his wife.

Far, however, from feeling annoyed by
that interruption of his proposal. Sir
Arthur was already conscious of a distinct
sense of thankfulness in that it had taken
place. Of course, that he should renew
the proposal at no very distant date was
a thing that * understood itself ' — that
admitted not of an instant's doubt. The
only question in the matter was a question
of time. But, as he was now telling himself,
to have spoken to-night would have
been a mistake — something worse, almost,
than a mistake. He was glad that he had
been saved from making it. His uncle —

the uncle who had adopted, and stood to
him in the place of a father, had, as yet,
lain in his grave but a few short weeks.
And, whilst to love in the midst of such
bereavement did not seem to the youno^
man wrong or unnatural, to talk of
marriage certainly did. An engagement,
at all events, publicly announced at so
early a moment would, he reflected,
savour, in the world's judgment, of bad
taste, and, in his own, of selfishness and ingratitude.
Tes, it was well that he had
been prevented from saying anything
further this evening. And he must be
more guarded, in future, against acting —
as he feared he was rather too apt to act —
upon sudden impulses. When the right
time arrived — and, of course, it would not
be very long before the right time did
arrive — for putting his question, he felt
satisfied as to what Dora's answer would
be. In the meantime, this state of half-confessed
love, of secret understanding,

x2

would be very sweet — almost sweeter, ha
thought, than an openly acknowledged
betrothal.

"With this undercurrent of reflection
running in his mind, Arthur was, nevertheless,
able both to eat well and to talk well.
During the earlier part of the dinner, however,
the conversation was mostly carried
on between the three gentlemen.

Towards his guest, Mr. McNicoll showed
himself peculiarly gracious this evening.
He had always entertained a secret liking
for Arthur Ledsom, and he had begun of
late to suspect something of his inclinations
towards Dora. And, not being without
parental feeling for any of his children
(though the affection he bore his daughters
was as nothing compared with that he felt
for his son), he was glad that Dora should
have the prospect of making so unexceptionable
a match. Further, although Mr.
McNicoll would have been too proud to
Jive owned such a thing, even under the

persuasion of rack or thumbscrew, be was
decidedly gratified by the notion of having
a baronet for a son-in-law.

By-the-way, Helen,' he observed to his
wife, when the meal was nearly at an end,
^ you have asked Ledsom, I suppose, to
give us the pleasure of his company tomorrow
evening T

'No,' rejoined Mrs. McNicoll ;but I
have only been waiting for a suitable
pause in the conversation in order that I
might do so. We are having a few friends
to dinner tomorrow, Arthur, to meet our
new neighbours from Monkswood. Victor
and the girls wished us to invite them, and
of course we were glad to do so. I hope
you will come also. Had you been at
home, I would have mentioned it sooner.'

Thank you very much. I should be
delighted,' hesitated the young man ; ' but
you know, Mrs. McNicoll, I can scarcely
^o to dinner-parties at present.'

But this is not a party protested Mrs.

McNicoll. ' There will only be the rector
and his wife, and the Courteney, and Dr.
and Mrs. Brownlow— all your own intimate
friends. You can hardly call that a
party.'

'Well, of course, if you consider it
quite the thing,' answered Sir Arthur,
I will come with the greatest of pleasure.
I am rather curious too, I must
confess, to see these new neighbours. I
have not seen any of the family yet, you
know.'

'And they also seem curious to see.you,'
remarked Victor, ' at least, the son, Mr,
Percival Bretherton, does. I promised,
you remember, to take you to call there ;
and he reminded me of the promise several
times before you left for Scotland.
At present, however, he is from homo
himself.'

*But, do you know, Victor, he may
possibly be back tomorrow,' put in Jessie.
Dora and 1 met Miss Bretherton this

afternoon when we were taking a walk,
and she told us that she had had a letter
from her brother, and that he had almost
decided upon returning tomorrow.'

'What, alone?' inquired Victor, eagerly
* without Charlie ?'

Oh, no ; Charlie is to come with
him, I suppose. Did you know, Arthur,
that young Mr. Bretherton was staying
with Charlie Nunnerley in London?
You heard how they got to know each
other r

Yes, Victor told me about it,' said
Arthur. ' Have you seen much of the
family yet, Miss. McNicoll ?'

Not personally. No, I have only called
once myself on Miss Bretherton and her
father. And, unfortunately, I was out
when they returned the call. But the girls
have been several times to Monkswood
whilst you were away.'

And like children with a new
plaything,' remarked Mr. McNicoll, sneeringly,

' they are fall of enthusiastic admiration
of this marvellous American
young woman — charmed out of their five
senses !'

Indeed, I wonder who could help being
charmed with her said Dora. ' You will
be charmed yourself, father, when you meet
her to-morrow

I shan't give myself much opportunity
of being charmed !' asserted her father.
You are not to expect me, remember, to
put myself out of the way to entertain your
company

Jessie looked for a moment as though
she would like to make a suitable retort to
this observation, but the words that were
trembling on her lips dared not find
utterance.

*But is Miss Bretherton really as
beautiful as Victor represents ? Do you
consider her pretty, Dora?' questioned her
lover.

She is more lovely than aDjone can
represent,' answered Dora, with all the
enthusiasm of which her father accused
her ; * and so deliciously fresh and frank
in her manner. Jessie and I have grown
quite good friends with her already. I
like her father, too — old Mr. Bretherton —
very much.'

Though he is scarcely the style of person
we have been accustomed to associate
with,' broke in Jessie. ' His diction will
amuse you, Arthur, and his mode of
shaking hands, and his elegant habit
of rubbing his knees — in fact, the whole
man.'

'If Arthur is not able, Jessie, to look
below such mere outside defects, and to
recognise Mr. Bretherton as one of Nature's
true noblemen,' observed Victor, a little
grandiloquently, 'he is not what I take him
for.'

Dear me !' laughed his friend ; ' I must

be careful not to disappoint your opinion
as to my penetration. Are you goings, Mrs.

McNicoii r

The ladies had risen ; and Sir Arthur
(who drank little or no wine), excusing
himself to his host, left the table along
with them. Victor also followed to the
drawing-room directly afterwards, whilst
Mr. McNicoll, in accordance with his usual
custom, retired to pass a solitary evening
in his library.

A little music and a good deal of conversation
filled up the remainder of Sir
Arthur's stay. No further opportunity
presented itself, or was sought by him, for
private intercourse with Dora. When,
however, he pressed her hand in farewell,
and looked with tender meaning into her
eyes, he felt satisfied that she must understand
him. And Dora did understand him
so far, at least, as to believe that he
meant to assure her of his affection.

Thrilled anew witch rapture by bis glance,
she escaped, directly he was gone, to her
own room, in order that she might think
over her happiness.

How wonderful it seemed that he should
love her ! He who, she told herself, had
everything to give — position, wealth, title,
good looks — everything ; whilst she had
nothing to offer in exchange — nothing but
love ! Of that, however, she could give
him plenty ; and, after all, what better was
there to give? In her secret heart, Dora
did not believe herself unworthy of a goodman's
love. What honest, true-hearted
girl does ? Still, that lie should love her,
should belong to her, should choose her
for his wife — he, the noblest, the best, the
handsomest young man in the whole world
yes, it was wonderful ! And, oh ! how
happy she felt ! Too happy, almost, she
thought. Could she feel happier, even,
when he had finished what he had been

about to say ? And how soon would he
finish it ? To-morrow ?

Yes, most likely, Dora thought, it would
be tomorrow !

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

LONDON: PRINTED BY Duncan Macdonald, BLENHEIM House.

ilA diamonFTn

ALICE 0' HANLON

Mm^'^

Bi iHB»i»ni i» fr.cyw s>^~.

I ,;;■■

University of Illinois Library

VOL. II.

BY

ALICE O'HAXLON

THE unforeseen."

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. IL

LONDON:
HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,

13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.
1886.

AH rights reserved.

in 2009 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/diamondinrough02ohan

A Diamond K THE ROUGH.

CHAPTER I,

MRS. macnicoll's DINNER-party.

When Dora McNicoll arose ou the following
morning she was feeling a good deal
surer than she had done the night before
as to what it was that Sir Arthur had
been on the point of saying to her. All
shadow of doubt, in fact, had now fled.

The remarks v/herebj he had prefaced
that interrupted question had, she reflected,
pointed unequivocally to his meaning,
whilst the manner in which he had bent
over her with that whispered word — Ah !
how the bare remembrance of it set her
happy heart fluttering again !

VOL. II. B

Yes, of course he had meant to propose
to her. Wonderful as it seemed, it was
true ! And, having intended to propose
to her yesterday, he would certainly not
let to-day pass without carrying out his
intention.

Before this evening, then, she might
be engaged — engaged to him whom she
loved with all her heart and soul !

Dora put on her prettiest morning-dress,
and went downstairs v/ith bright eyes,
and cheeks flushed with happiness. So
radiant and well did she look, indeed, that
Jessie was quite struck by her appearance ;
and declaring, with a great pretence of
jealousy, that she was growing 'positively
pretty,' she accused her of having rouged.
Dora laughed. She possessed, she knew,
a better specific for beauty than any rouge in
the world could supply. But it would be
time enough to tell her sister the secret when
all was settled. After breakfast, and the
attention for an hour or so to some housekeeping

matters relative to the evening's
entertainment, Dora went into the drawn
e-room, and loitered about there, rearranging
flowers and ornaments, and
starting and flushing with every ring
of the door-bell. The morning passed,
however, and Arthur had not made his
appearance. Then the afternoon followed
more slowly, and still he did not come.
Dora D-rew somewhat feverish with the
long disappointment of her expectation.

And now she could see him only in the
presence of others — for the first instalment
of their company had arrived, in the shape
of the Rector of Upton Church, with his
wife and daughter, the latter a lively girl
of sixteen.

Nothing now could happen this evening.
Not that it mattered, of course. There
had been no need for such violent haste as
she had foolishly looked for. Still, when
Arthur did at length present himself —
almost the last of the guests, and looking

very handsome in his evening dress —
Dora's greeting of him was somewhat shyer
than usual, and there was just a shade of
unconscious reproach in her glance.

But of this the young baronet noticed
nothing. Evidently, he was not very keenly
alive to slight or subtle changes in Dora's
mood or expression. And yet he never
doubted — inexperienced youth — never fora
moment doubted of his love for the
girl!

As may be supposed, he, too, had reviewed
again this morning the occurrence of
last night, but only to come more firmly to
the conclusion that he had been tempted
to act with unbecoming haste. A love
declaration so soon after his uncle's death
would, as he had already decided, have
been (to say the least of it) in bad form.
In this opinion Dora, of course, would
agree with him.

But perhaps she had not guessed what
he had been about to say. On this point

Arthur could not feel at all sure. He did,
however, feel sure, on the other hand, that
if she had guessed it, she would, like himself,
regard the declaration as untimely, and
would now understand that it was to be
put off until a more suitable season.
Having arrived at this conviction, he had
dismissed the matter from his mind ; and
an event which had occurred in the course
of the day had given a new turn to his
thoughts, and had put him into very good
spirits. The event was this :

Glancing to have ridden into High Rad-son,
he had there met a lady — by name
Mrs. Elder — a cousin of Lady Ledsom's
whom he knew to be now living with her
as companion. Seizing the opportunity,
Arthur had implored this lady to use her
influence towards effecting a reconciliation
between his aunt and himself, and he had
further begged her to urge upon Lady
Ledsom's acceptance the offer he had
-already often and eagerly pressed of so

adding to her income that she might not
materially feel the alteration in her position.
In reply, Mrs. Elder had warmly protested
that she would indeed do her best to make
her cousin feel more kindly towards one
who so well deserved her good opinion.

At the same time, she had gone on to
assure him that there was no occasion for
any distress upon his aunt's account, nor
for the exercise of such an act of unselfish
magnanimity as he proposed. Lady Ledsom,
she had declared, appeared to be
quite contented with her present home
(situated some miles on the other side of
High Radston), and Mrs. Elder had never
heard her express regret at having had to
quit Feldhurst Court. Also, as an income
for one lady alone, eight hundred pounds a
year, she had opined, was ample, and, sofar
as she could judge, Lady Ledsom considered
it such. That the latter retained
still her bitterness of feeling against her
nephew, Mrs. Elder had not been able to

deny. That bitterness, however, she had
averred, did not seem to have any reference
to her own reverse of state, but to the
old unreasonable grievance : Arthur's having
supplanted her dead son. Altogether,
therefore, the interview had served to relieve
the young fellow's hyper-sensitive
regret at having been the means of unwillingly
ejecting his relative from her old
home. If she really were so comfortable
and contented as her companion represented,
then he might, with a peaceful conscience,
enjoy the wealth and position
which had come to him by rightful inheritance.


He felt in a particularly happy mood
this evening, and his face showed it as he
passed round the drawing-room, shaking
hands with Mr. McNicoll's guests.

Our friends the Brethertons have not
yet arrived, I see ?' he observed, on completing
the circuit, addressing himself to
Mr. Hardcastle, the rector. * Do they

mean, I wonder, to set us an example of
fashionable punctuality ?'

The rector consulted his watch, smiling.

They are not many minutes behind time
yet he returned. ' And to be fashionable
is about the last thing poor Mr. Bretherton
would aspire to, I suspect.'

Oh, Sh" Arthur, Jessie says that you
.have not seen them yet !' observed Miss
Eva Hardcastle, coming up to where they
were standing, and passing her hand
through her father's arm. 'You had better
prepare for being enchanted.'

With whom ? Miss Bretherton ! Are
you, too, on the list, then, of this young
lady's admirers, Miss Eva ?'

*1 should rather think I am !' returned the
girl. ' Why, I don't believe I took my eyes
away from her face for an instant last Sunday
in church.'

How attentive you must have been to
mj sermon, then, my dear!' put in her
father, drily.

Now, don't be angry, you prosy old
darling !' (The rector was not prosy, but
his daughter was an only and much indulged
child.) ' But really I did find hera
orcod deal more interesting than the
sermon. You have never seen anyone half
so beautiful in all your life, Sir Arthur !'
(This young lady was somewhat given to
italics in her speech.)

^ Really ? Well, I don't feel prepared to
deny the statement,' rejoined the young
man. ' For it is quite true that I never
have seen anyone whom I should call
absolutely beautiful. I doubt, indeed, if
such a thing as perfect beauty exists, and
Tm sure I shouldn't care for it if it did. A
Grecian goddess, with chiselled features, is
all very well as a statue, but for '

Ob, but she, Miss Bretherton is nota
bit like that !' interposed Eva. ' The
description does not suit her in the
least I'

'Xo? Still— Shall I tell you a secret,

Miss Eva? I quite expect to be disappointed
in this wonderful beauty about
Avhom you all rave so. A good and sweet
face is more to my taste than a merely
pretty one ; and, without some kind of imperfection,
I question if any face can be
truly loveable.'

'Then hers must possess some imperfection
— for / fell in love with it at first
sight, and so will you, whatever you say !'
she added, with a nod of conviction. 'But
where can the imperfection lie ? Not in
her eyes, certainly. Papa, help me — does
her nose turn up ?'

Hush, my dear : here they are ! Leave
Sir Arthur to find out the imperfections for
himself.'

Mr. and Miss Bretherton.' The names
had just been announced by a footman in
livery.

With some curiosity, but no very great
interest, Sir Arthur turned towards the
door. He was sensible of feeling a distinct

prejudice against Miss Idalia Bretherton.
Such a result is not unfrequently brought
about by extravagant laudation of a person
before introduction.

To know beforehand that one is expected
to like or to admire an individual, is
enough sometimes to create a sort of unreasoning
repugnance in the mind, arising,
no doubt, out of the simple contradictoriness
of human nature.

Not, however, that Arthur Ledsom's
nature was really contradictory. On the
contrary, a more healthy, sunny disposition,
one more free from sourness or
cynicism was never possessed by any young
fellow.

Stilly somehow, he rather wanted to run
counter to the general opinion in regard to
Miss Bretherton's appearance. He was
determined not to find her beautiful,
if he could help it. He was convinced
that her attractiveness had been greatly
exaggerated.

In this spirit he turned upon her his
critical regard.

Idalia had now advanced into the room,
and, standing directly opposite to him, was
shaking hands with Mrs. McNicoll.

She wore a dress of pale, cream-coloured
silk, trimmed with a profusion of soft,
costly lace. It was a dress that had been
turned out of Mr. Worth's artistic establishment,
and, whilst richer and more adorned
than the style she usually affected, it suited
her complexion and fitted her gracefully-poised
figure to perfection. In order to

-4,

correct any want of simplicity in the dress,
Idalia wore no jewelry whatsoever —
nothing in the shape of ornament save a
dark crimson rose fastened at her throat.
She looked superb and yet girlish.

Sir Arthur drew back a little, but continued
to gaze. ' No,' — he was obliged to
own to himself — 'No, there had been no
exaggeration about the girl's beauty !'
There had not even been justice done to it.

What Eva Hardcastle bad said was true.
He bad never in bis life seen anyone half
so beautiful — never dreamt of anyone half
so beautiful !

On this point be eras conquered. His
incredulous pre-judgment, like a ' snowflake
on the river bad vanished in the
swift tide of vision and conviction.
Nevertheless, be was not goiuo- to yield in
other respects. He was not going to allow
that because she was beautiful she must
be attractive. Clinging with curious
obstinacy to bis prejudice, be averted ibis
eyes from her face and turned them upon
Mr. Bretberton. Against Mr. Bretherton
be bad conceived no prejudice. But — was
it possible ? Could this homely rustic bethe
father of that self-possessed, lady-like
girl ? Like everyone else. Sir Arthur felt,
at first sight, puzzled and amazed by the
contrast they presented. But for ibis
wealth, and the prestige afforded by ibis
possession of such a daughter, this man,

Arthur thought, looked fitter to be a
kitchen than a drawing-room guest. And
certainly, during the first moments after
his entrance, poor Abner, feeling shy
and ill-appease, did look somewhat out of
place.

When, however, Victor McNicoll, after
pressing forward with a warm and respectful
welcome, brought him round to introduce
to such of the company as he was not
already acquainted with, Mr. Bretherton's
manner changed. Losing self-consciousness,
as he was always so ready to do,
he at once lost also the shyness and
awkwardness which were far from being
his natural characteristics, and a genial
smile of interest and kindliness lighted up
his plain countenance.

Even before it came to his turn to shake
hands, Arthur Ledsom had decided, with
intuitive quickness of judgment, that
despite his red hands, his ill-fitting clothes,
and his enormous diamond pin, Mr. brothers

was not vulgar. And, in truth, Arthur
Tvas right. Mr. Bretherton possessed the
very nature and essence of good manners,
and was — once for all, we assert it — an
infinitely finer gentleman than the more
cultured son who felt so ashamed of him.
Gentle and conciliating in demeanour,
frank and affectionate in feeling, incapable
of exalting himself above another, or oE
indulofino^ the slightest maliciousness in
speech, his politeness was the genuine
article.

Never to blend our pleasure or our pride
With sorrow to the meanest thing that lives,'

is Wordsworth's notion of gentlemanly
conduct. Abner Bretherton would as
soon have thought of indulging in a sneer
even an ignorant man can sneer — or of
being witty at the expense of others, or of
seeking undue distinction or attention for
himself, as of perpetrating any other mean
or selfish action. His courtesy was that*

perfection of courtesy which springs from
a good and generous heart.

'Well, Mr. Bretherton/ inquired the
rector, accepting, next after Arthur, a
pump-handle salute, 'I hope you are getting
to like England ?'

Yes, oh yes, it's a fine country, sir, an
I'm a-studdyin' to like it,' was the reply.
Thar ain't no doubt it's a fine country.'

And the people ?' pursued Mr. Hardcastle,
wishful to draw Abner out, and
enjoying a dialect so new to him. ' I hope
you like the people ?'

Well, yes, to be sure I do !' protested
Mr. Bretherton. ' The folks around yere
they're friendly, an' they're neighbourly.
I hadn't looked fer English folks to be so
neighbourly. I'm afeard I hadn't bin coin'
them justice the a-way.'

I'm glad we are disappointing you
agreeably,' said the rector, 'but all the same,
I daresay you prefer America to England,
don't you ?'

'Well, the's only naturel. The thar,
it's only naturel an' right, ain't it, now ?' he
appealed, apologetically. * We'd all daughter
hold most by the country where we was
raised, hadn't we ?'

Certainly, certainly,' responded his
interlocutor.

An* a man, particular when he's gittin''
into years ' — he glanced round here to see
whether Idalia were near — ' he sorter
hankers after old faces, mister, an' old
ways, even though he ain't got nothing' again
them ez is new. You'll understand, mebbe,
what I mean ?'

Of course, of course !' said the clergyman.


I'm afraid, Mr. Bretherton,' put in Sir
Arthur, ' that you cannot include me in
your kind praise for sociality ; and, since
we are near enough neighbours to see each
other s houses from our respective windows,
I think I ought to apologize for not having
called upon you before this. Family

VOL. II. c

trouble, however, and an absence from home
must plead my excuse.'

'Now, thar ain't no need fer excuses.
Thar ain't a bit of need fer them,' asserted
Abner, * but we shall be mighty pleased,
sir, and proud to see you, whenever you do
feel in the notion of dropping in. My son
Peley — Percival, I'd daughter said — he'd be
quite sot up to lev you fer a comrade.
You see ' — he went on, looking the young
man over with frank admiration, in which
there was not a particle of nobis — ' You
see, you're polished, an' you've got bong
tong, an' bong tong it's what Percival
likes.'

Sir Arthur bowed, with perhaps a suspicion
of stiffness.

Thank you,' he said. ' I shall do myself
the pleasure of calling at an early
opportunity.*

Mr. Bretherton appeared to feel the lack
of perfect cordiality in this response.
There was a moment of reflective silence.

Then he said, with that simple humility
in which there was always a touch of
pathos,

He ain't like me, Percival ain't. You
mustn't sedge him by me. He's sorter
finer, an' — an' he's hed a powerful good
education. We'd git on well together, I
think.*

Thank you ; I've no doubt we should,'
Arthur answered, more warmly. ' But
your son is not at home at present, I
hear ?'

Well, no, he ain't — not to say at present,
but he's on the way thar. He allows to
git home by nine o'clock this evening' — him
and young Nunnerley. An' Idalia, she
lev left word for them to come straight on
yere. The is, ef your mother don't object
to it, Mr. Victor ?' he added, turning to
that gentleman. 'I'd like, ef you please,
to name it to her? Thar ain't no one
speaking to her, jest now. I'll jest go
right off an' name it now.' And with a



valedictory nod and smile, he left his companions
and crossed the room towards Mrs.
McNicoll.

CHAPTER IL

LATE AllRIYALS.

On Mr. Brother ton's departure, Sir Arthur
fell back to Miss McNicoll's side.

Let roe take you in to dinner, Dora ?' be
whispered.

Dora smiled and blushed.

Thank you, I am afraid not she answered.
'Mother has arranged that you are to
take in Miss Bretherton.'

'Miss Bretherton? I?' ejaculated the
young man. ' That's too bad !'

Arthur ! How very impolite !' Dora
shook her head reprovingly ; but there was
no great severity in her aspect.

I beg your pardon. Yes, it was rather

rude,' he acknowledged. ' But I am so disappointed
not to have you. And, somehow,
Dora, I don't care much for strangers.
Really, I don't know what I can talk to her
about.'

'Nonsense, Arthur! You' know you
are a capital talker. But, if you were not,
you need not have troubled yourself in
this case. Miss Bretherton will not let
you be short of a subject. She can find
plenty to talk about.'

And, true enough, Idalia did find plenty
to talk about. With an utter absence of
affectation, she set herself at once to entertain
and be entertained by the companion
allotted to her. She would have done the
same whoever that companion had been,
for she was in excellent spirits, and meant
to enjoy the evening. It did not take
much at any time to make Idalia enjoy
herself. ' Like her father, she was easily
amused and always ready to be pleased
with those about her. Possibly, however,

the facts that her neighbour at table
was young and good-looking, and that
he possessed a title, may have caused
Idalia to regard him with rather more
interest than might otherwise have been
the case. At any rate, whenever she addressed
him, she did look him straight in
the face with a quite undisguised interest
and curiosity ; but with an expression,
Arthur thought, more like the questioning
gaze of a child than a woman. And
i\'hat splendid eye? she had. How utterly
unconscious, too, she seemed of their
behoof so. How evident it was that
she was using them — not to make play
for his benefit — but for the legitimate
purpose for which eyes are intended, viz.,
as channels whereby to gather impressions
for their owners, not merely as those by
which, to impress self upon others.

Despite himself, those large, innocent-looking,
dark-fringed eyes began presently
to exercise a curious fascination over

Sir Arthur Ledsom's blue ones. He felt
drawn to look at them again and again.
He wanted to make quite sure of their
colour. Were they dark brown, or dai'k
blue ? He did not think he had ever seen
eyes of just that shade before. His remarks,
which at first had sounded rather
flat and forced, grew more and more animated,
because each time he made a remark
he was enabled to prosecute a study which
became more seductive the longer it was
pursued.

Still, his bias in her disfavour continued
to some extent to affect him, and it was
a good while before Sir Arthur would allow
to himself that he was finding any real
pleasure in this young lady's society. He
was interested, certainly, in her personal
appearance, but that was all ; and, of
course, he would much rather have been
beside the girl he loved. Before the
dinner was half over, however, Arthur
had forgotten all about his regret at the

loss of Dora's companionship. He bad
almost forgotten, in fact, that there was
anyone at the table but Idalia and himself,
so engrossed had he now become in a conversation
that they were holdings together.
The subject of this conversation was Italy,
or rather Rome, where, by a comparison of
dates, it had turned out that the two
young people had been staying in the same
month of this year. The discovery of
that circumstance served quite to break up
the ice of Sir Arthur's English reserve.
With a vivacity equal to her own, he began
to compare notes as to their experiences
in that city of cities. Then, to his admiring
surprise, he found that Miss Brethren
vas unusually well up in historical information,
and, also, that she showed a loving
and intelligent appreciation of art. Further
than this, she expressed such delightfully
unconventional views upon men and
things, that the young fellow was quite
transported.

Never, indeed had he either seen or heard
anyone like her. Like mist before the
rising sun, the last vestige of his absurd
prejudice melted away. He felt really
sorry when the dinner was over, and their
tete-astute brought to an end. His eyes
followed Idalia's retreating figure as she
left the room in company with the other
ladies, and it was not until the door
had closed after them that he became aware
that he had not even seen Dora McNicoll
pass out.

Astonished, and a little self-condemnatory
as he made this reflection, his first
action on re-entering the drawing-room
was to seek Dora out and seat himself bj
her side. But, even whilst talking to her,
his gaze kept wandering continually to
that quarter of the room where his new
acquaintance was seated between her father
and Victor McNicoll. Poor Victor —
although he had seen Idalia several times
since that afternoon of his first call at

Monkswood, he bad as yefc been content
to worship at a distance. In the deep
humility of his passion, he had never
ventured on anything like overt attention ;
he had even been afraid to let his eyes rest
upon her too often, lest they might make
untimely betrayal of his secret. This
evening, during dinner, he had been
devoting himself very specially to Mr. Brethren's
entertainment, and though it had
been without a thought of courting Idalia
through her father, he could not have
chosen a more effectual way of pleasing
her. Idalia had noticed his deferential
courtesy (for, however occupied herself, she
never lost sight of her father), and had
seen that it had put Mr. Bretherton entirely
at his ease. Grateful for what she looked
upon as a due appreciation of this dear father's
merits, she was now beaming upon
the young man with a frank approbation,
which raised him pro temp to the seventh
heaven of delight.

Tea was brought in by-and-by, and then
music was asked foro

The first to comply with this demand
was Miss Hester Courteney. With much
brilliancy, but not with much feeling, she
executed a difficult classical piece. Victor,
who had very reluctantly left his corner
for the purpose, turned over her pages.
Mr. Courteney, the while — watching his
junior partner from a chair close by the
piano — sought to discover something that
might justify hope in the success of his
favourite scheme, i.e.j the marriage of
these two. But the result of his observations
only made him feel angry and disappointed,
and, when his daughter had
finished playing, he marched off to the
other end of the room in ill-concealed
dudgeon.

Meanwhile, in reply to an inquiry from
her hostess. Miss Atherton had confessed
that, although a very poor instrumentality,
she sang a little ; and, without need-inch

any urging, she now assumed Hester's
place at the piano. Naturally curious as
to how she would acquit herself, the company
paused to listen, and, in another
minute, the general air of breathless
attention proved that this was not, like
the previous performance, an infliction.

Idalia had chosen a simple little song,
and the fact that she accompanied herself
without notes made it seem more simple
still. But her voice suited her, just as
Charlie Nunnerley thought her name
did. It was low, yet clear as a bell, not
very powerful but exquisitely sweet, and
capable of the most delicate and thrilling
modulation.

Had anything further been needed to
complete poor Victor's captivation, it would
have been supplied by the witchery of
those sweet tones issuing from the lips he
loved. Until the song was finished, he
stood behind Idalia's chair spell-bound.
Some one else, too, had felt the potency of

those mellow strains. Music lias been
termed by our immortal bard, ' the food of
love,' and its influence was one to which
Sir Arthur Ledsom, at any rate, was by no
means insensible. His affection for Dora
McNicoll had been fed and stimulated
more than he suspected, by the fact that
she, too, sang very sweetly. Her voice,
however, had neither the fulness nor the
timbre of Idalia's, and when, at his request,
she now gave the company his favourite
song, Arthur thought she had never sung
with so little expression, nor been in such
poor voice. He was scarcely sorry when
an interruption occurred which caused
Dora to cut the song short by a couple of
verses.

The interruption in question was occasioned
by the entrance of Mr. Percival
Bretherton and Mr. Charles Nunnerley.
Having dined at Monkswood Hall upon
their arrival from London, the two young
men, in obedience to the instructions there

left for them, bad at once dressed and
come on here. They had not expected,
however, Charlie declared, to meet so
numerous a party, and there is little doubt
that the young artist would have been
better pleased by the absence of one or two
amonor the guests.

The bustle attending their advent have



ing somewhat subsided, Percival Brethren,
with a cup of tea in his hand (brought
in fresh for the late comers), found himself
seated beside Miss Courteney on a
kind of low settee, or divan. As before
stated, this young gentleman's taste in
beauty lay in the direction of fairness.
With her light, wavy ' fringe her grey
eyes, and colourless complexion, Miss
Hester was very fair, and Percival considered
her decidedly good-looking. Certainly,
he knew of some one else who was a
good deal better-looking, but that was
another affair. And here, at all events
just now, was Miss Hester, and young

Bretlierton felfc disposed to make himself
agreeable to her.

With this view he began to talk to her
about his late visit to London. He had
enjoyed himself immensely. He liked
London, he protested, better than any
capital in Europe — not excepting even
Paris — and he considered England, upon
the whole, the finest country in the world.

Hester listened with a very irresponsive
air. Evidently, her patriotism was not
sufficiently strong to make this panegyric
upon her native land particularly agreeable.
With somewhat abated enthusiasm,
Peleus went on to add that he was contemplating
taking rooms somewhere in the
West End, in order that he might run upto
town for a few days whenever he felt
disposed.

You are thinking, perhaps, of studying
for some profession ?' observed Hester.

Oh, no !' he rejoined. * I don't need
any profession, you see. Why should a

fellow bother himself about a profession,
when there is no occasion for it? If I
want work, I can find plenty, j^ou know, in
looking after our estates here and in — in
America ?'

Yes, no doubt.' The answer was given
with the supreme indifference.

If I had wanted to have done anything,'
resumed the young man, ^ I'd rather have
liked to have gone in for art. Those artist
fellows in London lead a jolly kind of life !'

Do they ?'

Nunnerley introduced me at his club —
a professional club — composed mostly of
young artists, and I don't think I ever meta
more lively set. Rather in the ,
though, for some of them,
I suspect, were, figuratively speaking, a
little out at elbows. It isn't always a paying
business, you know. However, there
are compensations, and the pretty models
they get to sit for them make the work
interesting.'

VOL. II. D

Does Mr. Nunnerley have pretty models
to sit for him ?'

Well, I should p^uess he does, when he
can secure them. At any rate, he is going
to have a pretty enough subject now, if I
may be allowed to say so. He is going to
take my sister's portrait, whilst he is down
here.'

Indeed ?' A faint flush suffused
Hester's pale face, but it was gone in a
moment. ^ If the painting does Miss
Bretherton justice, it will unquestionably
prove a beautiful one,' she remarked,
coldly.

Peleus looked gratified.

Why, yes,' he rejoined, casting an admiring
glance in Idalia's direction. ' Her
beauty is not quite my style; but,
though I'm her brother, I must say, I
don't think there can be two opinions about
it?'

Hester bowed.

When does Mr. Nunnerley propose to

commence his work?' she asked, closing
ber lips very tightly after she had put the
question.

To her it seemed that Charlie was
already commencing his work — so far, at
least, as a preliminary study of his subject
was concerned.

After standing about for some time in
her neighbourhood, evidently on the watch
for it, he had now seized an opportunity
for drawing in a chair close to Idalia's side.
And Idalia had aided the movement. She
had made room for him with quite a beaming
smile of welcome, and they were now
enjoying what seemed to be a very pleasant
and animated dialogue. Presently, however,
Charlie — who had kept throwing
covert glances across the room at Hester
Courteney, and who had, each time, met
that young lady's eyes fixed upon him with
a cold and haughty stare — began to grow
visibly uneasy and confused. E-ising then,
he sauntered over towards where she and

d2

Peleus Bretberton were seated. But lie
did not attempt to join in their conversation
— if it could be called conversation,
when all the talking, with the
exception of an occasional monosyllable,
was on one side. By-and-by, growing
weary of his fruitless attempts to interest
her, and piqued into ill-temper by her
obvious indifference to his own attractions
(which Peleus was not accustomed to find
thus undervalued), the young man rose
and left her. In another moment, Charlie
had taken bis vacated place, and,
opening a portfolio in bis hand, was
asking,

Have you seen these engravings, Miss
Courteney ?'

Hester made no reply, except by repeating
the last two words,

Miss Courteney ?'

Hester, I mean,' said Charlie, lowering
bis voice.

Will you kindly, if you are able todo

SO, give me some sort of an explanation
?' Hester spoke in the same subdued
key as be had used, and, taking an engraving
from his hand, professed to be
studying it.

Explanation ?' he repeated. * What
about ?'

Do you need to ask ? You have not
written to me since you returned from
Switzerland, When you were there, I received
a short, cold note — oh, so different
from all your other letters ! What does it
mean, Charlie ?'

Why should it mean anything T
questioned the young man, with a disingenuous
air. ' What is this fancy you have
got into your head, Hetty ?'

Is it fancy ?'

The way in which you were looking at
me a little Awhile ago made me feel quite
uncomfortable, I assure you.'

Did it ? I don't wonder !'

Charlie turned over several engravings

in a nervous fashion before speaking again.
Then he said,

We can't talk here, Hester, can we ? I
swill write.'

^ To the post-office, as usual?'

Yes.'

And when are we to meet ?'

Very soon ? Shall I fix the time and
place when I write ?'

Hester murmured an affirmative.

'Charlie,' she demanded, in an altered
tone, and with a sudden softening of her
whole features, 'Is all right between us?'

We will make all right when we meet,'
he answered.

CHAPTER Il

THE GOBLIN ROCKS.

1 HOPE, Peley, that it isn't anything you
have said to him that has decided father to
stop at home?'

Idalia, who still ventured sometimes to
use his baptismal name, scrutinised her
brother's face with some suspicion as she
put this inquiry.

It was about a week after that little
dinner-party at Mrs. McNicoU's, and the
two young Brethertons were standing together
beneath the porch of Monkswood
Hall. On the gravel drive in front of
them an open carriage was drawn up.

Behind the carriage stood a groom holding
a saddle-horse.

No, certainly. I didn't ask him to
stay at home,' answered Peleus (the
young man was nob always particular
about veracity) ; ' but, at the same time, I
think it much better that he should do so.
Indeed, I don't know why he ever thought
of going at all. With the exception of Mrs.
Perriam, who goes, of course, as hostess,
there will, I expect, be none but young
people at the picnic'

But that's just what father loves, you
know, to be amongst young people,' persisted
Idalia. 'And, when I asked Miss
Courteney if we might bring him along,
she said at once, why, yes, of course we
might. He had quite agreed to go, too.
So I don't understand his changing his
mind, and I'm really vexed about it.'

Tm not, though !' burst forth Peleus.
And the exclamation sounded so very fervent
that he hastened to add, ' He will be

happier at home, I'm sure. He has a
letter to write to Jabez Dean about some
business matters ; and I've no doubt he'll
spend a good part of the day at the Fold
Farm.'

'Well, yes; he told me he should said
Idalia, reflectively. ' Perhaps he doesn't
really care to go.'

Not he, indeed ! Any way, ray dear,
it's quite time we were off,' declared her
brother, glancing at his watch. ' It is
nearly ten. Where can Nunnerley be ?
I'll run up to his room and bring him
down. You get in, Ida.'

In obedience to this request, Idalia
approached the carriage. As she was in the
act, however, of mounting the steps, a recollection
struck her of having seen Charlie
Nunnerley turn, a short time ago, into the
studio. By this name the family had began
to designate a small sitting-room
chosen by the young artist to paint in, on
account of its suitable liofht.

Springing again to the ground, Idalia
ran round a corner of the house, and peeped
in at the low window of this room.
Yes ; there he was standing before the
easel on which rested her unfinished portrait
; very unfinished indeed, as yet, for
although Charlie, during the past week,
had spent many hours of each day over it,
the work was progressing but slowly.

With the intention of tapping upon
the pane, Idalia raised her hand ; but before
she had touched it something occurred
which caused her to drop the hand
again as if she had been shot, and to
draw hurriedly away from the window.
Suddenly, whilst she had been looking at
him, Nunnerley (whose back had been
partly turned towards her) had stooped,
and she had seen him imprint a succession
of passionate kisses on the cold and insensible
canvas before him.

Neither cold nor insensible, however,,
looked now the face whose representation

lead received that ardent caress. As she
retreated swiftly from the window, Idalia's
cheeks glowed with as hot a blush as
though those kisses had actually touched
them. She felt shocked, too, and, in these
first moments, indignant ; almost as indignant
as though the freedom had really
been offered her in person. And yet,
beneath her annoyance, there was a dawning
sense of gratification, and Idalia knew
that she was not altogether angry. That
Charlie admired her, she was already
aware, for his conduct had plainly confessed
the fact. But she had not suspected
him of such a passion as this. That wild,
impulsive action had struck her like a
revelation. It had startled and frightened
her. She could not exactly tell yet how
else it had affected her. In the depths of
her heart she was conscious of something
very like a secret pleasure, but for the
present this pleasure was outweighed by
surprise and irritation.

Standing still for a moment, Idalia
strove to regain her composure. Then,
hurrying back to the carriage, she took
her seat therein, and very shortly afterwards
Nunnerley and Percival issued from
the house, accompanied by Mr. Brethren.
A few seconds later they were
driven off, Charlie seated opposite to her in
the carriage, while Percival followed upon
horseback.

As might be gathered from the preceding
conversation, the three young people
were upon their way to join a picnic-party,
or rather it might, perhaps, be more correct
to say a pleasure-party, seeing that the
feeding was not to be done out of doors.
The givers of the entertainment (however
it should be styled) were Mrs. Perriam and
Miss Courteney.

Invitations to it had been issued by
these ladies on the day following Mrs.
McNicoll's dinner. In accordance with
the programme arranged, the guests were

to meet by ten o'clock at Mr. Courteney's
house. Thence they were to drive, some
ten or twelve miles, through charming
scenery, to a place called ' Shelving Cove
tenderest point on the sea-board. Thereafter
luncheon at an hotel— the spot was
a very retired one, but in a village nearby
there existed one respectable inn — the
party was to visit by boat a tiny island, or
collection of curiously-shaped reefs, called
the ' Goblin Rocks.'

As more than one vessel had lately been
wrecked upon them, it was proposed shortly
to commence the erection of a lighthouse
on these rocks. But at present
they stood out to sea dangerously unprotected
by any beacon of warning. After
the return drive, the entire party was to
dine at Elfinbank, Mr. Courteney's house,
and the evening was to conclude with a
carpet-dance.

It was the last week — in fact, almost
the last day of September. But the

weather, for some little time past, had
been uncommonly warm and bright, and
this day promised to be as fine as its
predecessors. A slight mist, it is true,
hung at present over the bare stubble-fields
and autumnal-tinted woods ; but each
moment the yellow sun was piercing it
with clearer rays, and it was easy to see
that it was that kind of mist which augurs
a glorious day. At this early hour, however,
the air felt fresh, and even a little
chilly. Idalia, as the carriage rolled on
towards Mr. Courteney's house, dre\\^
round her shoulders a dainty cream-coloured
shawl, which she had brought
with her as a wrap. With eager expresses
Charlie bent forward to assist her,
but his help was declined with dignified
coldness, and he collapsed into his corner
looking distressed and surprised.

Already the young man had noticed a
change in his companion's manner. An
air of constraint and reserve seemed to

have fallen upon her in a curiously sudden
fashion. He was puzzling himself to
account for it. At breakfast this morning
Idalia had been full of life and spirits.
She had talked and laughed with him in
her usual frank and unsophisticated style.
Know, she would scarcely even look at him !
Charlie could not understand it. His face
o-rew o-rave and downcast, and he threw
himself back, trying to think in what way
he could possibly have offended her. For
offended she did, he thought, certainly
appear. He became more convinced of it
each moment as, in addition to her marked
constraint, he noticed that she was
evidently anxious to keep Peleus riding
close by the carriage, as though desirous
not to be left alone with him. She had
never, he knew, felt disturbed before at
the idea of being alone with him. Her
American breeding, no less than her artless
simplicity of nature, would effectually
have prevented her suffering from prudery

ou such a score, and, as a matter of fact
she bad been alone with him many hours
during the past week whilst he had been
trying to catch the form and expression of
her features. Ah ! what hours those had
been to him !

But their effect, Charlie believed he had,
as yet, carefully hidden from Idalia's
cognizance. What, then, was the cause of
this curious change which made her seem
so unlike herself? The young artist
would have liked to ask the question, but
he dared not put it into words. Despite
her sweet temper and her girlish ingenuousness,
there was an unconscious dignity
about Idalia which guarded her as a
shield.

No young man, however carried aw^ayby
admiration of her grace and beauty, had
ever ventured on too free a glance, or too
open a flattery. Some instinct taught
Charlie Nunnerley that he must take no
notice of her new shyness towards him,

excepting bj doubling the respectfulness
of his demeanour in her regard. Also he
felt that he must not to-daj, in any way,
force his attentions upon her. And that
he should avoid doing so would, he reflected,
be wise upon other accounts.

Some eighteen or twenty young people
had been invited to the picnic, and most of
the number had assembled at Elfinbank
before the arrival there of the new neighbours
from Monkswood. There was a
large wagonette before the door, into which
several of the guests had already climbed,
also two smaller carriages, all belonging to
Mr. Courteney, and quite sufficient to accommodate
the entire party. Two or three
gentlemen, however, in addition to Mr.
Percival Bretherton, had elected to accompany
the excursion upon horseback. The
start was not effected without some little
bustle and manoeuvring for desirable places
and favourite companions ; but when, at
length, the cortege did set off, one of our

VOL. II. E

friends, at least, was satisfied with his
position — for Yictor McNicoll found himself
in the same carriage with Idalia
Bretherton. Sharing the carriage with
them were two other friends who might
likewise have been presumed to be well
contented with an arrangement which
would allow them, during the long drive,
to enjoy each other's society. They were
Dora and Sir Arthur Ledsom. As a
matter of fact, however, neither of
these two was feeling just now specially
happy.

Within the last few days a vague uneasiness
had laid hold of poor Dora's mind.
It was not merely that Arthur had not
yet — and a whole week gone ! — finished that
interrupted confession. There was something
more than this. It almost seemed to
Dora that he was changed — changed in some
undefinable way which she found it impossible
even to put before herself in distinct
terms, but by which she was, nevertheless,

sensitively impressed. Did be not love
her after all ? This question was beginning
to obtrude itself with painful pertinacity.
She had felt so sure before that he
did love her. Now she felt sure of it no
longer ! And yet he came to the house as
often as ever ; he showed her the same
marked attentions ; he . . Where was the
difference ? Dora could not explain — she
could only feel and suffer from it.

As for Arthur, he too was suffering,
not from any acknowledged pain of heart
or mind, but from a curious, restless disquietude,
into the cause of which he forbade
himself to inquire. In the week
that had elapsed since his introduction to
the Brethertons, he had called two or
three times at Monkswood Hall. Once,
also, he had dined and spent the evening
there. And, strange to say, his uneasy
discomposure of feeling appeared to be
consequent upon those repeated visits.
Yet how he had enjoyed them 1 How 

2

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS
LiBRARY

interesting it bad been to study Mr. Brethren
as a new type, to him, of humanity
— how pleasant to discover, one by one,
the fine traits of that noble and simple
character which had raised the dear old
man to so high a place in his estimation.
What a delight, too, it had given him to be
compelled to reverse more and more each
time he had seen her that utterly ridiculous
prejudice which he had conceived
against Miss Bretherton. How he laughed
at himself now, with quite a sense of scorn,
for having ever for a moment entertained
such a feeling about one whose rare physical
attractions — now that he knew her better
seemed scarcely less rare than her other
attributes of charming sincerity, unaffected
goodness, and sweet naturalness. But
why should the fact that he had thus
enlarged the circle of his acquaintance —
that he had got to know such delightful
people — make Sir Arthur Ledsom feel so
upset and restless when once he had left

their presence ? (For whilst with Idalia
and her father he was sensible only of the
intense enjoyment their company afforded
him.) Why, when it might have been
supposed that the world had grown by so
much the wider for him, should the young
man have felt as though his future life
had suddenly narrowed? Why should he
have felt as though the years to come —
the years of his married life, which be had
of late been contemplating with such
quiet contentment — should all at once
have grown grey and monotonous in
prospect ? Arthur could not, or would
not, as yet suffer himself to dwell on
these phenomena, or to search into
their meaning. But none the less did
they exist, and none the less was he
sensible of them as an under-current in his
consciousness. Throughout the drive
this morning he was quieter than usual,
speaking, whenever he did speak, in a low
tone, and contented apparently rather to

listen to the conversation than to join in
it. Dora, on the contrary, was more gay
and chatty than it was her custom to be.
But her gaiety might have struck a close
observer as a little feverish.

The elaborate luncheon which Mrs.
Perriam had ordered at the Mitre Inn,
Shelving Cove, was partaken of shortly
after the arrival there. Then the party
walked down to the beach, some half mile
distant, and embarked in a couple of
sailing-boats, which were awaiting their
convenience. The sea was calm and
smooth, its blue expanse broken only
here and there by tiny breakers, and yet
there was a sufficiently steady breeze. One
of the boats — the first to take its freight
of passengers — was soon standing well out
of the little bay. The second boat was detained
for a short space by some slight
mischance which had occurred with the
rigging, and when it followed the other had
got considerably ahead.

Besides the ' Goblin Rocks which were
chiefly remarkable on account of their
curious configuration, and the sharp
abruptness wherewith they rose out of the
quite deep water which surrounded them,
it was intended to sail past a certain cliff,
rising perpendicularly from the shore, not
far beyond the rocks in the same direction.
Part way up this cliff, which exhibited
peculiarly twisted and contorted strata,
there existed a large cave, which cave it
was only possible to get at in abnormally
high tides, when the sea, which each day
washed the foot of the cliff, would rise
almost to its entrance. The cave was said
to have been formerly used as a store-house
by smugglers, who must have raised their
illicit goods to it by means of ropes ; and
there was a tradition that this outer cave
was connected by a small opening, through
which a man could barely crawl, with
other caverns burrowing far into the heart
of the cliff, leone of the three stolid

fishermen, however, who manned the
second boat, had ever, so they confessed,
had the curiosity to explore the succession
of caverns, nor did they know of anyone
in the neighbourhood who had.

It was only possible to land on the
Goblin Rooks at low tide, but at this hour,
as it happened, the tide was low, and so it
was determined by the party in the second
boat (the first boat had now passed the
rocks, and appeared to be holding on its
way towards the cliffs) to land, in order
that the ladies might sit on 'The Goblin's
Chair,* a natural seat scooped out by the
action of the water.

Victor McNicoll, who was of the
division in this boat, as likewise were
Hester Courteney, Charlie Kunnerley,
Idalia, and Peleus Bretherton, was the
first to step out of it, and so to secure the
privilege of helping the ladies to alight.
And as the fragment of projecting rock on
which he stood was covered with wet and

slippery sea-weed, Victor was almost obliged
to lift the ladies over it. This be did
with perfect composure of feeling ui:itil it
same to the turn of the last lady. Then,
for one delicious moment, his pulses
quickened, and his heart beat wildly within
his breast as he held Idalia in his arms.
Scarcely had he set her down, before a
simultaneous exclamation, in varying tones
of alarm, broke upon his startled ear.
Turning to learn the cause, Victor saw his
cousin, Charlie Nunnery, struggling in
the water. Idalia, it afterwards appeared,
had managed somehow, when rising to
leave the boat, to let her sunshade slip into
the water, and Charlie, stooping to
secure it, had overbalanced himself and
fallen in. The sea, as lias already been
stated, was very deep at even a few feet
from the rocks, and Nunnerley, a born and
bred Londoner, could not swim. After
sinking twice, however, he succeeded in
clutching at the oar which the boatmen

extended to him, and was presently drawn
to land, dripping wet, but otherwise none
the worse for his immersion.

When the hub-bub naturally occasioned
by this catastrophe had a little subsided,
it was suggested by several voices at once
(no one noticed that the first suggestion
came from Miss Hester Courteney) that the
boat should be put about, and the young
man conveyed back to the inn as speedily
as possible.

He looks amazingly like a drowned rat,,
doesn't he?' subjoined one of the party.
And how your teeth are chattering,
Nunnerley ! Get up and shake yourself,
man ! Do you feel cold !'

Mannerly tried to laugh, but his face
was very pale and his limbs trembled.

I do rather,' he answered, ' and just a
trifle nervous too, for I feel as though I had
had a squeak for it.'

Nonsense !' returned the gentleman who
had before spoken. ' Some of us would

have fished you out easily enough if you
hadn't caught the oar. There was no
danger. The only danger lies in your
taking cold now.'

Yes ; it would be well if he could change
his clothes at once,' put in Victor McNicoll.
Is there no place near, boatmen, where you
could land us, and where we could find a
house?'

There is a house amongst those trees
there, to the right,' said Idalia, touching
Victor's arm, and pointing towards the
shore. * Don't you see the chimneys and
the smoke ?'

With the exception of one terrified
ejaculation, which had broken from her as
she had seen Charlie sink for the second
time beneath the waves, Miss Bretherton
had not before uttered a word. Had her
companions, however, not been too preoccupied
to observe her, they might have
seen that her silence throughout the
event which had just occurred had not

arisen from indifference as to its issue,

Victor did, when she indicated them, seethe
chimneys.

Yes, certainly ; that must be a house,' he
agreed. ' Couldn't you put the gentleman
down opposite to it ?'

The boatman addressed rubbed his
grizzled chin.

^ Why, sir, un'll take no harm fro' saltwater,'
he returned, a little contemptuously.
^ Not if 'a wouldn't bidder so. But do ee
think, Jim, as we could put in at Need
Creek ?'

Jim hitched up his pantaloons, and expectorated
thoughtfully.

Ay, I daresay we might,' he responded.
' But they Coles are such a surly
lot — both father and son of 'em. I doubt if
they'd oblige the gentleman with dry
things.

'Oh, 'twill be all right, that, if they
offers some pay,' protested his mate.
Step in, ladies, if you please, and we'll

run you ashore in five minutes, or so.
Yoiid better sit in the bow, sir, so as
sou won't wet the young women's gowns

Nunnerley, however, who had by this
time recovered his self-possession, professed
to remonstrate against this chancre
of plan. He laughed at the accident now
and tried to make liofht of it. He should
be all right, he declared, until they got
back to the hotel, and he would much prefer
that his friends should 2:0 on to view
the cavern and finish the sail as previously
intended.

But his opposition, as he expected, was
not listened to. And having learned, as
the boat sped on its way towards the shore,
that from the house to which they were
bound a walk of only one mile, by a shortcut
across some fields, would take them to
the 3Iitre Inn, the whole party decided
to land, and, sending the boat away, walk
back with the young artist when he had
obtained a change of raiment.

Now, keep straight along this here
foot-paths observed Mr. Jim, who had
landed to give these directions, * and 'twill
bring ye to the front of the house. And
dont ee mind, sir,' he appended to
Charlie, ' if Peter Cole do be a bit gruffish
at first. The colour of your brass'll soon
set him right. He's a chap as'll do aught,
right or wrong, for money.'

CHAPTER IV

AN EVIL PLACE.

Accompanied by Peleus Bretberton and
bis cousin Victor, Charlie hurried on in
advance, and the young men soon reached
the bouse for wbicb they were bound.
It was an ancient building of grey stone,
wbicb bad evidently seen better days.
Although now a farm, it bad probably once
ranked as a country gentleman's seat.
There were two gables, one at either end
of the bouse ; the roof was red-tiled, the
windows beavily-mullioned and latticed,
and the whole place weathered by the rains
and storms of over three hundred years.

The situation was very solitary. Surrounded
by a neglected-looking orchard, the
house nestled at the foot of a grassy slope
leading up to cliffs which descended in a
sheer precipice to the sea — the same cliffs
wherein were situated those caverns above
referred to.

A massive stone porch guarded the .
On the latter, seeing no
knocker, Yictor proceeded to rap with his
knuckles. His summons was answered,
not by the ' gruffish ' Peter Cole, or any
other man, but by a woman. A very clean
and comely woman she was, too, with a
face which nature had intended to look
smooth and contented, but which circumstances
had conspired to mark with lines of
trouble and care.

The gentlemen hastened to explain the
occasion of their visit and to point out
JSTunnerley's condition and requirements.
But, for several minutes, the woman hesitated,
nervously twisting the corner of her

apron and muttering something about herman'
not being at home. Finally, however,
she appeared to make up her mind to
act as her sympathies prompted. Inviting
the young men in, she led them across a
large sanded kitchen (Charlie's dripping
raiment leaving a trail behind as he
followed), and ushered them into a bedroom
opening out of it on the ground
floor. Then, producing a suit of clothes
belonging, so she announced, to her husband's
son and her own step-son, she left
them and hurried back to the door where
the rest of the party from the boat had
now arrived. Among the party was a
gentleman who was somewhat given to antiquarian
pursuits — a Mr. Dunn. To his
great delight, this gentleman had succeeded
in making out the figures 1520, engraved
on the stone above the low porch, and,
when admitted to the ' house-place,' he began
to examine, with keen appreciation,
the unusual thickness of the walls, as

VOL. II. F

shown by the deep recesses of the latticed
windows and chimney corners.

Yea, sure, sir, they be thick enough,
and 'tis an old house, as you say,' assented
the mistress. * There be a many ins and
outs to it, and odd corners and cupboards,
and such like. But the queerest place, 'tis
where that skeleton was found, a year back.
You'll have heard tell about it, maybe ?'

There was a general disclaimer as to
any information upon the point.

Why, 'twas in all the newspapers at
the time I' resumed Mrs. Cole. ' And
mighty vexed my man and his son Will
vv^as at the bother and fuss that was made
over it. But, luckily, it have all died out
now. And so none of you remembers
reading naught about it in the papers?'

None of them did ; but some curiosity'
was expressed to hear about it now.

swell, let's see.' (Mrs. Cole was evidently
not averse from telling the tale.
By nature she was a garrulous woman,

though practice in the art of conversation
was seldom allowed her.) "Twill be, as
I was saying, over a year ago now, when,
one day, Will Cole was pottering about
some joiner-work in the cellar, and chanced
to knock a brick out of one of the vralls.
Behind the brick he noticed that there was
some black wood, and when he tapped on
it with his hammer it sounded holler. So
he set to and pulled down more bricks, and
then he found that it was a door that had
been made up. And, after a good bit of
trouble, him and his father got it open.
The locks and hinges, you see, was rusty,
for the door had been shut up a hundred
years, or nobody knows how much
longer.'

Dear me, how very mysterious !'
observed Miss Courteney, a little sneeringly.
*And then you came upon a
skeleton behind the door? I suppose
the house had been haunted previously by
a ghost ?'

f2

'Nay, miss, I don't believe in ghosts.
And the skeleton 'wasn't behind the door
leastways, I mean not just behind it.
There was a longish passage first that
widened out at the end into a little room,
if you may call it a room, scooped out of
the solid rock. The floor of it was spread
with a kind of matting made out of plaited
rushes, and there was a wooden stool and
a brown jug, and a narrow bedstead in
one corner. 'Twas on the bed the man
was found — for the doctors said it was a
man's skeleton.'

But how had it come there ?' demanded
one of her listeners.

Lor bless you, sir, nobody knows I
But from the look of the bones they said
it might have lain there a hundred and
fifty years, or more. There was a deal of
rumpus made over it, to be sure ; and all
the folks, far and near, was questioned
as to whether they recollected any old
tales — tales of their fathers' or grandfathers'

— about anyone being lost or a-
missing.

And did anything come to light ?' Mrs.
Cole had paused to listen to a burst of
laughter, which here made itself audible
from the adjoining bedchamber.

Well, no ; nothing to build upon for
certain she returned. ' Only an old cobbler
in the village, he said he remembered his
father telling of a revenue officer who had
come to Shelving Cove when he was a
boy, to try to catch a gang of smugglers
that was known to be about. And this
man, he said, went out one evening as it was
coming on dusk, quite alone, in a small boat
And next morning the boat came ashore
with the tide, right side up, but empty,
and the man was never seen nor heard of
again. But no one else seems to remember
naught about it; and old Carey the cobbler
he be nigh on ninety, and getting a bit
silly, so they didn't think much of his story.
And now the business 'tis all quieted over,

as you may say. But 'twas a skeery thing
to find in a body's house, wasn't it?'

'Not very pleasant, certainly,' rejoined
Mr. Dunn, the antiquarian. * Evidently
there had been foul play in regard to the
man, whoever he may have been. For my
part, I should be inclined to attach some
importance to the cobbler's tale. From
your description, I should fancy that
vault, or cellar, may have been a secret
hiding-place for smuggled goods, and, if
the revenue officer had got entrapped there,,
he would naturally have been kept a lifelong
prisoner. But you might let us look
at the place, will you ?'

The woman shook her head.

Nay, sir, I don't know as I dare,' she
replied. ' Peter, he said, I was never, on
no account, to let anyone down again.
There was such a lot of folks at first, you
see, wanting to examine the place, and he
hated having his house made into a common
show-place. Howsomever, he bent

in, and . . .' She broke off, and began
twisting again at the corner of her apron,
in apparent indecision of mind.

There only needed, it was plain, a little
pressing, and that pressing was supplied.

Your husband won't mind, I'm sure,'
added Mr. Dunn, ' and, if he does, we'll
make matters all right with him,' suggestively
drawing out his purse.

As had been foreseen, Mrs. Cole yielded.
'Well, there haven't been no one
down to see it this ten months past, so
maybe he wouldn't be angered now, and
I'll venture. Not that there's much to see,
though, when you do get down,' she subjoined,
' for the bed have been took away,
and the rush-matting and everything. But
wait while I fetch a lamp, for 'tis dark in
the cellars.'

Leaving the kitchen in search of what
she required, the good woman passed into
some neighbouring back premises, and
almost at the same moment Charlie Nunnerley

and his companions emerged from
the bed-room. The former was attired ina
suit of clothes of rough cut and texture,
enormously too large for him. The effect
was somewhat grotesque, and a burst of
laughter greeted his appearance. Nunnerley
joined in the laugh, but his rising
colour betrayed the annoyance which he
was privately suffering. Always very
particular about his dress, and vain as any
young girl of his personal appearance, the
artist felt it a positive pain to be obliged
thus to appear before the ladies with his
shapely figure disguised in huge inelegant
garments. A little morosely, when Mrs.
Cole re-appeared with her lamp, he declined
to accompany the expedition below
stairs. The rest, however, followed, and
where presently ushered by their guide into
the secret place, where, beyond doubt,
some mysterious cruelty had once been
perpetrated. But, as she had asserted,
there was not much now to see. A heavy

door of black oak gave ingress to a narrow
passage, leading to a small cellar, with a
rough, vaulted roof. "stalls, floor, and
roof were apparently composed of solid
rock, and there was no window or other
means of ventilation.

Amongst the first to pass in, were Idalia
and Peleus Bretherton, and the latter
presently drew the attention of his sister,
who was leaning on his arm, to an iron
staple fixed against one of the walls from
which depended a fragment of rotten rope,
remarking as he did so that it was very
probable that by it the long-dead prisoner
had been confined.

Idalia made no reply, excepting by
clinging more closely to his arm. Sensitive
and imaginative by temperament, this
dark, underground cavern was beginning
to affect her with a strange horror. In a
peculiarly vivid manner, it seemed to her
that she could realise the lonely anguish
and despair of that unknown man, who

had been kept here to languish out his
existence, or to whom, perchance, the place
had been made a living tomb.

Take me out, Peley,' she begged, by-and-by,
in a whisper. ' This dreadful
place oppresses me. I feel quite sick and
faint;

Assenting, with the observation that it
certainly was rather close and musty in
smell, Mr. Percival hastened to pilot his
sister through the little crowd which filled
the vault. Before, however, they had
gained the end of the passage, a sound of
ansjry voices, speaking in a loud key,
arrested their attention, and in another
moment their egress was barred by two
men, who appeared in the doorway. In
the light which fell upon their faces from
the distant lamp, both men looked singularly
ill-favoured. The elder, who might
be sixty years of age, was a spare, rather
under-sized man, with iron-grey hair and
a sharp, acrimonious visage. The younger

whose countenance was even more forbidding
in its expression of stolid brutality,
was a tall, burly fellow of thirty. Over
his shoulder this younger man carried a
pick-axe, and Idalia noticed that the hand
which grasped it was deformed by a loss of
the middle finger.

Neither of the men moved aside to let
Miss Bretherton pass ; but the elder, Peter
Cole (for, as may be guessed, they were
the master of the house and his son), called
over her head to know what his wife was
doing with such a ' ruck of people
trespassing about in his premises.' The
rude inquiry was put in an irascible tone,
and accompanied by an ugly imprecation.

To the strange, almost unaccountable
dread already inspired by the place, there
was now added in Idalia's mind a shrinking
repugnance to — indeed, even a kind of
alarm — at these two churlish, hang-dog
looking men.

Grasping her brother's elbow, she begged

in a faint voice to be allowed to go by ;
and it was only when Percival — surprised
at this unwonted exhibition, on her part,
of nervous timidity — had conveyed her
back to the upper air and the bright sanded
kitchen, that Idalia was able to draw a
breath of relief.

My dear Miss Bretherton, you are ill !'
exclaimed Charlie Nunnerley, hurrying
forward, at sight of her, from the window
recess where he had been seated, and forgetting
all about his unbecoming habiliments.
* You are quite pale! You are
going to faint !'

Idalia shook her head in denial, and the
colour — called up partly by the young man's
evident distress and anxiety — rushed back
to her cheeks.

'What can have possessed you, dear?'
demanded her brother, affectionately, leaning
over the chair in which he had placed
her. ' You are not a chicken-hearted
girl, generally, but you positively seemed

frightened ! Whatever was there to be
alarmed at in a dark hole and a couple of
bad-tempered men ?'

'I don't know,' Idalia answered, very
seriously. ' But I do not think it was
exactly fear ; it was a sort of shuddering
oppression that seemed to lay hold of me
all at once. I felt as if I was in an evil
place, and as though some vague horror
was impending over me. I can't explain
the sensation further ; it came, I guess,
somehow from thinking of the poor man
who had been murdered there — for I feel
sure it was a murder. But I shall be at
myself again, directly,' she added, using,
as she was in the habit of doing occasionally,
when excited, an idiom of her native
mountains.

But Idalia was not rightly ' at herself '
again for the remainder of that day. An
uncomfortable weight appeared to rest
upon her spirits, which she strove in vain
to throw off. That subterranean dungeon.

or vault, beneath the lonely farm-house,
haunted her recollection in an inexplicable
sway, and with a curiously depressing influence.
Are there more things in the
way of premonitions, instincts of ill,
shadows of coming events, &c., than are
dreamt of in our philosophy ?

Meanwhile, matters having been explained
to Mr. Peter Cole, and his resentment
against the intrusion of his visitors softened
by a liberal subscription of silver, the
latter had been permitted to leave the house
Without the disturbance which had at first
seemed imminent.

Still, the amiable man had made a great
ado about ' a chap's home being his castle,'
no matter whether it ' med be a hut or a
palace,' and he had savagely threatened to
break his wife's head if ever he found
her * making a show-place ' of his house
again.

As for Charlie Nunnerley's borrowed
garments, a separate arrangement had to

be made with their proprietor, which,
though greatly to the advantage of the
burly Till, did not appear to afford him
any intense satisfaction. Probably, however,
Charlie's reluctance to wear what,
v/ith his weak vanity and egotistical self-consciousness,
made him feel for the time
being so ridiculous and uncomfortable,
was quite equal to the other's dislike of
being obliging, even to his own benefit.

CHAPTER V.

NEWS E E M HOME.

For the next two days Idalia, on different
pretexts, excused herself from sitting to
Charlie Nunnerley for her portrait. The
young man noticed, moreover, that she
avoided him, or, at least, that she took
care not to remain in his company except
in the presence of her father and brother.
Also he observed that the change which
had come over her so suddenly on the
morning of the picnic continued to be more
or less manifest. Now, at first, this
change greatly disquieted him. Mr.
Charles Nunnerley's conscience was by no
means an easy one, and many torturing

Misgivings troubled him. Had Idalia
found out anvthino- to his disadvantage ?

^ »> CD

If SO, what was it ? And how had she
discovered it ? He felt as though he were
sitting on thorns, and he had to work to
hide his anxiety and chagrin. To stand
well with those about him was for Charlie
a necessity of existence. His love of
approbation was even more strongly
developed than his self-conceit. There
was nothing really aggressive about his
egotism. Under ordinary circumstances,
indeed, it only displayed itself in an agreeable
assurance, an amiable self-complacency.
Charlie, in fact, was nothing if
not amiable. To know that he was disapproved
by anyone in whose company he
happened to be was sufficient to crush his
spirits. In the case of Miss Bretherton,
whom in truth he loved with all the passion
of his nature, it was gall and wormwood
even to suspect that she might be losing
her good opinion of him. But by that
VOL. II. G

harrowing suspicion he was not long
tormented.

His anxious study of her manner soon
began to convince Charlie that Idalia was
not really either displeased with or contemptuous
of him. On the contrary, this
new shyness on her part began (when once
conscience had ceased to make a coward of
him) to strike him as flattering rather than
otherwise. Why should Idalia blush, as
she sometimes did now, when he approached
or addressed her ? Did she
guess at his devotion ? Was it possible,
he asked himself, that he was not indifferent
to her?

With a rapid rebound, the young man's
spirits rose from zero to boiling-point.
His secret wretchedness presently gave
place to an elation almost as difficult to
conceal as his former depression. Encouraged
by the most sanguine hopes, he
re-doubled his assiduous, but unobtrusive,
attentions. He ventured also to let his

eyes express more and more ardently the
love which he had not yet dared to put
into words, and the embarrassment
wherewith his unspoken confessions were
received did not serve to discourage their
repetition.

Thus, growing bolder, he took courage,
on the third morning after the picnic, to
follow Idalia into a small conservatory
opening out of an apartment which she
had adopted as her own private sitting-room,
or boudoir. In another part of the
grounds stood a long range of hot-houses
and vineries (left, of course, to the gardener's
care), but of the plants in this little
greenhouse the mistress of Monkswood
Hall had taken special supervision, and insisted
on watering and tending them with
her own hands.

I beg your pardon,' apologised the
young man, seeing Idalia start as he approached.
' I ought to have asked permission
to come in.'

g2

'Well, I didn't want any assistance,
particularly,' sbe returned, blushing slightly,
though smiling at the same time ; * but,
since you have come in, you may make
yourself useful. Please lift down that
livonia. I want these orchids to stand in
its place.'

Charlie obeyed this request in silence
and arranged the orchids where she directed
him. Then, bending over her, he asked,
in a voice much more low and pleading than
the occasion warranted,

Miss Idalia, may I not have a sitting
to-day ?' It was the first time he had
dropped the more formal ' Miss Brethren.'


Idalia moved a step or two away, and
again her colour rose.

Why, yes ; I suppose you may,' she
rejoined, in assumed carelessness : 'if it is
necessary.'

It is so far necessary that I cannot get
on with the likeness without it,' he answered.

^ And till the work is finished, you know,
I shall have to stay here,' he added, with a
smile. ' I could not go away and leave it
incomplete.'

No ; to be sure. I never thought of
that,' she protested. ' We must not be so
selfish as to keep you here too long. I
will give you a sitting this morning, and
every morning you like till the painting is
done.'

Oh ! I am in no such hurry to depart !'
exclaimed the young man. ' I — ' he began
to pull nervously at his moustache — 'in
fact, I should be only too happy to remain
under this roof for ever. Surely you must
know '

Yes, of course, I know that it will not
do for you to neglect your profession,' interposed
Idalia, hurriedly. 'If you go
now and look out your brushes, I shall
come into the studio immediately.'

Very well.' Charlie understood that he
was dismissed. But, since the banishment

from her presence was only to be momentary,
he took it in good part.

And I'll get father to come and sit with
us,' she observed, * so that we shall not feel
dull.'

'Dull'' He paused on his way out to
echo the word. ' Have the sittings, then,
been very dull for you ? To me they
have been — I dare not say what they have
been.'

Again Idalia's expressive face betrayed
some embarrassment. She turned it
away from her companion and began topick
some dead leaves from a plant.

'Ah, well! I expect you do get interested
in your work,' she said; 'that's pretty
natural.'

I am interested in this work, at any
rate. But I am not satisfied with it. Miss
Idalia, I never can be satisfied with it,' he
went on, returning a few steps towards her.
I can never do you justice.'

Oh ! Well, I don't care one thing

about the likeness, myself,' she replied,
checking his fervour by a sudden coldness.
1 didn't want it taken. Father, however,
is very pleased with it so far as it has gone,
so you may feel quite satisfied.'

That Mr. Bretherton was pleased with
the unfinished portrait was very true,
as, also, that he was greatly impressed
with young Nunnerley's abilities as a
painter.

'I don't know how ye kin do it!' he
exclaimed many times, standing in an
admiring attitude before the canvas, and
expressing renewed astonishment at each
point of resemblance which he perceived
to the original. ' Ef that thar ain't the
very turn of her chin, now ! An' the
little dimple — you're a-going' to put the little
dimple in? It's kinder wonderful, been' so
smart is ; an' it's a gift as you'd daughter be
proud on.'

But you hasn't done much at it — not
jest this last taylor two, lev you ?' he asked.

surveying the painting this morning with
a critical air, and his head very much on
one side.

I haven't done anything at it,' rejoined
Charlie. ' But I must work more industriously
now, or you'll say I'm taking it
out of you in board and lodging,' he added,
jocularly,

Takin' it out on us ?' repeated Mr.
Bretherton. ^ I don't understand.'

Another artist would have got it done
more quickly, and not trespassed so long
on your hospitality.'

Well, now, I call the thar real mean !'
expostulated his kindly host. ' It's mean,
ain't it, Idalia ? Ez ef we wasn't mighty
pleased to lev a nice young feller like you
around ! You know right well the you
kin stay as long as you please, an' welcome.
Thar ain't no hurry fur the picture. But
when it's finished I'll be glad to trade fur
it. An' the price,' he pursued. *Now,
ef the price was five hundred pounds, it

wouldn't be nob to call dear, au' I'd 'low to
pay it willing.'

The price of the portrait bad already
been fixed at one-fifth of this sum; but
Mr. Bretherton, who had learned from his
son that Charlie's circumstances were not
flourishing, meant thus to insinuate, as
delicately as he could, that the young
artist was at liberty to raise his demand
for the work.

Charlie blushed. Before Idalia he did
not care to be reminded of this purely
business side of his engagement. Moreover,
the reflection that poverty, even in
simple Mr. Bretherton's eyes, was scarcely
likely to score as a point in favour of any
suitor for his daughter's hand, struck
him just now with unpleasant force. In
the beginning of their acquaintance,
Idalia's fortune had constituted for him
one of her chief attractions; and, though
passion was now getting the better of cupidity,
it was difficult to conceive of anyone

under-valuing what he rated himself
so highly. Once more, under the pressure
of this consideration, the young man's
mercurial hopes began to give place to
fears, and he set to work in rather a depressed
state of mind. His companions,
however, did not observe the fact. Scarcely
had Idalia resumed the position required
of her before a servant entered with
the post-bag.

Mr. Bretherton, whose correspondence
consisted almost entirely of communications
from Jabez Dean about the business of
his farm, and of an occasional line or two
from an old neighbour, seized upon the
bag with avidity. A letter from Clear
Water Valley, no matter how brief its contents,
was worth its weight in gold to honest
Abner. The slightest news concerning
any of his friends there would afford
him a topic of conversation for days.
But, as his daughter had also noticed, the
reception of a letter from ^ home' invariably

rendered him restless and excited. Of
late, too, she had noticed that her father,
when thus excited, had got into a habit of
wandering up to the Fold Farm, whence,
after a chat with Mr. Basset, he would return
evidently more composed in spirit.

The bag this morning contained only
one letter, but it proved to be a bulky
one.

It's from Cousin Jabez, deary,' remarked
Mr. Bretherton ; ' and it's sorter thickish.
I'm afeard there ain't nothing much
in it but accounts.'

On opening the envelope, however,
there appeared, in addition to two sheets
of blue paper dotted over with figures,
another of different tint.

Why, who kin this be from ? It ain't
Jabez's writing. It's — yes, it's from his
wife ! It's from Kezia, Idalia ! Well,
now' — turning over the letter with a
beaming countenance — * it's kind of Kezia,
this yere is, an' it's friendly.'

Read it aloud, father,' urged Idalia,
knowing that the request would please
him.

I will, honey — that is, ef Mister Charlie
don't take no exceptions to it?' he observed,
in polite appeal.

Charlie, of course, returned a suitable
disclaimer, and Mr. Bretherton, having
paused for a few seconds to rub his knees
in joyous anticipation of his task, proceeded
to make out the letter. In the matter
of orthography it was a literary curiosity
which we dare not transcribe. Read by
Mr. Bretherton, it ran thus :

Dear Cousin Abner,

This comes with my best
respects, an' hoping' you an' Idalia an' Peleus
iskeepin'your healths. We are all keeping'
our healths wonderful — particularly Ether
who's as peart an' lively as a young
kittling, an' no wonder, fur what I've sot
down fur to write to you. Cousin Abner —

it's a secret about Ethelinda — fur she's a-
going' to be married.'

Ethelinda a-going' to be married !' interpolated
Mr. Bretherton. ' Think of the !
Now, the thar's interesting — the thar's
powerful interesting, ain't it, Idalia ?'

Idalia appeared to think that it was very
interesting.

Go on, father,' she said, reflecting his
genial smile. * Go right on, please. I
want to know who she is to marry.'

Mr. Bretherton followed the lines with
his finger until he recovered the place at
which he had left off. The letter contained
no stops whatsoever.

You'll be a bit surprised, I essay,
when you learn who it is, fur once we all
thought he'd a hankering' after some one
else, an' I make no doubt that was so — fur
thar ain't no wonder ef a young feller
couldn't look at no other gall an' Idalia by

—an' so ye'll know it's Silas Thornton
'

Silas Thornton ? Why, come to think
of it, deary, though he wasn't fit, not in
the way of education an' that, fur to hold a
candle to you, I do believe '

Never mind, father,' interrupted Idalia,
turning her face away from Charlie
Nunnerley's inspection. ' Never mind
that.'

No, no,' he acquiesced, perceiving her
confusion. * No, I oughtn't ter lev said
it, honey. It wasn't, perhaps, not to call

delicate ' he apologised, searching, ashe

spoke, for the place he had again lost,
and hastily continuing,

An' so ye'll know it's Silas Thornton.
An' we're all in a muss a-gittin' the house
fixed, fur the wedding' it's to be next week,
an' the young folks, they're a-going' to live
down to Silas' father's fur a spell, till the

house gits up ez he's settled to build for
'em. He's behaved mighty handsome, old
Pete Thornton has, an' him an' Jabez '11
lev to stock the little farm betwixt 'em.
An' Ethelinda, she says ever so often in a
day, " I'd give a heap, mother," says she,
"ef Uncle Abner was yere to be at the
seddon' " '

Bless her ! an' so would I — I'd give a
heap myself burst forth poor Abner. ' I'd
give a heap myself to be thar, an' to see all

the old folks again, an' ' He stopped

short, his voice broken by emotion.

Father ?' Idalia forgot all about the
attitude which Charlie desired her to maintain,
and, for the moment, all about Charlie
himself. * Father,' she repeated, leaning
forward to grasp and kiss his large red
hand, * dear father, we'll go back to the
Valley. I didn't know you felt like that.
We won't stay in England another day if
you are unhappy here.'

Thar, now, how foolish I am ! Idalia
honey, I'm gittin' old, an' I'm gittin'
foolish, an' you mustn't mind me!' exclaimed
her father, hastening to undo the effect
of his speech. ^I was kinder wrought up
jest for an instant, an' I wasn't thinking'
what I was a-saying'. It wouldn't do fur
us to go back, child. It wouldn't do at
all!'

But why not ? It shall do — it must do,
if you wish it !' she cried, impetuously — all
the more impetuously in that the idea was
insufferable to her.

I dort wish it, though : thar's what it
is,' he returned, cheerfully. ' Would you
lev me behave as ef I hadn't no duty to
my own children ? Would you lev me
take you an' Percival away from yere, jest
when you're a-gittin' a nice set o' young
friends, with polish and bong-tong, as suits
you ? Would you lev me kinder force
you to live among folks as you could never
feel naturel an' sociable with, through them

been' so different ? Why, Idalia, you ain'fc
coin' me justice, honey — you ain't coin' meno
sort o' justice ef you think I'm such a
hard an' selfish father as that.'

You're the best father in the world ! —
the best and dearest father in the whole
world !' asseverated his daughter. * But
you ought not, and you shall not, sacrifice
your happiness to ours.'

Now, the's foolishness, Idaly, talking'
thet-a-way is,' resumed her father, softly
caressing her hand. * Ain't my happiness
yours, and ain't yours mine? Lord! do
you think I could be happy ef I wasn't considering'
your happiness — if I wasn't a-crying'
to do my duty by you both ? Besides,' he
continued, eagerly, ' I'm gittin' to like
England myself. You mustn't think nothing'
more of what I said. I was kinder carried
away by my feeling fur a moment — that
was all, child.'

Idalia studied his face, but half satisfied
with the renewed cheerfulness of his tone.

VOL. II. H

^ And thar's this nice house ! Surely,
you wouldn't lev us leave this nice house ?'
he asked, as though combating an idea of
her own suggesting

I hope, indeed, that Miss Bretherton
does not wish to leave Monkswood ?' put
in Charlie, regarding her with a glance expressive
both of pain and reproach. To
his vanity, no less than his love, it had
been very mortifying to find that Idalia
could so completely — as was apparently
the case — lose sight of his presence.
Further, the young man felt almost indignant
at the display she had just made of
affection for her father, at the look of
tender solicitude wherewith she was still
scanning his wrinkled and homely face.

Was it really possible that she could love
that old ^ bog-trotter ' so passionately as
she seemed to do ? that in thought for
him she could grow oblivious of a handsome,
gentlemanly fellow like himself ?

Surely she, who was herself so different,

must be alive to the difference between
them — to his own immense superiority
over that rough, commonplace man ? And
yet, what would he not olive to have her
glorious eyes bent upon him with such an
expression as that !

It made him feel quite jealous, as well
as indignant. Whatever else was perfect
about her, he decided, Idalia's taste could
not be so. Otherwise, she could never
show herself so entirely satisfied with this
father of hers — so utterly blind to his
many imperfections of manner, speech, and
appearance.

She must sometimes feel ashamed of
him, as her brother did, and blush for his
gaucheries. With Percival's contempt
for, and growing dislike of, his father,
Charlie Nunnerley had the strongest
sympathy.

In his friend's place, he felt that he
should himself entertain very much the
same sentiments, and he had acknowledged

h2

this fact to Percival when the latter had
ventured to make him, to some extent, his
confidant upon the subject.

Even now, when he addressed her, Idalia
took so little notice of the young artist
that she did not even reply to his
question.

*Come out into the wood with me,
father, and let us have a nice little walk
together she said. ' Mr. Nunnerley, you
won't mind, will you, if I run away for a
spell ?' She turned to him at last with a
friendly enough aspect, and even, as she
continued to speak, a return of her new,
sweet shyness. ^ You can get on for a
while, I daresay, and we won't be long.
We'll come back, both of us, in an hour, or
perhaps less.'

CHAPTER VI.

THEY MUST COME HERE.'

Idalia kept her promise. A few minutes
within the hour she and her father, both
looking the happier for their absence,
returned to the ' studio.' But Charlie was
not destined to-day to enjoy any renewal
of the sitting. Hardly had his * subject '
resumed her place upon the dais he had
arranged for her before a second interruption
occurred.

This took place through the entrance of
a footman to announce a visitor, who was
immediately admitted. The visitor was
Sir Arthur Ledsom.

Thank you for letting me come in here,

Miss Bretherton,' observed the baronet
laying down his hat and the riding whip he
carried. ' I have brought some news
which Nunnerley will be concerned to hear
as well as yourselves

^ Concerned !* repeated Mr. Bretherton.
Why, I hope now the it ain't bad news T

It is not good news,' Sir Arthur answered.
' Still, I hope the matter will not
turn out to be anything serious. Victor is
ill — Victor McNicoll. The doctor says it
is, or loll be, typhus fever.'

Now, the's bad !' exclaimed Mr. Brethren.
' Such a nice young feller ez he
is ! I hope it ain't a-going' to be a hard
spell of sickness. How long has it bin on
him?'

Oh, he was only taken ill last evenings
returned Arthur. ' I called this morning
at Upton Lodge, and have just heard of it.
I thought you might be interested, so I
rode straight on here to tell you, and, of
course, Nunnerley,' he appended hastily.

I promised Mrs. McNicoll to let you
know about your cousin, Nunnerley.'

Thank you,' said Charlie ; * but I hope,
as you say, that it may turn out to be
nothing serious. What makes the doctor
suppose it to be typhus?'

Well, the fact is there are two or three
cases of the fever just now in Bennett's
Hollow — where so many of the mill-hands
live, you know ? And yesterday morning, it
seems, Victor, knowing nothing about this,
went down there to inquire after one of
the engine-tenters who had been absent
several days from his work. A little girl
showed him into the room where her
father was rambling in a hio^h state of
delirium ; and the wife, who must be an
awfully stupid woman, allowed him to remain
there a considerable time before she
informed him of the nature of the disease ;
and the very same evening, you see, Victor
began to feel ill.'

But is it certain that he has caught the

infection ?' demanded Idalia. * Perhaps it
is not really that.'

I am almost afraid it must be,' rejoined
the visitor, shaking his head. ' Dr. Everton.
at any rate, thinks so, and he has recommended
that the girls should be sent
from home. Neither Dora nor Jessie wish
to go. Their father and mother insist,
however — I think very rightly — upon their
doing so.'

But where are they to go?' asked
Charlie. There was very little sympathy in
his accent, and as he spoke the young man
busied himself with mixing some colours
upon his palette. .He was sorry, as a
matter of course, that his relatives should
be in trouble ; but, if the truth must be
told, he was a good deal more put out by
the fact that this untimely visit had occasioned
a new interruption of his work — that
work which had become to him such a fascination
and excitement.

Moreover, Charlie did not regard the

visitor himself with a very favourable eye.
It had struck him that Arthur Ledsom was
beginning to call a vast deal too often at
Monkswood Hall. He was growing suspicious
of him, and even alarmed. A rich
young baronet, with an estate like Feld-hurst
Court, would be no formidable
rival for a struofs^lino^ artist, whose fame
lay yet in the lap of the future, and whose
settled income was two hundred pounds a
year.

Sir Arthur's haste to constitute himself
a messenger this morning, even though of
tidings which could scarcely be agreeable
to himself (Victor's chief friend) to bear,
seemed to Charlie very like impertinent
officiousness.

Where are the girls to go ?' he repeated,
twitching, as he was in the habit of
doing when mentally disturbed, at his long
moustache.

I beg your pardon,' said Sir Arthur,
who had delayed to answer the question

for a moment whilst stooping to caress
Pippin, Idalia's little dog, who had followed
him into the room. ' Mrs. McNicolI
had thought at first, she told me, of sending
them to her sister-in-law in Perthshire.
But, naturally, they would not hear of this
plan. They are both, as you know, very
much attached to their brother, and although
they will consent to leave the house
(as to that, in fact, they have no option),
they will neither of them consent to leave
the neighbourhood. And, of course, there
will be no necessity for it. They can stay
at the Courteney, or at the rectory, or
with any of their other friends. There
will be no difficulty in finding them
an asylum.'

I should think not,' broke in Idalia.
'They must come here. Father, do let u&
have them here.'

^ Why, to be sure we will, child, if
you'd like it, an' ef they're in the notion

of coming', ' responded Mr. Bretherton,
warmly.

I should like it very much. I think
Dora McNicoU is just about the nicest girl
I ever met. And Jessie is nice, too, very.
Td like to go straight away and ask them.'

Thar ain't no reason why you shouldn't,
then, Idalia. Thar ain't no reason again' it
at all,' said her father. ' They'll be company
for you, an' it'll be sorter gay an'
cheerful levin' more vounor folks around.
Bless you ! I wouldn't mind how many
young folks thar was around !'

It — it is very kind of you f stammered
Sir Arthur Ledsom. He hardly knew why
the proposition sent, as it did, such a thrill
of excitement through his veins. He
hardly knew why he felt half wishful, yet
half alarmed, lest it should be carried into
effect. ' Dora — both of them, I am sure
will feel greatly obliged by the generous
suggestion ; will they not, Nunnery ?'

Charlie nodded assent. ' That goes
without saying, of course,' he replied.
But my aunt will probably have made her
arrangements already. No doubt, as the
matter is pressing, she will have gone to
Mr. Courteney's this morning. The house
is so near, you see, and, besides, they are
such old friends.' Charlie Nunnerley, at
all events, had no hesitation in deciding
within himself as to whether he should
like such an invitation to be given and
accepted. Nothing could please him less
than that his cousins should come here.
He had little enough opportunity at present,
he reflected, of seeing Idalia, alone.
With tvi?o other girls in the house trespassing
on her time and attention, how was he
ever to get her to himself ?

'Really,' he went on, 'I think they
should go there — to their old friends,' with
a suggestive stress on the adjective.

But / don't !' exclaimed Idalia ; ' 1
don't see why old friends should have all

the privileges. If Tre are new ones, we
want to get to know each other better,
don't sou see ? That's all the more reason
they should come here : anyhow, I mean
to have them, if I can get them,' she
added, with decision. *Do you suppose
Mrs. McNicoll will really have gone out to
settle it yet ?' she asked Sir Arthur.

No, I think not — in fact, I am sure
not,' he answered. ' She happened to say
to me that she should go immediately after
luncheon — By-the-bye, you will understand
that there is no danger, as yet, of anyone
taking, or conveying, infection from
Victor.'

The's so, is it? Xow, it had just come
into my mind to wonder how it would be
the away. I was jest a-going' to ask you,'
said Mr. Bretherton, betraying a little
anxiety — not, it need scarcely he said, on
his own account.

Sir Arthur's positiveness re-assured
him.

Indeed, there is not the remotest
danger, sir; otherwise, you may be sure I
would oppose their beinor asked here withall
my energy. The disease, the doctor
declares, will not properly develop itself
for another day or so, and will not be contagious
for a considerable time. Still,
though there is no question of danger,
Miss Bretherton, I think, perhaps '

'It's no use your thinking anything,'
interposed Idalia, laughingly, but with
rather an imperious little gesture. ' I'm
going right off now, this minute, to invite
them. You can walk there with me, if you
like.'

Sir Arthur coloured with pleasure. This
frank proposal might possibly have embarrassed,
or even shocked him, had it
come from an English girl. But the young
American's easy, matter-of-fact way of
claiming his companionship, whilst it
delighted, did not flatter him. He was
fully aware that in Idalia's native country

intercourse between young people of the
two sexes was characterised by more freedom
than in bis own, and, untrammelled
bj many of the conventionalities and restraints
which, to a great extent, may be
pronounced ill-judged and absurd, less
calculated to preserve modesty and propriety
than to injure them.

Thank you, I shall be most happy —
The stock phrase, for once, was true. — ' I
rode here, but I will leave my horse and
send for him later.'

Then I'll get ready at once.'

Idaliathrew the words over her shoulder.
She had approached Mr. ^N'unnerley, and,
evidently regarding it as due to him, she
now proceeded to offer him once more an
apology for her defection.

You won't be cross about it, will you ?
I'll make up for it another time ; and, you
see, it can't be helped.'

She looked at him as she said the words
with a deprecating, almost an humble air.

Charlie had the good sense or the tact
to make a gracious rejoinder, though
inwardly he was fuming with vexation
over the turn of events, and filled with
envy on account of the favour she had so
artlessly offered to Sir Arthur.

The edge of his ill-humour, however,
was a little taken off when, having left the
room, Idalia suddenly returned to ask
after her brother.

He might walk with us,' she added.
I should like him to go with us, and
help me to persuade the girls to come.'

Why, to be sure !' ejaculated her
father. ' Where kin he be now ? I wasn't
jest a-thinking' of him ; but I know he'd be
vexed, Percival would, ef we wasn't to call
him in, an' you here,' to Sir Arthur.
Now, wheel kin he be ?' He rose to go
in search of his son. ' Might you happen
to know, Mister Charlie ?'

Charlie knew pretty well where Mr.
Percival Bretherton had arranged to spend

his morning, but he did not choose to say
so.

I have Dot seen him since breakfast,' he
rejoined.

*^o; come to think of it, I hevn'fc
neither. But he'll be in the house, meb-
be. I'll take a look around said his
father.

No, no ; allow me ?' interposed Charlie,
glad of an excuse to quit the room and
indulge his chafed feelings alone. * If he
is in the house, I will soon find him, Mr.
Bretherton.'

Percival, however, was not in the house.
Idalia and Sir Farther presently started on
their mission alone, and Mr. Bretherton
shortly afterwards set off to make a short
call at the Fold Farm.

VOL. II.

CHAPTER VII.

IN THE OKOHABD.

The acquaintance which he had so unceremoniously
commenced with pretty
Susan Basset had been followed up by Mr.
Percival Bretherton before his visit to
London with considerable ardour ; and,
since his return from the capital, the youns^
man had been even more assiduous in his
hole-and-corner courtship — for such Percival
took care that it should be.

Scarcely a day now passed but that he
managed to have some private assignation
with the girl, and day by day his fancy for
her increased, or, at all events, his desire
for her companionship.

It has been observed bj a careful student
of human nature that, as a rule, men are
more susceptible to the flattery of open
and undisguised admiration than are
women. However that may be, it is certain
that Peleus Bretherton's self-love was
delightfully tickled, and his vanity constantly
stimulated through his intercourse
with Susan.

The poor girl had given him her whole
heart — and a very foolish and idolatrous
little heart it proved. From the first,
Peleus had seemed to her like a sort of
young god. In her idea, he was not only
wondrously handsome, but amazingly clever
the neplus ultra of fashion and culture.
She looked upon his notice as a signal
honour, and on the affection he professed
for her as a transcendent favour, no less
than an unspeakable happiness. In short,
the innocent child had learned to adore
this very poor piece of human clay with a
fervour that might have been ridiculous,

i2

bad it not at the same time been pathetic.
And, in her ignorance and simplicity, she
took no pains to hide her adoration from
its object.

Young Bretherton, for his part, accepted
graciously all the admiring homage she
rendered him, and, sunning himself in its
warmth, felt pleasantly like the superior
being she evidently considered him.

His manner betrayed this fact. Even
v/hen most carried away by his enthusiasm
for her rounded childish kind of beauty,
he treated Susan a little de haut en has,
judiciously mingling patronage with
passion.

To-day he had spent in her company a
much longer time than usual. Leaving
home shortly after the morning meal, he
had made his way round by the base of
the wood at the back of the Hall, and had
struck thence across some fields belonging
to his father's estate. From the further
of these fields he had climbed over a hedge

into a grazing meadow which composed
part of Mr. Basset's farm, and, ou reaching
the other side of this meadow, he had
scrambled up a grassy bank, surmounted
a somewhat rickety wooden fence, and so
found himself in an orchard.

This orchard was an extensive one, and,
with one solitary exception, filled only Vvdth
apple-trees, the fruit of which Farmer
Basset was accustomed to sell each year to
a cider manufacturer. Lying in a quiet
corner of the farm, and out of the way of
such portions as were under general cultivation,
the orchard was rarely, if ever,
invaded by the proprietor or the farm-labourers.


It had always, however, been a favourite
haunt of Susan's, and she had coaxed her
father (who, indeed, needed little pressing
to comply with any of her desires, wise
or foolish) to build her a tiny summerhouse
in one of its most sequestered nooks.
Little had she imagined, poor child.

when iu the hot summer afternoons, so
short a time ago, she had carried thither
her work or her book, and the little tabby
kitten which was then such a pet with her,
what moments of excitement and rapture
she should spend in this arbour before the
year was at an end or the trees had lost
all their leaves.

For here it was that Peleus Bretherton,
having impressed upon her the strictest
secrecy in respect of his visits, was now in
the habit, almost daily, of meeting her
alone — alone, that is to say, with the exception
of Luke, who, in Susan's estimation,
counted for nothing, but whose
presence, as he lingered about the orchard,
and passed to and fro at intervals before
the open door of the summer-house, seemed
often very unreasonably to irritate
Peleus.

He won't say a word to anyone so
long as I let him stay near me,' Susan had
over and over again assured her lover,.

because I've roche him promise not to.
But, if I be cross and drive him away,
'isn't safe what he might do. Sometimes
I be almost afraid he might even try to
hurt you. He's got some notion into his
silly head, poor fellow ! that I can't make
out, but which makes him set upon watching
your comings and goings, and not
leaving me alone when you're by. But
you needn't mind him, for he's a softy,
with no more sense than a child of four
years old.'

We'll shut the door on his imbecile
prying, at any rate,' Peleus had once said,
suiting the action to the word. But the
result had convinced him that the idiot, if
only a child in understanding, was a
powerful man in strength, and one not to
be offended with impunity.

Uttering a single low cry of rage, Luke
had burst open the door, which fastened
within only by means of a latch, and had
then, without a word of any sort — but

with a glance at Peleus which effectually
prevented that young man from offering
any interference — proceeded to wrench the
door off its hinges, and to carry it away to
another part of the orchard.

The loss of her door did not trouble
Susan, for she had not desired that the
structure should possess one, and it had
only been attached through a mistake of
the joiner employed in its construction.
But at first she had felt very much alarmed
at the vindictive aspect of Luke's
hatchet-shaped visage as he silently effected
this work of demolition, and had only
recovered her sense of mastery over him
when she had seen her brother return with
his normal expression of fatuous stupidity,
and seat himself on the ground at some
distance, with his back to Peleus and herself.

As a consequence, howbeit, of this little
scene, young Bretherton had understood
that he must, for the present, at all events,
be content to conduct his intercourse with

Susan under supervision of her imbecile
brother.

On gaining the orchard this morning,
be had, as usual, found the two together,
but he had found them engaged in an unexpected
fashion. Luke, mounted amongst
the branches of that one tree which formed
an exception to the rest — being a pear,
not an apple-tree — was busied in knocking
off the fruit with a stick, whilst Susan,
standing below, was collecting and depositing
it in a basket.

At the approach of her lover (if Peleus
may be termed so, when certainly he loved
himself a good deal better than her),
Susan, with a sweet, shy blush, hastened to
explain.

Her mother, it appeared, had decided
that the fruit of this tree was to be gathered
this morning, and had given orders that
Molly, one of her two maids, was to undertake
the task, in conjunction with a young
farm lad.

Reflecting that Peleus had arranged to
visit her to-day, Susan, at first, had felt
^ dreadfully fluttered,' but, the idea having
speedily occurred to her, she had hastened
to propose herself and Luke as substitutes
for the work, and, as it happened to be a
busy day indoors, the offer had been
eagerly accepted. As Peleus already knew.
Miss Susan was not expected by her indulgent
parents to engage in any labour for
which she was disinclined.

Applauding her thoughtfulness, Peleus
condescended for some time to lend his
assistance by catching the pears as they
fell under Luke's blows, and placing them
in the basket, and also by eating a goodly
number of the ripest and most tempting.

Presently, however, growing weary and
satiated, he persuaded Susan to leave her
brother to finish the task, to which his
feeble intellect seemed quite competent,
and to retire with him. into the arbour.
October having now reached its second

or third week, the weather was growing
chilly, and this shelter became this day of
higher request.

From his perch in the pear-tree, which
stood almost in face of it, Luke could command
a view of the interior of the summerhouse.
He retained his position,
therefore, and allowed the pair to leave him
without remonstrance. Had Peleus chanced,
however, to turn and glance upwards,
his composure might have received a somewhat
rude shock. Behind his back the
idiot was ' pulling faces,' as ill-bred
children will sometimes do, mowing and
gibing at him. But that expression of
malignant dislike was such as no child's
face could have worn. It disfigured his
already sufficiently hideous countenance
until, really, for the moment, the poor
softy ' bore scarcely a closer resemblance
to a human being than to an anthropoid
ape.

Happily, however, for himself, Peleus

remained iu blissful ignorance of the
strong antipathy inspired in that witless
cranium, and of the significant gestures
and grimaces wherewith he was now being
favoured.

Drawing Susan to that corner of the
summerhouse most protected from tho
wind, which every now and then kept
sweeping in, bearing with it little eddying
clouds of dead leaves, he proceeded to give
utterance to an idea that had struck him.

I say, little girl, there is something the
matter with you this morning. You look
shy and troubled, and you don't talk as
much as usual. I have noticed you opening
your pretty lips once or twice as
though you were going to speak, but you
have shut them again without saying anything.
Come, now ; tell me all about it,
Susie, my pet.' He stooped to kiss her.
There is something, isn't there ?'

The girl hesitated for a moment, blushing
under his caress, and then answered,

Yes, sir.'

'Sir,' he repeated. ' Haven't I told you
not to say sir?'

But it sounds so bold to call you by
your name,' faltered Susan, blushing
again.

Well, I want you to be bold with me,
little Susan he rejoined, by no means displeased
with the remark, and drawing her
closer with his encircling arm. ' Be as bold
as you like.'

Oh ! do you really, realJj/ love me ?'
Asking the question with a sudden

eagerness, Susan drew a little av;ay from
him, and ofazedinto Peleus' dark eves. As
she did so, the young man noticed, for the
first time, that within the few weeks of his
acquaintance with her a subtle change had
passed over the girl's face. Her pretty
long-fringed blue eyes had acquired a new-depth
and intensity ; her small babyish
features a more womanly expression.
And this exterior change, too slight to have

hitherto attracted his attention, was but a
faint reflex of the far greater change
which had taken place within — a change
which amounted, in fact, almost to a revolution
in all her ideas and sentiments, but
of which Peleus suspected little.

Of course I love you, you silly child !'
he answered. ' Why else should I be
here? Why else should I want to kiss
you like this — and this ?' again saluting,
as he spoke, her brow and lips.

Susan's face broke into joyous dimples
and smiles. She put on a coquettish little
air, and nodding her head meaningly,
observed,

Ah, well ! but there's somebody else
loves me too.'

Somebody else !' he echoed. ' What on
earth do you mean, Susan ?'

You won't be angry, will you?' she asked.

Not if you tell me everything. Is this
what you've been wishing to say all the
morning?'

Susan replied by an affirmative gesture.
Well, I'm waiting to bear all about it
resumed Peleus.

He isn't a gentleman, like 3'ou/ began
Susan.

Oh, indeed ! Well ?'

'Tis James Carey — the stupid V

And, pray, who may James Carey be ?'

His father owns a corn-mill by the

river-side,' explained Susan, * and James

helps him. 'Tis a first-rate business,

father says ; and James, he be tall and

good-looking, only he be fair, and I can't

abide fair men,' she subjoined, with an

admiring france at vous; Bretherton's dark

O O Iso

hair.

But how do you know that this fellow,
whoever he may be, is in love with you,
Susan ? He hasn't said so ?'

Yes, but he has ! He said so last night
to father,' affirmed Susan, 'and he be coming
again to-night. He has been coming
ever so long,' she went on, ' two or three

evenings a week, and sitting in the cbim-
uey-corner grafting at me. And be has
brought me little presents — poses, and
such like. But I never thought anything
of it — not till just lately I thought 'twas
because we had o-oue to school together
when we was both little. I didn't think I
was grown up — not properly grown up,
you know — or that anyone could think
of me like that till — till I'd got to know
you.'

But he has no right to think of you
'•' like that" ; confound his impudence !
What did he actually say to your father ?'

Susan blushed hotly.

Why, he told him that he was terribly
fond of me, and — and that he wanted me
to promise I'd be his wife some day. And
he be coming again this evening to — to seeme,
and get his answer.'

And what will the answer be, Susie ?'

You know she murmured, reproachfully.



*But tell me be persisted.

It'll be no, of course ! Do you tbiuk I
can love two people at once?'

Then you don't care for him ? You
love me best?' Peleus pulled her on to his
knee, as he whispered this unnecessary
query.

Yes, a million, million times best !' exclaimed
the girl, nestling confidingly in his
arms. ' I shall never marry anyone else
but you, if you're quite sure you want to T
she appended, with a return of her innocent
coquetry.

If I'm sure I want to marry you, do
you mean ? By George, you're a cool
young woman !' responded Peleus.

Susan turned to look at him. Then a
sudden pallor overspread her face, and,
springing from his arms, she stood confronting
him.

'Why do you speak like that?' she cried.
I don't understand. I thought you loved
me, because you said so. Don't — don't

VOL. II. K

people always marry when they love each
other ?'

Susie, Susie ; must I kill him ?' It was
Luke who asked this question. On the
instant he had observed his sister's act of
repulsion he had dropped from his tree,
and he now stood glaring at Peleus with a
look of savage malevolence, evidently only
awaiting a word of command to fall upon
the object of his instinctive distrust — his
curious hatred.

Oh, Luke ! You horrid, wicked, hateful
thing !' exclaimed Susan, interposing
between them in terror. * Get away this
instant, or I'll never speak to you again !
I'll never let you come near me ! How
dare you ? I — I've a good mind to beat
you !' she concluded, impotently raising
her little hand with a threatening gesture
towards the great fellow, who could have
crushed her to pieces by the grasp of his
iron fist.

But Luke did not smile at the threat.

On the contrary, his wide mouth dropped
"with an expression of abject distress and
humility, and, casting towards her one
vacantly, appealing glance, he shank away
like a dog with its tail between its legs.

Peleus Bretherton was not a coward ;
but he had certainly been startled and
alarmed by the idiot's conduct, and he had
scarcely recovered himself when Susan
again turned to him.

That fellow ought undoubtedly to be
shut up,' he stammered, looking after him
with a countenance to which the blood was
only just beginning to return. ' He is a
dangerous madman !'

But this statement Susan hastened to
contradict. Her brother, she declared,
was really as harmless as a baby. She had
never seen him look so or behave so before,
and he had never hurt anyone in his
life, nor anything, excepting that dog she
had once told him about.

Ee-assured by this asseveration, but still

k2

more by the reflection as to how poor
Luke had cowered before the expression of
his sister's displeasure, Peleus presently
began to feel in a measure himself again,
though he could not quite succeed in
throwing off the effect of what had
occurred.

'Well, little one, what were we talking
about before that unpleasant interruption ?'
he asked by-and-by.

Susan returned no answer. She had
again placed herself in front of him, and
with her hands hanging down and tightly
clasped together, she was looking into his
face with an eager scrutiny.

For some moments Peleus also remained
silent, apparently turning something over
in his mind. As a result of his meditations,
he broke shortly into a laugh, and,
slightly shrugging his shoulders, observed,
* You wished to know, my dear child,
whether people in love with each other
do not usually look forward to matrimony

as the appropriate end of their courtship,
or something of that sort, didn't you ?
Well, yes, Susan ; I suppose they do. At
the same time, if you will excuse me saying
so, it is, as a general rale, considered
the province of the gentleman to allude
first to this subject. Do you know, Miss
Susan, that you have proposed to me ? —
absolutely proposed to me !'

Whilst her companion had, very deliberately
and with somewhat satirical emphasis,
been uttering this speech, poor Susan's
face had grown crimson.

Oh !' she ejaculated, ' I didn't mean to
be so bold 1 I wasn't thinking. It — it
only seemed ' She paused, overwhelmed
with confusion.

'Come here, my pet.' Peleus stretched
forth his hand and drew her nearer. He
had regained, he felt, his due superiority
and ascendancy over her, and a satisfied
smile curled his lips. ' Come and let us
talk the matter over. You are not in

such a great hurry to assume the vinculum
'matrimonii, are you, Susie ? — the chains
of marriage, I mean,' he interpreted
condescendingly.

Eo, no, no ! Of course I don't want
to be married yet. I be far too young.
'T wasn't that, indeed ! It was only that I
couldn't abide the thought that you oughtn't
love me always and always. But you ivill,
won't you ? I don't want to be married,
not for years and years, nor ever, if you
don't like. But, if you were to give over
loving me now, I should die. If you were
ever to love anyone else, or to marry anyone
else, I — I should just kill myself, I
believe !'

You are a silly girl, Susan, a very silly
girl, to talk in that way,' rejoined Peleus,,
feeling both annoyed and bored by her
earnestness.

This style of thing was not at all to ibis
taste. It was all very well to have inspired
a grand passion, so long as it expended

itself in unselfish adoration of his own
person. Bat when it came to be exacting
to look for too serious a return, bah I
it became a bore. Peleus himself had
certainly never looked on the affair as a
serious one. He had merely meant to
amuse himself with this pretty Susan — to
indulge in a flirtation with her — rather too
strong an one, perhaps, but still, nothing
more.

In justice to the young man, it must be
said that he had never really looked ahead
in the matter at all, or considered how it
was to end. He had been content with
his present enjoyment in playing the role
of a gallant, and he had insisted upon
Susan's secrecy in regard to his visits for
two simple reasons : first and foremost,
because he had thought his dignity as a
gentleman would suffer if he was known
to be paying court to this little plebeian.
(Peleus did not allow himself to admit the
fact, even to himself, that Susan was, in

reality, his superior as to birth and lineage.)
Again, his desire for the concealment
of his attentions had been influenced
by the fear of interference on the part of
Susan's relatives, especially of her father,
who, he rather thought, might feel inclined
to spoil his pleasant sport.

And so far, with the sole drawback of
the idiot brother's obtrusive presence at
their interviews, all had gone well. Peleus
had abandoned himself to the agreeable
present, and had given no thought to the
future. At least, he had not done so explicitly,
for there is no doubt but that
there had all along existed in his consciousness
an implicit intention of dropping
the whole affair when he was tired of
it.

Certainly, at all events, the young
fellow had never once dreamt of offering
marriage to the daughter of a farmer — to
a girl who did not always speak correct
English. Peleus had very lofty notions as

to the style of person ou whom it would be
due to himself to bestow the honour of his
hand, should he decide upon marrying at
all. His wife, at any rate, should be a lady
who would do him credit.

Yet, here was this simple child — this
ignorant, Quixotic Susan — venturing to
own that she had actually aspired to such
a position. Peleus felt quite angry and
indignant at her assurance.

Still, he had not, as has been seen,
thought proper distinctly to repudiate this
morning any such intention as she credited
him with. Several considerations had moved
him to a policy of delay in explicating
his true views. Susan must be taught by
degrees to see the folly of which she had
been guilty — to appreciate the absurdity of
her notions. But for the moment he dared
not say anything that might bring on a
scene (Peleus was dreadfully afraid of a
scene), or that might cause a rupture
between them.

Her intensity had put him out and bored
him, certainly, but he was not tired of this
amusement yet, and did not wish that it
should come to an end.

Besides, there was this lover. If he
were to quarrel with her now, was it not
possible that Susan, in spite of all that she
had said, might be led into giving him
encouragement?

The idea awakened in Peleus' manly
bosom a resentful, dog-in-the-manger kind
of jealousy. J^o, he was not going to
stand any chance of losing the girl in that
way, and he forthwith proceeded to lavish
upon her many fervent expressions of
endearment.

And now, my darling, I must runaway,'
he concluded. ' But you'll promise
me again, before I go, not to have anything
to do with that fellow, Carey — won't
you ?

Susan looked hurt again.

Oh, Percival! How can you ask?' she
remonstrated. ' You ^72(9zt' I shan't.'

She had given him this name almost for
the first time ; but, somehow, Peleus did
not feel quite so pleased with her obedience
in this respect as might be imagined.
Already, in fact, the reaction against his
fondness for this innocent girl had set in,
though he did not as yet recognise that
such was the case. Promising to meet her
again on the morrow, in order to learn how
she had sped with * that cheeky young
miller,' he quitted her, to return home by
the way he had come. As he traversed the
fields, he felt a little cross and disappointed,
but no scruples of conscience troubled the
young man as to the injury he might be
doing this girl who loved him by keeping
her from marrying another, whilst, at the
same time, he was fully resolved not to
marry her himself. As for poor Susan,
she sat still in the arbour, after he was

gone, to dream of him a little longer, lost in
the sublimity of her passionate devotion.
Then, as she made her way to the house,
she began to meditate over the words in
which she should reject the offer of an
honest, noble, generous heart — the love of
a man whose little finger was worth the
whole of her dandified Percival's body.

CHAPTER VIII.

BUT I MAI SPEAK AGAIN ?'

Idalia returned to the Hall just in time
forluucheoD, and she returned triumphant.
Dora and Jessie McNicoll, after bringing
forward various objections, only to have
them eagerly over-ruled by Idalia, had at
length yielded to her persuasions.

They had agreed to become guests at
Monkswood Hall pending the illness of
their brother, and they had promised to
arrive this afternoon. Sir Arthur Ledsom,
moreover, in accordance with an invitation
unconventionally extended to him by Miss
Brethertou, had arranged to be the girls'
escort, and afterwards to spend the evening
here in their company.

These facts Idalia communicated to her
companions as they sat down to the midday
meal (which meal, to his son's annoyance,
Mr. Bretherton usually spoke of as

dinner,' and at which, indeed, he always
made his own principal repast, sitting at
the later and more fashionable hour almost
without tasting a morsel), and by each of
the three the news was received with characteristic
difference of manner. Genial,
hospitable Mr. Bretherton felt heartily
pleased at the notion of welcoming the

young folks ' beneath his roof, and, as a
matter of course, he allowed his satisfaction
to appear. Charlie Nunnerley, on the
contrary, felt heartily vexed both b}^ Idalia's
success with his cousins and at the invitation
accorded to Sir Arthur ; but this vexation
he did not allow to appear. Peleus, for
his part, was gratified to learn that the
young baronet was to be their guest — he
made a point of cultivating Sir Arthur
as a highly creditable acquaintance — but

exhibited entire indifference as to the
advent of the Misses McNicoll. \ These plain
3'oung ladies, with their pallid, freckled
countenances, had by no means attracted
his fancy.

I hope, however, that their coming
won't interfere with our ride this afternoon,
Idalia ?' he asked his sister.

^ No ; certainly it will not need to,' she
returned. ' Let us start early, and we
shall be back in plenty of time to receive
them. You will ride with us, will you not,
Mr. Nunnerley ?'

I should have liked to do so immensely,'
(Charlie unquestionably would have
liked it), ' but lam sorry to say, I cannot,'
he replied.

'You cannot? Why on earth not,
Kunnerley ?' demanded Peleus.

'Because I have another engagement,
unfortunately,' Charlie answered. 'I' — he
hesitated for a second — ' I arranged to call
upon my uncle this afternoon at the mill,

and I feel all the more bound to keep the
appointment on account of this unpleasant
news about Victor.'

Peleus regarded his friend with a passing
suspicion.

Seems to me that you are marvellously
fond of your uncle, my dear fellow,' he
observed, ^ considering what a cross old
buffer he is ! This is the second time
you have been to see him since the picnic'

Charlie laughed, but he also reddened.

Oh, it is not out of pure love for him,'
he protested ; ' I have to consult him about
a little matter of business. My mother
left him trustee to her small property. It
is simply a matter of business.'

Perfectly satisfied with this reply, Percival
muttered a sort of apology for his
remark, and the conversation drifted into
another channel.

When Idalia presently left the table, in
the intention of at once preparing for her
ride, Charlie sprang to open the door, and,

after holding it for a minute or two in his
hand, he followed her from the room. He
"was about also to mount the stairs behind
her, in order to reach his own apartment,
when he was stopped by a voice addressing
him. The voice came from Mrs. Briscoe,
the housekeeper, who was hurrying towards
him with a discomposed mien.

Oh ! Mr. Nunnerley, if you please, sir,
where is Miss Bretherton ?' she panted.
The worthy woman was growing stout,
and haste or emotion disturbed her
breathing.

'Here I am,' called out Idalia, leaning
over the banisters. She had not gone very
far, and her quick ears had caught the
query. ' What is the matter, Mrs. Briscoe ?
Do you want me ?'

Oh, miss, I'm so sorry ! Something
has happened — something very dreadful !'

Idalia was down the double flight of
stairs in a moment. She cast an inquiring
glance towards the room she had just

VOL. II. L

quitted. Then, re-assured by the reflection
that the misfortune, whatever it
might be, had nothing to do with her
father or brother, she turned towards
Mrs. Briscoe, half smiling at her excitement.


Well, what is it ?' she asked again.

Oh, miss ; 'tis the little dog !'

Pippin, do you mean ?' Idalia's smile
vanished like magic. ' Why, what is wrong
with him ?'

He has been hurt, miss, very badly.
Indeed, we are afraid he is dying. Bates
has just brought him into the kitchen. Oh,
Miss Bretherton ! I don't think you should
go there.'

But Idalia was already across the square
entrance-hall, and running down a long
passage which conducted to the domestic
regions. Nunnerley followed her closely
a light in his eye, which was not kindled
by grief at the dog's disaster. A group of
servants were standing around the fireplace

as their young mistress entered the
kitchen, but at her approach they moved
aside, and disclosed to Idalia's view her
little favourite stretched on a mat at their
feet. A cloth covered the spaniel's body
almost to his pretty silken head, and his
long-drawn, gasping breath showed plainly
that he was dying.

Miss Bretherton uttered an inarticulate
cry of dismay, which, however, she
immediately suppressed. But her mobile
features became marked by an expression
of extreme distress.

You mustn't touch the cloth, ma'am, if
you please,' advised Bates, the respectable
elderly coachman, who had placed the
injured animal where he now lay. ' 'Isn't
no sight for you underneath. The poor
little fellow has been nearly cut in two.'

Again Idalia stifled a cry, and her face
turned very white.

Charlie thought she was going to faint,
and he put out his arm towards her.

l2

Before he could touch her, however, she
had sunk to her knees by the dog's side.

'How did it happen?' she demanded,
almost in a whisper.

Bates proceeded to explain. The previous
night had been a wet one, and the
heavy rain had found its way into a bedchamber
where two of the maids slept.
Plumbers had been sent for this morning
to repair the roof. For the purpose of re-lining
a spout, they had carried up the
ladder with them a large sheet of lead.
This, when they had finished with it, they
had cast down from the roof. Bates, who
chanced to be standing beside the stable-door,
had perceived their intention, and at
the same moment he had noticed that
Miss Bretherton's little dog lay curled up,
fast asleep, on a workman's bass directly
beneath the spot. He had shouted to
warn the men, but it had been too late.
The sheet of lead had descended right on
the dog's body, and, striking with its things

edge, it had — as he unnecessarily repeated
— nearly cut the little chap in two.

Oh, Pippin ! Pippin !' At the sound of
Idalia's voice the spaniel moved his head,
and his eyes brightened, even beneath the
film of death. Ever since she had possessed
him, Pippin had manifested the
strongest partiality for his mistress, and
of late his attachment had so increased
that he would follow at her heels from
morning till night, only suffering himself
to be tempted away at feeding times.
Idalia, in return, had become exceedingly
fond of him, and she had taught him
several amusing tricks. As she now approached
her hand to caress his head, the
poor dog gave her fingers a feeble lick.
It was his last effort. The next instant
a shudder passed over his frame, and he
was dead.

Idalia remained kneeling for some
minutes, without uttering a word or sound ;
but, from the trembling of her lips and

other signs, Nunnerley saw that she was
greatly moved.

Come away, Idalia — Miss Bretherton *
he corrected himself hastily — * come
away ! Let me take you away.' He
stooped as he spoke, and took her hand.

Idalia allowed him to raise her from the
ground. Also (whether she was conscious
of the fact or not Charlie could not feel
sure), she left her hand in his whilst heled
her from the kitchen, and drew her,
without asking permission, into the first
room they came to. This was the library
a handsomely furnished apartment, well
lined with book-shelves, the varied and
valuable contents of which had been
principally collected by the late General
Curtis.

Still, apparently but half sensible of his
attentions, Idalia suffered Charlie to place
her upon a chair. Then all at once she
gave way, and, covering her face with her
handkerchief, sobbed aloud.

By nature extremely sensitive and
sympathetic, the girl's feelings had received
a trying shock through this sudden and
horrible death of her canine pet. Before
the servants, however, she had managed to
control her emotions, and even now, though
it was a relief to cry, she felt ashamed of
breaking down. She struggled hard,
therefore, to regain her self-command.

Nunnerley, meanwhile, secretly overjoyed
by her distress, was encouraging himself
in the wildest hopes as he witnessed it.

The spaniel, it will be remembered, had
been his gift, and it had always delighted
him to see her petting it. It delighted
him still more to see the trouble which its
loss was now occasioning her. Surely it
was not upon the dog, merely as a dog,
that all this affectionate regret was being
wasted.

Dear Miss Idalia ' — Charlie ventured to
sink on one knee by her chair — ' do not
grieve so ; I cannot bear it ! Let me find

you another dog just like him ? I can do so
easily.'

No, no ! I don't want another dog
she faltered. ' It would not be Pippin —
poor little Pippin ! But T am quite ashamed
to behave like this,' she went on. ' I
shall be better directly. You will think I
have not much self-control.'

I think you have an exquisitely kind
and tender heart,' rejoined the young man,
summoning courage to lay his hand on
hers.

Idalia withdrew her hand, but not,
Charlie thought, either very hastily or very
angrily.

Please don't kneel there, Mr. J^unner-
ley,' she said, ceasing now to sob, and
returning her handkerchief to her pocket.
Charlie, however, felt emboldened to
disobey.

Just one moment,' he begged, his voice
tremulous with the strength of those feelings
which he had hitherto with such

difficulty repressed. 'Do let me say something
; do let me ask you one question.
Miss Idalia — dear Miss Idalia — did you
care for the gift just one wee, ice bit
because of the giver ?'

Idalia's face flushed crimson.

What do you mean ?' she stammered.

Are you You are not talking of

Pippin ? Do get up, please !'

But Charlie still kept his place.

Oh ! if you would only ' he recommenced.


She interrupted him with an imperative
gesture.

Don't say anything more ! I can't
listen, Mr. Nunnerley ; at all events, not
now.'

*Not now?' he echoed. 'Then I may
some time? Oh, Idalia ! do you mean that
I may speak some time ?' In his delight,
he caught once more at her hand, and,
raising it to his lips, kissed it several times
with eager warmth.

Idalia snatched it away, and sprang from
her chair.

You ought not to have done that !' she
exclaimed; 'you had no right to do that V
There was displeasure in her tone, but
not, it seemed to Charlie, very deep displeasure.


Forgive me ?' he pleaded ; ' pray forgive
me? I offer the most abject apology.
But if you only knew ; oh ! if you only
knew how I love '

Hush, hush !' She stopped him again
with uplifted hand. ' Leave me, Mr. Nunnerley.
I must ask you to leave me at
once. I wish to be alone.'

But ' — Charlie debated within himself
for a second — ' but I may speak again ?' he
entreated, softly.

Miss Bretherton walked away towards
the window. From there, with her back to
him, she answered,

Perhaps ; I don't know. Go away now.'

Charlie went without another word.

CHAPTER IX.

SOWING THE Wind.

Five minutes later, Nunnery slipped out
at a side door, taking pains to do so unobserved,
and passed from the Monksu'ood
grounds. Proceeding along the highway,
he very soon reached a stile, over which he
vaulted ; this brought him into the field-path
which formed a short cut to his
uncle's mill — the same path that Victor had
taken thence on the day of Sir Jonathan
Ledsom's funeral.

jot a soul was in sight, for the bye-way
was an unfrequented one, and the young
man now gave the reins to his feelings.
Since quitting Idalia's presence, he had

been so full of jubilafcion that he scarcely
knew how to contain himself. His heart
was leaping for joy ; his legs felt full of
springs. He wanted to run and jump
along the road, to laugh aloud, to sing, todo
something or other to give vent to the
ecstasy that possessed him.

Day by day, since he had come to live
beneath the same roof with her, his love
for Idalia Bretherton had grown, until it
had become a passion such as almost
astonished himself — such as he had never
believed himself capable of feeling. Of
late he had nourished hopes, but they had
seemed too extravagant — too delightful —
to entertain. 'Now those hopes had
merged into something very like certainty !
In not point-blank refusing him permission
to recur to the subject of his love, Idalia
had, he thought, virtually consented to
listen to his confession at some future
time. And from A^r this meant much ;
it meant, he believed, almost everything.

Charlie had not intended to speak so
soon, but now he blessed the circumstance
that had tempted him into doing so.
Courage, and he would succeed ! He,
Charlie Nunnerley, would win this girl,
who needed only to be known in order to
have suitors by the score ! All along he
had congratulated himself upon being
among Miss Bretherton's first friends in
England. In time, the fame of her beauty
and of her prospective wealth must spread
beyond this out-of-the-way country corner,
and then, if he had waited so long, his
chances might have been small enough.

As it was, here already was Sir Arthur
Ledsom — a baronet young, good-looking,
rich, and as ignorant of his own value in
the matrimonial market as she evidently
was of hers. Sir Arthur, Charlie felt
almost sure, was falling in love with Miss
Bretherton ; and, if this were so, he would
not stick at the father. Indeed, to his
surprise, Charlie had noticed that Sir

Arthur seemed actually to like Mr.
Bretherton.

Did Idalia suspect, he wondered, that
the young baronet admired her ? And, if
so, was it possible that she preferred him ?
Yes, Charlie believed that it was possible !
Unless she had loved him, at least a little,
she would, he was convinced, have behaved
very differently in the interview that had
just passed between them. The conviction
transported him with delight. Ah,
how proud he should be of her ! And
w4iat a wife she would make for an artist !
With her for a model and an inspiration,
Avhat subjects he might conceive, and what
paintings he might execute ! He would,
he resolved, work hard now, and he would
aim at becoming a Royal Academician.
He would promise Mr. Bretherton this —
he would swear to obtain a position. But
Charlie was not much afraid of poor
Abner. If the daughter only loved him,
the unworldly father would give his

sanction. He could easily persuade him
out of any possible objections to Lis suit.
Also he believed that, when the time came
for such things to be thought of, be could
bring Mr. Bretherton into making charmingly
liberal marriage settlements.

But how fast he was getting on ! All
at once Charlie checked himself. He was
making as sure of bis success, almost, as
though it were already placed beyond
doubt. And yet how many potential slips
there were between that cup of ecstasy and
his thirsty lips !

If Idalia did, indeed, favour him, was it
not because she did not know him —
because her liking was built on a mistaken
estimate of his character? "Would
she love him, even a little bit, if she really
knew v;hat he was — if she knew how
unworthy he was of her affection ? If
even (a shudder passed over the young
man's frame at the bare notion of it) — if
even she could know what he was about todo

now, and what he had already done
to-day ! If she could know that at
luncheon, an hour ago, he had told her a
deliberate falsehood — that when he had
said he was going to call upon his uncle,
he had known perfectly well that he had
not the slightest intention of doing so ;
that that excuse about the business consultation
had been altogether a fabrication —
what would the consequences of such an
enlightenment be ? Could he for a moment
entertain any doubt upon the point ? And
with her strict sense of honour, her own
straightforward truthfulness and candour,
what would she think of the fact that,
whilst hinting at love for herself, he was
all the while engaged to another young
lady?

That the engagement was clandestine,
and that it had been entered into, on
his own part, almost purely from mercenary
motives, would hardly, he thought, incase
of discovery, give a better colour to

the affair in Idalia's eyes. But was there
any likelihood of discovery ?

Charlie hoped not. Yet he was anxious
so anxious that all his exuberant elation
had now vanished. By all means he must,
he resolved, get out of the coil in which he
had become involved. He must get rid of
Hester at once. How he TV'ished he could
make her desire to be rid of him. If she
would only take the initiative, he would,
under the circumstances, be perfectly willing
to be jilted. Until to-daj he had not
felt altogether determined to break off the
eno^ao;ement.

Interest had prompted him to keep some
hold on the girl he had once professed to
love — until he could feel more sure of the
girl whom he really did love. But now
that he did, whether on reasonable grounds
or not, begin to feel pretty well assured of
success with the new love, it was high time
to be off with the old one. This very day
this very afternoon — IS'unnerley resolved

VOL. II. M

to make an effort to break the chains that
bound him. For, as may have been guessed,
he was at the present moment on his
way to meet Miss Hester Courteney by a
secret appointment, such as his friend
Peleus Bretherton had kept in the morning.
Between these two young men there existed
considerable likeness of character, and,
as a consequence, the possibility of similarity
in their modes of action under given
circumstances. Both were selfish, vain,
and deceitful. In this respect, they were
certainly birds of a feather. But in the
colour of their feathers there was, on the
whole, a decided difference. One bird
had a good deal more black in his plumage
than the other ; or, to drop metaphor, one
of these young men, however much
appearances might be against him, was by
no means an irredeemable miscreant. He
possessed something at least oE a heart and
a conscience, whilst the other — but after-events
will speak for themselves. On

reaching the end of the field-path,
jSTunnerlej turned to the left (Upton
Mills lay on the right), and, after keeping
for some short distance along a narrow
cart road, he passed through a turnstile
which brought him down to the riverside.


A little further on the river fell in a
short, broken cataract ; and on a slight
elevation just above the fall stood the
ruins of what had once been a wind-mill.

Grown over with mosses and ivy, and
with only one shattered sail remaining,
this ruined mill presented a picturesque
object. But the interest wherewith Xuu-
nerley now regarded it was not excited
by its picturesqueness. It was here that
he expected to meet Hester Courteney.
Although he could not see anything of her,
as he swept his eye over and around the
broken, ivy-clad walls, he was not at all
sure that Hester could not see him. In
the hope that she might indeed be watched



in his approach through some crevice or
fissure of the ruin, the young man began
to walk very slowly, swinging an umbrella
he carried with an easy nonchalant air.
Once or twice, also, he stopped in a
leisurely manner to look down into the
river; and again, as the happy idea occurred
to him, he paused to light a cigar.

Certainly anything more unlike an eager
lover on the way to meet his mistress could
scarcely be conceived. If Hester was watching
for him, as he hoped, she could hardly
avoid taking mortal offence. And that
she should take mortal offence was just
what he wished, since it would make his
unpleasant task the easier.

When he had come within a few yards
of the old mill. Miss Courteney stepped
quietly forward into view. Then, still
preserving his leisurely pace, Charlie actually
began to whistle, and so approached
her smoking and whistling.

At last !' Hester greeted him with

these words only. But her face which, a
moment before, had flushed a little, now
became pale and set — strangely so, even
for Hester, who was always pale.

Neither the ciofar nor the whistle had
been lost upon her.

Why — am I late ?' he asked, with assumed
carelessness, drawing forth his
watch.

'You are three quarters-of-an-hour behind
Your time,' she answered, 'and I
have been waiting here as long as that.'

'Dear me! Have you really? I'm
sorry for that. But. the fact is, we were
late over luncheon ; so I couldn't well
help it. Excuse me smoking, will you?'

Hester bowed ; but her grey eyes were
fixed on her companion's face with a
startled, questioning gaze which belied
the coolness oE her compressed lips and
composed bearing.

*By George, how cold it is !' he resumed,
rubbing his hands together, but carefully

avoiding her glance. All this rudeness
was very hard for the young man to
maintain. Although by no means partial
to physical suffering, he would gladly have
undergone a mild bastinado rather than
have to pass through this interview such
as he intended it to be. Stern necessity,*
however, impelled him to the course he
had resolved upon, and Charlie determined
not to be a coward.

If you will come round the corner of
this wall,' said Hester, in a low, steady
voice, ' you will not feel the wind. Was
it because of the cold that you walked so
slowly here ?'

Charlie took the cigar out of his mouth
and knocked off the ashes.

'Did I walk slowly,' he asked; 'welly
perhaps I did. 1 was thinking a good
deal as I came along, Hester.' Miss
Courteney, he saw, was not disposed
hastily to pick a quarrel with him. It

would be necessary to lead up to matters
in another fashion.

May I know the subject of your
thoughts ?' Hester's tone was still firm
and unraised — betraying nothing of the
fierce pain and excitement that were
raofinof within.

Suddenly Charlie threw away his cigar.
Against his will, he was moved to a strong
feeling of admiration by the girl's dignity
of demeanour and wonderful power of
self-control. Although she had shown it
in no other way than by her unusual pallor,
he knew well that she had sustained a
great shock through his own conduct this
afternoon. She had come here to meet a
lover, or one who, despite a recent falling
oS in ardour, had, up to the present
moment, professed to be such ; and she
had met instead a rude ungentlemanly
boor, who, so far, had not even offered hera
greeting. Yet she had borne the shock

almost without flinching, with a quiet
fortitude that disdained even to show
surprise.

Won't you sit down, Hetty ?' he asked,
in an altered tone, pointing to a low
fragment of broken wall facing the river
and sheltered on either side by a thick
growth of bramble bushes. It was a spot
where they had often sat together for
hours in the early summer, screened from
the observation of any chance passer-by.
It was a spot where Charlie had sworn,
over and over again, that he loved her,
and where Hester had tasted, in listening
to him, the sweetest bliss of her life.

Very devoutly the young man began to
wish that some other place had been
appointed for their interview this afternoon
some place less connected with obtrusive
reminiscences. Already, since his visit to
Monkswood had commenced, he had met
Miss Courteney several times, but he had
never met her here before.

In accordance Tvith bis suggestion,
Hester seated herself upon the wall, and,
after a moment of hesitancy, Nunnerley
placed himself by her side. Then, whether
moved by her own recollections, or affected
by the change in his tone and his
present contiguity, Hester's proud reserve
suddenly gave way. She turned to him
and grasped his arm.

*0h! Charlie, Charlie! What is the
matter with you ?' she cried. ' Why are
you behaving like this?'

Nunnerley flushed crimson, but he did
not speak.

Two days ago, Charlie,' pursued Hester,
you swore that you were not changed
towards me. You said, when I accused
you of being so, that it was all my fancy.
You declared that you loved me as much
as ever. Charlie, tuas it the iruih T Her
accents trembled with wistful eagerness
as she put this question.

Still the young man made no reply.

He only drew a little farther away from
her, and commenced nervously poking at
the ground with his umbrella. It was
horribly disagreeable for him. But he
must let her know the truth now, cost
what it would. He must not yield to the
cowardly impulse which prompted him to
tell further falsehoods, in order to escape
the shame and the unpleasantness of the
moment. Surely she would let his silence
suffice for an answer ?

Hester did let it suffice. She took her
hand from his arm and gazed at him for a
few seconds, her eyes wide open and full
of anguish. Then all the warmth and
light gradually faded again from her face,
and her features hardened into an expression
of stony despair.

I see ; I understand,' she murmured, ina
clear though subdued key. ' Do you
wish our engagement to be cancelled ?'

Greatly relieved by this pertinent
interrogation, and still more by her quiet

way of putting it, Charlie took courage.

Well, Hester,' he said, ' I'm awfully
sorry, of course. But really, sou know, I
don't see how the thing was ever to come
to anything between us.'

'Did you ever intend it to come to anything?'
she demanded.

You know I did — that at least I have
always hoped matters might arrange themselves.
But, Hester, I am positive — quite
positive — that your father would refuse to
listen to me for a moment if I asked him
for your hand. I know he would.'

Of course Job. know he would !' There
was a kindling of angry contempt now in
Hester's grey eyes, though otherwise her
self-mastery was complete. 'But you have
known that all along, and so have I.
Why else have we kept our engagement
secret?'

But, my dear girl, it must have been
very unpleasant for you?' Charlie was
growing quite bold now, deceived by his

companion's apparent stoicism of feeling.
■'■ I — I have been thinking lately how very
wrong and selfish it was in me to — to
have drawn you into this.'

He still continued to bore holes in the
ground with his umbrella, and to avoid
looking into her face. Had he done so at
this juncture, he might have been somewhat
shaken in his impression as to Hester's
philosophic calmness and lack of resentment
against his now acknowledged infidelity.

*Tt is wretchedly unfortunate that Mr.
Courteney should have conceived such a
prejudice against me, but '

Hester interrupted him. ' I know the
reason of my father's prejudice against
you,' she said, sharply.

You do ?' He looked at her now with
a quick glance of surprise, and then blushed
furiously. ' Since when have you known
it?' he inquired.

Ever since I have known you, or nearly
so she replied.

But you have always pretended not to
know.'

Yes, that is true.'

Why ?'

'Because I knew that you would prefer
that I should not know ?'

Will you please tell me what it is that
that you do know, or have been told ?'

I know that my father thinks — or,
rather, that he is sure — that you once took
a ten-pound note of his — a good many years
ago — when you were a boy.'

It's a vile slander !' broke out Charlie.
Why didn't he prove it ? He never
could prove it ?'

*He could haveproved'it easily enough,'
said Hester; 'but he let the matter drop
because your uncle beo^ored him to do so.'

It's an abominable lie !' protested the
young man, colouring again, and moving
uneasily upon his seat. ' Hester ' — (a happy
idea struck him all at once : he would turn
this very discomposing, but perhaps well-timed,

confession of lies to account) —
Hester ; diO you believe there was any truth
in the accusation ?'

Hester reflected for a moment before
replying, but no blush warmed the frozen
rigidity of her features.

Yes,' she said at length ; ' I believe it
thoroughly, because father has given me
his proofs. I have always believed it.'

sand yet you would have consented to
marry me !' he exclaimed, with righteous
indignation, '■ believing me to be a thief?'

A bitter smile curled Hester's lips — a
smile which passed in a second.

Yes,' she answered, 'Iwouldhave married
you knowing you to have been a thief. I
would have married you, Charlie, T almost
believe, if you had committed a murder.
Whatever you had been, or whatever you
had done, I loved you so that I should
have thought nothing of it, so long as you
had continued faithful to me. Yes,' she
went on, 'I loved you so that nothing

mattered to me but your love. I would
have done anytbin^^ and risked anything
for you. I would have risked, as you
know, my father's displeasure by running
away and marrying you without his consent.
I would have risked disinheritance
for myself ; though, for your sake,
I was glad to believe that it would never
come to that. I would have given you my
whole fortune willingly if I had had it in
my hand ; yes, even though I knew that
you were marrying me in a great measure
on account of that fortune. I only wanted
a little love from you in return for my
great love. "With that I should have been
satisfied, so long as you had loved no

one else ; so long '

Hetty ! Dear Hetty !' Charlie's
amour-i^ropre was so pleasantly titillated
by this impassioned acknowledgment (for,
despite her frigid aspect, Hester's low
tones had trembled with subdued emotion)
that he felt tempted into forgetting

Lis resolution. He stooped to kiss her.

But Hester repulsed the embrace.
Springing to her feet she stood confronting
him, Charlie was almost frightened
by the scathing fire of rage and contempt
that played upon him for a moment from
those grey eyes which he had sometimes
thought so cold.

No ; do not offer me your false kisses.'
When she spoke again the girl's strong
will had triumphed once more, quelling all
demonstration of feeling, although her
words were hard. ' Offer them where
your false heart has gone !'

Hester ! What do you mean ? I '

Hush ! You need not attempt to deceive
me,' she interposed. ' Do you think
I am blind? Or that I have never suspected
this until now ? I know all ; I know
that you love her, and I see that you
have entirely ceased to care for me. But
what do you think her love is worth,
Charlie Nunnerley, compared with mine ?

Would lie love sou, do 3'ou suppose, if
she knew that sou had stolen a bank-note.
"Would she '

Stolen ! Hester, pray consider what
you are saying,' Charlie interrupted, in
his turn, looking uneasily around. ' I deny
the charge in toto. But even supposing
now, for a moment, that it were true, or
that evidence existed which could make it
appear so, could anyone be cruel enough
to ruin me by reaping up a thing that had
happened so long ago ? As you said yourself,
I was only a boy.'

'You were nineteen,' observed Hester,
deliberately.

But the things is not true — that's the
point !' protested the young man, irately.
If anyone repeats it, it will be an actionable
libel. But why should we talk on so
confoundedly unpleasant a topic ?'

We can drop it now,' was the quiet
rejoinder ; ' and you can finish what you
have to say to me.'

VOL. II. N

Charlie shuddered. Hester's suggestions
had filled him with a sense of danger
and insecurity. He had feared before to
make her an enemy, but he feared it more
than ever now, for he recognised that she
held in her hand more than one deadly
weapon which might be turned against
him.

Hetty dear; do not let us quarrel,' he
implored, earnestly. ' Please sit down
again, and let me stand, if you do not care
to be near me.'

He rose as he spoke, and leaned against
a portion of the broken masonry.

1 am going to speak candidly to you,
Hester.'

Hester resumed her seat.

'Do,' she said, 'and please be brief as
well as candid. I want this interview
over. Tell me the plain truth, and then
go away and leave me. No : on second
thoughts I will tell it to you. Charles
Nunnerley, you are a scoundrel 1'

Miss Courteney !'

Yes, sir : you are a scoundrel. You
have deceived me ; you have lied to me ;
you have fooled me. You have won
my heart to cast it away from you like a
broken toy. You pretended to love me,
and you made me love sou ; so much that
I have been content all these months to
keep the secret of our engagement — to
become almost as deceitful as yourself ; so
much that I had promised to elope with
you whenever it should be your august
pleasure to accept from me that sacrifice
of my pride and dignity. And now you
would cast me off because you have met
with a fairer face and perhaps a larger
fortune !'

'You mistake, Hester. Allow me.'

No, I will not allow you. I will listen
to no more falsehoods. Let me finish . . .
I have not been altogether unprepared for
this. I knew, and felt, that you were
changed, although only the very last time

n2

we met — only two days ago — you vowed
that you were not so ! What has happened
since then ? I can guess . . . And
now you may go. You came here this
afternoon determined to gain your release
at all hazards — by affront, by wheedling,
by deception, by I know not what means.
But I will spare you any further trouble.
I give you your release. Take it, and go!'

'Hester, I cannot ask you to forgive me.
I acknowledge that I deserve that you
should despise me,' he stammered, vaguely
comprehending the depth of suppressed
passion seething in the insulted girl's
breast. ' But, at least, say that you do
not hate me — that you will not wish me
harm.'

'Not wish you harm ! Manly and unselfish
creature !' There was withering
sarcasm in her accent. ' Oh, no, how could
I wish that you should suffer ? Let me
press the iron into my own soul, and piously
return good for evil !'

Hester, you do bate me !'

Insulted love, I have beard, does sometimes
turn to bate. But we will not
discuss that question. Kindly leave me,
Mr. Nunnerley.'

Charlie moved a step forward and took
off his bat. Whether Hester bated him or
not, be felt that be almost bated her. The
sort of thing which she had just said to
him was what be could never foro-ive.
Her plain speaking and bitter sarcasms
bad wounded his vanity to the quick.
Yet be knew that she had not said one
word more than he deserved ; nor, indeed,
so much as he deserved. He had injured
the girl, and insulted her. It was natural
that she should wish to revenge herself — if
only she would be content to revenge herself
in words alone.

Miss Courteney, my regret for what
has occurred is beyond expression,' be
began, feeling that he must apologise —
that be must make some endeavour to conciliate

her. ' If you would but permit me
to speak, I think '

You think that your capacity for
dissimulation is not at an end ? You are
mistaken, so far as I am concerned ; for
my weak credulity is at an end. There is
nothing more to be said between us. If
you will not leave me, I must leave you.'

Intuitively the young man felt that
nothing more was to be said ; that to
humble himself to the lowest point of
self-abasement would be worse than
useless. His offence was beyond redemption.


Good-bye, then,' he murmured, sullenly.
' I will return your letters to the postoffice.
Perhaps you will be good enough '
this with a quick, ill-concealed anxiety —
to let me have mine back, too ?'

Hester reflected for a moment, and a
bright flush of colour rose unaccountably
to her pale face.

Yes. Yes, certainly your letters shall

be returned to you. Good-bye, Mr. j^un-
nerley.'

He lifted his hat once more, and walked
off by the same way that he had come,
along the river's bank. But how small he
felt — how wretchedly discomfited ! Was
she looking after him, he wondered ?
Looking after him with contempt and
aversion in her gaze ? He confessed to
himself that he was an object worthy of
disdain. He could almost have wished
that the earth would open and swallow him
up, so ashamed and confused did he feel,
so anxious to get out of her sight. It was
quite a relief when he could turn away
from the river, and feel satisfied that he
was at last out of the range of her vision.

He could hold up his head now, and
feel rather less like a beaten hound. Certainly
Miss Courteney had had the best of
it. She had administered the lash pretty
smartly. But, then, it was all over. Yes,
it was all over now, and he was free of

lier ! There was consolation in this
thought. He need no longer look on
himself as a hypocrite. His double dealings
were at an end. He had broken the
fetters that had been galling him. He
was at liberty now to love Idalia with all
his heart and soul, and to try his utmost
to win her.

And he could win her— he felt confident
he could win her — if only he could make
sure that Hester Courteney intended tolet
him escape so easily as this. For,
after all, he had escaped very easily. Considering
how blindly devoted she had
always shown herself to him, Hester had
made very little to do over the breach of
their connection. There had been no scene,
no tears, no reproaches — at least, no tender
ones. She had called him some very
ugly names, it is true, and she had poured
out upon him vials of scorn and indignation.
But this was a great deal better
than the other thing ; and, on the whole,

he bad reason to congratulate himself.
If this was to be all, he had every
reason to congratulate himself. And
surely it would be? Surely, for her
own sake, Hester would keep the secret
of what had passed between them? If he
could not rely upon any mercy for himself,
he could, at any rate, rely upon the
pride and reserve of her own nature.

Aro^uinor thus, and strivings to believe
what he hoped for, Nunnerley worked
himself into better spirits, and, by the
time he had again come within vie of
]\Ionkswood, he had recovered something
of the joyous elation wherewith he had
set forth upon his walk.

CHAPTER X.

A MIDNIGHT CONFESSION.

One night, when she had been at Monks-wood
about a week, Jessie McNicoll awoke
to find the place by her side vacant.

Although separate apartments had been
put at their disposal, the sisters had elected
to occupy the same.

'Dora?' Jessie uttered the name anxiously.
A mysterious prescience seemed to
warn her that something was wrong.
Dora dear, where are you ?'

There was no answer in words, but a
stifled sob reached her ears from the
further end of the large room.

Jessie was out of bed in an instant.

By the dim flicker of the dying firelight
she descried a figure standing near a distant
windows, the blind of which had been
drawn up.

Dora, what are you doing there ? You
have got your dressing-gown on ! And
your hands are as cold as ice !' she exclaimed,
clasping her sister in her arms.
What is the matter, darling ?'

^ Nothing. There is nothing the matter
faltered Dora. *I could not sleep, so I
have been walking about a little : that is
all. Go back to bed, Jessie.'

'No, I won't — not without you come,
too !' protested Jessie. ' Oh, how cold you
are! You must have been up for hours.
Dora, there is something the matter. Is
it ' She paused for a moment, shocked
by the idea that had suggested itself —
Oh, Dora, it is about Victor ! You have
been keeping something from me. Is he
worse? Is he in danger?'

'No, no!' It was Dora's turn now to

expostulate. ' How excitable you are,
Jessie dear ! I have heard nothing more
than we were both told this afternoon.'

Then there is really no reason for
serious alarm? Arthur said that the
doctor's report was favourable — that Victor
had taken the fever very mildly.'

Yes, but still one cannot help feeling
anxious, you know, until he has got over
it. Of course he is very ill.' This observation
was somewhat disingenuous on
Dora's part, since it was meant to mislead
her sister.

That is what you have been fretting
about, then, is it?'

Dora quibbled again. ' It was silly, was
it not? Come, let us get into bed. I do
feel rather cold.'

Cold ? You are frozen !' Jessie gathered
her close, in order to impart some of
her own warmth. 'Now, Dora,' she went
on, presently, 'you know you are not
going to have any secrets from me. We

never have bad any secrets from each
other yet. "Was it only about Victor that
you were crjino^?'

bessie's tone was peremptory. The
younger Miss McNicoll possessed a stronger
will than her sister, or, at least, a greater
power of insistence (which, so far, had
gone for the same thing) ; and gentle,
sweet-tempered Dora had grown accustomed
to give way whenever any difference of
opinion or desire arose between them.

come, tell me!' she persisted.

Dora felt impelled to yield, partly from
habit, but partly also from other motives.

'No, it was not altogether that,' she
admitted.

*Then what was it? You cannot have
any personal trouble, Dora — you ? Why, I
always look upon you as about the most
fortunate girl in the world !'

Fortunate ? How am I fortunate ?'
echoed Dora, with a little hysterical laugh-that
ended in a renewed burst of sobbing.

What does this mean ?' cried her sister.
Don't you care for Arthur ? I thought
you loved him ?'

Oh, Jessie I What are you saying?
You mustn't talk like that !' Dora remonstrated.
(Hitherto Jessie had delicately
avoided such plain speaking.)

^ Yes, I must — just this once, dear? I
want to get to the bottom of things. Why,
my head would be turned if I were in your
Tjlace ! To think of becoming mistress of
such a place as Feldhurst Court, and the
wife of a baronet ! What girl in your
position ever had such prospects before ?
Of course, I know that we belong to a respectable
family, and that the Bashaw is
rich enough. But there has never been a
title yet amongst the McNicolls. Perhaps
it is rather a vulgar aspiration on my part;
but, I must confess, that I should dearly
love to be called '^ ray lady." If you were
not my own sister, I should be frightfully

jealous of you, mj dear, and so I tell you
frankly.'

^ Jessie, it is all a dream, what you are
talking of — all a foolish dream,' asseverated
Dora, struoforlino- to choke back her
tears. Fortunately, however, those tears
had already relieved the tension of mental
anguish which the poor girl had borne for
days, and borne with so brave a countenance
that no one could have suspected her of
beinor the victim of a secret orgies.

Jessie did not, even now, suspect it.
Reflecting how unusually bright and lively
her sister had appeared throughout the
past evening, she felt sorely puzzled, however,
at surprising this wild burst of grief
in midnight hours. As yet, Jessie did not
understand that, although these qualities
might manifest themselves in a different
direction from her own, Dora was by no
means deficient either in strength of
character or tenacity of purpose.

Surely, it cannot be possible ?' — Jessie
put the inquiry after a brief silence, and ina
whisper almost of awe — *It cannot be
possible that you have refused him ?'

Dora laughed again rather faintly. * He
has not given me the opportunity of refusing
him, Jessie she said, ^ and he never
will;

Nonsense ! He is not a flirt. I never
knew anyone less like a flirt than Arthur
Ledsom. And he must either be a flirt, or
he must mean to make you an offer
observed Jessie, with decision.

I don't see that,' demurred Dora,
tremulously. * Most certainly he is not a
flirt ; but '

But other people see it, if you don't !'
interposed her sister. ^ Even Percival
Bretherton hinted to me yesterday that
you were a remarkably lucky girl. I
thought it very bad form of him, and I let
him see that I thought so. But, all the
same, it is true

It is not true, Jessie. It is altogether
a mistake.'

*Then, why, pray, does he come here
every day ? I know he pretends that it is
to tell us about Victor ; but he knows very
well that we hear without him. That is allan
excuse.'

Yes. But he does not come to see 11x6^
Jessie.'

You silly goose ! Who, then, does he
come to see ? Is it me ?'

No, Jessie ; it is Idalia Bretherton.'
Jessie experienced quite a shock. Dora

had made the assertion in such a tone of
solemn conviction, mingled with an inflection
of acutest pain, that she could not
avoid being impressed. A few moments
of meditation, however, enabled her to
rally.

'Nonsense !' she ejaculated again ; * how
absurd you are, Dora ! Does he not always
sit beside you ? Does he not always ride
or walk with you when we are out to-vol.

II.

gather? Does he not always talk to you
twice as much as to anyone else ?'

'Yes assented her sister, *that is true.
But . . Oh, Jessie, now that we have
begun to talk about it, I will tell you all !
He does sit beside me, but all the while he
looks at her. He does talk to me, but
whenever she speaks, he stops to listen —
sometimes in the middle of a sentence ;
and then, often and often, he forgets to
finish the sentence. And when she sings —
Oh, Jessie, have you never noticed it?
When she sings, he hangs on every note,
with all his soul in his eyes. And when
she stops, he sighs — and . . . Oh, there
is no doubt of it — no doubt at all !'

Jessie filled up another short silence by
straining her sister in sympathetic distress
to her affectionate young heart.

IF this is true, I shall hate them both !'
she burst forth. 'But it can't be. Why,
you little donkey, didn't he come just the
same when we were at home ?' she

continued, brightening suddenly ; ' thai
^as not to see Miss Bretherton, was it?'

Carried away by her unaffected
sympathy, and encouraged by the darkness,
which seemed somehow to rob the
confidence of anything like indelicacy,
Dora opened her whole heart to her sister.

*He did love me once, Jessie!' she
exclaimed. ' Before he saw her. At least,
I thinly he did. And one night he was
just on the point — just ia the very act — of
telling me so v/hen you came in and interrupted
us.' And Dora went on to give
her listener a faithful account of that
interview in the firelight drawing-room, every
word of which was transcribed upon her
memory.

Jessie heard her through without comment.


'I could beat myself, I am so vexed,'
she then observed. ' But how was I to
know ? If he had only spoken ! But,
Dora, he is not fickle. 1 believe, indeed I

o2

am sure, you are doing him an injustice.
If Arthur loved you once, he loves you
still. You are quite as good and as sweet
as she is, darling; you are sweeter, of
course, in my eyes. And Arthur is not the
kind of man who would care much for
looks.'

^ Every man cares for looks averred
Dora ; * and Idalia's beauty is not of a
common order. Oh, Jessie, it is no
wonder, no wonder ! . . . I should like to
go home,' she pursued, breaking down
again. * I would give anything to go
home ! I am not afraid of the fever, not
in the very slightest degree.'

Now, Dora, listen, to me,' resumed
Jessie, in a superior, argumentative tone ;
you are jumping to conclusions a vast
deal too hastily. Arthur may admire
Idalia, and I have no doubt he does.
Who could help.it ? But to admire is not
to love. And to look at a person a good
deal doesn't prove much ; for, to tell the

truth, I often catch myself gazing at Mr.
Percival in a way that Fm quite ashamed
of. He's such a handsome fellow, you
know, that it gives one a sort of pleasure
to stare at him. Yet, I am so far from
being in love that I do not even like him.'

I should think not ! But the cases are
different — quite different.'

I don't see it. I believe — I really do
believe that you are mistaken ! Besides,
there is Charlie? Didn't you admit yourself,
the other day, Dora, that Charlie was
evidently emprise and, also, that Idalia seemed
to favour him ? . . . And — why, were
they not playing chess together nearly the
whole of last evening?'

Dora faltered an assent.

Yes. But, Jessie, it was Arthur's
manner, whilst they were playing, that
made me feel sure — ^ surer than ever 1
had done before — that it was her he cared
for. He was so restless and distracted
that he could not sit still or talk rationally.

And every second he kept looking
over at them. Oh, I am not mistaken !
But do not let us say any more, dear. I
perhaps I have no right to feel as I do,
and I have tried to keep my trouble to
myself ; — but it did seem as though I was
justified in . in thinking what I have
done.'

^ Of course you were justified in that,'
returned her sister. ' But, darling, I don't
even yet believe that you are justified in
your doubts of him. At all events,
promise me that you will wait a few days
and let me judge ? Lookers-on, you know,
see most of the game. Will you defer
your decision and your misery, you foolish
little gaby, until I can form an opinion
upon the matter.'

Dora clutched eagerly at this straw of
hope. Yes, perhaps it was true that an
observer — especially one so acute as Jessie
— might be in a better position to judge
than herself. At any rate, she would try

to think so. It was like a sort of reprieve.
Blindly she clun to the faint hope it
brought ; and, relieved by her tears and by
this sisterly confidence, she presently sank
into a sleep of exhaustion.

CHAPTER XL

Sib ARTHUR LEDSOM CHOOSES HIS COURSE.

With a solicitude which she took care not
to show, Jessie waited next morning for
Arthur Ledsom's accustomed visit. Despite
her protestations of the previous
evening, she feared, in her secret heart,
that there might be truth in Dora s suspicions,
and she longed to satisfy herself
that such was not the case. But her
affectionate anxiety was doomed to be
prolonged.

Sir Arthur did not appear at the usual
hour. Since the commencement of his
friend's illness, it had been his practice to
inquire each morning at Upton Lodge for

news of Victor's condition, and then to
bring that news on to Victor's sisters. Asa
rule, this early call had only been a short
one ; but, almost invariably, it had led to
some arrangements for Sir Arthur to visit
Monkswood later in the day. Either he
had asked permission to ride with the
ladies in the afternoon, or he had contrived
to secure an invitation for the
evening.

This morning, however, the daily bulletin
was brought, not by the young baronet,
but by Mr. McNicoll's gardener, and, whilst
not positively alarming, his report was less
favourable than those which Arthur had
been in the habit of delivering, and on
which he had, perhaps, thrown the best
possible light. Although not, according to
the doctors, in any actual danger, Victor
was unquestionably very ill. Throughout
most of the past night, he had, the gardener
declared, been delirious, and Mr. McNicoll
had never left him for a moment. That

their father had constituted himself his
son's principal nurse, the girls had already
heard to their intense surprise. Such a
display of parental affection appeared to
them entirely foreign to his character.
But they were yet to learn that respecting
the nature and extent of Mr. McNicoll's
devotion to his favourite child which would
surprise them still more.

After repeating these tidings concerning
his young master, the gardener had gone
on to convey a verbal message from Sir
Arthur Ledsom, who, it appeared, had
made his customary inquiries at Upton
Lodge. The message was to the effect
that, owing to an engagement with his
estate-agent, he should nob this morning
be able to do himself the pleasure of calling
at Monkswood.

That he would present himself later in
the day, however, no one doubted ; for,,
with whatever variety of feeling his presence
amongst them was regarded, the

little party at the Hall had come almost to
look upon their circle as incomplete without
him. Nevertheless, not only this day,
but the next and the next passed without
bringing him. It began to be feared that
he was ill, and early on the morning of the
fourth day PeleusBrethertonwent up to the
Court to inquire. As he approached the
house, the young man was convinced that he
saw Sir Arthur hastily retreating from one
of the windows. Yet, when he asked for
him, he was told that the baronet was 'net at
home.' In reply to a further inquiry, he was
informed, moreover, that Sir Arthur was
in his usual health.

Of all this mystery there seemed to
young Bretherton but one possible solution
viz., that Sir Arthur was offended. Disconcerted
and annoyed, he hurried home to
try and find out who was the offender, and
what the cause of offence.

But although it was true, as Percival
guessed, that the ' not at home' had mere

been used as the conventional form for
denying himself to his visitor, poor Sir
Arthur was not offended with anyone.
He was only unhappy — only, as he told
himself, utterly and unmitigated wretched
— unfit for society, and especially unfit
to tolerate the society of a person so
uncongenial to him as Mr. Percival
Bretherton.

To the reader it has, of course, been no
secret that Arthur Ledsom, all this time,
had been falling in love with the daughter of
his new neighbour. Those signs which
poor Dora had noticed with a bleedingheart,
had been to the full as pregnant of meaning
as she had imagined. And yet the young
man had proved strangely slow in recognising
his own condition. Fickleness,
either of feeling or purpose, was about the
last quality which he would willingly have
attributed to himself, and, having made up
his mind that Dora McNicoU was to be his
wife, he had blindly and obstinately refused

to recognise that he no longer desired that
she should become so. There had, however,
Gone a point beyond which he had found
it impossible further to deceive himself.
Thrown constantly into the company of
the two girls, in each other's presence, he
had at length been compelled to see the
truth — to understand, with something
like horror, that it was Idalia, not Dora,
whom he loved ! And, the veil thus eventually
torn from his eyes, poor Arthur had
understood something else. In the licht
of this new, overwhelming, and transporting
sentiment, he had seen clearly that
"what he had felt for Dora McXicoll had
never really been love at all. That is, it
had never been this kind of love, tender,
passionate, and absorbing. It had been a
calm and placid affection, very real and
very pleasant so far as it went ; but, alas,
by comparison, how poor, how narrow, how
weak !

And yet he was bound to Dora — bound

in honour to remain faithful to her ! In
this conviction Arthur had never, until
within the last few days, allowed himself
for one moment to waver. Of a truth,
this young man was not fickle. His case
was one for pity rather than blame.
Youth, inexperience, and perhaps a little
hastiness of resolve were the only faults
whereof he had been guilty. Owing to
circumstances of various kinds, Arthur
had, so far, seen absolutely nothing of the
world, or of that class of society to which
his present position gave him the entree.
At college, where he had remained up to
the time of his uncle's death, the young
fellow had made many acquaintances, but
few friends. And, as it chanced, the two
companions whom alone he had admitted
to his intimacy had been men without
sisters (one of them, indeed, without any
settled home) ; and, although he had frequently
spent portions of his vacations in
their company, it had been chiefly in

travelling abroad, where only chance intercourse
with ladies could be enjoyed.

As a matter of fact, therefore, young
Ledsom had never known, with the slightest
degree of familiarity, any other girls
than Dora and Jessie McNicoll, Hester
Courteney, and one or two others among
the McNicolls' friends. With each and all
of the latter Dora, in Arthur's opinion,
had compared most favourably. From
his earliest boyhood he had been fond of
her, and, of late, that fondness had greatly
increased. For, as has already been
shown, Arthur had discovered the — to him,
weighty secret of Dora's love for himself,
and this had acted powerfully in begetting
a warmer liking on his own side. The
only error had been in his mistaking
liking and affection for the passion of love.
But, having made this mistake, Arthur
Lad resolved to abide by the consequences.
He had, he knew, paid Dora sufficient
attention to justify her preference of lira.

Further, he had, if not absolutely committed
himself in that interrupted interview,
at least done so to an extent which made
it impossible for him, as an honourable
man, to consider himself otherwise than
bound to fulfil the hopes he had raised.
To desert Dora now would, it seemed to
him, with his punctilious sense of chivalry
and honour, be the act of a blackguard.

Assured, therefore, within his own
mind that such conduct would be out of
the question, and determined to remain
staunch to his creed as a gentleman, he
had nevertheless been unwise enough to
throw himself into the strongest temptation.
He had visited continually at
Monkswood. and, whilst outwardly assiduous
to poor Dora, he had suffered eyes,
ears, and heart to become ever more penetrated
by that sweet poison which was
destroying his peace. But at length a
crisis had arrived in his experience. It
had been brought about through that

game of chess to which the McNicoll
sisters had referred in their midnight
talk, and which had been played by Idalia
and Charlie Nunnerley on the last evening
he had spent at the Hall. Long before
this he had guessed Nunnerley's secret,
and more than once he had suffered acute
pangs of jealousy on surprising v/hat
looked to him like signs of favourable
feeling upon Idalia's part. But this evening
as he watched them seated apart, absorbed
in their amusement and in each
other, a horror of great darkness seemed
all at once to fall upon poor Arthur. His
heart sank with a sickening dismay.

Suddenly he realised that to see Idalia
belonging to another would be more than
he could endure, and suddenly, also, he
was seized with a violent impulsion to
throw honour to the winds, and to enter
the lists himself as a candidate for this
coveted prize. Were he to do so, he
thought, he should at least have a chance

VOL. II. p

against Charlie NuDnerley. Once admitted,
the temptation raged within him like a
tempest, and, though he kept it from breaking
forth whilst at the Hall, it had raged
on fiercely throughout the three following
days. Like a victim who has been stretched
on the rack, the poor young fellow had
endured the torture as long as he was
able ; but flesh and blood could stand it
no longer, and at last he had given way.

But that giving way was not to be for
long. Martyrs, rallying after moments of
weakness, have faced torture again rather
than deny their principles, and Arthur
Ledsom was of that stuff out of which a
brave man is made.

The storm of doubt and temptation raged
on, but it presently raged itself out. It
left the sufferer from its violence scathed
with pain, haggard and spent with emotion,
but with his breast, not his back, to the
enemy. He was weak and ill (notwithstanding
his servant's denial of the fact to Peleus

BrethertoD) both in body and mind. He
would take a little time to recover himself .
But he had chosen his course.

As a knight sails peur et sans reproche
his motto should be ' Honour before
Happiness.'

p 2

CHAPTER Nil

SUNSHINE AFTER SHOWER.

On the afternoon of the day upon which
Peleus Bretherton had paid his unsuccessful!
call at Feldhurst Court, there was to
be a feast for the school children belonging
to Upton Church.

The occasion of the treat was the
anniversary of the opening of the little
building which was used both as a Sunday
and day school, and which stood in a field
at the back of the church.

For some time Dora McNicoll, and, fora
shorter time, her sister also, had been in
the habit of giving their services as
teachers on the Sunday. They were the

only younor ladies of the neighbourhood
whom the rector bad been able to enlist in
the work (the rest of the teachers being of
the farming class), and, accordingly, he seta
high value on their help. One evening,
when they had been at Monkswood a day
or two, Mr. Hardcastle called there to
remind them of the approaching festivity,
and to beg their assistance in amusing the
children. Further, finding the usual little
party together, he had successfully pressed
the rest of the young people into this
service.

Idalia Bretherton had promised, not only
to be present, but to sing one or two songs.
Jessie McNicoll, as her contribution to the
entertainment, had undertaken to read a
humorous selection from Dickens, a thing
which (being a clever mimic, and having
the power of sustaining well different
voices), she could manage capitally for so
young a person. Charlie Nunnerley and
Percival Bretherton, for their parts, had

agreed to aid Mr. Hardcastle's curate in
exhibiting and explaining the representations
of a magic-lantern. As may be
supposed, however, a Sunday-school tea-party
was about the last diversion in the
world likely in itself to have attracted
either of these young men. The one had
consented to be there, partly because he
expected little Susan Basset to be present,
and partly because he would not have
cared to be left at home alone ; the other,
it need scarcely be said, was going simply
because Idalia Bretherton was going. As
for Sir Arthur Ledsom and Dora McNicoll,
though neither of them had accepted any
special role, both had engaged to patronise
the entertainment by their presence.

When the day came, however, Dora declared
herself unable to fulfil this engagement.
She was suffering, she protested,
from a severe headache, and directly after
luncheon she retired to her own room to
lie down.

Jessie, suspicious of the headache, but
none the less sympathetic, begged to be
allowed to remain at home with her sister.
But this Dora declined, asserting with
truth that she would greatly prefer to be
left alone. Now, encouraged by his former
success, Mr. Hardcastle had called
again at Monkswood only that morning to
suggest that some of the young ladies
might walk over early in the afternoon in
order to superintend the arrangement of
the tea-tables. This Idalia and Jessie,
who were feeling, both of them, an unfeigned
interest in the affair, had readily
consented to do. Accordingly, at a little
after three, they left the house for this
purpose. The children, it had been arranged,
were to assemble at four, and to
be conveniently dismissed by half-past
seven, so that the Monkswood dinner-hour
would only need to be postponed shortly
beyond the usual time.

But for four hours and more, Dora,

now that her sister and Miss Bretherton
were gone, could calculate on the boon of
solitude.

It was a boon which she prized at the
present moment above expression.

To assure herself more fully of its possession,
her first act was to lock the
chamber door. Returning then to the
couch from which she had just risen, and
where she had lain tortured with impatience
for Jessie's departure, she threw
herself again upon it, and, burying her
face in the pillow, gave way to a burst of
not altogether silent grief. Poor girl !
she had been wrought up during the last
few days into a state of highly nervous
excitement. Arthur's prolonged absence
had appeared to her an inexplicable
mystery. At first she had hardly known
whether to be glad or sorry about it, and
she had made strenuous efforts not to
show that it affected her at all, efforts
which had been so successful as even partially

to deceive Jessie's watchful and
affectionate observation. Since this morning,
however (when Percival Bretherton
had paid that visit to Feldhurst Court,
which had virtually been declined by Sir
Arthur), a blank and sickening dismay
had fallen upon poor Dora. She could
not understand it. Did Arthur wish, then,
to avoid them all ? Was he intending to
come no more to Monkswood ? If so,
what was the reason ?

In trying to puzzle out this dark riddle,
her bewilderment and agitation culminated.
Only one fact appeared to stand
out more clearly than ever amidst the
gloom and incomprehensibility which surrounded
her, and that was, that he whom
she had once believed to be her lover,
certainly did not now care for her — if
ever, indeed, he had done so. What there
was in the circumstances specially to confirm
this conclusion, Dora could not have
told ; but by some occult process of reasoning

she arrived at such confirmation. The
last remnant of hope died out in despair.
Dora wept and wept until the fountain of
her tears was dry, and she could weep no
more. Rising then, physically exhausted,
but mentally determined that no one, not
even Jessie, should be allowed to guess
how deep were her secret sufferings, she
passed over to the glass. The reflection
she saw there shocked her.

Her cheeks were swollen and blistered
with the scalding tears, her eyes lustreless,
her eyelids red. How could such
signs escape notice ? Dora hastened to
bathe her face in water. Then, in the
hope that fresh air might efface the telltale
marks, she slipped on her hat and
jacket and left her room with the intention
of taking a walk about the grounds.
By this time the three gentlemen (for
Mr. Bretherton, at his daughter's request,
had arranged likewise to put in an appearance

there) would, she felt sure, have set
off for the school.

Not wishing, however, even to encounter
a servant in her present condition, she
ran swiftly and silently down the stairs.
But, on reaching the last flight, her steps
were suddenly arrested. She had heard no
ring nor sound of footsteps crossing the
carpeted hall, yet at this moment the
entrance door was thrown open, and in
the gathering dusk — for already the early
twilight was beginning to fall — she descried
a well-known form framed in the
aperture.

They are all out, Sir Arthur,' Dora
heard the footman remark. ' They've gone
down to the church, sir — to a school-treat,
or something of that sort.'

Oh, to be sure ; this is the day ! I had
forgotten all about that,' was the rejoinder,
in a tone that spoke of vexation or
disappointment. *Will you say to Miss

McNicoll — No, never mind. I will call
again tomorrow.'

Miss McNicoll ! Dear me, I beg jour
pardon for not remembering, Sir Arthur.
She is at home. But she is not very well.
She has a headache, I believe.'

Sir Arthur, who had been on the point
of departing, turned eagerly back.

I will come in,' he said, ' and, if you
take my name to her, Miss McNicoll will
perhaps see me. Mention, please, that I
have called purposely Dora !'

The name was uttered in surprised exclamation,
as the young man stepped into
the hall. For, neither retreating nor
advancing, Dora had remained, since first
she caught sight of him, standing motionless
upon the staircase. A sense that
some crisis was at hand, that something
unforeseen was about to happen, had seemed
to paralyse her limbs, and almost to suspend
her breath.

On being spoken to, however, the spell

vanished, and, drawings the broad brim of
her hat further over her face, she ran down
to meet her visitor.

Were you going out ?' he asked. ' You
are feeling better then ?'

Yes, thank you. I was only going fora
little run in the grounds ; but I don't
mind about it she answered, preceding
him into the drawing-room, the door of
which the servant had hastened to unclose.


I am so pleased you are not at the
school !' he resumed, when they were alone.
Do you know, that affair had altogether

slipped my memory. I ' He paused

all at once, to look more closely into her
face. ^ Dora dear, you have been crying ?
You are in trouble ?' he exclaimed.

Dora blushed crimson. In the hall it
had seemed so sombre and dark that she had
hoped Arthur might not notice her tearstained
countenance. But the drawing-room,
as she had forgotten to consider,

faced the west, and on entering it she had
"been dismayed to find the light still so
strong. To have turned her back upon
the windows would have been the action of
another moment. But already it was too
late.

Why, Arthur, you know,' she stammered,
'that poor Victor is . . has been very
ill. The doctors have been calling twice a
day lately.'

Yes, but the crisis is over now, Dora.
Yesterday and to-day he has been rallying
splendidly. Surely you have been told
that there was no occasion for alarm ?'

You have called to enquire after him,
then ?' said Dora, eluding his question by
another, and hoping that her evasive
suggestion might have served its purpose.

Of course I have, every day,' he rejoined.
*But I have not been /i^r<? just lately,
Dora. Have you been wondering why ?'

We have all wondered why,' she answered.
Then, looking at him for the first

time with more courage of observation,
she added — ' Ob, Arthur, you have been
ill? How dreadfully pale you look !'

Do I ?' he asked, smiling. ' Well, I am
riot feeling quite the thing, it is true.
But I am going from home for a few weeks,
Dora. That will set me all right again,
I expect.'

Oh ? Yes, I hope so ! Where — when
are you going ?' she faltered.

To-morrow, I think. But, Dora, dear
Dora, before I leave, I want to have a
very important matter — the most important
matter of my life — settled. I could
not go away without asking you a question,
Dora. You know what that question
is ?'

He had seated himself by her side on a
sofa which stood with its back to the
light, and where Dora had taken her
place.

'Dora, you know, don't you ? You can
guess what I want to say ?' He drew

nearer, as he spoke, and possessed himself
of her hand.

Dora opened her lips to reply — but, fora
moment, the words refused to come.
She could only shake her head as in denial.

dearest, you must guess ? You must
know that I want you to be my wife ?
Will you, Dora ? Will you be my sweet
little wife ? He bent forward to look into
her down-cast face, as he pressed these
queries with gentle earnestness.

What he saw there was answer sufficient.
In the revulsion of her feelings
Dora was trembling from head to foot,
and her colour was coming and going with
every fresh throb of her palpitating heart.
But at length, by a determined effort, she
mastered her emotion, and slowly raised
her eyes, beaming now with a light that
defied the effect of those recent tears.

'Your wife?' she whispered. ^ Oh,
Arthur!'

You are not surprised, are you, dear ?

I thought you knew. I thought you had
understood that I was on the point of asking
you once before ? Don't you remember?
It was on the night — the night
before your dinner-party?' A sudden
twinge of pain at the recollection of
whom he had first met at that dinner-party
had occasioned the momentary
hesitation.

Yes, I — I did almost think that evening
— ' she confessed, simply, * that you
meant something. But, Arthur, since
then . . .'

Since then, what?' he asked. Then,
with no pause for a reply, he appended —
Don't you love me, Dora ?'

In answer to this direct question, Dora
once more turned to look at him. She
had not noticed, poor girl, that Arthur
had said no word, as yet, about his love
for lor. But the omission, even if she had
noticed it, would perhaps not have struck
her as significant, for, surely, the greater

VOL. ir. Q

matter included the less. He was asking
ber to marry him — to become his companion
through life. Therefore,'of course,
be must love her. She had been mistaken
in those wretched suspicious — those
sickening fears ! She . . The delicious
reaction from her disappointment and
despair was almost too much for ber.
Her heart was so full of joy that she
well-nigh thought it might burst. It was
quite an effort to speak. But at last she
oft out the words,

Love you ? Yes, I do love you, Arthur,
more than words can tell! I think I have
always loved you !' Dora was no coquette.
She had not even acquired the rudiments
of the art, or possibly she might not have
suffered so much truth of feeling and
warmth of expression to show itself invoice
and aspect.

But with her present companion, and
under the circumstances of the case, no
acting, or pretence of coolness, could

have served her turn one hundredth part
so well as this frank avowal. It proved
to Arthur, at any rate, that his manly
self-sacrifice had been no vain, no unnecessary
act.

You dear little brown mouse !' he cried,
gathering her in his arms, and stooping to
kiss her cheek.

Dora submitted to the embrace. Then,
with a soft, joyous laugh, she repeated,

'Brown mouse! Why do you call me
that ? Because my dress is brown ?'

Your dress, and your hat, and your
jacket, too.' The jacket was seal-skin.
You are all brown together. But the
colour suits you, dear,' he went on, trying
to pay a lover-like compliment. ' Well,
Dora, may I consider that we are engaged?
Subject, of course, to the approval of your
parents ?'

They are sure to approve,' said Dora,
nestling against his shoulder with a sigh of
ineffable content, as he still held her close,

q2

How could they help it ? Oh, Arthur
how happy I am !'

Are you, love ? I am so glad ! Then
the tears are all gone ? Dora, tell me
was it only about Victor you were
troubled ?'

No,' she confessed, a little shyly. * It
was partly — it was almost all because you
didn't come, Arthur.'

I thought so. I was rather afraid so
he rejoined. 'Couldn't you trust me, then,
Dora? Did you think I was going to prove
faithless ?'

It wouldn't have been faithlessness !
You had never really said anything,' she
protested. ' But, Arthur, now that I
know I must have been mistaken, I
should like to tell you something — shall
I?

Do,' he said, stroking the soft fur of her
jacket upwards, 'tell me whatever you like,
Dora.'

Well, I have thought — indeed, I have

been feeling quite sure that it Tvas not me
you loved, Arthur, but some one else.'

Sir Arthur started guiltily. Till now he
had been labouring under the impression
that he had in no way betrayed his passion
for Miss Bretherton.

'Some one else ?' he echoed, faintly.

Dora smiled radiantly. She could
afford to smile at what she now saw could
have been nothing but a foolish fancy.
Yet, in another moment, the recollection
of what she had suffered, and a vague kind
of uneasiness in openly referring to Miss
Bretherton's name, chased the smile from
her lips. Arthur even felt her shudder as
she replied,

I thought it was Idalia, Arthur. And,
if it had been, it would have been no
wonder. The wonder is how you could
possibly choose me when she was by. Oh,
Arthur, is this true? Are you really quite
sure that you love me best ?'

Sir Arthur winced from the agony inflicted

by this cruel probing-knife. For a
second or two he was again almost tempted
to cast honour and chivalry to the
winds. By a sublime effort, however, he
clutched at his wavering resolution, and
morally set his teeth.

'You silly child!' he said. 'What
possible foundation could you find for so
foolish a fancy ? I have never paid Miss
Bretherton any special attention.'

'No — not in words, nor in acts, you
haven't, Arthur. But . . .'
'Well?'

I have seen sou look at her sometimes
as though you loved her. But I suppose
it was only admiration ? How could anyone
help admiring her ? Arthur, was it
only that ?'

'My dear Dora !' he spoke, in a bantering
tone, though his eye had fallen beneath
her gaze. ' Do you know that you
are letting me into a secret? You are
proving that you have actually been feeling

jealous. You will make me quite
conceited.'

Yes, I have been jealous,' she acknowledged,
impulsively, 'frightfully jealous
and wretched ! Arthur, I could not help
loving you ; and I believe — I really do
believe — it would have broken my heart if
what I thought had been true.'

Again she had touched the riq-ht kev.

Dearest, I thank you for your love
with all my heart. I will try to be worthy
of it. I will do my utmost to make you
a good husband. But you must trust me
better, dear, in future. And, above all,
you must promise me, please, never again
to say anything of that sort about Miss
Bretherton. I — I don't like it, Dora.
Will you promise me this r'

Dora did promise, and Arthur rewarded
the promise with a caress. After that
they had much talk — talk which had the
effect of completely removing any remaining
doubts from Dora's mind. How, forsooth,

could she doubt any longer in
face of the fact that Sir Arthur wanted
her, there and then, to fix the date of their
marriage, to agree that it should take
place as early as possible, consistently with
decent respect for his uncle's memory.
It was very lonely for him, he complained,
in that great house, with its big empty
rooms ; and the young baronet contrived
to draw some pleasant pictures of the
time when those rooms should be brightened
and filled for him by the presence of
his chosen bride. In the meantime, however,
he was going from home for a few
weeks, for a month, probably, and he was
intending to depart on the morrow. Returning
to this subject, as she presently
did, with a flood of questions, Dora learned
that Rodney Harcourt — one of the two
young fellows who had been Arthur's
principal college chums — had recently
been suffering from hemorrhage of the
lungs, and had been ordered by his physician

to winter abroad. Yesterday morning
Arthur had received a letter stating
that Harcourt was leaving at once for the
Elvira, and begging him, if he could, to
go with him, at any rate for a short time.
Arthur did not think proper to tell Dora
how eagerly he had complied with this
suggestion, and what was the chief cause
of that eagerness. Neither did he contradict
her when Dora seemed to consider
his friend's case as more serious than it
really was, or when she took it for granted
that Harcourt, but for him, vrould have
been going alone, which was not the case,
seeing that his mother had arranged to
accompany him. He gave her to understand,
merely, that thinking it his duty todo
so, he had telegraphed to his friend to
say that he would join him tomorrow at
Dover, in order that they might travel together
on the following day.

Then you will not be at the concert tomorrow
evening, Arthur? I am so sorry,'

complained Dora. ' It seems very strange
and sudden your going away like this. I
do wish it had not been just now — not quite
so soon.'

But, though she threw a shade of deprecation
into her tone, Dora was so unequivocally,
so ecstatically happy, that nothing,
not even the thought of her lover's immediate
departure ere she had time to taste
the sweets of this unexpected engagement,
could seriously interfere with her
rapture.

But you will write to me, perhaps ?'
she added, blushing half in shyness and
half with the new joy which this prospect
unfolded. She had never yet received a
letter from young Ledsom.

Write ? Of course, I shall write,
dear, regularly. And I shall see you
again tomorrow,' he said, rising to take
his leave. 'I will run down, if it is only
for a few moments, to say *' good-bye." '

But cau you not stay for dinner now ?
Or will you not come again this evening ?'
Dora asked, this time with something o£
real disappointment.

Arthur, however, could not, he protested,
do either the one or the other. He
had letters to write, his agent to see, and
a whole world of necessary business to
transact before quitting home. Believing
this excuse, Dora suffered him to depart
without further urgency, and accompanied
him to the hall-door to see him off. Herein
the hall, the lamps had been lighted,
but, though the twilight had gradually
gathered round the pair as they sat in the
drawing-room, no one had intruded upon
their interview for the purpose of bringing
in lights.

I've my notion as to what's a-going on,'
the footman, who had given Sir Arthur
admittance, had sapiently observed to his
fellow-servants, ' and I tell you they don't

want no lights, them two, neither they
wouldn't thank for no one to go in disturbing
of them just now

From similar considerations the amiable
lackey refrained from presenting himself tolet
the baronet out, when at length he
heard the drawing-room door unclose.
But he did not refrain from peeping round
the corner to watch the parting caress,
whereby his suspicions were satisfactorily
confirmed.

When Sir Arthur Ledsom had left the
house, and was hurrying homewards in the
deepening gloom, he felt by many shades
less wretched than he had done earlier in
the afternoon, when his steps had been
bent in the opposite direction. Virtue, to
some extent, was already proving its own
reward. Happy the young fellow certainly
was not, but he felt brave and strong,
and self-respecting. ' To bear one's fate
is to conquer it,' he murmured to himself,
marching forward with a firm step and

erect bearing. ^ I will bear mine, and ,
perhaps, ifc will become endurable.
Anyhow, poor Dora shall never know that
the question has hung between crushing
her happiness or my own.'

CHAPTER XIII.

YOa FORTUNATE GIRL.'

Directly Sir Arthur had gone, Dora ran
back to her bed-room.

Since she had left it, a fire had been
lighted there, which was now blazing
brightly in the grate. The weather as yet
was not absolutely cold, but the October
evenings were chilly and sometimes damp,
and, thoughtful for the comfort of her
guests, Miss Bretherton had ordered that a
fire should be kindled in their chamber
each day at sundown. In addition to the
ruddy glow of the fire, the room at present
was farther illumined by a paraffin lamp

and a pair of tall wax candles, the latter
standing on either side of the dressing
table.

When she had quitted it a little while ago,
the day had been at its dreariest, and the
room had looked cold and cheerless.
Now she found it all aglow with light and
comfort. The change seemed feebly,
though very feebly, to typify the change
which that interval had wrought in her
own feelings.

To describe this change would be impossible.
It was simply an utter reversal
of all things — an entire shifting of the
scenes of life — a delicious revolutionising
and re-organising of everything.

Pausing in the middle of the room, Dora
stood looking around with a smile of ineffable
but almost bewildered joy. Could it
be true, she wondered, all this that had
happened to her?

With the suddenness of magic the whole
face of heaven and earth had become transformed.

Night without transition bad
been turned into day,

Tbe cup of misery, whilst still sbe belt
it to ber lips, bad proved to bave dregs
not full ' of horrors,' but of a ravishing,
intoxicating sweetness. It was like a
dream — a nightmare of felicity ! Dora
was almost afraid to stir lest sbe might
awaken and find it but a dream.

Presently, however, the chiming of a
timepiece on the mantel-self roused ber to
action. Approaching a little closer, sbe
saw that it wanted only a quarter to seven.
Sbe would dress, sbe resolved, so as to
leave the room free for Jessie when sbe
returned, and then sbe would sit down and
try to think calmly about ber happiness.
At present, certainly, Dora did not feel
very calm. As sbe began to move about,
performing ber toilet with unnecessary
baste, sudden thrills of joy kept tingling
through ber veins.

Little gusts of emotion shook ber from

bead to foot, communicating a tremulousness
to her fingers which made it difficult
to do up her hair or to arrange her laces
and ribbons. But at length she was
reads, and Dora held up the candles to
survey herself more critically. She had
put on her prettiest evening dress, for,
though Arthur was not to be here to see
her, she longed to make herself look as
nice as she could. A curious complication
of motives actuated this desire, but Dora
did not trouble herself to analyse those
motives. And though sbe wished as she
scrutinised her reflection in the glass,
and mentally compared her plain features
with those of Idalia Bretherton, Dora did
not feel altogether dissatisfied.

In that pretty, pale blue dress, with its
soft creamy laces, her well-formed little
figure looked particularly dainty. Also,
with the light of love in her eyes, and the
glow of happiness on her cheeks, Dora
thought that, after all, she did not look

VOL. II. E

SO ' very plain ' — that, on the contrary, she
looked 'rather nice.' And she was right.

With the sweet expression which her
face habitually wore (the result of a sweet
and gentle disposition) Dora could never
look anything but nice. Then again she
was young — and youth per se is a kind of
beauty. And, whether she were pretty or
plain, the one glorious fact remained — she
was loved ! Arthur loved her ! He had
chosen her out of the whole world —
chosen her even after knowing Idalia !
Why, then, should she despise her own
appearance ? He had set upon it the hall-mark
of his approbation — that was
enough ! Since he loved her as she was,
she would be satisfied with herself as she
was.

At any rate, she need no longer feel
envious of anyone on the face of the
globe, for no happier person could exist.

Dora set down the candles, gave a final
pat to her hair, and, retreating to the fireplace,

established herself in an easy-chair
with her feet on the fender.

Here, some three-quarters of an hour
later, Jessie found her. She had come
into the room softly moderating her usual
impetuosity out of consideration for her
sister's headache — the headache which
Jessie was only too well convinced was
but another name for heart-ache.

*How are you, darling?' she inquired,
stepping forward on tip-toe. ' I am sure
we must have seemed to be away an age.
And I have been feeling so wretched about
you all the time, Dora. Have you been
very lonely and dismal?'

j^o, not very.' Dora was leaning back
in her chair — her face half covered with
her hand. She had decided to play with
her happiness a little — she would not
blurt everything out at once. She tried to
speak in a languid tone, and she sighed
after she had given her answer.

But Miss Jessie McNicoU was a very

r2

sharp young? lady. Her quick ears seemed
to detect something not altogether genuine
in that sigh.

'You look very cosy here,' she observed,
regarding watchfully her sister's
averted and half-concealed face.
And what a jolly fire I Are you better,
dear ? '

^ Yes, my head is a good deal better,'
murmured Dora.

Jessie stretched her hands out over the
blaze, but she did not remove her gaze
from Dora's countenance — or what she
could see of it.

It has just begun to rain,' she resumed.
I was glad you were not at the schoolroom,
Dora. It was so close and stuffy,
with all those children and the smell of
tea and cake. We had to light up early,
you see, and have the blinds drawn because
of the magic-lantern. But it was a
great success, the magic-lantern.'

Was it? And your reading — how did

that go off ?' demanded Dora, ^vith a drawl
of pretended weariness or indifference.

Oh ! very well, and Idalia's singing
was splendid. Mr. Heath went into
raptures over it ' (Mr. Heath was a new-curate
who had only been a fortnight
in the neighbourhood). 'I hope lie isn't
going to add himself to the list of her
admirers, because — ahem ! well, never
mind why. Besides, he wouldn't have any
chance. Dora, do you know, I'm almost
certain, from something in her manner tonight,
that Idalia likes Charlie. It is
surprising to me. Still, you know, he can
make himself amazingly agreeable.' As
she rattled on, Jessie's eyes brightened
with interest and curiosity. ' Dora,' she
inquired, abruptly, ' why have you put that
dress on ?

This dress ?' repeated Dora, dropping
the hand that had been supporting her
head, and stopping to smooth out her
flounces. 'Why shouldn't I put it on?

But had you nob better get ready for dinner
yourself, Jessie?'

Yes ; it is to be at eight. I shall have
to hurry. But Idalia has not come upstairs
yet. She wants to make her father
take a glass of wine. He got rather overdone
with that close atmosphere. Now,
Miss Dora, allow me to look at your face ?''
She fell on her knees and caught both her
sister's hands. * Explain, please, why you
have made yourself look so nice. Is
Arthur coming ?'

I am not expecting Sir Arthur Ledsom
to be here this evening.'

Oh, indeed !' said Jessie, mimicking her
stately tones. ' Dora, you little goose, do
you think I can't see that something has
happened ? Tell me this minute what it
is? You can't deceive this child, you
know. Has anyone been here ?'

Dora broke now into a gay laugh.
Yes,' she admitted, * I have had a
visitor.'

Arthur ?'
Dora nodded.

What did he come for ? Who did he
come to see ?'

Well, he said he had come to see me.
Jessie, he has asked me to be his wife.'

'No!'

Tes !' ejaculated Dora, imitating in her
turn her sister's surprised accent.

But sou don't mean to tell me — you
don't mean to tell me that the thing is
settled ? — that you are absolutely engaged
?'

I believe,' rejoined Dora, ' that we absolutely
are engaged.'

Oh, Dora ! And you are to be Lady
Ledsom ? You are to be the mistress of
Feldhurst Court ?'

I am to be Arthur's wife,' corrected
her sister. ' It is not for his position that
I love him, but for himself, dear.'

Just so — ' Jessie rose from her knees ;
*but the position is not to be despised —

twelve thousand a year is not to be despised.
Oh, you fortunate girl !' She stooped
to kiss her, and then began to caper wildly
about the room.

Dora watched her, blushing a little consciously.
It was quite true, as she had
said, that she loved Arthur Ledsom for
himself. She would have married him,
rather than anyone else, had he been
a tradesman, or a farmer. What would
his position in the social scale have signified
? She tried to persuade herself
that his rank and his wealth were matters
of supreme indifference to her. But
all the while she knew that this was not
so.

Her diamond, she was aware, had sparkled
with decidedly the more lustre since it
had been framed in its new golden setting.
Sir Arthur, if not dearer than plain Arthur,
had at least seemed a personage of more
distinction and dignity. And though she
would have been proud and happy to have

been chosen bj bim, whatever his station.
she was unquestionably more proud and
happy in that he should choose her, being
a baronet, and the owner of such a place
as Feldhurst Court. Love mig-ht be the
first thiner and without doubt it was but
Miss McNicoll did not undervalue the
sterling accessories which love in this case
would bring her.

Whilst Jessie eras still ' letting off the
steam' (as she would have expressed it) of
her sympathetic delight, Idalia came in to
inquire after the supposititious headache.
To her surprise, she was caught before she
could say a word, whirled round in a mazy
dance, and brought up with a flourish in
front of Dora's chair.

Allow me, my dear, to present you to the
future Lady Ledsom,' panted Jessie, now
out of breath.

Idalia glanced from one sister to the
other, her lovely eyes wide open in questioning
astonishment.

Is that SO ?' she said.

That is so,' returned Jessie.

For several moments, not another word
was spoken. Idalia's mind gradually recovered
its balance, and as her startled
ideas re-arranged themselves, her expressive
face betrayed the nature of the sentiments
which these ideas had awakened.
Jessie, regarding her vigilantly, was gratified
to see that no shadow of disappointment
had followed on the heels of surprise,
but rather that something of relief, mingled
with unequivocal satisfaction, was the
uppermost feeling in her friend's mind.

When at length she spoke, her view of
the matter was put beyond doubt.

How charming ! Why, how delighted
I am !' she exclaimed, with hearty enthusiasm.
' 1 like him ever so much, dear, and
I'm sure you'll suit each other splendidly.
I've thought sometimes it might be so.'
(She did not add that she had sometimes-feared

ifc might not be so.) * I guessed you
liked him, Dora, a good while ago, and I'm
real glad ! I can't tell you how glad I
am !'

In proof of this gladness, which, it need
hardly be said, Alas wholly sincere, Idalia
lingered, putting interested questions as
to Arthur's visit, and repeating her friendly
congratulations, until she was startled by
the gong sounding for dinner.

Neither Jessie nor she were dressed ;
but, having sent down orders that the serving
should be delayed for five minutes, both
girls managed in that time to make themselves
presentable.

As they were descending the stairs together,
Dora begged her companions, for
this evening, at all events, to keep her
secret from the three men. Not that she
would have minded Mr. Bretherton knowing
it ; indeed, she could have told the
news to him herself without shyness or

difficulty. But, somehow, lie did not
feel particularly eager to receive the felicitations
either of her cousin or of Mr. Percival
Bretherton.

CHAPTER XIV.

A NEW AND ARISTOCRATIC ACQUAINTANCE.

In its normal condition, the little market
town of High Radston was a dismally slow
place. It boasted neither theatre, concert-room,
nor other place of amusement whatsoever.
As a rule, its inhabitants, after
sleepily transacting their business throughout
the day, were wont sleepily to betake
themselves to bed about the hour of ten.
Nevertheless, there occurred now and then
a break in this humdrum condition of things
an opportunity for relieving the tceclium
view with a little innocent gaiety.

Under the auspices of an enterprising
brewer — one of the magnates of the

neighbourhood — it had become customary
to get up, during each winter season,
about four grand dress-concerts. These
concerts, which were always the occasion
of a mild excitement in the town, were
held in the Town Hall, a small, but 
building which stood on
one side of the market square. The
artistes, vocal and instrumental, were entrapped
from London, and there was commonly
among them one, if not more,
celebrities.

It was in reference to the first of these
concerts (which this year was being held
at an unusually early date) that Dora
McNicoll had expressed her disappointment,
on learning that her lover's intended
departure for the Continent would prevent
his presence thereat ; for, in common
with every person of the slightest pretension
to distinction in or around High
Eadston, Sir Arthur had, she knew, taken
tickets for the series.

Still, though Arthur was not to be
there — though she had this morning bidden
him adieu for a month — Dora felt beatifically
happy as she drove down to the
concert in the company of her friends.
After all that aching agony she had of
late endured, her heart was at rest. She
wanted, for the present, nothing more
than the simple faith she now possessed in
Arthur's affection. This was enough,
even without his presence, to fill these
early days with a golden light — to make
her feel, as she now felt, that she was
treading on enchanted ground — that life
was indeed good to live.

When the carriage stopped at the door
of the Town Hall, Mr. Percival Brethren,
after assisting the other ladies to
alight, offered his arm to Dora, in order
that he might escort her into the building.
The fact of her engagement to Sir Arthur
Ledsom was now known to him ; for the
baronet himself had openly acknowledged

that fact In a few simple words this morning,
when, his interview with Dora over,
he had seen the rest of his family, and
had bidden them a hasty good-bye. As a
matter of course, Mr. Percival had offered
his congratulations apropos of the event,
and something of what Dora had instinctively
foreseen had happened. The congratulations
had been so profuse as to
savour of impertinence. Yet the impertinence
was of a kind that it had not
proved easy to resent. Not, however,
that the announcement of this engagement
had pleased Mr. Percival. On the
contrary, he had, in his secret heart, felt
greatly aggrieved that the best match of
the neighbourhood should have fallen to
the share of this insignificant girl instead
of to that of his beautiful sister. And
Percival could not understand it ; for,
although he had once or twice teased
Jessie about Sir Arthur's attentions to her
sister, he had of late felt almost convinced

that Idalia, and not Dora, would be asked
to become the mistress of Feldhurst Court.
Since, however, he had been mistaken, and
it was Miss McNicoll who was to be the
future Lady Ledsom, Percival had thought
well to swallow his vexation, and to
bestow upon her an amount of respectful
attention such as he had not before honoured
her with. Innately a snob, the very
fact that the girl was some day to own a
title invested her with no inconsiderable
degree of interest in his eyes.

It was for this reason that (although
hitherto he had preferred Jessie of the
two sisters) he now offered Dora his arm,
and designed to give her his companionship
for the evening. Of six seats for
which the Bretherton party had secured
reserved tickets, four were in a line near
the stare, and the other two immediately

CD / •'

behind. To these latter Peleus led his
companion, leaving the four in front to
be occupied by Mr. Bretherton, Jessie,

VOL. II. s

Idalia, and Charlie. Whilst submitting to
be piloted to this position, Dora had
taken no note of the gaily-dressed company
already settled in its vicinity. Scarcely,
however, had she assumed her seat,
with Peleus by her side, before her elbow-was
touched. Turning then, she uttered
a little ejaculation of surprise, and the
following instant was shaking hands very
warmly with her neighbour in the next
chair.

That neighbour was a girl — a girl who
looked younger than Dora, and younger,
too, than her own years, although they, in
point of fact, had not yet reached nineteen.


Notwithstanding her youth, howbeit,
the girl was evidently a widow. Her
dress, it is true, was not, as a whole, of
very deep mourning, but she wore an unmistakable
widow's cap. The effect of
this cap (as its wearer was probably very

well aware) was strangely quaint and
piquant.

The suggestion of elderliness which
seemed to belong to the neat streamers
and plain border heightened by contrast
the extreme juvenility of the face thus
framed, so that the girl looked rather like
a child playing at being its own grandmother.


In figure, also, this young widow, though
tall, was particularly slim and girlish.
Neither fair nor dark, she possessed clear
grey eyes, chestnut brown hair, and a pure
pale complexion. Her features were of a
refined, aristocratic order, the nose being
very straight, the short upper lip curving
in a high-bred, slightly haughty fashion.

When in repose, indeed, the face gave
one the impression of a nature quiet and
reserved, if not actually proud. But when
she spoke, a singular contradiction appeared
— for, in reality, this young woman was

s2

neither quiet, proud, nor reserved. On
the contrary, her disposition was remarkably
vivacious, even rollicking, and the
refinement of her appearance was by no
means borne out by any special refinement
in her speech, which was apt to prove careless
and unguarded, as well as rather too
free-and-easy.

But when did you get back, Annette ?*
Dora asked, when the first surprised greeting
was over. ' Are you settled again at
Standon ? I had not heard of your
return.'

No ; we didn't announce it before we
came, and we have scarcely had time to do
so since. We only arrived a couple of
days ago. But I was intending to send
word to you, and to some of our other
friends tomorrow, Dora. Yes, we have
come home to remain now, I expect.' All
the while she had been speaking, the young
lady had been looking, not at her interlocutor,
but at Mr. Percival Bretherton,

whom sbe was studying with an unabashed
gaze of curiosity and inquiry. ^ Lady
Ledsom is the only friend I have looked
up yet,' she went on. ' Oh ! by-the-by,
sou don't see she is here ? We came together
to the concert ;' and, leaning back in
her chair, she disclosed to Dora's view
Lady Ledsom's spare form and somewhat
hard, though not altogether unpleasant,
features.

A rush of colour came into Dora's
cheeks asLady Ledsom extended her hand.
Arthur had not yet, she knew, informed
his aunt of his engagement, but he was
intending before very long to venture upon
doing so by letter. Would theodora
wondered, take any notice of the communication
? And would she feel indifferent to
or annoyed by the news ? Perhaps, as
Arthur's choice, Lady Ledsom might learn
to dislike her with the same unreasoning
and unjust dislike as that which she already
showed towards her nephew.

At the present moment, however, Lady
Ledsom was looking at her with an expression
of anything but dislike. Since
leaving Feldhurst Court, she had dropped
the association of her Upton neighbours,
but Miss McNicoll had always been rather
a favourite with her, and she was glad to
see her this evening. In her judgment —
correct enough in this instance, Dora was
a sensible, modest, womanly girl — just the
sort of girl Lady Ledsom approved.

How do you do, my dear ?' she asked
in a kindly tone, and with a friendly pressure
of the hand. ' I hope you are all well
at home ?'

Thank you, Lady Ledsom,' Dora answered,
still blushing a little; you have
not heard, then, about Victor? He has
been very ill of typhus fever. Jessie and
I have been banished from the house.
We have been away quite a long time

BOW.'

Lady Ledsom politely expressed her

concern, and, on being assured that their
brother was in a fair way to recovery, she
went on to inquire where the two girls
were staying.

At Mr. Courteney's, I suppose ?'

Oh, no.' Dora leant forward and
lowered her voice. ' We are staying at
Monkswood Hall, with the new people
who have got the estate, you know ? — Mr.
Bretherton, and his son and daughter.'

Ah ! And is that the son beside you?'
put in the young widow. * What an
awfully handsome young man ! I've been
wondering who he was, and also what
you were doing here with him alone, Miss
Dora.'

Hush, hush, Annette ; he will hear
you,' remonstrated Dora; 'and Jam not
alone with him. Don't you see Jessie
just in front ? there she is, moving to you !
And that is my cousin, Mr. Nunnerley,
next to her, and Miss Bretherton on the
other side of him.'

I see,' returned the other, acknowledging
Jessie's salute. ' But really, Dora,
your swain is quite captivating. And, if
they own Monkswood, they must be people
one can associate with. Why don't
you introduce him to me, you uncivil
girl'

Dora glanced round. Her companion's
voice, although not loud, was exceedingly
clear and distinct, and she had taken little
pains to modulate her tone. Dora was
afraid that her remarks might have been
overheard by their object, and, as a matter
of fact, Peleus had caught every syllable,
although he was now looking another
way, and professing to be absorbed by
some person or object ia the distance.
Dora had to touch him before he would
turn towards her.

Mr. Percival Bretherton, allow me to
introduce you to Lady Stanton,' she then
said. ' Lady Standon, as I think you have
heard, is a cousin — or, rather, a second

cousin by marriage of Sir Arthur Ledsom's.
Not a very close relationship,'
she added, smiling, ' but still, a connection.'


Peleus executed a low bow, and his
colour deepened.

I have the pleasure of Ledsom's acquaintance,'
he remarked, 'and I have
had the pleasure also of hearing him
speak of your ladyship. About a week or
ten days ago, we happened to be riding
in that direction, and he pointed out your
place, Standon Park. But he did not
seem to think then that you were returning
to it for some time.'

'No ; we have taken most of our friends
by surprise, I believe. But he ought to
be here to-night — Sir Arthur, I mean.
Do you see him anywhere, Dora ?' Lady
Standon looked around as she put the
question — and at this moment the first
notes of a grand orchestral symphony
were struck by the musicians, who for

some little time past had been busily tuning
their instruments.

Under cover of rather a noisy overture,
Dora explained that Sir Arthur had left
home that morning for the Mediterranean
coast. But she did not say anything
about that transporting secret which,
every time she thought of it, set her happy
heart throbbing anew, and both girls soon
fell into silence.

Percival Bretherton appeared also to be
listening to the music. But his thoughts
were so occupied with another subject
that the harmonious strains fell on an unheeding
and unappreciative ear. Who
this very young widow was Percival now
quite well knew, and that knowledge was
filling him with a good deal of excitement.
As happened in the case of most strangers,
his interest and curiosity had already
been piqued by Lady Standon's appearance
— by her youth and her condition of
widowhood. Again, his vain and susceptible

nature, gratified to begin with, by the
admiring glances she had accorded him,
had been further fired by those compliments
which had not of course been intended
to reach his ear, but which had
very distinctly done so. The girlish young
widow had pronounced him to be ' handsome
' and ^ captivating.' Peleus would
have been delighted with anyone who considered
him handsome and captivating, for
to be * captivating ' was one of his highest
aspirations. Now, however, that he knew
who it was that had uttered it, that
pleasantly penetrating flattery had become
invested with a double, a quadruple value.
As yet, it was not much more than a
week — at all events, it was less than a
fortnight — since young Bretherton had
first heard the name of Lady Standon.
That, as he had hinted to her, was on the
occasion of a ride which he and the rest of
the young people from Monkswood had
taken in company of Sir Arthur Ledsom,

The ride, rather a long one, bad led the
little party in what was for some of them
a new direction. After skirting the town
of High Radston and getting into the
suburbs beyond, they had first passed Lady
Ledsom's present abode, Frenchified Cottage,
and then, at the distance of a mile
further in the same direction, they had
come upon the gates of Standon Park.

Naturally, finding himself in the vicinity,
Sir Arthur had pointed out this place —
the somewhat neglected park, and the
large grey-stone house, with its two
horizontal wings, visible from the lodge
gates — and had explained to his friends
that the estate belonged to a connection of
his own. Dora McNicoll, furthermore, to
Percival surprise, had claimed the then
absent owner of the place — young Lady
Standon — as an old schoolfellow of hers,
and, through the conversation which had
then ensued, the young man had learned
the following particulars.

Before her marriage, Lady Standon had
been a Miss St. Ledger. Though not rich,
her family was one of the oldest in the
county. Her father, now dead, had been
a particular friend of the late Sir Jonathan
Ledsom, and his wife. Lady Ledsom, was
Annette's godmother. Once when quite a
child, the latter had spent several months
at Feldhurst Court. But the visit had not
been repeated (for Lady Ledsom did not
greatly affect her godchild) until Annette
had reached her seventeenth year. At
that time she and Dora McNicoll had passed
a twelve-month at the same school— a first-class
finishing establishment in Paris — that
year being the extent of Dora's boarding-school
experience. Although very different
in disposition, the two girls had formed
a pretty strong friendship, and Annette
had been pleased at the notion of spending
a portion of her holidays in the neighbourhood
where her friend resided. Little,
however, had she dreamed what those

holidays were to bring her. She had expected
at the end of them to go back to
school ; instead of that, on the very day
when the school term re-commenced she
was married to Lord Standon. Her bridegroom,
a man of forty-five, both was and
looked old enough to be the little schoolgirl's
father. But ho was a peer — Baron
Standon of Standon Park — and therefore a
brilliant match for the ill-dowered Miss St.
Ledger. Greatly flattered to find herself
the choice of a man of such rank and
wealth, and also of an age so superior to
her own, Annette had yielded to Lord
Standon's fervent love-making, and had consented
to the immediate marriage which he
had pressed upon her. The brief wooing
which had preceded the hasty wedding had
taken place for the most part at Feldhurst
Court, where the two had first met ; for
Lord Standon, whose estate, it has been
seen, lay at no great distance, was a cousin
(through his mother's side of the family)

of Sir Jonathan Ledsom, and as a relative
he enjoyed the entree of his house. Neither
Lady Ledsom nor Lady Standon — Lord
Standon's mother — had cordially approved
of this union, but they had not ventured
openly to oppose it, perhaps because they
had understood that such opposition
would have proved of little avail. And so
Annette had been married.

She had enjoyed six months of wedded
life, and of marital devotion perhaps rather
too passionate to have lasted long, and then
she had been left a widow. Now, at first
the girl had undoubtedly felt her loss very
deeply, but at seventeen grief is not sempiternal,
and she had soon begun to recover
from the blow.

Not so, however, her husband's mother,
the Dowager Lady Standon, who, after his
marriage, had still continued to live with
her son. Distress at his death had driven
her to the verge of distraction, shaking
her nerves and almost unhinsfinor her mind.

Her physicians, after vainly trying other
remedies, had advised her to leave Standon
Park for a time. Very opportunely, some
close friends of hers — a general and Mrs.
Willet — were at this juncture on the
point of departure for a tour in the United
States. At their pressing invitation, the
dowager and her daughter-in-hiw had consented
to join them, and the two ladies
had been absent ever since, — so long that
their friends at home had almost had time
to forget them.

There would be a splendid chance for
you, Bretherton !' Charlie Nunnerley had
remarked, when circumstances had brought
about this reference, * if the young widow
should return unmarried, I'd advise you
to go in for her. She's a peeress, you
know, not a commoner like Leonora —
though, for the matter of that, the stanton
are new people compared with the
Ledsoms. And, in her ladyship's case,
there is the almighty dollar to support the

title. The Standon estates were not entailed,
and her husband left the park and
nearly all he possessed to her. Really,
soli had better think seriously of it.'

As a matter of course, Nunnerley had
made this suggestion purely in joke. But
to Peleus — who (notwithstanding all his
Boeotian respect for a title) possessed very
hazy notions as to the diversities of British
rank and the strength of British caste
sentiment — the suggestion contained nothing
essentially absurd. More than once,
in fact, since it had been uttered it had
recurred to the young fellow as a very interesting
suggestion.

Until this evening, however, it had been
only an interesting suggestion. But now
the aspect of events had altered. Here
was the young widow at home again, still
a widow, and a charming one. Already
he, Percival, had been introduced to her.
More than that, he had already made an
impression upon her ! She had called him

VOL. II. T

handsome,' she had found him 'captivating.'
Percival was conscious that an
agreeable exhilaration, a strong excitement,
was taking possession of him. His
thoughts flew fast on the wings of ambition.
Yes, as Nunnerley had said, here was
his chance — a glorious chance ! Why
should he not ' go in for ' Lady Standon ?
Why should he not become the master of
Standon Park ? Why should he not somehow
acquire a title for himself, and become
a member of the British aristocracy ?

Peleus' head began to swim with the
rapidity, the jubilant whirl and excitement
of his ideas. Here was an opening
for him, the prospects of a career, of a
realization of his wildest, most ambitious
dreams.

He was ready at a moment's notice to
fall in love with this piquant, childish little
widow ; and, as for her. she already found
him 'captivating' — what more was needed?

His cheeks becomingly flushed, and his

dark eyes glowing witch excitement, Peleus
kept stealing glances across Dora Mc-nicol's
chair at Dora's neighbour. And
not uns frequently, when he did so, he caught
Lady Standon — who, if the truth must be
told, was a naughty, flirting little thing —
stealing a glance likewise at him. Also,
after each song or instrumental performance
— for the concert was a miscellaneous
one — her ladyship would bend forward to
make some observation, addressed as much
to him as to her old school-fellow. But
the climax of his gratification was yet to
come.

An interval of a quarter-of-an-hour had
been arranged to divide the concert into
two sections, and no sooner did this
interval commence than Lady Standon and
Miss McNicoll changed places. The proposition
that they should do so, moreover,
came from the former.

'Lady Ledsom wishes, I can see, to
have a little chat with you, Dora,' she det

2

claret, coolly, ' so, if you like, we will
change chairs.'

Lady Ledsom had not expressed any
desire to have a chat with Miss McNicoll ;
but, when the young lady took the chair
next to her, she welcomed the movement
with a very friendly smile — so friendly,
indeed, that certain plans which Dora had
been concocting, certain hopes which she
had been nursing, began to assume a very
feasible appearance. Those hopes and
plans bore reference to a reconciliation
which it had struck her she might possibly
be the means of effecting between
her future husband and this near relative
whom he had once regarded in the light of
a mother, and with whom he was so anxious
to be upon affectionate terms. If she
could in any way bring this about, Dora
knew that Arthur would feel very grateful.
As a first step to the accomplishment of
her object, she set about trying to ingratiate
herself with Lady Ledsom by her

quiet conversation and particularly deferential
bearings.

Meanwhile Lady Standon had opened
upon Peleus the battery of her lively volubility
of speech.

You're an American, Mr. Bretherton,
Miss McNicoll tells me she began. ' I
am quite charmed at the notion that there
should be an American family settled in
these regions. It seems prodigiously
strange, though ! Do you know that I
have just returned from the States ? I
have been there more than a year.'

Have you r' said Percival, striving to
hide the complacent delight which had
been inspired within him by the young
widow's open expedient for furthering
their acquaintance. 'I had been told of
your visit, although not of how long it
had lasted. You enjoyed the tour, I hope:'

Oh, yes, I've had a lovely time ! We
went everywhere and saw everything, even
Salt Lake City. It's a wonderful country,

and you are a wonderful people.
I like America, and I like American
manners and ideas. They just suit me,
do you know. My mother-in-law, Lady
Standon, is quite shocked because I
say so, but it's true. One can have a
little freedom over there, and enjoy a
little fun without being set down as a —
without being misunderstood. You have
no idea, you Americans, how painfully
stiff and proper one lias to be in society
here.'

• Toil are not painfully stiff, I am glad
to say,' murmured the young man.

No ; but 1 shall have to begin to be
so now that 1 have come home,' she rejoined,
shaking her head slightly. ' Lady
Standon says I have grown quite like an
American myself, and that I even talk like
one. Do you jBnd that so ?'

No, I cannot say that I do,' said Peleus,
with an admiring glance of his dark eyes

I never knew an American lady have so
sweet a voice as yours.'

Ah ! you know how to flatter, I see
she returned, flirting her fan with the air
of an accomplished coquette. ' Do you
come from New York, may I ask T

Peleus hesitated a moment.

Well, no, I was not born in that city,'
he replied, ' though I have lived there a
good part of my life — there and in Boston.
I was educated at Harvard University.'

Were you ? I've seen it !' she exclaimed.
'Really, it will be quite pleasant having
some one to talk with about all one
has seen ! I suppose you know most of
the States well ?'

I know some of them very well.'

Well, you must call on us, won't you ?
The dowager will be pleased. She is
going to live with me at the Park, as a
kind of chaperone, you know. She seems
to consider that I need a watch-dog sadly,'

she added, laughing, 'and perhaps T do;
for, although I've been married, I am not so
very old yet, you see.'

I should scarcely think you were !'
exclaimed the overjoyed Peleus ; ' but
may I really call upon you, Lady
Standon ?'

To be sure. Why not ? You are a
kind of neighbour, you know, and we have
not too many people in this quiet country
region. I know Monkswood, your place,
quite well. What a charming old house it
is ! I have only been inside it once,
though. Lady Ledsom took me there to
call with her when I was quite a small
child. By the way, was it to General or
Mrs. Curtis that you were related ? Dora
says that the estate came to you through
one of them.'

Peleus explained that Mrs. Curtis had
been his aunt. His companion, however,
did not appear to be much interested in the
answer to her question.

Excuse me,' she interrupted, whilst he
was yet speaking, ' but is that exceedingly
lovely young lady in front of us your sister?
I have not seen her face properly until this
moment.'

Percival signified that the young lady in
question was his sister.

Well, I could almost have guessed it,
you are so much alike,' pursued Lady
Standon, not thinking of the broad compliment
implied by this statement, in conjunction
with the remark that had just
preceded it. ' But who is that queer old
fogey beside her ? he looks like a retired
cab-driver, don't he ? or a superannuated
gardener ? — why. Miss Bretherton is speaking
to him !' (had Annette's eyes wandered
less continually in the one direction, she
might have observed this phenomenon
many times previously). ' I hope — I beg
your pardon, I'm sure, if he is any
acquaintance of yours ?' she appended
hurriedly.

There was no reply from Mr. Percival
BrethertoD, and turning to look at him,
Lady Standon saw that his face had assumed
the colour of a full-blown peony. Fora
moment the young man's evident confusion
puzzled her, but in the next her
quick imagination had formed a hypothesis
and leaped to a conclusion.

Ah ! I daresay he is some faithful old
retainer of yours that you have brought
from America, isn't he ? But you have
such ridiculously levelling, democratic
notions, you know, over the water. Now,
in England, although we might allow our
servants to attend a concert or other place
of amusement at the same time with ourselves,
we should never dream of allowing

them to sit on the same benches, or '

she paused suddenly. The object of her
remarks resting one large red hand on the
back of Idalia's chair, had just turned a
wrinkled but beaming countenance upon
her companion.

I hope, Percival, you've been enjoying
yourself ?' he asked. ' The music, it's been
powerful good, ain't it? An' it's lively
seeing so many folks around us. But ain't
ye well, Percival ? Ye look pale and kinder
tuckered out, my boy ?'

The kindly smile had faded from the old
man's face, whilst that of the young one
had grown white instead of red.

I am perfectly well, sir, thank you,' was
his rejoinder.

But the tone in which the words were
spoken, the peculiar scintillation in the
eyes that had met his own, caused the unhappy
father to turn swiftly away, with all
the gladness driven from his simple heart,
and a sharp pain quivering there, as
though from the venom of a poisoned
arrow.

Lady Standon, in her turn, was now
blushing furiously. But she tried to
carry off her embarrassment with an
affected ease.

^ Wbo on earth is he ?' she inquired
forcing a laugh. ^ He looks a very nice,
kind old gentleman. Why do you speak
to him so?'

Percival's feelings — his confusion, his
annoyance, his mortification — could not
easily be described. At all times ashamed
of his father, he had never before felt so
utterly ashamed of him as now, so bitterly
humiliated at having to acknowledge his
relationship.

That nice old gentleman, as your ladyship
is polite enough to call him he said,
unable in his vexation to avoid a sneer, * is
my father I'

Oh !' interjected Annette. ' Oh, what
shall I say? How can I apologise to
you ? But, really, you know, you look so
different — you and Miss Bretherton — that
that — there, I am only making matters
worse, I believe. Pray, do pardon my
stupidity.'

There is no occasion for apology,' rejoined

the young man, curtly. ' My sister
and I are different, I should hope ! My
father is what he has unfortunately chosen
to make himself. But one is not responsible,
I suppose, for the idiosyncrasies of
one's parents ?

The tone of this remark was so brusque,
and young Bretherton's mauvaise honte
and angry irritation were so apparent,
that Lady Standon turned away from
him in some disgust, and began to study
her programme of the second part of the
concert.

Despite his good looks and gentlemanly
aspect, this new acquaintance, she saw,
was not altogether the thing. It was bad
form to blush for his own father or to be
rude to him in public, and it was almost
worse form to o-lower straight before him,
as he was now doing, with such a look of
savage ill-temper on his face.

Lady Standon began rather to regret
having made such very pronounced advances

towards him, as, also, having invited
the young man to call at Standon
Park. Then, too, there was the father.
Certainly, though the son had no right to
be ashamed of him, Annette had herself
felt shocked and startled by Mr. Brethren's
appearance and speech. She was
not in the least particular as to her associates
being of her own rank, provided
they were educated and presentable, and
had the manners of gentlefolks. But
this man was not presentable, neither
was he, she thought, a gentleman.

Annette could not understand matters
at all. "Was it true that Monkswood Hall
really belonged to him ? — that time-honoured
old mansion, which had never been
in other than patrician hands ? The very
mention of their 'place' had led Lady
Standon to conclude that the Brethertons
were the sort of people who were justified
in possessing places. And neither Percival
nor Idalia had, in mien or physiognomy,

exhibited anything to contradict
this view. She would never have dreamt
that that odd-looking, farmer-like man
seated next to the beautiful Miss Brethren
could have any connection with their
party. And, now that she knew how very
close a connection he actually did possess,
she was sorely puzzled. She must, she
felt, get to know something more about
this mystery from Dora. Accordingly,
half turning her back upon Peleus, and
making a pretence of consulting Dora
about something in the programme, she
began to pour forth a number of pertinent
questions. When, by-and-by, she turned
back — her transitory dismay changed into
something like amusement — and feeling
quite ready to resume her semi-flirtation
with that dark-eyed, handsome young
plebeian, she found the chair by her side
vacant. Mr. Percival Bretherton had
disappeared. Since, however, he had not
gone through the formality of an adieu,

the young widow expected that he would
re-appear when the interval was at an
end. He had gone out, she supposed, fora
breath of fresh air.

CHAPTER XY,

A FILIAL PROPOSITION.

Yes, it was quite true Percival bad disappeared.
Directly Lady Standon had
turned her back upon him, he had seized
his crush-hat, and had slipped quietly out
of the hall. "With the exception of Jessie
McNicoll, none of his party had seen him

go-poor
Mr. Bretherton had still been

gazing straight in front of him with his

stricken air, whilst Idalia, at the time, had

been listening with half-averted, blushing

face to something which Charlie Nunnery

was saying to her in an eager, pleading

whisper. Jessie, having no one to talk to,

VOL. II. u

had looked round in the hope of attracting
Percival's attention, and had been justin
time to see him taking wing. Like Lady
Standon, however, she concluded that he
would return after the intervaL

But Peleus did not return after the interval.
Marching straight through an outer
court or vestibule, temporarily fitted up asa
refreshment-room, and filled with ladies
and gentlemen eating ices, &c., he made
his way to the open air. There, for a
while, he stood bare-headed, leaning
against one of the pillars of the porch.
Then, putting on his hat, he sprang down
the steps and walked off, followed by the
wondering gaze of a crowd of urchins who
were lingering around the concert-hall,
warned off the steps now and again by a
mild-voiced representative of the law.
The said representative also followed
Peleus with his gaze, and even for a few
paces with his feet, curious, and a little
suspicious of the young man hurrying

away up the street in evening dress, and
without a top-coat, on this chill November
night.

But neither of the cold nor the darkness
did Peleus take any note. The young
man had resolved to walk home, a distance
of nearly seven miles ! As for his unsuitable
attire, he gave no thought to that,
neither did he recollect that his dress-boots
(new ones) had felt very tight when first
he had put them on this evening.

His mind was in such a tumult of agitation
that he had ceased to be conscious of
the pinching of his feet. Never in his life
before had Peleus been swayed by such
powerful emotions as those which at present
possessed him, by such fiery vexation,
such pungent disappointment. Certainly
the occasion may not seem adequate to
have called forth feelings of so strong a
nature. But Peleus Bretherton's mind was
neither a logical nor a well-balanced one,
and effects in his sensorium were nob

u2

always nicely adjusted with their causes.
Possessed of much imagination, but little
discrimination, he was apt to leap at conclusions
not at all warranted by their
premises.

In the present instance his fancy had
been running riot, unrestrained altogether
by reason. On the sands, or rather on
the quicksands, of Lady Standon's coquettish
glances and covert flatteries, the
young man had erected, with magical rapidity,
a superb chateau en Espagne, Carried
away by his wild hopes, his mad ambitions,
he had overlooked all obstacles that might
militate against the success of his schemes,
and had regarded himself as already
crowned by fortune. Then all at once had
come the shock as of an earthquake, and
his fairy palace had tumbled about his
ears, whilst out of its ruins had sprung a
host of mocking imps gibing at his pleasant
dreams. As swift to despair as to hope,
Peleus had felt that all was over for him,

that there was not the faintest, not the
remotest chance of that happening whereof
he had just been making so sure.

And jet — here lay the sting and aggravation
of the matter — the fault was not his
own. In himself — his own person and
position — there existed nothing to preclude
success in those delightful schemes he had
been devising. The impediment lay without.


It was his father who was the stumbling-block
— the spoke in the wheel of his
prosperity, the mill-stone round the neck
of his ambition. Without his father, all
things would be possible for Idalia and for
himself ; with him, Peleus began to fear
that nothing would be possible. Before
she had seen him, Lady Standon had been
more than gracious; afterwards she had
turned her back upon him. And this was
how it would always be. So long as their
father lived, or so long, at least, as he lived
with them, society figuratively, if not literally,

would turn its back upon his sister
and himself, despite all their advantages
of wealth, education, and appearance. Of
one thing, at all events, he was certain,
they would have no chance of bettering
their social prospects by advantageous
matrimonial connections. It was because
of their father, Peleus now told himself,
that Sir Arthur Ledsom had passed Idalia
by, and had chosen a girl so much her inferior
in every personal attraction. How,
indeed, should he be expected to ally himself
with a man who could be mistaken fora
* servant,' as Lady Standon had mistaken
him ? And how could anything but constant
disappointment, degradation, and disgrace
accrue to himself (Peleus) through
this miserable tie ?

All at once, as by a giant stride, the
young man's dislike of his father (hitherto,
by comparison, a weak and passive feeling)
developed into an active insensate hatred.
Hurrying along the country road that led

to bis home at a speed that made him
perspire in spite of the cold night air,
Peleus fed and inflamed his malignant
sentiments until he would surely have been
startled himself had he paused to look into
the pandemonium of lurid passions that
were raging within. By-and-by, however,
a little of his excitement wore off with the
physical exercise, and then the young man
became conscious that all his emotions had
merged into one wild intense desire to get
rid of his father. If only, in some way,
this could be managed ! Peleus did not
even yet admit to himself that he desired
Mr. Bretherton's death. He would be
welcome to live if only he would live apart
from his children, and cease to weigh like
an incubus on their lives and fortunes.
Why should he not go back to America,
and leave Idalia and himself in England ?
That would be the fittest arrangement that
could now be made, and Peleus resolved
that it should be made if he had any influence

or power in the matter. But, alas !
what mischief bad already been done by
his father's presence here ! If he had but
remained at his farm at Clear Water
Yallej, and allowed Idalia and him to take
possession of Monkswood alone, how
delightful everything would have been.
With their advantages of person and
manner, they could have passed easily as
belonging to one of the best southern
families. There were plenty of good
families — wealthy and respectable planters
in the States of Carolina, and it would
have been assumed that they had sprung
from one of these. Now, however, their
low origin had been made clear to all the
acquaintances they had yet formed. But
all was not lost. If Mr. Bretherton would
only now consent to leave them, Idalia
and he would pass a season in London ;
they would make other acquaintances, and
propitious fate would still enable them to
secure a firm footing in that elysium of

fashionable society wbicli he so pined to
enter. Peleus made up his mind that this
very night, before he went to rest, he
would take a first step towards the accomplishment
of his worthy design. Calmed
by the strength of this resolution, he began
at length to grow sensible of the facts that,
in addition to the cold and darkness of the
evening, the roads were heavy with mud,
that his tight dress-boots were wet
through, and that he was becoming very
foot-sore.

During the last mile or two he was compelled
frequently to stop for relief on this
latter account, and when, eventually, he
reached home, limping with pain and weariness,
it was to find that the carriage had
just arrived with the other inmates of the
Hall. Through the questions and explanations
which then ensued, the young man
learned that his friends had been rendered
very uneasy by his disappearance from the
concert in so sudden and unaccountable a

fashion : that, after the interval, Charlie
Nunnerley had gone outside to inquire for
him, and that he had learned from the
policeman at the door that a young fellow-answering
to his description had been
seen hurrying away upon foot. Disturbed by
this report, Idalia and Mr. Bretherton had
declared themselves unable to remain with
any pleasure until the conclusion of the
concert, and by-and-by the carriage had
been summoned, and the whole party had
come away. Had Peleus not diverged
from the highway at a point not very far
from Monks wood, in order to follow a lane
which cut off a trifle of the distance, the
carriage must have overtaken him.

An excuse for his conduct was not easy
to frame, but Peleus contrived to blunder
out something that served the purpose of
an apology, and very shortly afterwards,
to his extreme satisfaction, everyone, with
the exception of his father, retired to bed.

Left alone, Mr. Bretherton and his son

sat for several minutes in silence, each
occupying an ease-chair on opposite sides
of the fire-place.

Now that he found himself face to face
with his father, Peleus did not feel that it
was quite so simple a matter as he had expected
to elucidate his views as to the
advisability of that father's exterminating
himself so far as his children were concerned.
It needed a little courage to lead
up to this suggestion. Peleus took up the
poker and administered a vigorous assault
upon the fire, in the hope of stimulating
himself to open the subject ; but, when he
had finished, he still remained speechless,
poising the poker hesitatingly in his hand.

It was Mr. Bretherton himself who first
broke the silence.

Peley, my boy,' he said, in a grave and
gentle tone, 'you give me a look this
evening ez cut me to the heart, an' ef you
hevn't nothing' again it, I'd like to know
the meaning' of it r'

'I have DO objection, Fm sure, to talk
matters over plainly,' rejoined the young
man. ^ In fact, that is just what I wish
to do-nevertheless, though Mr. Brethren
paused for him to continue, he seemed
at a loss how to proceed, and re-commenced
poking the fire.

With lines of trouble plainly marking his
wrinkled countenance, Mr. Bretherton
watched him quietly. The father's agitation,
which was almost as great as the
son's, had the effect of imparting to him an
unusual dignity of aspect and calmness of
manner.

* Peleus,' he resumed presently, seeing
that the young man still hesitated, ' I've
often thought — an' I've thought it more
'an ever this evening' — ez maybe I hevn't
acted right by you in the past. I seem to
understand now ez it wasn't wise the you
should lev been sent away from home so
young, an' particularly the you should
have been let stay away so long. I'd

ouorhter lev stood out aojin grandmother
about bet thar ; but she was so set, poor
woman, upon levin' ye well educated.'

1 hope, sir, that you do not regret giving
me the education of a gentleman ?'
observed Peleus, scowling at the poker
and avoiding his father's eye. ' It would bea
pity to deprive me of the one thing for
which I feel that you have a claim upon
my gratitude.'

The one thing ?' echoed poor Mr. Brethren,
shaking his head sorrowfully.
Ah ! thar's what it is. Education's all
very well, Peley. I hevn't nothing' again it
not in itself. But 'pears to me ez it
may lead to mischief ef it leads a son to
despise his own father. It's rough on a
father, Peley, when his son can't keep for
him, an' ekally it's rough on the son, too.
There's ties of nature', my boy, ez cannot begone
again without bringing' suffering' to them
ez goes again 'em.'

Peleus moved impatiently upon his chair.

The conversation was taking a tarn which
might make what he had to say more
difficult. He muttered something under
his breath which sounded like, ' Ties
of nature be hanged !' But Mr Brethren
did not appear to catch the
remark, for, after a moment's pause, he
went on,

I know, Peley, ez you're polished an'
lev got hon ion \ an' I know ez I ain't fit,
not the away, I ain't fit to hold a candle
to you. But I'm your father, my lad, an'
I 'low to do a father's duty by you.
There'd daughter be love between us, my
son, an' there is love on my side. Couldn't
you — couldn't you kinder make up your
mind, Peley, to bear with your old father,
ef he ain't jest to say all you'd lev him in
the matter of polish ?'

As he concluded this appeal — an appeal
by which few sons could have remained
untouched — Mr. Bretherton leaned forward
and held out his hand. Peleus

glanced at the hand, which was large and
horny, and then at the face of his father,
down which he saw that the tears were
slowly trickling. Instead, however, of
feeling moved by this sight, the young
man's heart hardened within him.

'I'll tell you what it is, sir,' he broke
forth, affecting not to notice the hand, and
resuming his attentions to the fire, 'you
asked me to speak plainly, and I'm going
to do it. Of course you are my father,
there's no denying that fact!' (Peleus'
tone suggested that he would have been
glad to deny it if he could.) ' But, in my
opinion, the mere fact of relationship,
however close, is not enough to ensure
affection. There must be some sort of
congeniality in taste and sentiment, and
also in manners and cultivation, else such
ties become galling chains — not exactly
the thing that one needs to congratulate
one's self on having to wear, or that no
desires to shake hands over!' he added,

with cutting sarcasm, though not without
a little effort in bringing out the
words.

Mr. Bretherton had taken back his
hand, and his face had flushed with pain
and a passing indignation. When he
spoke again, however, it was as quietly as
before.

I don't know ez TVe rightly understood
you, Peley,' he said. *I hope 'ain't so!
Did you mean ez / was the gallic' chains,
been your father?'

Again Peleus was troubled with a
momentary indecision. But he summoned
his courage, and blurted out, sulkily,

How could you expect it to be otherwise
?'

Mr. Bretherton's face turned pale, and
his clasped hands began to tremble.
That's bad !' he faltered. ' It's worse
than I thought! It goes again' me very
hard !'

Even an obdurate villain, one might

have supposed, would have been affected
by the pathetic quaver in the poor man's
voice, but this admirable son only-puckered
his brows into a deeper frown ashe
continued to gaze into the fire, meditation
low he miojht brin matters to a
satisfactory issue.

Isthar anything, Peley, ez you can think
on,' recommenced Mr. Bretherton, after
another protracted silence, ' that might set
things to rights between us, or make
them anyways better ? I'd be glad ; you
don't know how glad I'd be to do anything
ez could be done with a view to the
thar

Would you ?' Young Bretherton put
down the poker, and turned to his father
at length. ' Well, there is a way — there is
a way, father, if you would only agree toit,
to set everything straight, and — and to
ensure the happiness of us all.'

Now, the's good !' exclaimed Mr.
Bretherton, his face brightening eagerly.

VOL. II. X

The's comforting', the is ! Wall, now, I
'low to do it, Peley, ef it's any thin' at all
in reason. So jest speak out, my boy;
speak out, an' we'll try n' mend matters.'

Thus adjured, Peleus made an effort to
go straight to his point.

I don't think, sir,' he began, ' that our
life here at all suits you. I am sure you
must have felt much happier in Clear
Water Valley, with your old occupation,
and among your old associates ?'

Wall, that's so : yes, the is so, Peley,
naturally,' responded Mr. Bretherton slowly,
puzzled to guess at what his son was
driving. ' But I'm getting' ureter to the
life every day. I'm a studying', you see,
to kinder accommodate myself to it.'

But what need is there for that ? Why
should you not be happy in your own way?
Why should you not go back to your farm
and your old friends? As for the farm —
though Dean is, I suppose, an honest

enough man — ifc stands to reason that no
agent can manage the property so well as
it would be managed under the eve of its
owner.'

<■ But Why, how you do surprise

me, Peley !' (Mr. Bretherton rubbed his
hand over his eyes, as though to make
sure that he was not dreaming.) ^ I
thought you couldn't abide the Valley ?
Surely you ain't in the notion of going'
home r'

I did not say anything about myself,'
muttered Peleus, in nervous impatience.
Of course I don't wish to go ; I'd sooner
hang myself ! I merely suggested that
you should live where you could live most
happily. It is a different thing for Idalia
and for me. Our present surroundings do
suit us.'

Idalia and you ? It's a different thing
for Idalia and you ? repeated Mr. Brothers
questioningly. ' I'm getting' old, an' I

x2

must be getting' slow of understanding', too,
Peley, for I can't rightly make out what
you mean.'

Peleus quite agreed in his own mind
that his father was slow of understanding.
But, however unpleasant the task might
be, he felt that it was necessary to enlighten
his understanding, and he determined
to beat about the bush no longer.

Well, sir, you must see — you cannot
help seeing it — that my sister and I are
very different from yourself. Our superior
education, our general cultivation and
experience in society, has set a wide gulf
between us and you. It may be very unfortunate
— no doubt it is so — but we can
never run in the same groove, nor be
happy together in the same way. Would
it not be better, therefore, seeing that all
this is fact, to recognise it as such once for
all?'

A change during the progress of this
speech had again passed over Mr. Brethren's

face. The look of surprise aud the
brightness of hope which had lingered in
his eyes had suddenly died out, and a
curiously hard, set expression had taken
the place of his usually mild and gentle
one.

*Wall, Peleus,' he observed, when his
son paused for a reply, ' say we do recognise
it : say we recognise the thar fact,
what then ?'

Then it follows that the best plan — the
wisest and happiest for us all — would be
that we should agree to live apart,' rejoined
Peleus, boldly.

Oh ! tJiefs what fellers, is it ? I'm beginning'
to understand now. You think ez
the old father you're so ashamed on should
go back to his farm in America, and leave
sou two young things here alone, ain't the
it?'

We are not too young to manage by
ourselves. I can take care of my sister
urged Peleus inspirited by the hope that

his father was about to prove amenable to
reason. 'And if you would listen to me
calmly, sir, I could show you, I feel sure,
that the arrangement would be a highly
advantageous one in every respect

Oh !' ejaculated Mr. Bretherton again.
An' your sister : now, do you suppose,,
Peleus, ez she would be willing' to fall in
with the arrangement?'

I have not spoken to her on the subject
yet, but \

I'm glad you hevn't !' interposed Mr.
Bretherton, his voice suddenly breaking,
whilst a smile containing a world of tenderness
flickered across his troubled countenance.
^ I'm glad you hevn't, an* I'd
strongly advise you not to. Why, I always
thought, till now, Peleus, the you were a
smart young fellow ; but, there, you ain't
smart at all ! To think ez you shouldn't
lev snowed Idalia better than the ! To
think ez you should lev thought that she
was ez unnatural — fer the's what you aro

Peley — ez unnatural an' as cruel ez yoa
lev jest been a-showin' me the you are.
But she ain't, bless her, my darling ; no,
she ain't.'

Peleus gave vent to an inarticulate grunt
of impatience ; but, before he could frame
any words for a rejoinder, his father
resumed,

Why, how dull an' unnoticed' you must
be not to see how set we are on each other,
Idalia an' me ! She's not ashamed of me,
Peleus, nary a bit, although she's so much
finer the I've often wondered she wasn't
a little thetaway. But she knows — thar's
what it is — she knows I'm fond of her an*
proud of her, an' the — the I'd be willing' to
give my life fer her. An' so she puts up,
you see, with me been' a bit old-time, an'
wanting' in style, an' all the, known' ez my
heart is full of love for her. An', Peley,
my boy, though you mayn't think it, love, an'
kindness, an' youthfulness, they're a heap
more valuable in the long run than style.'

No doubt !' sneered Peleus, with no
sion of softening about his handsome
features. ' But love is sometimes employed
as a synonymous term for selfishness. I
don't much believe myself in the kind of
affection that does not study the interests
of its object. Of course Idalia is very
fond of you : she makes that plain enough.
But, if you were as fond of her as you profess
to be, you would rather live separately
from her than remain to be a blight upon
her life.'

A — blight — upon — her — life !' repeated
his father, pausing between each word.

'Yes ; that's what it amounts to, though,
of course, you don't mean it, and I daresay
are not even aware that it is so.'

No, I ain't aware of it — not yet, I ain't.
How do you make it out, Peleus ?'

Peleus had taken up the poker again,
and was excitedly breaking up a piece of
coal. He did not look at his father after
uttering that almost inhuman remark, or

even he might have been startled bj the
ghastly pallor that had now overspread
poor Mr. Bretherton's face, and by the
significant way in which he was pressing
his tremulous hands against his heart.

You force me to speak so very plainly,
sir — more plainly than I like to do. I
wish you could have understood things for
yourself without this uncomfortable explanation.
But, now that so much has been
said, it is best to be perfectly frank. This
evening, father, you were taken for a
servant. That's a pleasant thing for a
man, isn't it, to have a father who can be
mistaken for a servant ? By Jove ! it's a
horrible thing, I can tell you,' continued
the young man, letting loose all his concentrated
animosity. ' To feel like a
gentleman, and yet to have one's low birth
everlastingly weighing on one's shoulders,
like the old man of the sea — everlastingly
being patented to the world ! And — I
won't say anything about a disappointment

that I have had myself— but, do you know-that
Idalia might have been Lady Ledsom,
if — if — but for her connections ?'

Don't study to be delicate, Peley ; it's
late in the day for that,' observed his
father, with a bitter little smile. ' We've
struck me 'most as hard as you can strike
me. Thar ain't no need to be keerf ul now.
But is the thar true ez you tell me about
young Ledsom?'

Peleus recapitulated the statement, with
additions.

And you think it was because of me—
because he'd lev hed to lev been ashamed
of me, ez he didn't ask her ? Wall, the
might be so,' he added, looking piteously
down at his labour-hardened hands. ' Yes,
the might be so ! But,' with some faint
relief, 'she didn't keep for him. I should
lev snowed it ef she had. I should lev
noticed, an' guessed it out. An', besides,
she'd lev told me. She hasn't no secrets
from me, Idalia hasn't.'

She may not have cared for Ledsom : I
don't know about that,' rejoined Peleus,
deliberately ; ' but she may care about
some one else. She may have another
chance — many other chances — of rising to
the position which her beauty and attractions
entitle her to, and she may lose them
all in the same way. And 7, too. But I
won't speak about myself,' he concluded,
virtuously.

Well, Peley, it's a new dear to me, this
is, an' it's a painful one. An' what you've
said to-night it's pretty nigh broke my
heart ; it's been 'most more than I could
bear. But I'm a-going' to think it out. I
won't stand in the way of my children,
Peley — neither of Idalia nor of you — not
when I know that I mn a-standing' in their
way. But you're young, Peley, an' I didn't
ought to let myself be guided by your
notions not without studying' to find out
whether they are true notions or not. But
I'll think it out keerf ul ; an' — an' I'll pray

some over it ; an' I'll do what's right by
you, ef it kills me in the coin'. An' now
I'd be glad ef you'd leave me, Peley. You
can't make things no plainer to me than
you have done, an' I'm kinder wrought up.
I — I'd be glad to be alone.'

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

LONDON: PRINTED BY DUNCAN MACDONALD, BLENHEIM HOUSE.

m^^:

^-^^^-^^

-^JM

JA DIAMOND IN |j

the ROUGH

fore;



;^?3 t

« • O

ALICE 0' HANLON

University of Illinois Library

L161— H-il

VOL. III.

BY

ALICE O'HAXLON

Author OF

U

THE Unforeseen.

IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. III.

LONDON:
Hurst AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS,

13, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1886.

All rights reserved.

in 2009 with funding from

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

http://www.archive.org/details/diamondinrough03ohan

A DIAMOND IN THE Enough.

CHAPTER I.

HESTER COURTENEY TELLS HEE SECRET.

Between that afternoon when Charlie

Nunnerley had broken off his clandestine

engagement to Hester Courteney, and the

evening of the concert, nearly a fortnight

had elapsed. In the interim, so far as he

knew, Hester had kept the knowledge of

his faithlessness to herself, and the young

man began to hope that the strong element

of pride in her nature would triumph over

that other strong element of vindictiveness,

and that she would never now reveal their

common secret.

VOL. in. B

Meanwhile, lie had given himself up to
his love for Idalia Bretherton ; and on the
evening of the concert, carried away bj
the excitement of the music and the
beautiful girl's close proximity, as she sat
by his side, he had again blurted out during
the interval, a passionate avowal of his
attachment. To this Idalia had not, as on
that former occasion, refused to listen.
On the contrary, she had done so with a
blushing cheek and no evidence of displeasure,
and she had promised to give his
proposal an earnest consideration, and to
return him an answer some time during
the next day.

Over that answer she was pondering on
the following afternoon when a visitor was
announced who requested to speak with
her alone. Repairing to the drawing-room,
Idalia found Miss Courteney there,
and something in Hester's face caused
her to fancy from the first that she had
some object in her visit other than to

make a friendly call. This surmise
proved correct. After the exchange
of a fevf conventional remarks, Hester
observed,

"Will you excuse me, Miss Bretherton,
if I introduce a subject which it is
not, perhaps, very usual for comparative
strangers like ourselves to discuss? I
understand — at least I have heard — that
Mr. Charles Nunnerley is a suitor for your
hand ?'

Well !' exclaimed Idalia in surprise, a
warm blush overspreading her face, ' I
must say that I think such a question is
rather an unusual one.'

You must allow nle to press it, nevertheless.
Please tell me whether you are
engaged to him ?'

Idalia's beautiful eyes widened. But,
after a moment of hesitation, she answered
with simple dignity,

No, we are not engaged.'

But, believe me, I have a good motive,

b2

for asldng,' Hester persisted. 'Yon are
perhaps interested in him ? That he admires
you I am quite aware.'

Idalia's colour deepened still further.

You should have explained your
motive, I think, before putting me through
this catechism,' she said, smiling a little •
but, since you wish to know it I own that
I am interested in Mr. ISTunnerley.'

Then,' remarked Hester, with cool
deliberation, * you are interested, allow me
to inform you, Miss Bretherton, in a
scoundrel — a despicable scoundrel!'

Idalia drew herself up.

Miss Courteney !' she cried, a whole
world of indignant-astonishment in her
tone.

What I say is true,' resumed Hester,
quietly, * though, of course, I should not
say it unless I were prepared to justify the
assertion.'

Idalia did not reply ; and for a brief space
the two girls sat eyeing each other — on the

one side with covert enmity, on the other
with undisguised disapprobation.

Then a bitter smile curled Hester's spare
lips.

*I won't pretend,' she re-commenced,
that in revealing what I am about to do
I am actuated purely by a disinterested
desire to save you from falling into the
clutches of a designing and heartless
fortune-hunter ; but, as I expect that will
be the result, I have no cou bt that you will
come in time to regard my interference
with gratitude.'

What makes you loathe him so ?' demanded
Idalia.

Loathe ? Yes, that is a very good
word. I do loathe him though, unfortunately,
I have not always done so. Has he
happened to mention to you, Miss Brethren,
that until within about a fortnight
ago he and I were engaged to each
other ?'

You ? He ? A fortnight ago ?' faltered

Idalia, the colour which had again rushed
to her cheeks ebbing as swiftly away.
Miss Courteney, he is our friend, and —
and mj father's guest. I hate to listen
to anything against him — but is that really
true?'

I am quite prepared to prove my statement,'
rejoined Hester, in her low, calm
voice. ' If, however, you will first glance
over some of these, it will help you to
believe me more easily.'

She rose as she spoke, and, untying a
packet, laid a number of the letters which
comprised it on a table before Miss
Bretherton.

Half-unconsciously, Idalia took one of
them up and began to read. But at the
end of a second or two she laid it down.

Oh !' she exclaimed, *I cannot look at
these: they are private letters.'

They are my letters, and I give you
leave to look at them,' said Hester ; ^ you
need, therefore, feel no scruple.'

^ Thank you, I cannot. I don't wish it
answered Idalia. ' They were never meant
to meet anyone's eyes but your own.'

*And your tone seems to say that you
consider it a kind of treachery in me to
show them. Don't you think a traitor maybe
fought with his own weapons ?'

I should like,' said Idalia, ignoring the
question, ' to hear just the simple truth
about this, if you will tell it to me. I
did not know that Mr. Nunnerley had been
engaged to you, and I am very much
shocked to learn it — particularly if, as you
say, it was so short a time ago. Oh, are
you sure? I can't understand how it
could be only a fortnight since, because
'

Because he was then making love to
you? Yes, I know all that perfectly.
Nevertheless, it is a fact that until last
Tuesday week, when he politely gave me
to understand that he had transferred his
valuable affections, I was his promised

wife. Do not suppose, however,' she went
on, with a momentary betrayal of her well-repressed
passion, 'that I am jealous of
your victory, or that I would marry him
now if I could. I would a great deal
rather shoot him V

There was no difficulty for Idalia, as she
marked the venomous flash of Hester's
usually cold grey eyes, in believing this
assertion, and, without speaking, she sat regarding
her companion with something of
that mingled curiosity and repugnance
wherewith she might have studied some
unknown and dangerous animal.

However, not to prong this interview,
which can scarcely be pleasant for either of
us,' resumed Hester, *I will, as you suggest,
just state the plain facts of the case ;'
and without any change of colour or faltering
of her firm, quiet accents, she went
on to relate, with determined frankness,
the history of the secret engagement with
Mr. Nunnerley, and of her clandestine

correspondence. She mentioned her
intention of eloping with him when the
riofht time had come, and of consummating
her folly and deceit by an unsanctioned
marriage. She explained, moreover,
Tery fully the cause of her father's strong
dislike and distrust of the young artist,
dwelling with careful minutiae on every
particular of that crime which, under very
strong temptation, Charlie had actually
committed so many years ago; and she
finished by subjecting the young man's
character to a cool and subtle analysis, and
by holding up his motives, in his love-making
both to herself and Idalia, for the
latter's inspection, with a very ugly and
sinister light upon them.

Idalia listened to the end without the
interruption of a word, but not without
certain involuntary comments of her mobile
and expressive features.

'Well!' she ejaculated, when Miss
Courteney at length paused, ' I should

guess that tale has been a pretty painful
one for you to tell, especially the part that
shows how you have behaved to your father,
Miss Courteney. But I am glad he didn't
have all the trouble you were meaning him
to have, poor man !'

Thank you observed Hester, haughtily.
' I am very fond of my father.'

Are you ?' questioned Idalia, drily.

But the point at issue is not, I think, my
conduct, but that of Mr. Charles Nunneries,'
pursued Hester. ' I suppose you believe
what I have told you ?'

Yes,' returned Idalia, slowly, * I believe
it. And,' (there was a look of pain in her
eyes and a slight quaver in her voice,' and
whatever your object may have been, Miss
Courteney, I am greatly obliged to you
for — for letting me know this.'

Hester's pursed lips parted in a faint
smile of triumph.

*My principal object — I don't think I
have made any secret of the fact — was to

punisH Mr. Nunnerley for making me feel,
as he has done, like a fool in my own
eyes,' she protested, calmly, 'and he will
be punished if he is prevented from gaining
possession of you and your fortune, though
not by any means so heavily as he deserves.
I imagine, Miss Bretherton, that you will
not marry him now ?'

No,' returned Idalia, * I shall not marry

him now. Yet last night ' She

paused, looking earnestly at her companion,
and debating within herself whether she
should give Hester something of her confidence
in return. Eventually, however,
she decided not to do so, and, leaving the
sentence she had commenced incomplete,
she added, ' Miss Courteney, I should Hke,
if you don't mind, that you and Mr. Nunnerley
should meet here in my presence.
At a quarter to four this afternoon he is
coming to this room. He expects to find
me here alone. "Will you wait till then ? —
it will not be very long.'

Certainly, it will give me the greatest
satisfaction to do so assented Hester.
And the sudden gleam in her grey eyes,
which vanished as swiftly as it appeared,
attested the veracity of this assurance.

CHAPTER 11.

REAPING THE WHIRLWIND.

•

Naturally very warm-hearted, and gifted
with, perhaps, almost too keen and
ready sympathies, Idalia felt a little self-reproachful
on reflecting, as she did
during a short silence which now ensued
between them, that she had not expressed
the slightest regret as to the gross
ill-treatment which Miss Courteney had
received at the hands of the gentleman
who now professed to be her own lover.
But whilst she felt immensely shocked and
hotly indignant against young Nunnerley,
she could not, though she tried to do so,
move herself to sympathy with Hester.

In the first place, the latter did not seem
to desire her pity and kindly feeling. It
was evident that she had suffered, but
equally evident that her resentful pride
had kept her from being crushed by that
suffering. Moreover, whilst she had done
Idalia a service (the kind of service that a
doctor renders in performing a necessary
but painful operation), she had not done it
from friendly or benevolent motives, butin
order to gain her own ends. Then,
again, in the story which she had told, and
in her manner of telling it, Hester had
betrayed a nature which awakened in Idalia
a strong aversion. She could not, therefore,
notwithstanding the attempt to do so,
feel much sympathy towards her visitor,
and she was too honest and unconventional
to pretend to sentiments which she did not
experience.

It was a relief when, after a little
desultory conversation, Hester presently
took up a book of engravings, and, asking

permission to look over it, carried the
handsomely-bound volume to a seat in the
window-recess, where she proceeded to turnover
its pages in silence. Guessing correctly
that Miss Courteney as little desired
to make talk as she did, Idalia did not interrupt
her, and for nearly a quarter of an
hornet a single observation was exchanged
between the two young ladies.

At the end ol that time (with the effect
of quickening by a very natural excitement
the pulses of both) the drawing-room
door unclosed, and Mr. Charles Nunnerley
entered.

Ah, how good this is of you !' he
exclaimed, approaching Idalia with an air
of rapturous delight. ' I did not expect
you to be here already. It is a good deal
before the time, but I was so anxious — so
impatient, that — ' he stopped short, struck
with vague uneasiness by something
in the steadfast luminous gaze of Idalia's
eyes.

You don't see that I have a visitor, Mr.
ISTunrierlej,' she said, indicating bj a
movement of her head the place where
Hester sat, but still keeping her eyes upon
him.

Charlie turned quickly and perceived
Hester, who, laying down her book of
engravings, now slowly rose from her
chair. Instantly his face changed. The
colour forsook his cheeks, leaving them of
a curious leaden hue. If the young lady
had been a ghost, her apparition could
scarcely have called forth more unequivocal
signs of alarm and dismay. In face of
such confirmation, Idalia could no longer
have doubted — if indeed she had so
doubted — the full truth of Miss Courteney's
arraignments. Her countenance
reflecting, in some degree, the pallor of
his, she sank back upon her seat, just as
the young man, by a strenuous effort,
managed to recover himself.

^ Hester ! — Miss Courteney, how do you

do ?' he asked, stepping forward with an
outstretched hand, and a covertly deprecating,
appealing glance.

Thank you, I am perfectly well answered
Hester, deliberately putting both
her own hands behind her back as she
spoke. 'But I do not shake hands with
you, Mr. Nunnerley.'

'Why not? — Oh, just as you please, of
course,' stammered Charlie, again losing
his self-possession, and this time evidencing
it by a furious blush.

Miss Bretherton understands the
reason of my refusal,' pursued Hester,
and she will be as much astonished at
your audacity in offering me your hand as
I am myself.'

Retreating a few steps, as though he
had received a physical blow, Charlie
caught at the back of a chair, and stood
supporting himself upon it, whilst he
looked questioningly from one of his companions
to the other. Then, all at once,

VOL. III. c

his eyes fell on the packet of letters upon
the table, and once more he changed
colour.

Yes, they are your letters observed
Hester, seeing that he had recognised
them. * I brought them for Miss Brethren
to look at. I thought they might
interest her a little. But you can take
possession of them now if you like.'

I have not read a word of the letters,
Mr. Nunnerley. You may be sure of that,'
put in Idalia, hurriedly.

But Charlie did not appear to hear this
protest. Drawing himself up, he turned
towards Hester, perfectly collected now,
With the blank, frozen calmness of sudden
despair.

Oh, how cruel you are !' he cried, in a
strained undertone ; * how cruel and unwomanly.'


You do well to make such accusations,'
rejoined Hester, with a withering smile;
.' they fall sweetly from your perjured lips.'

And this is jour revenge? Ab, you
don't know how deep it is. You have
robbed me of every chance of happiness
on earth ! But what good will it do you ?'
he demanded, bitterly.

What good, indeed ! Do you not see,'
she sneered, ' how you are committing
yourself in asking such questions? Do
you not see how you are betraying your
base selfishness, your utter nobleness?
But I will leave you now to your interview
with Miss Bretherton. I think,' she
added, turning to bow to the latter, ' that
you will have a pretty clear conception by
now of this gentleman's worth, and I may
wish you joy of him as a lover. Good-afternoon
!'

Charlie sprang to open the door.

Yes, go !' he cried, * go, before I am
tempted to forget that you are a woman!'

Except by one quick scorching glance,
Hester deigned no further retort. Gathering
her skirts away as she passed him, she

o2

swept out into the hall and crossed it with
a stately step, under which, poor girl, she
tried to cover a miserable sense of lost
dignity, hardly compensated, she already
began to feel, by that of satisfied revenge.


A servant was loitering about the ,
and, siofnins: to the man to
show Miss Courteney out, Charlie followed
only a few steps, keeping guard the while
over the drawing-room, in fear lest Idalia
should escape. Then, when the visitor
had gone, he re-entered the room, and,
closing the door, stood leaning his back
against it. Idalia had not stirred from
the place where he had left her, but she
had folded both arms on the table before
her, and she now faced him as he came
in with sad, dilated eyes. There was a
quality in her gaze which gave the young
man a sensation as though he were sinking
through space, like a lost spirit ejected
from Paradise, whilst an angel bending.

half in pits and half in horror, watched
his downward flight from above.

Alas ! only a moment before, as it
seemed, he had indeed been in Paradise.
He had climbed up to it bj the golden
ladder of hope, and he had felt strangely
secure of his foothold there. He had forgotten
about Hester, or, at least, he had
lost his fear of her, and he had been sure,
almost sure of his success with Idalia.
What a blind idiot he now seemed to
himself, and how he cursed the besotted
confidence which had brought him this
horrible, this unbearable disappointment !
He was like a king who — in the very act
of being crowned, with the sceptre already
in his hand, the joy-bells ringing all round,
the crown just suspended above his brow
had been found to be an impostor, and
incontinently hurried from the palace to
the dungeon. The fate of Tantalus was
no worse than his. He had been so
thirsty — so thirsty for those pure waters

of Idalia's affection, which had seemed
just within reach of his lips, but which
all unexpectedly had sunk from his sight
into the arid earth.

From the moment of seeing Hester, or,
at all events, from the moment of discovering
that she had told her secret to
Idalia, Charlie had felt that his case was
hopeless. Idalia would never have him
now. He understood her character too
well to deceive himself on that score.
With such knowledge of his duplicity
and faithlessness in her possession, he was
doomed.

Nevertheless, he could not, he felt
accept his doom without one despairing
effort to avert it.

Eagerly approaching her, he threw himself
upon his knees.

Oh ! Idalia, Miss Bretherton,' he implored,
' have pity on me ! Have a little
pity on me !'

The words and the attitude might have
seemed melodramatic, but that the young
mans earnest utterance and pain-drawn
face robbed them of all suspicion of
affectation.

You will not condemn me unheard ?*
he went on. ' You have listened to her;
you ought, in justice, to let me give my
explanation.'

If you have anything to say that I
ought to hear, of course I ^Yill listen toit,'
said Idalia. ' But please get up, Mr.
Nunnerley ; I cannot speak to you v.'hile
you kneel there.'

It is my right position, the only one in
which it seems proper for me to address
you,' protested Charlie ; ' I feel so repeat-ant,
so abject. But I will get up if you
wish it,' he added, rising, and seating
himself in the nearest chair. ' Ah ! if you
could only conceive how wretched and
ashamed I feel !'

Yes answered Idalia, simply, *I can
see that you are wretched ; and I think
you ought to feel ashamed,'

^I am ashamed of my want of candour
towards you — that is what I am ashamed
of averred the young man, disingenuously.
* I ought to have confessed my former
relations with Miss Courteney before telling
you of my love for yourself. But I
am not, perhaps, so culpable as you think.
I don't know what Miss Courteney may
have said to you,' he subjoined, tentatively,
but I am quite sure she has thrown the
worst possible light upon my conduct.'

She told me that sou were engaged to
her without her father's consent. I suppose
you own to that ?'

I own that there was something of the
sort — some kind of foolish understanding
between us,' he assented, ' but I deny that
I ever loved her. Oh ! Idalia, believe mein
this, at any rate. I have never loved
anyone in the world but yourself !'

'Well, that makes it all the worse for
you,' said Idalia, severely. ' If you did not
love her, there is no sort of excuse for you
whatever.'

• But you have not let me try to give
you one,' remonstrated Charlie, feebly.
How can I make you understand ?'

I understand enough said Idalia ; ' I
know that you have corresponded with
Miss Courteney secretly, for, though I did
not read your letters, I saw that they were
directed to a post-office, and not to her
own home. I know that you proposed a
run-away marriage, which I consider an
abominable thing. How could you be so
cruel to her poor father ? You must have
seen — anyone can see how fond he is of
her. I don't defend Miss Courteney, of
course ; I think she is as bad as you are,
and I don't want ever to see her again, I
believe. But you with a momentary falter
of her voice, * you have disappointed
me awfully. I can hardly tell you what I

think of your conduct. It is hateful, mean,
and cowardly ! You had best not try to
explain it, I guess. Your explanations
would only make things worse.'

^ Then all is over between us ?' cried
Charlie in despair.

Certainly it is answered Idalia, making
no attempt to deny that there had
been something between them.

And yet you were going — I think you
were going to say " Yes " to the question I
asked you last night ? Oh, tell me ! Let
me know the extent of my punishment —
the lowest depth of my misfortune.'

No, I was not. I was neither going to
say " Yes " nor '' No," returned Idalia,
colouring slightly ; ' I was intending to
tell you that I liked you very much, more
than I had ever liked any other young
man, but that I wasn't sure I loved you.
And I was meaning to ask you to wait a
year, and to come to me again then, if you
cared to.'

Oh, Idalia, keep to that arrangement ?
Dear, dearest Idalia !' he rose hurriedly,
and, dropping on one knee by her side,
attempted to seize her hand, ' do keep to
that arrangement ! I will make myself
worthy of you. I will become all you could
wish. Oh, if you only knew how I love
you — how I worship you. how I adore you
you would have some mercy — you would
give me some hope. Ha ! don't say " No "
now ! Let me come to you again at the
end of a year,' he pleaded, vehemently.

But Idalia, with a visible shudder, withdrew
herself from his touch.

'No, no, Mr. Nunnerley, I can never,
never love you now ; that is impossible,
utterly impossible. Please move away ;
go back to your chair ?'

He obeyed with a groan.

This will kill me !' he ejaculated. ' Oh,
how hard you are!'

No, I am not hard,' she answered, looking
at him with large, troubled eyes ; * I

am very sorry for you. But this has been
a great shock to me. It has made me feel
as though I could never trust anyone again
—my own impressions, I mean, of any
person's character. I thought you were
good, and true, and noble-minded. I —
have been dreadfully mistaken in you.'

In the anguish of his mind, Charlie's
shapely white hand tore restlessly at his
long moustache, whilst beads of perspiration
stood upon his brow.

'Oh, you don't know how I suffer!' he
cried. 'I have been a fool, it is true, and
worse. But I love you, Idalia, I love you !
I can be — I ivill be as good and as true
as you have thought me. Only give me a
trial. Don't give me up ; if you do, I
shall go straight to the dogs.'

Idalia shook her head.

*I don't know what you mean by that
exactly,' she returned ; * but I hope that
you are ashamed of your falseness for your
own sake, Mr. Nunnerley, and that you

mean to be more honourable in future because
it is right and proper, and in order
that you may be able to respect yourself,
not in order that you may please me. It
is of no use your trying to do anything to
please me.'

Do you mean that it is too late ? That
you can never like — never even respect me
again?' he demanded, in a hoarse whisper.

I am very sorry,' said Idalia, gently.

Then you do mean it ?'

How can I like or respect anyone who
could behave as you have done ?'

Then it is really, really all over? There
is no hope for me ?'

There is not the slightest hope of what
you mean, Mr. Nunnerley,' she returned,
with a decision that could not fail to be
convincing.

I must leave the house at once, then !'
he exclaimed, springing up in desperation.
*I could not bear to sleep another night
under this roof. It would drive me mad !*

I don't suppose you will go mad said
Idalia, with a shade of sarcasm ; ' and I
expect you will soon get over your disappointment.
Any way, you will feel that
you have well deserved it. But I quite
agree that you had better leave Monks-wood
at once.'

I will be gone in an hour,' he declared,
standing before her pale and crushed.
Please tell no one till I have left the
house. I cannot say good-bye, or enter
into any explanations with Percival or Mr.
Bretherton. You can do it for me, if you
will. I leave my character in your hands.
Not that I care though, now, what anyone
thinks of me, or what becomes of me,' he
added, bitterly. 'My life has lost all
value !'

That is a very foolish thing to say, Mr.
Nunnerley, and a very weak one. I would
be more manly !' reproved Idalia, scornfully.


Thank you ; you have the courage of

your opinions, at any rate, Miss Brethren.
You are not afraid of letting a fellow
know what you feel about him. By Jove !
you have hit me pretty bard ! But — but
I love you,' be continued, breaking down,
and your candour is only a part of your
true, sweet self. Good-bye, dear Idalia —
let me call you so just this once more;' and
be belt out his hand.

Idalia put hers within it, and the tears
rose to her eyes, though she did not suffer
them to fall. She had really liked this
young man very much. She bad almost
loved him; it had been a serious trouble
to find him so unworthy of her affection.
Moreover, although she knew that that
affection was dead — that it bad been slain
by the blow just dealt to it — yet the aroma
of her former liking, like the scent of the
dead rose, still seemed to linger about him,
and she bad not during this interview been
able to feel all that contempt and indignation
for his conduct which a cooler inspection

and a fuller realisation of ifc was yet to
bring her.

The tears, in fact, were only kept back
until she had escaped to her own room,
where, though she was not the sort of girl
that is given to weeping, she allowed them
full vent, and in doing so found relief from
the agitation and the shock she had undergone.
In about an hour she caught the
sound of wheels crushing the gravel drive
beneath her window, and looking forth she
saw Charlie Nunnerley seated upon a dogcart,
which he had mounted in the stable-yard,
with his portmanteau and other
belongings on the opposite seat.

A few moments after he had driven offa
note was brought to her. Its contents
were very brief, and ran as follows : —

Dear Miss Bretherton,

I shall send a
man down from London tomorrow, whom
I hope you will allow to pack and bring tome

the still unfinished portrait. As I have
now only the background to put in, I can
do that easily in my own studio. I do not
know better the work will be more of an
agony or a comfort to me, but in any case
I feel that I cannot leave it incomplete. —
Yours till life shall end,

Charles Nunnerley.'

YOL. III.

FATHER AND DAUGHTER.

'For the actors concerned in them, the
events just related had passed with the
rapidity of a dream. It had wanted
exactly twenty-five minutes to four when,
in a transport of blissful anticipation, the
young artist had first entered the drawing-room
to find Miss Courteney there, and at a
quarter past five he was being driven with
a burning heart, full of frantic rage and disappointment,
on his way towards the High
Radston Station.

At six — an hour yet before the usual
dinner-time — Idalia, having made some
slight change in her toilet, went down

stairs in search of her father. He had
mentioned, as she remembered, at luncheon
that he was intending, during the afternoon,
to call upon a man who acted as his
bailiff — collecting the rents of his farm
tenants, and generally superintending the
property which he possessed in the neighbourhood.
He would, however, she felt
sure, have returned home before this time,
and Idalia believed that she knew where to
find him. In a retired corner of the ground
floor there was a small apartment of somewhat
nondescript character, formerly used
by Mrs. Curtis's maid as a sewing-room,
and which, on account of its plain furniture
(covered, like that of his own ' best parlour'
at Prospect Farm, with horse-hair), Mr.
Bretherton had appropriated as a kind of
private sanctuary, where he retired to
write his letters, or to sit when disposed to
be alone. At the door of this room Idalia
now gave a little tap. There was no reply
for a few seconds, and, without repeating

D 2

her warning, she turned the handle and
entered. As she expected, her father was
here, seated by the jure. But, from the
startled way in which he looked round on
her entrance, it was evident that he had
not heard her knock at the door. Further
from the dejected attitude wherein for a
brief instant she had surprised him — his
body drooping listlessly forward, his hands
resting nervelessly upon his knees — it was
evident to Idalia that he was either unwell
in body or discomposed in mind. Without
speaking, she approached a lamp (brought
in a few minutes before by a too attentive
servant), and turned up the flame which
Mr. Bretherton himself had hovered.

Then, seating herself upon his knee, she
looked inquiringly into his face,

Father, dear, something is the matter,*
she said, anxiously. ' Are you ill ?'

No, deary, no, I ain't ill — not to call ill;
though I think, maybe, I've got jest a
touch o' dyspepsia,' he allowed.

rm so sorry !' she said, tenderly. * Yes,
I can see that you are not well, or else you
are in trouble. Father, is it that? Is
there anything that is troubling you ?'

'Well, not anything in particles,' he admitted,
"with reluctance.

But there is !' she exclaimed, trying to
turn his face further round to the licht.
Tell me about it, father. I thought this
morning that sou looked pale and out of
sorts rather.'

Did ye, child ? Wall, now, the's sorter
curious, for I thought jest the same about
you. I thought you were a-lookin' off
colour an' peaked, an' as ef you hadn't
slept well, an,' he subjoined, slowly, ' 'most
as ef, Idalia, you might lev something on
your mind.'

'And so I had,' she answered, frankly,
I had something very important on my
mind, something that made me feel
anxious and excited, because I hadn't
quite decided what was best to do about

it. And I am afraid that being so much
taken up by my own affairs, father, made
me not sufficiently observant of you. But
now you must tell me what is the matter.
I came here to tell you my own secret, but
I won't speak a word about it until you
have told me yours.'

But, child, I hevn't got no secret to
tell. Ef I've give in to been' a bit put out,
what's the ? A man can't expect to live
in a world like this, honey, without things
going' again' him now and then.'

^ But you are not easily put out, father.
You have such a sweet, cheerful temper.
It takes a great deal to put you out,'
Idalia persisted. * And I can see from
your face that you have been worried,'
she went on, softly smoothing the wrinkles
from his forehead. ' Come, why
don't you begin ? I must know everything.'


He turned his face a little away from
her scrutiny, but drew her closer at the

same time, so as to rob the action of any
unkindness.

I can't tell sou everything about — •
about this yere little matter, Tdalia, because,
honey, there's things as is best not
spoke of. An' — an' you mustn't '

Is it anything about nie f she interposed,
suddenly. ' Father, I believe it is
something that concerns me.'

What makes you say the, Idalia ?' he
asked, in rather a startled tone. ' Is thar
any reason, now, why I should be — well,
kinder troubled about you?'

No, there isn't ; but you are. You
dear, silly father ! what is this notion that
you have got into your head ?'

Idalia,' he said, gravely, after a moment's
pause, ' you believe, don't you, as
I 'low to do my plum best to make you
happy? Now, is thar — answer me this
question true and honest, child — is thar
anything I can do — anything in the world
ez would make you happier, or more

prosperous, or — or ez would make things,
iu a general way, better for you ? Don't
you be afeard now to speak, e£ thar is

Idalia looked at him in bewilderment.
She could not even guess as to what was
in his mind. But she wanted to find out,
and so she merely repeated, in an interrogative
tone,

Happier? More prosperous, father?'

Well, yes. Young folks, they're ambitious,
Idalia — they're kinder ambitious ;
an' I don't see nothing again it. Lor, no !
I repose it's natural, though I wasn't never
thet-a-way myself. Now, would it help

you any ef ' He hesitated and turned

pale. ' I wasn't a-meanin' to ask you this
question right-out, honey,' he pursued,
but, someways, it's borne into me to doit.
How would you like, Idalia, ef I was
to go back to America ?'

Idalia started, and drew back a little, in
order that she might get a better view of
his face. Then she nestled against his

breast and laid her head there. She was
beginning to understand now, she thought !
Her father was finding his new home and
life — this change from all his old habits
and associations — too hard for him. But
his faithful heart shrank from inflicting
pain on his children. He was afraid that
Peleus and she would feel it a trial to leave
Monkswood, and so, though he was longing
for it himself, he did not like to propose a
return to their native valley. It was this
that was troubling him — the conflict of his
own wishes and interests with theirs.

The girl began to tremble perceptibly as
she clung; to him in silence. If it had
come to this, that her father was really
unhappy here, she had not a moment's
doubt as to her own duty and desire.
And yet, bow she had grown to love this
beautiful house, with its impressiveness of
age, its quaintness of architecture, its
delicious gables and ivy-clad mullions windows
! How well it and all her present surroundings

and present friends, suited and
delighted her! How, on the contrary,
her refined taste shrank from the pictured
contrast her memory presented of Prospect
Farm and the inhabitants of Clear Water
Yalley, from whom she had been trained by
her grandmother to keep aloof, and who
had never personally been anything more
to her than mere acquaintances ! ISTot that
Idalia had ever been consciously discontented
with her former home. Occupied
with her studies, and having her yearnings
for affection satisfied by her father's
devotion, she had thought herself quite
happy. But the world had opened out to
her since then. It had grown wider, and
she felt cold and sick at the thought of
returning to that narrower world.

How would you like it, Idalia ?' pressed
her father, breaking the silence in which
she had indulged these reflections.

If you would like it, father,' she said.

prepared now with her answer, ' I should
be quite content.'

To her surprise, the answer seemed to
shock instead of please him.

You would !' he ejaculated. ' You'd be
content Idalia? But I wasn't jest meaning*
to come and go,' he went on, hastily, and
with a craving eagerness in his tone ; ' I
was meaning', you understand, fer to stay —
say a year. How's the do ?'

Idalia brightened.

'Only a year? Oh! that would not be
very dreadful !' she said. ' And then you
would come back here ?'

Again she was astonished to perceive
that her assent had not gratified him. Mr.
BrethertoQ had loosened the embrace in
which he held her, and was leaning back in
his chair.

Oh ! a year don't seem so long to you,
don't it?' he observed, in a voice that
hardly sounded like his own, so strained

and harsh was it. ' Then you wouldn't
mind, mebbe, ef I stayed away three years,
for instance, or five ?'

Five years !' Idalia shuddered as the
dreary vista stretched out before her,
but she made an effort to smile cheerfully
into her father's face. * It shall be just as
you wish, dear,' she said.

There was another brief silence between
them. Then something very strange
happened. A convulsive quiver shook
poor Mr. Bretherton's frame from head to
foot, and a great tearless sob broke from
his lips.

Father ! father ! what is it ?' cried Idalia,
throwing her arms, in an agony of alarm
and distress, round his neck. ^ My own
father ! what is it ?'

Why, you sound — you sound ez ef you
loved me, honey,' he faltered, brokenly.

1 sound as if 1 loved you P she echoed, in
slow amazement.

An' it's what I've always believed. I

could have bet mj life on it ! An' yet
you'd be willing' I should leave you, Idalia ?
You'd be willing' I should leave you ?' he
wailed.

Idalia grew frightened. Her father, she
thought, must be wandering in his speech
or losing his senses.

Oh, father ! you are ill ! You are very
ill ! I don't think you know what you are
saying !' she cried. ' Leave me ? What
can you mean ? What can you be talking
of?'

Mr. Bretherton sat up. His limbs
shook still, but it was with a different kind
of emotion.

Kin I lev bin mistaken ?' he exclaimed.
I believe, honey — I almost believe we've
bin misunderstanding' one another. Yes, I
do believe the's so !' He burst suddenly
into tears. *You didn't understand,
then ' Again he hesitated, with a momentary
fear. ' You didn't understand,
Idalia, ez what I meant was, should I go

back to Clear Water Yalley by myself, an'
an' leave you and Peley here? You
didn't understand ez I was skin' you ef
you'd like that ?'

*0h! how could you ! how could you!'
was all Idalia replied.

But the keen reproach in her accent set
her father's heart leaping for joy.

You wouldn't like, the, to lev had to
live without me, Idalia ?' he asked, with
an exultation that was almost passionate.

Oh, father ! what have I done ? I
must have been behaving very ill, or '

An' you ain't ashamed of me ?' he
interrupted, not seeming to have heard
what she said. ' Tell me, child, ain't you
jest a little bit ashamed of me?'

Do you want to break m}^ heart ?' she
cried, covering his lips with her hand.
Ashamed of you ? Ashamed of the best
and truest and kindest man that ever lived?
Oh ! what have I done, father, to make you
speak so ?'

What lev you done, honey ? Why,
you've poured oil and balm into the wounds !
You've set me up agis — you've made a new
man of me !'

But how did I hurt you, dear ? Oh ! I
didn't mean to. I wouldn't do it for the
world I Have I been neglecting you ?
I'm afraid I have. I'm afraid I have been
thinking too much about — about other
people — about our visitors. Forgive me,
father, if I have left you too much alone —
if I have done anything to grieve your
kind heart.'

It was Mr. Bretherton's turn now to
look amazed.

^ You hurt me ? yoii grieve me ?' He
caught her to his breast with tender
fervour, whilst the tears streamed down
his furrowed cheeks. ' Idalia, child, you've
never vexed me in your life — no, never
since you was born — only jest now, when
I misunderstood you so. But I'd no right
to lev misunderstood you,' he went on.

with a change of mood. ' I'd uglier be
ashamed of myself. To think as I should
lev thought as you'd ever lev give in to
the thar scheme !'

Idalia began to cry herself now as lie
clung to him.

I can't make out what it all means,' she
said. ' If / haven't hurt you, some one
else has. You would not say such things
without reason. It isn't like you. Father,'
with sudden conviction, ' I don't believe
that dreadful idea ever came into your
own head. Some one has put it there.'

Hush, hush !' he remonstrated. ^ You
mustn't say the, deary, an you mustn't
think it. Look yere, we're both kinder
wrought up, ain't we ! We'd best not
talk any more jest now, hadn't we ? Only
jest sit still what you are, an' let me think
what a comfort you are.'

But, father, you must promise me that
you will never, never breathe such an unkind
notion again. How could you think

of leaving me ? How could you even
dream of such a thing? It would break
my heart if I thought you had really meant

it;

I didn't mean it, child. Xo, no ! An'
ef I dreamed it, it's a dream as I've
awoke from. Now, sit still a spell.'
And, drawing her head to his breast once
more, he softly stroked her hair. 'Let us
try to calm ourselves, an' sorter think matters
over a bit, an' then we'll talk again. I
didn't mean to say what I lev said when
we begun, but I'm thankful — I'm thankful
I did. An' I haven't forgot, honey, ez you
hevn't told me yet what ye come to tell
me.'

VOL. III.

CHAPTER IV.

A Leal FETE.

In one of the immediate outskirts of High
Eadston, not many minutes' walk from the
town, there stood a large oblong-shaped
house, painted white. Two storeys in
height, and of the plainest possible architecture,
this house displayed in its frontage
a row of stiff-looking windows arranged on
either side a stiff, inhospitable doorway,
whilst a second row, equally bald of ornament,
appeared in a line above them.

At its side the house was longer. In
fact, it was nearly twice as long as broad.
Standing well back from the road, it was

approached by a carriage-drive, bordered
on either side by tall elms. Other trees,
too, in considerable number grew about
the grounds, a large cluster containing a
rookery coming close up to the rear of the
house. No doubt it was owins^ to the
superabundance of these trees that the
dwelling possessed a somewhat gloomy
aspect. In the time of its late tenant
(a misanthropic old gentleman, lately
deceased) it had possessed a very gloomy
aspect, but just before we find occasion
to notice it the property had changed
hands, and the best was now being made
of it, both by art and nature. A fresh
coat of paint, to begin with, had made it
look fifty per cent, better, whilst new gravel
on the drive, and dainty lace curtains, and
pretty flower-stands behind the prim windows
had aided the agreeable effect. Furthermore,
the weather at present was lovely.
It was a clear, bright day towards the close
of April (some five or six months after

e2 ^^^^,,^\%

sv^

0^

^^u^^^

-N

the events chronicled in our last chapter),
and the exuberant foliage around the house
which, as the summer advanced, would
grow heavy and dark — still wore the sweet,
tender green of spring.

The present proprietor of the ' Rookery '
(so the house was named) was a Colonel Shilling,
a distant relative of the Dowager Lady
Standon. This gentleman— who, it chanced,
had been on the look-out for a country
house when this was thrown into the
market — had purchased the place at what
he considered a very low figure ; and seeing
that there was good fishing in the
river close by, and good shooting in the
Standon preserves, which Lady Standon
the younger had placed at his disposal, he
was greatly pleased with his bargain. An
ex-officer of Hussars, Colonel Shillito was
a pleasant, gentlemanly man of middle age.
He had recently married a young and
charming wife, and this amiable pair, who
had already made the acquaintance of

every family of note within a radius of ten
miles from their home, were universally
admitted to form a delightful acquisition to
the limited society of the district.

Through the large iron gates, matching
in point of rigid simplicity their unornamental
mansion, well-appointed carriages might
very frequently be seen to pass. One
carriage there was which turned in at
them every day — a dainty little phaeton,
with two high-stepping, hot-blooded little
ponies in the harness, driven by a lady,
who, like her ponies, was young, spirited,
and decidedly restive under restraint.

The same lady, although not in the
same carriage, had at this moment — early
in the afternoon of that fine April day just
alluded to — drawn up before the porches
and pillared entrance of ' The Rookery.'
She did not, however, descend when the
summons of her powdered footman had
been answered, but kept her seat in the elegant
landau.

Ah ! there you are ! I hope 1 haven't
kept you waiting ?'

The remark was addressed to the master
and mistress of the house, when, a few
seconds later, they emerged in out-door
attire.

^ Not at alL' Colonel Shillito advanced
with raised hat to shake hands. * My wife
has only this instant come downstairs. You
are wonderfully punctual.'

Does that mean that punctuality is not
one of my salient virtues ? If so, I consider
the suggestion a libel. The sports have
begun, though, so we shall be a little late ;
and there's an awful crowd about the place.'

So I saw from one of the windows
upstairs,' observed Mrs. Shillito, stepping
into the carriage with her husband's
assistance. * We can just see the turn
of the road where the entrance stands
from these left windows. Where upon
earth can all the people have come from, I
wonder ?'

Oh ! it is a grand occasion, my dear,'
rejoined the colonel, taking his place on
the back seat, opposite to the two ladies.
^ The whole population of the town will
have turned out, no doubt. And then
there are the agricultural rustics of the
vicinity — quite enough to make up a
decent crowd. But I imagine we shall have
had plenty of the affair, Lady Standon,
before it is over

I don't know that !' replied the young
widow, who, in a broad-brimmed hat,
wherewith she had superseded her usual
close-fitting bonnet, was looking more
childlike than ever. ' I am anticipating a
great deal of fun, for my part, I assure you.
IVe never had the pleasure of speculating a
donkey-race before. And that obstruction
race for boys will be awfully absurd and
amusing, I expect.'

Ah ! how nice it is to be young !' sighed
the colonel, affecting a deeply lugubrious
air. ' There was a time, alas ! in the long-vanished

past when it didn't take much to
make me enjoy myself.'

And it doesn't take much now. Don't
be ridiculous, Alec. Everybody knows
what a boy you are expostulated his
wife, laughing. * I believe you would
be delighted to run in a sack yourself.
It would have to be a monstrous
one though,' she subjoined, glancing complacently
at his broad shoulders and stalwart
frame.

Mrs. Shillito was very proud of her
husband's fine proportions and erect
military bearing. She considered him,
notwithstanding his iron-grey hair and the
crow's feet which nearly fifty years of life
had carved pretty deeply about his frank
blue eyes, to be one of the handsomest menin
England. As for the colonel, he returned
the compliment in kind. In his opinion,
his wife was excessively pretty, which was
very far from being really the case

although there was a charm about her face
which mere regularity of feature can never
impart.

In contrast with her husband, Mrs.
Shillito was small and slight. She had
red hair, clear, wistful grey eyes, a fair
complexion, and a placid, lady-like expression
of countenance, which corresponded
with a pleasing, self-possessed manner.

'I hope the Dowager is well, Annette?'
she inquired, as the carriage now swept
out of the Rookery avenue. ' You did not
persuade her to come with you ?'

'I didn't try very much, I'm afraid,'
confessed Annette. ' To-day happens to
be poor Herbert's birthday, and she is as
melancholy as a gib-cat in consequence.
By the way, what success did you have
with the McNicolls, Mrs. Shillito ? Are
they coming to you this evening P'

'Mr. McNicoll is,' rejoined Mrs. Shillito,
but not his sisters. They have not visited

anywhere yet, they say, since their loss,
so of course I did not like to press the
invitation.'

Well, I thought perhaps they might
think it rather soon to dine out,' commented
Lady Standon ; ' but Victor, you say, is
coming ? I guess I know why ; you told
him, I imagine, what other guests you were
expecting ?'

Yes ; I heard my wife mention that
you were to honour us with your company,*
put in the colonel, ' and you are perfectly
right in supposing that the attraction was
more than he could resist. Poor fellow I
he is but mortal.'

Thank you, colonel. You are charmingly
gallant. That, of course, was what I
meant,' said Annette. ' Stow, here we are.
Please tell Sykes to drive right into the
enclosure. There is a place near the grand
stand, you know, where carriages are
allowed to wait.'

Colonel Shillito gave the desired direction,

and, moving slowly through the little
crowd about the entrance gates, the
landau entered a fenced-in space, where
certain rural sports and competitions were
in progress. This fete (quite a novel sort
of thing for High Radstoo) was being held
in honour of the laying of the foundation-stone
of a new public building in that
town.

The building in question was a free
library, and the funds, both for the erection
itself and for the purchase of a liberal
supply of books wherewith to stock it, had
been devised to the town by a wealthy
brewer lately deceased — the same gentleman
who had been chiefly instrumental in
getting up the series of winter concerts
already adverted to.

A considerable number of vehicles, of
various descriptions, were already in
possession of the limited portion of ground
allotted as a stand for carriages, but space
was at once respectfully made for the

handsome equipage with the Standon crest
upon it. When, eventually, the latter was
drawn up in the best position for commanding
a view of the arena, Lady Standon
perceived that the next carriage on a line
with hers horizontally was a barouche,
containing two young ladies in deep
mourning and a gentleman with fairish
hair and blue eyes. With the ladies
Annette exchanged a very friendly smile
and bow, but the gentleman she beckoned to
approach her — a summons which was instantly
obeyed.

You abominable young man ! you hardly
deserve that I should shake hands 1' washer
greeting, with a coquettish assumption
of petulance. Annette was a born
coquette. She had flirted from the age of
three, and she would probably continue to
flirt up to the age of seventy, should she
live so long ; but it was, as a rule, a very
innocent kind of flirtation that the girlish
widow indulged.

And, pray, what have I done amiss, fair
cousin ?' demanded Sir Arthur Ledsom,
proceeding, as he put the question, to
salute Mrs. and Colonel Shillito, with
whom, despite their common connection
with the Standon family, he could claim no
sort of personal relationship.

You have neglected me, sir,' pursued
Annette; 'you have not been to call at
the Park for an ao^e. Does love-making
engross your whole time ? I shall express
my opinion to Miss Dora, for I
consider you a pair of remarkably selfish
young people !'

Arthur blushed. ' It's very flattering
to learn that you have missed me,' he
remarked. ' I'll do myself the pleasure of
repairing my error at the earliest possible
opportunity.'

Oh, I miss everybody who does not
pay me proper attention,' returned Annette.
Don't you know that I have the social
instinct largely developed? And the-company

of my revered mother-in-law,
especially in her atrabilious moments, is
scarcely sufficient to satisfy my yearnings
for human fellowship. In other words,
'her ladyship has a knack of checking my
eloquent volubility of speech, and I must
have some one to chatter with, else I shall
go spark out, like a fire in want of fuel.'

Chatter a little with me, then. Lady
Standon,' interposed a voice behind her.
Please do ; for, if the fire of your liveliness
goes out, what on earth is to become of the
neighbourhood ?'

Dear me ! is it you, Mr. McNicoll?' exclaimed
Annette, turning towards Victor
who had just come up to the side of the
carriage. ' Actually, you have attempted
a compliment ! And not such a very lame
one, either, for a novice in the art.'

'A novice?' repeated Victor. *What
makes you say that ? I hope I don't strike
you as deficient in the courtesy which
becomes a gentleman ?'

'You strike me as fearfully matter-of-fact,
and given to taking people au pied che
la lettre. But never mind that; tell me
what is coming on next.'

Victor tendered the lady his programme.

Please take it, and I will get another
for Mrs. Shillito. A cart-horse race is the
next performance. Don't you see the fiery
steeds being brought up to the starting-point?'


Oh, yes ! with their tails and manes
all tied up with ribbons. How delightfully
absurd they look ! But where are the
Brethertons ?'

There was a shade of disappointment
now in Lady Standouts tone. Her eyes had
been wandering all around the enclosure
whilst she had been talking.

I thought they were certain to be
here she vent on; 'but I don't see them,
either on the grand stand or anywhere
else.'

They have this moment arrived,' observed

Victor, quietly, but with a heightened
colour in his cheek, and a swift glad
light kindling in his dark eye, which did
not escape Annette's notice. * They have
driven in, but they are sending their
carriage away.'

Oh ! do go and bring them here, then
either you or Arthur,' urged Lady
Standon. * We can accommodate them
with seats — can't we, Mrs. Shillito? At
any rate, we can find room for Miss Brethren,
and her brother can stand on the
steps, or hang about somewhere. Do you
go, Mr. McNicoll,' she concluded, rather
imperiously ; for, whilst more than willing
to obey her mandate, Victor had hesitated,
looking at Sir Arthur, as though waiting
to see whether he would undertake the
errand, which, for his part, the latter had
showed no signs of a desire to do. Pausing
no longer, Victor hurried off, threading
his way amidst horses with liveried
grooms at their heads, drays occupied by

farmers and their families, slanderers, gigs,
&c., towards a space beyond where he
perceived Idalia and Peleus Bretherton
standing on the outskirts of the rustic
throng which still seemed fatuously inclined
to block lip the en trance way.

No sooner had his friend departed on
this mission, than Arthur Ledsom, raising*
his hat and murmuring a word or two of
polite excuse, also left Lady Standon's
side and returned to the barouche, where
Dora and Jessie McNicoll sat in the
mourning garments which rather suited
them both.

Breaking off at this juncture, we may
leave our friends to look on at the bucolic
sports they had gathered to witness, whilst
we explain, as concisely as possible, certain
events which have transpired during the
six months whereof we have found it unnecessary
to give any detailed account, although
the events in question cannot well
be omitted from notice.

VOL. Ill, F

CHAPTER y.

MISJUDGMENTS RECTIFIED.

Among the changes wrought by Time, it is
not always the most momentous that are
most clearly to be detected by human
vision. On its surface the tide of life may
appear to be flowing smooth and unruffled,
but who knows what strange seething and
tumults may be taking place in its hidden
depths ? It is in the calm often that the
storm is brewing — in the deep stillness
that precedes a cataclysm that the forces
which bring it about are gathering
strength. Also, it is in Nature's season
of apparent rest — in the quiet critic cells
of winter — that the sweet buds and flowers

of spring are germinating, and developing
towards future joy and beauty.

Outwardly, and so far as actual incidents
were concerned, it was for the McNicoll
family that the last few months had
scored in their passage the gravest marks.

Several days before that which had
witnessed Charlie Nunnerley's departure
from Monkswood, the crisis of Victor's illness
had been reached, and he had begun,
though slowly, to amend.

From the date, however, on which that
news had been conveyed to him, the young
manes recovery became singularly rapid.
How far the news was to be credited with
this circumstance it would be difficult to
say, but it is certain that Victor guessed,
as did others, something of the reason of
Charlie's mysterious flight, without warning
or farewell. He believed that his
cousin had proposed to Miss Bretherton
and been rejected.

But more than this could only be blind

f2

conjecture on his part, since the full truth
concerning the matter was never revealed
by Idalia to anyone save her father.

Still, though his convalescence proved
so rapid, Victor's illness had been a
serious one, and when he left his bed he
looked, despite a good appetite and
excellent spirits, shockingly weak and
thin.

Accordingly, as a means of completing
his restoration, he was advised by his
doctor to try change of air, and, Torquay
having been fixed upon as a suitable spot,
it was decided that Mr. McNicoll (who
himself seemed to be somewhat out of
health) should accompany his son thither.

Mrs. McNicoll, meanwhile, intended to
set a-going a thorough disinfecting and
cleaning-through of the house, so as to fit
it for the return of her daughters, and
then to follow the gentlemen in about a
week's time.

'Now, during the journey down to

Torquay, Mr. McNicoll proved terribly
fractious and irritable. He quarrelled
with bis fellow-passengers, rated at the
railway officials, and was especially ill-natured
with his son. But from the latter
he could provoke no ruffled rejoinder.
For years now Victor had been accustomed
to keep so tight a rein upon his own
temper in his intercourse with his father
that use in this respect had become almost
second nature with him. But, even had
this not been so, it would, he thought, have
taken a great deal now to rouse him to
real anger against his father; for in his
late illness Mr. McNicoll had become to
him a new man. Even yet Victor was
lost in amazement at the discovery he had
made. He had thought sometimes that his
father actually disliked him, and he had
found out that he passionately loved him.
And, for the time being, what a transformation
that love, coupled with anxiety, had
wrought in his conduct ! Mr. McNicoll

had watched by his bed-side with all the
tenderness and patience of a woman.
Assuming (of course quite unnecessarily)
the functions of a nurse, he had — particularly
during the crisis of his disorder —
jealously guarded his son's pillow, allowing
no hand but his own to minister to him, and
scarcely permitting oven that his mother
should approach him.

Touched beyond measure by this proof
of intense affection, and shocked at his own
blindness in not having discerned its existence
before, Victor had concluded that,
just as he had misjudged his fathers feelings
towards himself, so he had been mistaken
in regard to those which he bad
supposed him to entertain towards the rest
of his family. It did not occur to the
young man that this capacity for love
which he had surprised was as narrow as
it was deep — that the whole strength of it
flowed towards and centred in his own
person. His father's heart, as he now

looked upon it, was a kernel of gold. His
nature was a sweet fruit, with a very bitter
rind.

Victor felt that the dutifulness which he
had formerly practised as a hard task
would henceforward prove an easy one.
And just now, on this journey, he felt it
particularly easy to bear with a return of
that acerbity which had so long been laid
aside, because he perceived that Mr. Mc-nicol
was himself unwell, and he believed
him to be suffering through his voluntary
confinement to the sick chamber.

The surmise was true, though how true
Victor little suspected.

On the morning following their arrival
at Torquay, Mr. McNicoll was too ill to
rise from bed. A fortnight later he was in
his grave. He had caught, as it proved,
the contagious disease from which his son
had just recovered, and in his case the
complaint developed itself in a highly
virulent form. To Victor this fatal termination

was a terrible blow. His father,
he could not cease to reflect, had lost his
life through his devotion to himself, and
he had lost it at the very moment when
victor had begun to feel the first stirrings
of an affection begotten in his own breast
by a knowledge of that parental attachment
which he had so little suspected.
The young man felt his bereavement keenly,
and his mourning for the dead was
very sincere.

At the same time, it would no doubt
both have lasted longer and proved more
poignant but for a discovery that followed
it— to wit, that Mr. McNicoll had left behind
him a very unjust will.

By the disposition of this will — executed,
it appeared, many years before — a sum of
two thousand pounds was devised to Mrs.
McNicoll, and one of three thousand pounds
to each of his daughters, to be handed over
as they respectively came of age. The
entire remainder of a very large invested

fortune — amounting to nearly one hundred
thousand pounds, in addition to the house
and furniture, the horses and carriages, as
also Mr. ]\IcNicoirs half-share in those
prosperous woollen-mills, which annually
brought in a large income, and which in
itself would have constituted a handsome
provision — was bequeathed unconditionally
to that gentleman's ' beloved son.'

After one burst of disappointment, mildly
enough expressed, but accompanied b}^
a frank protestation against the injustice
of the will, both Mrs. McXicoll and Dora
seemed disposed to fall in with its arrangements
in dignified silence. But not so
Miss Jessie. Promptly drying the shallow
tears which she had conscientiously been
endeavouring to shed over the fate of the
poor ' Three-tailed,' she declared that she
would pretend no longer to grieve for him.
In her opinion (and in expressing that
opinion the young lady certainly forgot the
precept ' De mortuus,' &c.) her father had

crowned a life of ill-doing with a deed of
wrong.

He had been an unloving tyrant when
alive, and he had done that which was
calculated to produce bitterness and dissension
between those he had left behind.
On what principle, she wanted to know,
had he left a huge fortune to one of his
children and a miserable pittance to the
other two ? Her sense of justice — a well-developed
quality in Jessie's mind — was
cruelly outraged, and she took care to let
the fact be known. Nevertheless, it must
in fairness be added that there was nothing
selfish about the girl's indignation.
Jessie's notions of equity were not, like
those of a good many people, governed by
purely personal considerations. It was
more for her sisters sake than her own
that she felt the wrong, so far as she did
feel it in a personal fashion. She would
have liked Dora to have been able to take
a handsome dowry to her husband ; not

that Arthur at all required additional
wealth, but because it would have given
Dora a truer sense of equality in the
matrimonial contract.

Still it was, on the whole, more as an
abstract question of right and wrong that
Jessie (who, it must be remembered, was
still very young and inexperienced) treated
this subject of her father's will, and it was
to her brother chiefly that she expounded
her very decisive views.

Vastly to her astonishment, however,
Victor took the matter with what seemed
to her extraordinary coolness. That the
will was unfair he freely admitted, but,
further than this, she could not get him to
say a vrord in condemnation of their
father's conduct or in disrespect to his
memory. Exasperated by this reticence,
Jessie came very near to quarrelling with.
her brother. In her ignorance, the girl
never reflected that the iniquity that had
been committed was capable of redress.

All she really wanted from Victor was the
acknowledgment, accompanied by as hot
an indignation as her own, that it was an
iniquity ; and, failing to draw from him the
sort of unqualified judgment she desired,
this impulsive young person grew highly
wrathful, and allowed herself to utter
reproaches against him, and to assign motives
for his conduct, which were characterised
by the very lack of justice she railed
against in another.

But those hard words — so hard that,
had it not been for Victor's manly self-control,
they might have led to permanent
ill-feeling — were to cost poor Jessie a good
deal of mental suffering.

As quick to repent of a wrong she had
herself done as to resent the wrong-doings
of others, she was overwhelmed with
remorse when she found how she had misjudged
her brother. For Victor, instead
of talking, had acted. In words he had
refrained from expressing any strong

opinion respecting the testamentary injustice
from which he might so largely
have profited, but through the more potent
medium of deeds he had put his opinion
beyond doubt.

"Without a moment's unnecessary delay,
and without breathing a syllable of his purpose
to any of those concerned, the young
man had, through his solicitor, effected a
legal division of the property into three
equal parts. Retaining one of these parts
for himself, he had caused the other two
to be respectively made over to his two
sisters by deed of gift, each share, however,
being subjected to a lien, whereby
a certain liberal sum was to be annually
paid to Mrs. McNicoU for the term of her
natural life.

To the lawyer employed in making these
arrangements, as also to a number of
those who afterwards became acquainted
with them, young McNicoU's generous
and disinterested conduct seemed to savour

of Quixotism, if not of hare-brained recklessness,
or even of temporary insanity.
In Victor's own mind, however, there had
never existed for a moment any hesitation
as to what honour and rectitude required
of him, and he was seriously annoyed when
at first his grateful sisters refused — or
would have refused if they could — to take
full advantage of his self-sacrifice.

The property, however, being already
legally settled upon them, they were
obliged to submit, and Dora and Jessie
McNicoll were now known far and wide to
be substantial heiresses. That this fact
should be known far and wide Miss Jessie
had taken care. Filled with compunction
in that she had so ill-appreciated his
character, and with self-accusation on
account of her undeserved reproaches, the
girl noised her brother's good deed abroad
with an almost wild enthusiasm. But it
was especially to Idalia Bretherton that
Jessie loved to enlarge upon Victor's unselfish

generosity and many other virtues ;
for, though she delicately concealed her
knowledge from him, the quick-witted girl
had guessed her brother's secret, and she
longed, by thus putting in her oar, to help
his cause.

And, to her delight, Jessie had found in
Miss Bretherton an interested and sympathetic
listener to those lavish panegyrics
which she seized every opportunity of
ringing in her ears. Apparently Idalia
did not weary of the theme, but how far
she really joined her friend in this hero-worship
of her brother, and in what degree
Jessie's encomiums influenced her sentiments
towards the subject of them, maybe
left for future discovery, and we may
now suffer our attention to revert to the
green meadow which had been converted,
'pro tempore to the uses of that rustic fete
champetre.

CHAPTER YI.

PELEUS NUllSES HIS AMBITION.

The programme of those rural sports that
were just now rousing to temporary excitement
the sleepy neighbourhood of High
Eadston had proved sufficiently diversified.
There had been gymnastic exercises on
swinging and stationary bars, donkey
tournaments, running in sacks, and other
athletic exhibitions of various descriptions.
At the present moment the obstruction
race ' formerly alluded to was in progress.
The competitors in this were all boys
under fourteen years of age. In the
course of the race — or rather, wild scramble
towards the winning-post — they had to

climb up ladders and slid down ropes, to
leap ditches and fences of artificial manufacture,
to creep through drain-pipes and
through bottomless barrels suspended at a
little distance from the ground, as well as
to perform other equally ludicrous feats.
Lady Standon had opined that this race
would amuse her, and she certainly appeared
to be finding entertainment in it. Shortly
before it had commenced she had left her
carriage, declaring that she felt 'awfully
tired of sitting still,' and, with Peleus Brethren
by her side, she now stood leaning
against a clumsy wooden railing which
had been constructed round the arena.

What a capital view we have from here,'
she remarked to her companion, after a
brief conversational hiatus. ' There, that
nice-looking little fellow in the yellow
knickerbockers is in front again ! I do so
hope he'll win, don't you ?'

Yellow knickerbockers?' repeated
Peleus, * where ? Oh, yes — I daresay he

VOL. III. G

will. And of course I hope so, if sou
do.'

Lady Standon turned to look at him.

Why, I don't believe you are noticing
anything!' she exclaimed. 'Whatever is
the matter with you to-day ? You keep
falling into reveries, and looking as absentminded
and distrait as possible.'

Do I ?' said Peleus, forcing a laugh
which sounded very feeble aud mirthless
I was not aware of the fact.'

Yes, you have a kind of wildly distracted
air,' the young widow went on, purposely
exaggerating in order to tease him
for she perceived that Mr. Percival had
not relished the accusation. ' You look as
though you had just committed a great
crime, or as though you were meditating
one. Which is it? Come, tell me, and I'll
keep your secret. Are you thinking of
murdering your grandmother ?'

Peleus' cheeks flamed suddenly. Then
as suddenly he grew pale, and, leaning forward

to grasp the top rail of the fence, he
lauorhecl aofain.

*I don't happen to have a grandmother,'
he faltered. * You are remarkably polite,
Lady Standon.'

The last sentence was spoken in a tone
of half-resentful irritation. Annette regarded
the young man in puzzled surprise.

Surely you are not offended by an
innocent joke?' she asked. 'That would
be preposterous !'

Of course I am not offended,' protested
Peleus, rallying from the unaccountable
perturbation into which her jesting had
thrown him. ' And if I have not appeared
to be very much interested in these sports,
Lady Standon, I think you may guess
where the distraction has lain. Whatever
else I may have been oblivious of, I have
certainly not been oblivious of your
presence.'

Annette smiled.

That is a very pretty speech,' she

g2

observed, coquettish. ' On the strength
of it I will excuse your pre-occupation,
although, as a matter of course, I don't
believe the explanation. Did you hear,
by-the-by, that I called at your house the
day before yesterday V

Indeed I did ! You may imagine how
tantalized I felt to find that it had happened
whilst I was out. Tf it had not been for
the knowledge that I should meet you this
afternoon, I think I should have ventured
to indemnify myself for the disappointment
by riding over to Standon Park
yesterday. Would you have been at home
to me, Lady Standon?'

Peleus' voice sank, and lie put his
question with tremulous eagerness.

To be sure I should — why not ?' Annette
replied ; her tone one of light indifference.
* We haven't exhausted the
States yet ; and you know I like to talk
to you because you are an American, and,
possibly, for other reasons also. But I

won't flatter you. You are desperately
fond of flattery, I've discovered.'

That depends upon whom the flattery
comes from returned the young man.
*But I own that for flattery with just a
little basis of real feeling in it from someone
I could name I would give my
head !'

It would not do you much good, would
it, if you lost your head?'

I have lost my head already, and my
heart too !' cried the young man, with
more significance in his manner than
sense in his words. 'Ah, Lady Standon — '

Oh, I say !' interposed the girlish
widow, hurriedly ; ' do look at that ridiculous
little urchin frantically struggling to
get through that barrel — and all those
other boys so far ahead of him. He is
an emblem of many people in life, isn't
he? Striving after the unattainable, you
know ? There's the gun. They're in.
And my little fellow has won ! I'm so

pleased !' And she clapped her daintily
gloved hands.

Mr. Percival Bretherton's countenance
reflected nothing of her satisfaction.

Did you mean that for me, Lady Stan-don
? What a cruel hint! But I won't
take it, J warn you,' he continued, trying
to speak playfully, though there was an
under-thrill of earnestness in his accents.
I shall still struggle towards the goal of
all my hopes and desires — your favour.
Don't crush me by saying that it is unattainable.'


Lady Standon laughed.

Oh, dear no ; within certain limits, you
shall have my favour as a free gift. But
don't trouble yourself to do any struggling
; I'm the easiest person in the world
to please. And now I think I'll go back
to the carriage, if you will take me. But
tell me first why you did not bring Mr.
Bretherton with you this afternoon. I'm
sure the dear old gentleman would have

enjoyed himself. He never seems to ^o
anywhere with you now.'

Percival changed colour again, and fora
minute or two he made no reply. During
the last few months he had enjoyed
frequent opportunities of meeting with
Lady Standon, and he had assiduously
used those opportunities in an endeavour
towards realising that ambitious conception
which had first occurred to him on
the night of the concert. But whilst his
hopes of success had at times risen almost
to the verge of certainty through the
very decided encouragement given to his
attentions, they had at other times been
depressed — indeed, well-nigh extinguished
by a certain de haut en has manner which
Annette kept always at hand, ready to
assume on the instant he ventured too far,
and attempted to turn their very frank
flirtation into a serious affair. Above all
things Peleus hated the kind of condescendingly
friendly way which the aristocratic

young widow had adopted in speaking
of his father; and Annette, who was
quite aware that he hated it, invariably
used this weapon of reference to poor
Abner whenever she wished particularly
to quell his son's too presumptuous ardour.

My father, I believe, Lady Staunton, is
a free agent,' observed the young man
presently, with much stiffness. ' Had he
cared to accompany my sister and me this
afternoon, I presume he would have been
here.'

*Yes, to be sure.' Lady Standon
smiled on him now with the utmost complaisance
and politeness. It was by no
means her ladyship's desire permanently
to alienate this handsome swain. In her
own idea, Annette could not have too
many admirers. To lose one of them
was almost as grievous to her as it is to a
miser to part with a cherished piece of
gold. And, in a place where resources in
this direction were so limited, the value of

each vassal to her charms became greatly
enhanced. lu her secret mind Lady Stan-don
considered young Bretherton a * cad.'
Yet it was her very anxiety not to lose his
lover-like attentions which prompted her so
zealously to guard against an avowal on
his part such as must inevitably lead to the
end she would avoid. At present, she was
intent upon further securing her captive's
chains.

To be sure,' she repeated ; ' and I had
forgotten that, if Mr. Bretherton had come
this afternoon, he might have had to
return home alone. You and Miss Brethren
are going to dine with Mrs.
Shillito when the sports are over, are you
not?'

I believe so,' returned Peleus, slightly
mollified, but not yet disposed to thaw.

And so am i, you know. I've quite
been looking forward to the evening,'
resumed Annette. ' We shall be such a
comfortable little party, shan't we ?

Only Mr. McNicoll and your sister, and
you and myself (a coquettish glance
accompanied this conjunction of pronouns),
besides our host and hostess. My cousin
Arthur was invited also, but he is such a
devoted lover, it seems, that he won't go
anywhere without his fiancee. By the way,
I've often been amazed,' she rattled on,
that Arthur didn't fall in love elsewhere.
It is astounding! However, it strikes me
that another gentleman is making good
headway in the quarter I mean.' She
turned her glance towards Idalia, who
still sat in Annette's carriage, with Victor
McNicoll standing on the ground by her
side. ' And, after all, T daresay be is the
finer man of the two. It was splendid
the way he behaved towards his sisters,
was it not?'

Well, if you want my opinion, I must
say that I'm rather sick of that story,*
observed Peleus, still a little sulky.

'One hears of nothing else anywhere,
and, for mj part, I consider the fellow a
prig

'No? Do you really?' Lady Standon
studied her companion furtively, and with
a rather enigmatical expression of countenance.
' It would be awkward for you not
to like him, wouldn't it, supposing he were
to become your brother-in-law?'

He shall not become my brother-in-law
!' Peleus exclaimed. ' Things will be
different now — I mean, I shall — that my
sister ouorht to have higher ambitions,' he
finished, lamely.

Annette considered for a moment.

Well, I daresay you are right,' she
assented. ' With her wonderful beauty,
and that interesting American flavour in
her voice and manner, she'd be the rage in

London society, if ' She had been

about to add, ' if you could get into
society,' but, catching herself up, she concluded,

' There can be no doubt of that.
And now, we really must go back to the
others.'

It was a little after ten when Miss
Bretherton's carriage was announced at
Colonel Shillito's door, and Victor McNicoll
who had been offered a seat in it, rose at
the same moment with Peleus and herself
to bid their entertainers adieu. Although
the afternoon had been so fine, the sky
had gloomed over before sunset, and now
it proved to be raining in torrents.
Colonel Shillito and Victor had a little
friendly contention as to which should hold
an umbrella over Idalia's head whilst she
stepped into the carriage. It issued in the
victory of the elder gentleman ; and,
laughing with a merry pretence of
triumph, the big colonel, with his little
wife at his elbow, stood framed in
the doorway of the brilliantly-lighted hall,
watching till their guests were driven
off.

"What a real good time we have had !'
exclaimed Idalia.

You have enjoyed yourself, then ?' Victor
asked, in a low voice but not so low as
to cover the delight in it. Throughout most
part of the evening Idalia and he had been
seated very near each other, and, although
they had not talked much together, their
eyes had chanced very frequently to meet,
and there had been something — an occult,
inexplicable quality — in Idalia's glance
which the young man felt that he had
never detected there before, and which
had filled him with a transport of hope
and joy. 'And so have I enjoyed myself,'
he added — 'more than I could express.'


'Dear me! I wonder what there has
been so specially to enjoy ?' observed
Peleus, satirically. 'Just music and conversation.
If you ask my opinion, I should
say the evening had been a particularly-dull
one.'

He professed, as he spoke, to stifle a
yawn. Nevertheless, unless dulness is
compatible with a feverish tingling and
throbbing of nervous excitement in every
pulse and fibre of the body, Mr. Percival
Bretherton could scarcely be said to be
suffering at present from the unenviable
sensation.

'But surely you must have found the
conversation amusing, Percival?' asked
Idalia, ' I never knew anyone have so
many anecdotes to tell as Colonel Shillito.
If only father had been there, it would
have been just splendid. How he would,
have laughed at those funny stories !'

Yes, I wish he had been with us !' said
Peleus. * I hope the poor old fellow has
not been feeling very lonely.'

Idalia, whose face just then had been
directed towards the carriage window,
turned with quick gratification to look at
her brother. It was almost the first time
since they had left America that she had

heard him speak so kindly and sympathetically
about their father. The remark
pleased her so much that she put out her
hand, with a swift impulse, to take his
own.

That's good of you, dear!' she cried.
Then, hastening to cover the exclamation
which she feared might betray to their
companion more of her brother's unfilial-ness
than his own observation must
already have taught him, she went on —
You didn't eat any dinner, Percival ? 1
noticed you sending your plates away
scarcely touched. You are not well, I am
afraid? That's the reason you didn't
enjoy yourself. Indeed, your hand is
quite hot,' she subjoined ; ' I can feel it
through my glove.'

Nonsense ! I'm as well as ever I was
in my life,' Peleus replied, laughing. ' A
fellow can't always eat like a horse. How
are the Courteney getting on, Mr.
McNicoll ?' he asked, evidently wishful to

change the subject. ' Heard from them
since they left?'

Yes, I have had two letters from Mr.
Courteney, which isn't so bad considering
low short a time they have been gone,'
Victor answered. * They just came in, it
appears, for the fag-end of the carnival.
Miss Hester, her father says, is delighted
with Rome, and she and her aunt intend
remaining three months in Italy. But my
partner will have to return in about a
fortnight. I can't spare him long, you
know, not possessing very much experience
yet in the management of the mills.'

'No; I expect you are kept pretty
busy,' Peleus remarked, with covert superciliousness
; though being at the head of
a big affair like that is the sort of thing
to make a man feel of consequence in the
world. You have the advantage, you see,
of idle fellows like Ledsom and me.'

That's true,' returned Victor. * Work
is always an advantage.'

This answer not being exactly what
Peleus had looked for, he did not pursue
the subject. There was, however, during
the remainder of the drive, 60 lack of conversation
between the trio — in which
Peleus decidedly bore the lion's share.
Until Upton Lodge was reached, and Victor
had been dropped at his own gate,
the young man continued to chatter incessantly.
Apparently however, his lingual
efforts had proved a little exhausting ;
for directly Victor had left them he sank
back into a corner of the carriage, and did
not again address his sister (who, for her
part, was glad enough to be silent, and to
occupy herself with her own thoughts)
until they had arrived at home.

VOL. III. H

CHAPTER Iii.

A MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE.

As the carriage swept round towards the
front of the house, Idalia, peering through
the rain-pelted window, became sensible of
some change in its aspect. Wherein that
change consisted she could not, in the first
instant, distinguish. She seemed, however,
vaguely to recognise that an unusual stir
and excitement pervaded the place — very
unusual, indeed, at this advanced hour of
the night.

Pressing her face against the glass, she
ran her eye hastily over the front of the
ancient edifice, and so perceived that it
was full of light. Every window, even

those of the many unoccupied rooms, appeared
to be illumined with flickering lamp
or candle-light.

The hall-door, moreover, stood wide
open, letting a stream of light flow out
over the shining, wet steps and into the
darkness beyond; and, when the carriage
was drawn up with a flourish before the
porch, Mrs. Briscoe, the housekeeper, was
disclosed standing back out of the rain,
her head enveloped in a light, fleecy shawl,
and her countenance expressive of anxiety
or alarm. Behind her tyro or three other
servants were clustered in a little group,
which broke up as she stepped forward,
and, after a sharp glance into the interior of
the carriage (which seemed to include no recognition
of its occupants), put a question
to the coachman. Idalia could not hear
this question, but she saw the housekeeper
elevate her hands with a gesture of dismay.
Her excitement, also, seemed to have communicated
itself to the groom, who, though

h2

he had sprung to the ground and laid his
hand on the handle of the carriage-door,
made no attempt to unclose it, but stopped
short to address Mrs. Briscoe in his turn.

An impatient rattling on the windowpane
by Peleus recalled the man to a sense
of his duty. Throwing open the door, he
hurriedly commenced to apologise. But
Peleus interrupted him brusquely.

What on earth is the row, Henderson ?'
he demanded. ' Whatever is all this about,
Mrs. Briscoe? By George! one would
think you had all gone mad !' he went on
helping his sister to alight with a hand
that shook and trembled, though Idalia
did not notice the fact because her own
was trembling also.

Mrs. Briscoe came forward, but she
omitted the little south-country curtsey
she was in the habit of using when
speaking to her employers.

I was asking, sir, whether master was
with you she began.

Father ? Do you mean father ?' Idalia
interposed, seized instantly with a vague
terror. ' Why, he is in the house, of
course. Isn't he in the house ?' she appended,
contradictorily.

Well, no, miss, he isn't, not that we
can find,' replied the housekeeper. ' But
don't you be frightened, miss ; he'll be
back directly, I make no doubt.'

'Back?' echoed Idalia, 'where from?
He can't be out of doors in this rain,
and at this hour? "Why, it is past
eleven !'

Come iu, Idalia. Come in out of the
cold,' urged her brother, taking her by
the arm, ' and then we'll find out quietly
what all this nonsense is about.'

Half unconsciously, Idalia yielded, and
having drawn her into the morning-room,
where a bright fire was blazing, and a tray,
set with three coffee cups, sandwiches, and
a silver cake-basket stood on the table,
young Bretherton called in one or two of

the principal servants, and bade them close
the door behind them.

snow, then, what's all this about?' he
repeated, taking up a position on the
hearth-rug, with his back to the fire.
^ You say that Mr. Bretherton is — is not
at home ? Where is he, then ?'

We don't any of us know, sir,' answered
Mrs. Briscoe, to whom Peleus had looked
in putting the question. ' He went out
about half-past eight, but he does not
appear to have returned. We thought
perhaps he might have come in by the side
door, without anyone hearing ; but I've
had the whole house looked through, because
I really couldn't help feeling a bit
uneasy-like about him. And he isn't anywhere,
sir, upstairs or down.'

Well, I don't see anything so very
extraordinary or alarming in the matter,'
protested Peleus, laughing rather harshly.
You must have lived, all of you, in remarkably
well-regulated families? Did

you never know a gentleman stay out till
eleven o'clock before ?'

Oh, Peley, don't ! Please don't laugh !'
cried Idalia, springing up and catching at
his arm in great excitement. ' Father
never stays out, you know he doesn't !
He likes to be in bed by ten, unless he is

waiting for us, or Oh ! you are sure he

is not in bed ?'

^ Quite sure, miss.'

Where can he be, then ?' she interrupted,
wildly. * There's the Fold Farm : he
never goes anywhere else. But at this
hour? Oh no, I'm sure he can't be thereat
this hour !'

No, madam, he ain't there. I took
upon myself to go and inquire half-an-hour
ago,' put in a well-bred London domestic,
who combined in his own person the
offices of butler and head-footman. 'And
I had to rouse the house, for all the family
were in bed. But there is something I've
been waiting to explain, sir,' he went on,

tiirDiog to Peleus. * Master did not go
out alone. There was a man came for
him, a man who brought a letter; and
master went with him.'

A letter ?— Yes ?— Well ?' Young Brethren's
face had looked pale throughout
the whole conversation, but at this juncture
it became almost ghastly. * And he went
away without — did he go away without
saying anything, James ?'

I'll just tell you exactly what happened,
sir,' returned the man, gazing at
Peleus with more amazement than sympathy.
He had a pretty correct knowledge
— as had most of the servants — of
the state of the young fellow's sentiments
towards his father, and he could not comprehend
the very evident agitation under
which he was labouring.

Yes, make haste ; let us hear all about
it?' Peleus replied. 'Sit down, Italian
loosing himself from her grasp. ' Well ?'

Well, sir, there ain't very much to tell,

and, of course, if we could only just understand
the rights of it, we should see that
there wasn't any mystery of any sort about
the matter,' sapiently interpolated James.
*But, as I was going to say, it would be
between eight and half-past, and of course
quite dark out of doors, when there came
a sharpish ring at the hall bell. I answered
it, and there stood a man with his
mouth and throat muffled up, just as
though it might have been the depth of
winter, and a letter in his hand. He
wouldn't give me the letter, though. He
said he'd been ordered to see Mr. Brethren,
and deliver it himself. So I went and
told master, and he came out into the hall.
Just then the front door nearly banged to,
for the wind had risen quite stormy, and
there was a great draught in the hall. I
thought what it was, sir, and true enough,
when I looked, the big window at the top
of the staircase had been left open.
Master felt the draught too, and said something

about it. So I ran up-stairs at once
to close it. But it was a stiffish job ; the
window seemed to have stuck somehow in
the frame — it often does, Mrs. Briscoe,
and should be seen about — which was the
reason the maids had left it. Well, Mr.
Percival, when I'd managed it at last, sir
and was running downstairs again, I saw
master with his top-coat and hat on, just
going out at the door. He heard me, I
suppose, for he looked back, and his face
seemed to be puckered and troubled-like.
He half stopped, and said to the man
behind him, "I'll just mention where I'm
going — James, my poor laugh— ," I really
seemed, madam, to make out those words,
and I thought be meant '' daughter." But
I couldn't be sure of it then, and I can't be
sure of it now, for the man gave him a
little pull by the sleeve, and said, " Oh,
come along ; don't waste time !" and the
next instant the door was pulled to, and
they was gone.'

'And that is all?' asked Peleus, vrho bad
listened with strained attention to the servant's
recital.

That's all, sir.'

The young ran burst out laughing, and
a quick ear might have detected relief in
the sound.

Well, James, all I can say is that your
story strikes me as a very queer one, and
rather of the cock-and-bull description,' he
observed, ' especially that embellishment
about *' my poor laugh — ," which we owe
to your fertile imagination, and which I
therefore beg you will never repeat again.
As you can see for yourself, there is
nothing whatever the matter with Miss
Bretherton. But did you conclude, then
that your master had gone down to High
Radston— to Colonel Shillito's?'

'Well, sir, just for a minute I did admitted
James. ' But then, I reflected that
it couldn't be so. Because, you see, it
wasn't likely that he'd have set off to walk

seven miles — a man like master, getting
into years, and when he might have
driven. And particularly if there'd been
any accident or sudden illness — which was
my first notion — he'd have been all the more
sure to have taken one of the traps or gone
on horseback. And that's what made me
feel from the very first that I must have
been mistaken about those words you object
to, sir, for all that I seemed to hear
them so plain.'

'Oh, Peley !' ejaculated Idalia, forgetting
his tenacious objection to being
addressed by this name. ' It sounds like a
trick ! Who could have written that letter ?
He has been drawn from the house on false

pretences But then, who could wish

to harm him ? Oh, it is impossible — quite
impossible, that anyone could wish to
harm him !' she subjoined, throwing an
appealing glance round the room.

The glance was answered by a chorus of
emphatic negatives. The servants were

universally of opinion that their kind
master could not have an enemy or an ill-wisher
in the world ; and the clamorous
expression of this opinion appeared all at
once to lighten the cloud of undefined disquietude
which had seemed to oppress their
minds.

'Dear-aime, no!' broke forth Mrs.
Briscoe ; ' such a good, innocent soul
(begging your pardon, miss), 'tis not in
nature to suppose that anyone could
mean him hurt. He has just been kept
somewhere by the rain. That'll be it, I
make no doubt. And we shall all be
laughing at ourselves by-and-bye, when he
comes in. for being so silly and so scared
about nothing.'

Of course you will,' affirmed Peleus ;
and I feel inclined to laugh at you now,
and to feel a little angry beside. See how
you have terrified my sister, and all so
unnecessarily.'

We've only just told the plain truths

sir,' protested James, who had no great
liking for his young master. * And you
looked a good deal frightened yourself a
while back. You went as white as a sheet,
sir.'

Really ?' Peleus again indulged in a
short laugh. ' You've a first-class imagination,
my good fellow. However, I am
not alarmed now, so I think sou may all
leave the room. As Mrs. Briscoe says, my
father is no doubt sheltering somewhere
out of the rain.'

Stay, though, James. Did you know
that man who brought the letter ? Was he
perhaps he was — a servant from Feld-hurst
Court, or from the rectory, or from
Mr. McNicoll's ?'

No, sir ; of course it was no one I
knew, else I should have said so. He
was not a gentleman's servant, but more
like a labourer, or something that way.
That was one reason why I went upto
the Fold Farm, sir. Mrs. Briscoe

thought it would be as well I should go
and see if he was there, and take him an
umbrella, for we noticed that master hadn't
his with him.'

'And do you think that you could
describe the man ?' again questioned
Peleus, pulling nervously at the dark
silky moustache which he had but lately
acquired. ' Should you know him again ?'

Well, as I told you, sir, I couldn't see
much of his face, for it was muffled up,
and his hat was down over his eyes, so as
one might almost fancy he'd 'meant to hide
himself. But I think I'd know his figure
a great hulking chap he looked — and
I believe I'd know his voice too again,
if I heard it. It wasn't a particular sweet
one.'

Well, well, you can go now. You are
determined to make a mystery of the
affair, James ; but it will all be cleared up
when my father returns. Let us have the
coffee in, Briscoe.'

Coffee !' Idalia sprang to her feet as
the door closed behind the servants. ^ Oh,
Peleus, how can you think of coffee?
Look at the hour !' She pointed to the
time-piece, which now marked quarter to
twelve. ^ Oh, look at the hour ! Something
has happened to him — I feel — I feel
that something has happened to him !
Rain ? it isn't the rain ! No rain would
keep him to this hour. He would know
that we should be anxious. I must do
something, Peley. I must go and look for
him.' She rushed from the room, as she
thus concluded, and threw open the great
entrance door.

It was a wild, dark night. The rain
was still pouring down in torrents, more
heavily than before.

Beyond the shining pavement of the
portico Idalia could not see a step out into
the blackness which she strove to pierce
with dilated eyes. But she could hear
sounds — the creaking and swaying of the

tall trees in the avenue, the whistling and
moaning of the wind around the angles
and gables of the house, the intermittent
banging of some distant gate or
shutter.

Idalia, my dear girl, come in,' entreated
Peleus, who had followed her to the
door. ' You are so excitable and impetuous.
Try to be calm, do !'

Hush ! Listen ! I hear a footstep on
the gravel,' said Idalia, crushing the arm
which he had passed round her waist.
Father ! father, is that you ?'

There was no response to the half-distracted
cry.

It is only the wind, dear. There is
nobody there,' asserted her brother. 'Why,
supposing he should be in the house after
all?'

This suggestion, as he had expected,
instantly brought Idalia in.

Oh, he must be ! He may be !' she
exclaimed, catching eagerly at the idea,

VOL, III. I

How stupid of US not to have looked for
ourselves before.'

Aud thereupon, beginning first with
the most likely apartments (his own private
sitting-room and bed-room), Mr.
Bretherton's anxious and terrified daughter
headed a second search through the
house, one that, had not the general solicitude
crushed out all sense of humour,
would have seemed laughably rigorous.
From attic to cellar, every nook and corner
of the fine old mansion was examined.
Closets, cupboards, wardrobes, every place
possible and impossible was scrutinised.
But to no purpose, or rather, with the
negative result, which put Mr. Brethren's
absence from his home beyond
question.

When the last chamber had been gone
into, and the futile search was oven IdaUa
leaned up against a wall, and, pressing
her hand against her heart, gave vent to
an inarticulate wail of disappointment.

Don't 'ee take on so, my dear, now,
don't 'ee' cried Mrs. Briscoe, relapsing in
her sympathy to her native vernacular,
and venturing to touch her young mistress's
hand. 'Dear heart alive ! 'twill all
come right. Do 'ee trust the Lord now.
But if I was you I'd have all the men go
out different ways and look for him,' she
added, betraying a wise lack of reliance on
faith without works : ' 'twould ease your
mind. Miss Idalia, my dear.'

Before Idalia could utter the relieved
acquiescence that sprang to her lips,
Peleus interposed with the declaration
that he had been about to propose the
same thing, adding that he should himself
take part in the expedition. Some fifteen
minutes later, accordingly, having despatched
the six serving-men, who composed
the household staff, in six different
directions, with ample instructions as
to their proceedings, young Bretherton
mounted a horse he had ordered to be

i2

saddled for himself, and rode off towards
High RadstoD, with the intention, as he
informed his sister, of inquiring whether
by any chance Mr. Bretherton had followed
them to the Rookery. Among the
six emissaries, it may be mentioned, was
the head-gardener, who, with his young
daughter (supposed to act as janitor) occupied
the lodge by the gate.

As it appeared, this gentleman had spent
a considerable portion of his evening at a
little roadside public-house about a mile
away. Miss Maggie Plaise, his daughter,
meantime solacing her solitude with some
highly-spiced fiction, had been so enthralled
thereby that she had failed to notice
either the footsteps of Mr. Bretherton's
mysterious visitor as he had passed up to
the house, or those of her master and his
companion as they had passed out by the
gate.

How the remaining hours of that dreadful
night dragged themselves away, Idalia

Bretherton scarcely knew. On the tenterhooks
of suspense and anxiety, the poor
girl could not rest many seconds in the
same place. With a tortured, hunted
look in her beautiful eyes, she kept passing
from room to room, peering into one
after the other, as though with the desperate,
forlorn hope of finding her father
somewhere in the house after all. Then,
every few minutes, she would hasten again
to the hall-door, and stand there, striving
in vain to pierce the thick darkness of the
moonless and starless night, and straining
her ears in an attempt to distinguish
amidst the strange, mysterious sounds
that filled the air and seemed to aggravate
her terror.

By-and-by the men began to return
from their quest, and poor Idalia was subjected
to a renewed strain of hope and
disappointment with each footstep that fell
on her listening ears, to be gradually
discriminated by her quickened senses as

nob the footstep of hin she so tenderly
loved.

The last of the searchers to arrive at
home was Peleus, who dropped in, pale
and jaded, about five o'clock in the morning.
His report, alas ! proved to be only
an echo of those that had preceded it.
Nothing had been seen or heard anywhere
of the missing man.

CHAPTER VIII.

AN UNSUCCESSFUL Search.

Before the dawn of the following day the
news of Mr.Bretherton's disappearance had
spread far and wide.

Carried bj the servants to so many
different centres, it had radiated around
each of them with that proverbial celerity
which attends the dissemination of ill-tidings,
until almost every soul in the
district seemed to have heard the report.
And in its effect the report was singularly
universal. Intuitively, every person who
had ever seen Abner Bretherton appeared
to discern that he was not the man to stay
out all night of his own accord, or without

stern reason. He did not, it was well
known, drink (the new owner of Monks-wood
had been an object of considerable
curiosity in the neighbourhood, and his
habits had been pretty well canvassed)
and the notion of a ' spree ' was one which
no one found it possible to connect with
him. The thing was a mystery, and as a
mystery it stirred even the slow-flowing,
bucolic blood of the country-side to some
excitement.

As early as six o'clock, honest Farmer
Basset, his ruddy face full of concern,
came down to the Hall to inquire after his
friend, ' The Squire,' as he always called
him. The liking which these two men —
in whose characters there were points
both of strong resemblance and of strong
diversity — had conceived for each other at
their very first meeting, had gone on up to
the present moment steadily increasing.
(It is in the nature of all true friendship
to be progressive.) And of late a deeper

element of sympathy had been developed
in this friendship through certain occasions
which had arisen for it: About a fortnight
ago Mr. Basset had lost the aged
father of whose * soreness ' he had been so
boastfully proud, and to whose person he
had been so touchingly attached, and Mr.
Bretherton had followed alone with him
those honoured remains to the grave.
Further, the kindly American, with a view
to cheering him by companionship, had
almost every day since strolled up to the
farm for a chat with its proprietor.

He had been there, as Idalia had already
learned, on the previous afternoon, and he
had stayed on that occasion later than
usual, by reason, no doubt, of her own and
her brother's absence, and had drunk a
cup of tea with the family.

And after tea the Squire and me drord
up to the fire and had a pipe and a crack,'
observed the farmer, getting slowly under
weigh with the information Idalia was

eagerly endeavouring to extract from
him.

Yes. And what did you talk about ?
Oh ! Mr. Basset, did he say anything about
having an engagement in the evening ?
Is there anything you can think of that
might give us a clue as to where he is
gone ?'

Nay, missy, for truth there bent
naught I can think on. There 'a sat, as
nat'ral as a picture , smoking his pipe.'

But what did he say ? Oh ! please try
to remember every word he said,' urged the
girl.

Lor' bless 'ee, so I will. But 'twas m©
talked most, my dear, and the squire he
listened most. 'A sat there smoking his
pipe as nat'ral as a picture,' he repeated.
And not an idee in 's head, I'll be sworn,
but of sleeping in his bed like any
Christian man. And you found un gone,
missy, when you com'd home. Laua-a-
massy ! I be that took aback myself as I

scarce know what I be after. You found
'un gone?'

Again Idalia, greedy of every scrap of
information she could gather concerning
his proceedings of yesterday pressed to
know all that her father had said and done
at the Fold Farm.

I'll answer your questions afterwards,
Mr. Basset,' she promised, with the pathetic
ghost of a smile. ' You must please
answer mine first.'

So I will, so I will ! You want to hear
what 'twas us talked about, do 'ee ? Well,
my dear,' (after a reflective rub of his unshaven
chin), ' 'twas most about my
daughter, my little gell Susan. Her's
been ailing this good bit past, pining away,
as 'twere, and drooping ; and neither her
mother nor me, we can't for life of us make
out what be amiss wi' her. And your
rather, missy, he do have noticed it too,
how peaked and thin her have grown, poor
little wench, and how all her pretty pink

colour have gone from her cheeks. But
you'll have maybe noticed it yourself?'

Idalia shook her head impatiently. She
had, it was true, thought Susan Basset
looking changed and ill the last time she
had met her, and at any other moment she
would have been full of sympathy upon
the subject; but just now she really could
not speak nor think of Susan Basset. It
seemed almost an impertinence that her
name should have been obtruded upon her
notice. Overwhelming grief and anxiety
is a touchstone apt to detect egotism, even
in the noblest and least selfish of mortals.
To Idalia, the question as to what had
become of her father was the only
question worth considering in the universe.


Yes, but m}'- father ? Try to tell me
something about him, Mr. Basset,' she
entreated.

The good farmer proved quite ready to
tell all that he could tell about his friend,

and to tell ifc a good many times over.
But it soon became apparent that nothing
whatever had occurred during Mr. Brethren's
visit of yesterday that could throw the
faintest light on the mystery of his subsequent
disappearance. Susan's failing
health and drooping spirits had, it was
plain, formed the principal topic of conversation
between the two men during the
hour or so that Mr. Bretherton had remained
at the farm after the substantial
repast which his host now described as a
cup o' tea,' and it was equally plain that
warm-hearted Abner had entered with the
deepest interest into a discussion as to the
probable causes of Susan's indisposition,
and as to the most likely remedies to use
for her recovery. Among other things, he
had suggested that the company of * young
folks ' might be what she needed, and he
had insisted that she should come and stay
at Monkswood for a ' spell,' in the cheerful
society of his young folks.

This being all that Mr. Basset had to
communicate, with the exception of certain
remarks about the live stock on his
farm, which Mr. Bretherton had visited together
with him in the afternoon, Idalia was
thankful to have the flow of his garrulity
(for, when once he had overcome a preliminary
difficulty in getting up steam, Mr.
Basset was a great talker) interrupted by
the advent of a second visitor. This
proved to be the rector of Upton, and
before that gentleman had been very many
minutes in the house he was followed by
his curate, Mr. Heath, an amiable and
intelligent young man, who, in secret,
nourished a hopeless admiration for Miss
Bretherton. That it was a hopeless one
he had recognised through the firm, but
kindly, manner in which Idalia had checked
his very first attempt to give it expression.


Scarcely had the two clergymen departed,
with a promise to come again in the

course of an hour (neither of them had
yet breakfasted), in order to consult with
Peleus and herself as to the best steps to
be taken for continuing the search, when
Idalia caught the sound of horse's hoofs
trotting up the avenue.

The horseman turned out to be Colonel
Shillito, who, disturbed by Mr Percival's
midnight visit, had been unable to sleep
agaiij, and who had ridden out thus early
with the same sympathetic motive which
had actuated the kindly inquirers by whom
he had already been forestalled.

That the world is not such a hard place,
nor human nature so selfish and pitiless,
as some pessimistic philosophers are in the
habit of representing it, the young Bred
at all events, were being supplied
with ample proof.

After a little talk — fruitless, so far as
any feasible suggestion respecting the
missing man's whereabouts was concerned
Colonel Shillito invited himself to

breakfast, and begged that it might be
served early. This claim on her hospitality
(Idalia was too much her father's
daughter not to accord it a hearty and
instantaneous response) bad a happy effect
in drawing the poor girl for brief space
out of her anxious absorption.

Leaving the room, she gave orders that
the morning meal, of which she herself
stood sorely in need, though she did not
recognise the fact, should be at once prepared.
Then she ran upstairs to wash
and to change the gala dress which she
still wore, and which looked so unsuitable
to the hour, and impressed her (now that
she was sufficiently collected to observe it)
a^ so wretchedly incongruous with the
state of her feelings. In her plainest and
warmest winter gown — for misery had
made her feel chilly — she presently descended,
and was just about to re-enter
the morning-room, where she had left
Colonel Shillito, when once more the hall-bell

rang. Oa the qui vive of expectancy,
the poor girl flew, with a beating heart,
to answer the summons herself. But it
was not, alas! the lost father, for whom
she now seemed to have been watching for
weary days or weeks. This time it was
Victor Mc'Nicoll who appeared.

i've only just heard,' began the young
man, showing no surprise at finding that
it was Tdalia herself who had let him in —
I've only just heard this — this strange
news. Can it be true?'

Idalia drew him, without speaking, into
a small reception-room to the right of the
entrance hall. Then she closed the door
behind her, and put out both hands towards
him.

Oh, Victor, find him for me ! Find
him for me !' she cried, suddenly giving
way, and shedding the relieving tears
which had refused to come all through
that long night of anguish.

or? o

Victor seized the outstretched hands,

VOL. III. K

and held them in a firm supporting clasp.

Idalia, I will he said ; * I will find him
if I have to seek the whole earth through !
But he added, after a short pause, and in
altered, tremulous tones, * surely there is
no reason to feel so greatly alarmed ?

Tell me, my tell me just what has

occurred. I hardly waited to listen at
home to what they were saying.'

And, for a little time, the young man
did not listen now though he appeared to
be doing so, to the explanations which
Idalia, with a curious new hopefulness in
her mind, had commenced to pour forth.
He still held in a gentle, but strong, grasp
the hands which quite unconsciously she
had left in his own ; but his heart was
beating so violently that he almost feared
his companion must hear its heavy thuds.
To him the last few moments had revealed
a priceless secret. That sudden spot:
gaseous appeal to him for help, Idalia's
use of the Christian name which she had

never given him before, that instinctive
confidence which she seemed to possess in
his identifying himself with her griefs and
interests — all struck Victor as facts
pregnant of delicious meaning.

So, likewise, did the trustful way in
which she had given him her hands, and
in which she now stood looking up into
his face, with the large tears shining in
her lovely dark-fringed eyes. It was all
Victor could do to prevent himself catching
her to his breast, and pouring forth an
impassioned avowal of the love which had
so long secretly burned in his own heart, and
on which this unconscious betrayal of an
answering affection on her part had now acted
like oil upon the flames. The conviction,
however, that Idalia would be deeply shocked
by so untimely a disclosure, and that
she was herself utterly unsuspicious of all
that her manner had revealed, fortunately
saved the young man from committing so
flagrant a mistake. Of his own accord

k2

he presently released her hands, and, by a
strong effort of will, bent his attention to
listen to what she was saying. He had
not, however, caught either many words
or the sense of them, when the interview
was broken in upon by Peleus. The
young fellow had heard the opening of
the entrance-door, and had come to see
who was the new visitor, as also to announce
to his sister that breakfast was
now ready.

As a matter of course Victor was invited
to join in the meal ; and when, by-and-bj^
Mr. Hardcastle and Mr. Heath returned,
and the party had been farther augmented
by the advent of Mr. Bretherton's steward
a man of the name of Brook — the
question at issue was seriously grappled
with : where and how was the missing man
to be sought ? Naturally, as it appeared
to everyone, the primary and most important
point was to discover the identity of
the individual who had brought that

message, which, whatever its purport or
object, had been successful in luring poor
Abner from his home. To this end James
was again summoned and subjected by the
conclave of gentlemen to a close and
rigorous examination. It ended, however,
in their eliciting merely what the man had
stated on the previous night, i.e., that the
visitor had been a 'big, hulking fellow
whose face he had been unable to see,
whose voice and figure he had failed to
recognise, and who, he fancied, was a
stranger to the neighbourhood. In
addition to this, James could only repeat,
as he did over and over again, an unavailing
regret that he had ' bothered about that
stupid window,' instead of remaining in the
hall near his master.

In this direction, then, nothing further being
forthcoming that might serve for their
guidance, it was finally decided that the
only thing to be done was to thoroughly
scour the whole country around.

This task, after arranging a systematic
plan of procedure, and bidding Idalia keep
up heart and hope, the kind friends who
had gathered around her departed to
execute — Peleus, of course taking, as on
the previous evening, his share in the
exploration.

As for Idalia — afraid to leave the house
lest her father or some tidings of him
might arrive in her absence, yet unable to
rest within doors, she wandered, like an
unquiet spirit, hither and thither through
the grounds, and in and out of the wood
at the back of the house.

It was a clear bright morning, and all
nature seemed to be full of newly-awakened
life. The tall trees in the wood were
swaying gently in the breeze, rustling
their tender green foliage softly, and
keeping up a hushed, rhythmical accompaniment
to the music of a hundred
birds, spending a glad honeymoon amidst
their branches. From a wheat-field not

far beyond, a lark, springing now and the,
would carrol bis way up to the pale blue
sky. The hedges around the wood were
festooned with honeysuckle in full leaf,
whilst their banks underneath showed a
mass of starry white blossoms. In the
wood itself, carpeted with verdant moss,
the wild hyacinth, with its long, spear-like
leaf and its fragrant, bell-shaped flower,
had almost ousted the yellow lent-lily and
delicate anemone which had held the stage
before it ; and the whole gleaming, sham
ground shimmered with a
lovely turquoise sheen, as the pendant
blossoms bent and swayed before the
wand.

For poor Idalia, however, there was no
joy nor beauty to-day in the sweet sounds
and sights of early summer. The winter
of distress in her soul was more potent
than all these things. Subjective realities
had deadened her perception of objective
nullities. For the moment the outer world

had become a blank, and Idalia could hardly
have told whether there was snow or
sunshine around her.

Once in returning from the wood, after
one of ber brief rambles through it, Idalia
met Sir Arthur Ledsom going there to look
for her.

Since his engagement to Dora McNicoll,
the young baronet had almost ceased to
visit at Monkswood. Idalia and he had
met very seldom, and when they had meta
curious constraint had marked their
intercourse — at least on the young man's
side.

But this morning there was neither
stiffness nor reticence in Sir Arthur's
manner, as he advanced to meet her with
hurried steps.

Oh, Miss Bretherfcon, is it true — this
about your father?' he asked, excitedly.
What can I do ? How can I help you ?
My time, my property, my life, everything
I am or have, is at your disposal. Only

tell me what I can do !' be cried, forgetting
in his passionate sympathy with her anguish
all his wonted precaution, and letting the
love which, so far, his best efforts had been
powerless to slay, shine out of his eager
eyes and tremble in his agitated tones.

Even in the midst of her engrossing
anxiety, Idalia could not but recognise the
thrill of emotion in his accents, and understand
what had brought it there. Love is
a passion not easily hidden, especially from
the object of it, and long ago Idalia had
more than suspected that, although Arthur
Ledsom had offered his hand to Dora
McNicDll, she it was who possessed his
heart.

A vivid colour rose for a moment to her
cheeks, and the blush instantly reflected
itself in Arthur's face. Then in a few-words
— words which in the utterance of
them recalled the poor girl to a full sense
of her wretchedness — Idalia explained all
that had occurred, and Sir Arthur, lingering

no longer in the presence that was
dearer to him than any other on earth,
hastened away to spend himself in her
service.

Alone again, Idalia re-commenced her
restless wanderings, racked with suspense,
tortured by wild alarm (which she
increased by conjuring up a thousand
imaginary horrors), and, above all, smitten
with heart-breaking remorse in that
she had allowed her own pleasure to take
her yesterday from her father's side.

Oh, if I had not left him ! If only I
had not left him !' was the cry which inwardly
she had been repeating all the
night through, and which now kept forcing
itself at intervals from her lips.

In this way the morning passed slowly
away. Afternoon and evenings followed
it, broken only by a succession of new
visitors, and by the return, one after another,
of the searchers — each of whom
had set out on his mission animated by

the hope of being the one to unravel this
strange mystery, but who, one and all,
had to present themselves to Idalia's silent,
piteous interrogation crest-fallen and unsuccessful.


CHAPTER IX.

Italia IN DESPAIR

A WEEK later Idalia Bretherton — a mere
ghost of her former self — sat waiting for
her brother to finish his breakfast. The
hour was a late one, but Peleus lingered
over his meal, professing, as he partook
of it, to be studying the morning paper.
In reality, however, he was studying his
sister's face over the edges of it — a frown
knitting his handsome brows, and an expression
compounded of angry impatience
and of half-reluctant compassion on his
countenance.

Idalia,' he broke forth, suddenly, laying
down the newspaper and pushing his

chair from the table, ' are you never going
to try to be a little more cheerful ? What
good does it do to mope and brood like
that ? You only make yourself ill, without
its being of the least use to anyone.'

Idalia looked up, but she did not rouse
herself from the listless, drooping attitude
which spoke so plainly of hopeless dejection.
There were dark circles round her
eyes and hollows in her cheeks. The
poor girl's features seemed to have shrunk
altogether, and her face to have grown
smaller — all but the large violet blue eyes,
which by contrast appeared larger, and
which were full of a still, pathetic anguish
that set the beholder's heart aching to
contemplate.

Peley, I think it will kill me !' she
answered, calmly, with nothing of that
fevered excitement in voice or manner
which had marked the first fall of the
calamity. This now had all gone, and in
its place there had succeeded the dull

quietude of despair — less wearing, perhaps,
in its immediate effects upon the
physical frame than those alternations of
suspense and disappointment, but not less
to be feared in its consequences should
the cause thereof endure. ' If he had but
died in my arms,' she went on. * If I
could only have nursed and watched by
him, I could have borne it. But not to
know — not to know v/hat the end has
been ! That is the horror of it.'

But what makes you so sure that he
is— is dead, Idalia ?' demanded her brother.
I don't believe it myself. I see no reason
why we should believe it. Wait for the
answer to the telegram, dear ; and, in the
meantime, do try, for my sake, if not for
your own, not to give way like this. Your
father is not the only person in the world.
You surely owe some consideration and
affection to me. And if you are going to
wear that death's-head and cross-bones
aspect for ever,' he added, petulantly,

you'll be a charming companion for a
fellow.'

Idalia's only reply to this remark was a
look ; but it was a look which caused
Peleus' eyes to fall beneath her own.

At any rate,' he subjoined, taking up
his paper again, 'you might try to keep
up your spirits until we hear from
America.'

Until we hear from America!' echoed
Idalia, moved to a passing impatience.

How can you pretend, Peleus, to believe
for one minute that he can have gone
there ? You brow you don't believe it !
Would he have left us without one word of
warning? Would he have set off to travel
thousands of miles without even a handbag
? What folly ! — what wretched folly 1'

She got up from her seat, shaken out of
her lethargy by the transitory anger which
this suggestion always produced, and walked
towards the window. Within a foot of
it, however, she stopped short, uttering a

startled exclamation. On the other side
of the casement a face had met her view
It was a young face, and a girl's face, but
one that was almost as greatly changed —
almost as much like a faded shadow of
what it had once been — as her own.

Idalia threw up the window.

^ Susan "Basset ? Is it really you Susan ?
Poor child ! how ill you look I' she cried,
forgetting her own sorrows for the moment
in a rush of sympathy.

But Susan paid no attention to her
inquiries. She peered past Idalia into the
room.

Is he there ?' she asked.

He ? Who ?' repeated Idalia. * Oh,
Susan ! whom do you want ? Have you —
have you any news for us ?'

"Tis Mr. Percival I want. He's there
behind you. I want him to come out and
speak to me,' replied Susan.

You want me V Peleus laughed, with a
very forced amusement. ^ All right! Delighted,

I'm sure ! I'll be with sou in an
instant, Miss Basset.'

No, no ! come in here, Susan,' interposed
Idalia. ' Why don't you come into
the house ? You know something about
my father.' (Catching at straws of possibility,
Idalia had given up considering the
likelihood or unlikelihood of any vehicle of
information.) ' I believe you know something
about my father, and / must hear
it, as well as my brother. I — I am quite
prepared for the worst, Susan.'

But I don't know anything about your
father — not the least thing,' protested
Susan. ' 'Tis Mr. Percival I want. 'Tis
just something between him and me.'

Really ? How extremely flattering !'
commented Peleus, sotto voce for his sister's
benefit.

Then hurrying out, in fear lest Susan
should further commit herself or him, he
drew the girl away from the house. Idalia
remained where she was, leaning her head

VOL. III. L

against the window-frame, and watching
their retreating figures, but with an abstracted,
unseeing gaze. Already — convinced
that it bore no reference to that
one subject of profoundest concern — she
had ceased to feel the slightest curiosity
about Susan's visit, or as to what business
she could have with her brother.

Mind, as well as body, had suffered,
poor girl, through the long strain she had
undergone, and but for one secret source
of support and comfort — scarcely recognised
by herself, but still there, like the
red embers in the heart of a fire that
seems to be dead, keeping life and warmth
and potential brightness alive — Idalia
might so have succumbed to her misfortunes
as absolutely to lose her reason.

For nothing — not a sign nor trace — had
yet been discovered of her father — that
father whom she loved with an ardent
devotion, such as it is fashionable in fiction
to represent as appropriate only to

the relations of lovers, but wbicb, in real
life, happily develops itself sometimes in
connection with the close and tender ties
of blood.

Had the earth opened and swallowed
him up, poor Mr. Bretherton could not
have disappeared more completely and
mysteriously. The ' hulking fellow,' moreover,
whom James had described as the
bearer of that fateful letter, might, so far
as appeared, have been a figment of the
servant's imagination, for not a soul in
the neighbourhood had either seen him
that night or seemed able to recognise the
bald description.

As a matter of course, it had at once
been concluded that the missing man
could not have wandered far upon foot,
and the strictest inquiry had been directed
towards discovering and tracing any
vehicles that had been abroad on that wet
and stormy night. With the exception,
however, of a milk-shandy returning

l2

from High Radston, and belonging to a
small farmer whom everybody knew, only
one other conveyance had been seen.
About that conveyance a good deal of
suspicion had been aroused, and still continued
to be felt ; but, unfortunately, all
efforts to trace it to a destination had failed,
notwithstanding that those efforts had
been undertaken principally by the lost
man's own son as his share in the work of
investigation. The conveyance in question
appeared to have been a kind of
spring-cart, the hinder portion of which
had been covered with a tarpaulin. It
had first been noticed by Molly Osborn,
one of Mrs. Basset's strapping maid-servants,
who had been to post a letter at
that country post-office before alluded to
in connection with Miss Hester Courteney's
clandestine correspondence.

Molly had overtaken the cart, and had
passed it very near to the entrance of
Monkswood Hall. That had been, so far

as she could judge, about a quarter past
eight, and about a quarter to nine the
landlord of the public-house yclept ' The
Griffin,' going to his door to inspect the
weather, had observed the same cart — or,
at least, a cart ^Yith a tarpaulin cover
gleaming wet in the light of his bar-window
— passing towards Upton — that is, in
an exactly contrary direction.

Neither Molly nor the landlord, however,
could describe the driver, who had
worn a mackintosh coat, with the collar
pulled up into his neck, and a waterproof
hat drawn down over his face and provided
with ear-flaps. But that he was
not a particularly large man, and therefore
not identical with James's 'hulking fellow,'
was the impression of both witnesses.
To conclude the matter, this cart had
been traced as far as a tiny hamlet at a
distance of three miles beyond the parish
of Upton, where it had been seen by one
person. After that, it seemed to have

disappeared as completely as Mr. Brethren
himself had done.

In this quarter then, no less than in
every other whereto inquiry had been
directed, baffling failure had been the
sole result. It had been felt shortly that
the only thing left to do was to advertise
freely in the newspapers, local and
provincial, offering a heavy reward for
any information likely to be of use, and
also to place the matter in the hands
of the police. In addition to this, on a
suggestion made by Peleus that his father
might possibly have returned to America,
all the ports whence passenger vessels
ordinarily sailed had been visited by one
or other of the gentlemen who had devoted
themselves to the quest. Further, although
poor Abner's name appeared on no
list of passengers who had sailed, or were
about to sail, for the New World, a cable
message had been sent across the Atlantic.
And for an answer to the inquiries that

would have to be sent forward to Clear
Water Valley Idalia's friends were now
waiting, certainly without much hope.
As for Idalia herself, she regarded the very
supposition that her father could possibly
have taken such a step as an insult to his
memory ; and to mention the telegram in
her presence invariably awakened the indignation
which she had shown this morning
when her brother had ventured to do
so. Her own fears pointed to some fatal
accident. Day by day she grew more sure
that her dear father was dead — that never
in this life should she behold his kind face
again ! and this conviction, striking her
with a fresh pang as she now stood leaning
up against the window, abstractedly watching
the retreating figures of Peleus and
Susan Basset, brought a rush of hot and
blinding tears to her eyes, through which
she ceased to discern the figures at all.

CHAPTER X.

A POINTED QUESTION.

Meanwhile, until they had sot far beyond
hearing from that open window at which
Idalia stood, young Bretherton and his
companion walked forward in absolute
silence. It was Peleus who then made the
first remark, and the tone of his voice
corresponded well with the darkened lookin
his face.

Well, Miss Susan, I must say that this
proceeding on your part is a somewhat
extraordinary one,' he observed ; ' may I
ask for an explanation of it ?'

Susan glanced at him, but she did not
quail, as she once might have done, at the
sight of his displeasure.

I wanted to speak to you,' she rejoined,
gravely.

'So sou have already observed,' ho
retorted ; ' but there were other ways,
surely, of obtaining an interview without
summoning rae through the window !
What do you suppose my sister will
think ?'

I don't care what your sister thinks,*
the girl answered, but there was neither
boldness nor defiance in her air, as the
words might seem to indicate ; ' I've just
some to ask you a question, Percival, and
'tis one I be in the right to have answered,
so you must please tell me true, plain " ses "
or no.

Humph ! Pray let me hear the question
?' returned the young man, with an
expression of uneasy irritability. ' One
would suppose from your aspect that it was
something tragic. Have you been studying
a play, Susan ?'

But Susan did net appear to understand,

or even to hear this satirical query. She
marched straight on, without speaking
again, until they had reached a turn of the
avenue whence they could not so easily be
seen from the house. Then pausing, she
leaned her back against a tree, and turned
to face her companion. And a very pretty
and touching picture she made, poor little
thing, standing there with her golden curls
ruffled by the breeze and streaming over
her shoulder ! Her childish face, round
still, but almost colourless, looked by contrast
with the black frock and hat worn
for her grandfather even fairer and paler
than it really was. Her little rosebud of a
mouth was set with a stern, determined
look that sat curiously upon it ; whilst at
variance, though not out of keeping with
that expression, appeared a pathetic wist
fulness in the deep azure eyes. So young,
so fair and sad the girl looked, that even a
heart of stone might have melted at the
sight.

Peleus Bretherton had not much heart
to speak of, but even he — startled by the
effects, as he knew them to be, of his own
selfish and cruel flirtation — felt a little
moved.

Well, Susie, I am waiting for your
question ?' he said more softly, taking one
of her long curls in his hand.

Susan, however, drew it instantly away
from his touch.

Don't, please !' she requested, peremptorily.
' Percival, what I want to knovv^
'tis this : Have you quite given over loving
me ?'

Annoyed by the repulse of his caress,
Peleus felt his softened mood changing.
Really, Susan he exclaimed, ' this is quite
melo-dramatic !'

'Tis seven weeks ago and two days
since you have been to see me,' pursued
Susan, regarding him with a steadfast, unwavering
gaze.

'It is very kind of you to keep so

accurate an account of mj movements,'
remarked the young man ; ' you are
aware, I suppose, that I have had very
important matters to take up my time
lately ?'

But not for seven weeks said Susan.

Peleus shrugged his shoulders, with an
air of dismissing the subject. He had, it
was true, made violent love to this girl.
But, however she might have taken it, the
affair to him had never been a serious one,
and he certainly did not feel bound to continue
it against his inclination. He had
grown indifferent to the amusement now,
and he meant to drop it. His shrug said
this as plainly as possible.

Why should I call to see you, if I don't
wish ?'

Susan did not remove her fixed gaze
from his countenance.

Percival,' she demanded, abruptly, ' be
you going to marry Lady Standon ?'

Young Bretherton started and coloured.

His sang froid manDer changed at last to
one of interest.

What makes sou ask such a question ?'
he inquired.

*Aunt Briscoe, she says that the
servants do all think you mean to answered
the girl.

Really ? I'm much obliged to the
servants for canvassing my affairs,' Peleus
returned. But he laughed and seemed
pleased rather than angry. Even to have
his ambitious hopes spoken of by the
servants as possible of fulfilment appeared
to raise that possibility in his own
estimation.

I fear, little Susan, that there are two
sides to that question,' he said, smiling on
her. ' My meaning to have the lady and the
lady's meaning to have ??z^are not necessary
correlatives.'

Susan looked as though she did not understand.


You could not marry her and me, too,'

she returned, gravely ; ' 'tis this I came to
ask you, Percival : don't you want to marry
me now ?'

Upon my word !' protested the young
man, in a rallying tone ' that is a plain
question, Susan. You make a fellow feel
quite bashful.'

The girl made a gesture of contempt or
impatience.

'Answer "yes" or "no," please,' she
urged.

Hang it ! Neo, then, if you will have
it !' said Peleus, crossly.

It had scarcely seemed possible that she
could look paler, but, for a moment,
Susan's face grew almost ghastly.

Did you nevers mean what you said,
then ?' she asked, in a low voice of concentrated
emotion ; ' didn't you call me
your little wife many and many a time ?
And didn't you swear as you loved me and
didn't you — kiss me ?'

To be sure I did !' Peleus laughed

again. * Donec you know, Susan, that any
man will kiss a pretty girl if she's willing
to let him ?'

The remark was a brutal one, and its
effect upon Susan proved singular. For
an instant the poor girl's innocent blue
eyes distended in a wild stare of surprise.
Then a hot colour rushed into her face,
crimsoning even her brow and neck. She
put up her hands to cover the burning
blushes, ejaculating * Oh ! oh !' but unable
to get out another word.

A sense of overwhelming shame and
dismay had overtaken her. She must
have behaved shockingly to have anyone
sneer at her in that horribly disdainful
way. And yet, what had she done ? Homo
had she behaved badly? He had sworn
that he loved her, and she had believed
him. She had thought they were to belong
to each other for ever, and so she
had let him kiss her, and she had thought
no harm of it. Had there been harm in

it? In a short time common-sense came
to Susan's relief. No, there had not. It
was lie, not she, who had behaved badly.
It was he who ought to be feeling ashamed
and disgraced. She put down her handy
and the blushes faded from her cheeks,
leaving them whiter than ever.

You've been making game of me, then?*^
she cried, 'you've just been treating me
like a plaything ? Me, Susan Basset V she
held up her head with a proud little
gesture ; ' and the Bassets, they have lived
on the Fold Farm thousands of years.
'Isn't as if we was common people. My
father, he'd be fit to kill you if he knew !'

Peleus looked somewhat disturbed by
this suggestion. But before he could reply
Susan continued,

But you needn't be afeard that I shall
tell him, or anybody. I promised I'd say
nothing till you let me ; and now —-now
'isn't likely I'd let anyone know I'd been
made game of. But I did love you so

she went od, in a changed voice, 'I— I
just worshipped you. And all the while
you were only amusing yourself. You
didn't mean anything ? Oh, I hate you !
You be a liar, and no gentleman !' she concluded,
in passionate scorn.

Peleus half-turned on his heel.

Upon my life, you are a dreadfully
intense young woman,' he exclaimed, ' but
it isn't worth while, I assure you, to get
into such an excitement over the matter.
If I have led you into any mistake as to
my intentions, I can only offer you a very
humble apology. Indeed, I'm awfully
sorry, Susan, if I have made you unhappy.
But I don't see why you should feel so. I
of course I like you very much yet —
immensely, in fact. Don't let us quarrel,
Susan. Shake hands and be friends — come,
do.'

Oh, go away ! Go away I' cried Susan,
with a motion to ward off his approach.
I don't care for you one atom now. But

VOL. III. M

I don't care for myself either. I — I wish
I were dead !' She broke into passionate
sobs, but restrained herself speedily.
You've broken my heart. You — you
made me love you so as I cared for nothing
else in the world but you. And now — now
you've thrown me away like an old shoe
into the mud. I don't care to live any
longer.'

And, without another word or look, the
poor child turned to leave the worthless
scamp who, she believed, had permanently
blighted her young life.

Out of patience with her vehemence, yet
anxious to part with the girl on a pleasant
footing, Peleus moved forward to follow
her. As he did so, a hatchet-shaped
visage, distorted by a scowl of the utmost
malignity, was protruded from behind the
trunk of a tree, some few yards distant,
and a huge clenched fist was shaken
threateningly in his direction. Then
Susan's faithful watch-dog, who had been

a hidden spectator of the entire interview,
shambled forth and began to follow his
mistress.

By George ! I'll have that brute shut
up in an asylum, as sure as my name is
Bretherton !' cried Peleus, enraged, and
alarmed also, by the expression of Luke's
face. * Susan, do you hear, if that brother
of yours ever comes into these grounds
again, I — I'll see that it's the last time
he is able to do so.'

He'll not come in again Susan replied,
without looking round as she spoke.
^ Come away, Luke !'

Peleus let them go. The sight of
Luke's inflamed and hate-inspired countenance
had driven away all desire for
reconciliation with his sister. Disgusted,
irritated, and frightened at the same time,
he told himself that he wished he had
never seen either of the pair. He was
tired of Susan and her ridiculously serious
way of taking his love-making, and he was

m2

filled with a shuddering repugnance towards
the ' softy.'

By-and-by, however, though he could
not forget the spiteful scowl and threatening
gesture, Peleus Bretherton's thoughts
diverted to other subjects. Certainly the
young man had a great many other things
to think about. How many of them were
pleasant things ?

CHAPTER XL

SOME EXCITEMENT AT THE Flore-MILL.

In an almost direct line with Mr. Basset's
farm, across the intervening meadows,
which fell in a gradual decline towards the
river's bank, was situated the house and
mill of Mr. James Carey, flour-dealer.
Measured by that line, the distance separating
the two dwellings would hardly have
made half-a-mile; but by following the
windings of the narrow cart-lane, which
formed the only means of communication
betwixt the mill and the high-road, that
distance became nearly doubled. To
young legs, however, a mile is not of much.

account in the way of a walk, and James
Carey, junior, the miller's son, had made
nothing of it in the long, pleasant evenings
when, his ^ bosom's lord ' light in the
hope of meeting pretty Susan Basset, he
had taken his way to the Fold Farm. But
since his love-dream had ended in a rude
awakening, through the very unequivocal
refusal of Susan to listen to his suit, James
had contented himself with visiting the
Fold Farm only in spirit. In body he had
spent his evening leisure hours at home ;
and, as a means of curing the wound in
his heart, he had taken to cultivating his
head. And James Carey's head, it maybe
remarked, was well worth cultivation,
both as regarded the quantity and quality
of its contents.

At present, the study wherewith he was
principally occupying himself was political
economy. He had been led at first to
take an interest in the subject through
reading Smith's ' Wealth of Nations,' a

second-band copy of which he had picked
up, along with a number of other volumes,
at an old book-stall in London, during a
business visit made there towards the
close of last summer, and he had since
devoured several works of a kindred
nature lent to him by the rector of Upton,
with whom the young miller was a great
favourite.

Just now James was deep in John Stuart
Mill ; and on a certain evening (two days
after the date of our last chapter) he had
carried his book out of doors and seated
himself upon a low wall. This wall, which
enclosed a narrow yard, or flagged terrace,
at the back of his home, was washed at
its base — or rather the rock that served
as its foundation was washed — by the
river.

At this point, where the mill had been
built, the river, though not very broad,
was deep, and the flow of the water
required to turn the big wheel had been

artificially strengthened by the construction
of a weir, which stretched across it
from side to side, just above the mill.

The house and the mill stood a few feet
apart (having only a narrow passage
between them), not sufficiently far apart
to prevent the former from sharing somewhat
in the dusty, flour-besprinkled aspect
of the latter. But That dust there was
about the house was certainly confined to
the exterior of the dwelling ; for Mrs.
Carey was a model house-wife, almost too
scrupulously neat and clean, and a speck
of dust on her bright furniture, or of dirt
on her spotless floor, was a thing not to be
tolerated. For the rest, the Cares were
Well-to-do people, whilst their style of
living might even be described as
luxurious.

At the time when James had first
repaired to his favourite seat on the wall,
the sun was sinking low in the horizon,
and before long a golden glow, filling the

air and reflected from the river, caught his
book and his attention at the same moment.
Closing the volume, but keeping his finger
inside to mark the page he was reading,
James watched the lingering glories of sunset,
falling as he did so into a reverie that
bore no connection with the ' Influences of
the Progress of Industry and Population
on Values and Prices.' Indeed, when, by-and-by,
nothing was left of the gorgeous
panorama he had witnessed, save a broad
belt of crimson evanescence melting into a
Claud-tint yellow, and throwing upwards
feathery streaks of a paler amber into the
cold sapphire beyond, the young fellow
sighed as he returned to bis subject, and
found that it had for the moment lost all
its interest. Anxious, however, to make
the most of the fast-waning light, be strove
to fie his attention on the page, and had
just succeeded in doing so when the back
door opened, and a stout, comely woman
stepped out on to the terrace.

'James, lad, thy father wants thee ta
come in and write a bit of a note to Barns
about those sacks. He'd like 'em a day or
two earlier than they was ordered, he says,
if they can let him have them.'

'All right, mother, I'll be in directly
answered her son, raising a pair of clear
hazel eyes that were exactly the colour of
her own. It was from his mother that
young Carey had derived his good looks.
His regular features were the counterpart
of hers, only cast in a larger mould, and
his chestnut-brown hair was scarcely to
be discriminated in shade. In the intelligence
of their expression, moreover,
the two faces were much alike, but there
was more mildness and good-nature in that
of the son than of the mother. ' I'll be indirectly,'
he repeated, * as soon as I have
finished this paragraph. But the letter
can't go this evening, you know, so there is
no hurry.'

You're always wanting to finish a

paragraph ; I never saw such a lad
for reading!' exclaimed his mother,
coming up to the wall. 'But you didn't
ought to strain your eyes, James, and
you won't be able to see much longer i'
this light. Dear-aime, how high the river
is!'

Yes, it is from the rain last night, I
suppose. Good gracious ! what's that ?'

The question referred to a strange sound
which had suddenly broken on the ears of
both. It was a sound that seemed to be
compounded of a human cry and a wild
beast's howl, and each moment it grew
louder and more strident.

The Lord preserve us !' ejaculated Mrs.^
Carey, ^ what can it be ?'

There's a man running alone the
river's bank, mother,' reported James,
leaning over the wall far beyond his
centre of gravity, so as to command a
view of the embankment beyond the mill ;
he is coming this way, but — I'm afraid,

there must be some one in the water ! The
fellow keeps stopping and looking as if he
meant to jump in.'

Mother and son turned simultaneously
to scan the rushing stream, but, for some
seconds, in vain. Then, pointing eagerly
in the direction signified, Mrs. Carey
exclaimed,

What's yon, James ? This side, looked,
iK)t far above the weir — Why ! 'tis
only the branch of a tree,' she concluded,
answering her own question. ' Lor, it did
give me a turn.'

The object designated, and at which
young Carey was now gazing fixedly, was
certainly the branch of a tree, but it was
not only that. As it approached the weir,
plunging and swerving from side to side,
a white human face was occasionally
brought into view, and a human arm was
seen to be thrown across the log.

Mother, there is some one sticking toit
!' cried James, ' I believe it's a woman.

Oh! she'll be over the v»^eir in a moment
!' He was kicking off his boots as he
spoke.

James, what are sou going to do ?' His
mother caught at him .frantically. But
the next moment James had left his coat
in her hand, and he himself was in the
river. It was ten years since he had last
tried to swim. Then he had been a boy
of fourteen, now he was a man of t\fenty-
four. But James had not stopped to consider
whether he had lost the art, which asa
matter of fact he had in those days but
barely acquired. As the log, or rather the
thick branch, to which a mass of green
foliage yet attached, swept over the weir,
James had seen beyond doubt that it was
a woman who clung to it, and he had
further seen that it was a woman with
golden hair. The sight of that golden hair
seemed to inspire the young fellow with
preternatural strength and courage. He
struck out boldly up-stream, but the force

of the current was so powerful that he
could make no headway against it. He
managed, however, to keep himself from
being carried away, and also to steer himself
into the course of the approaching bough.
In an agony of alarm, which paralysed all
power of movement or sound, his mother
watched until she saw him grasp at the
passing bough, but only to be swept away
with ft and its previous adherent. Then,
horror loosened her tongue. She covered
her face with both hands and screamed
wildly for help, her shriek being echoed
with equal wildness by an individual who
had just burst into the yard at the top of
his speed.

But James Carey had not been swept
away very far. How he had accomplished
the feat he could never himself comprehend,
but, by the time his father and certain other
members of the household had rushed
forth to learn the cause of the alarm, the
young fellow had scrambled on to the

bank, a few yards below the bouse, at a
point where the swollen river had risen
almost to a level with its border, and was
endeavouring to drag her whom he had
rescued after him. Leaping the fence
which separated them, Mr. Carey and a
young man who acted as assistant in the
mill sprang to his aid, followed by the still
howling and shrieking intruder upon the
premises, who had at once been recognised
by everybody as the unfortunate Luke
Basset.

It need scarcely be said, then, that the
golden locks which had inspired James
Carey to that effort, of which, under the
circumstances, the success had been almost
miraculous, belonged to Luke's sister
Susan. By the united exertions of the
three men, the poor girl was soon drawn to
the ground. Whether she were dead or
alive could not at first be told, for poor
Susan's eyes were closed and her face was
lividly pale.

How came sbe to fall into the water,
Luke? demanded Carey, senior, whilst his
son, indifferent to all other considerations,
stooped over the insensible form, breathlessly
endeavouring to discover some signs
of life.

She didn't fall ; she throned herself in I
She thro wed herself in, 'repeated the 'softy'
' and Luce knows lucy /'

And though questioned closely Luke's
intelligence, or his vocabulary, proved unequal
to affording any further information.
However pressed, he either could or would
do nothing but reiterate the one phrase —

She throned herself in, and Luke knows
why,' with a peculiar emphasis on the last
three words.

James' examination, meantime, having
convinced him that life still lingered, the
half-drowned girl was speedily conveyed to
the house. There Mrs. Carey — who, on
perceiving that her son was safe, had immediately
recovered full possession of her

faculties — applied herself to the work of
restoration, and in so cautious and sensible
a manner that the vital spark — which,
in sooth, had been very near extinction —
was fanned into a fitful flicker. In a
marvellously short time Susan was in a
warm bed, still insensible, but breathing
perceptibly, whilst James, none the worse
for his bath in the river, was galloping
down the lane on horse-back, to break the
news of her accident (as, despite Luke's
asseverations, he considered it) to Susan's
parents, and afterwards to ride on for a
doctor.

It was not until several weeks had
elapsed — weeks of suffering from a dislocated
shoulder and other injuries — that
Susan Basset was able to rise from her bed
in Mrs. Carey's pretty spare room, and it
was still later before her reluctant confessions
confirmed Luke's statement that
her fall into the river had not been accidental.
Even then only a brief and shame-vol.

III. N

faced admission could be drawn from her.
A spoiled child, passionate and headstrong,
though possessed of a sweet and
loving disposition, Susan had rebelled
fiercely against the disappointment and
misery brought upon her by her faithless
lover. In the hot and fiery impatience of
early youth, which knows nothing of the
healing influence of time, she had been
driven (and, alas ! her case, as the daily
papers show, is by no means an exceptional
one) to the madness of suicide. No
sooner, however, had she committed the
frantic act than Susan had as frantically
regretted it. As the cold waters had closed
over her head, the love of life had rushed
back to her heart, and in an instant,
like a lightning-flash of revelation, the
cutter folly of her deed had been made
manifest.

The next instant — for she had not as
yet been carried away from the bank —
Susan had clutched at the overhanging

bough of a large tree. But, unfortunately,
the bough was one that, in a late storm,
had been partially severed from its trunk.
The poor girl felt it giving way beneath
her weight ; but she struggled to pull herself
up by it, and had just, as she thought,
been on the point of succeeding, when she
had fallen back with a plunge into the
river, the huge branch over which she had
thrown her arm coming away with her.
Instinctively she had clung to the branch ;
but as she felt herself swept away with it,
her face dipping every now and then beneath
the water, and the rush of the
swollen, impetuous torrent in her ears, she
had given herself up for lost. Consciousness
had deserted her, and she had known
nothing more until she had awakened to
find herself in Mrs. Carey's white, dimity-hung
bed.

N ii

CHAPTER XII.

ANOTHER STARTLING EVENT.

On the same evening that had witnessed
this scene, which to the household at the
flour-mill had certainly proved an exciting
one, there occurred another event of quite
equal importance to the development of
this story, and of almost equal excitement
to one, at least, of the actors therein. The
hour of the evening was considerably later,
and a moon, three-quarters full, in a cloud-drifted
sky, was fitfully illuminating his
path, as Victor McNicoll took his way
across the fields which led from the Upton
Brook Works towards Monkswood HalL

Of late, Victor had almost entirely neglected
his business, and certain matters
demanding his personal attention had
become so urgent, that he had compelled
himself to go down to his counting-house
after dinner this evening in order to
devote a quiet hour or two to work.
Satisfied, however, with having done what
was absolutely necessary, he had presently
locked up the offices, where he had been
writing alone, and come away.

The visit which he now proposed to make
at Monkswood would be the second for the
day. But this was no unusual occurrence.
The young man had got into the habit of
presenting himself there two and even
three times within the twenty-four hours.
And although during those visits not a
word, nor scarcely a look of love, passed
between him and the young mistress
of the Hall, they had grown to be to the
latter her one source of consolation and
support.

As for Yictor, be had, it will be remembered,
given Idalia a promise that he
would hind her father if he had to ' seek
the whole earth through.' But although
he had thrown himself heart and soul into
this task, letting his business and every
other object in life become subordinate toit,
Yictor had already begun to despair of
its accomplishment. It had been easy
enough to talk of 'seeking through the
earth ;' but having by this time sought in
every spot which seemed in the least
likely to afford success, the young man
was at his wits' end where to extend his
search. Without clue or guidance in his
wanderings, the earth would prove a pretty
large place to ransack.

Nevertheless, Yictor had not the slightest
intention of relinquishing his purpose or
forfeiting his promise, and he had to-day
telegraphed to his partner, Mr. Courteney,
begging him to return at once from Italy,,

in order that be might devote himself exclusively
to further investigations. But
bow or where to set about them ? This
was the question which he was pondering in
despairing perplexity as he hurried along
the field-path, little imagining that every
step was bringing him nearer to a startling
solution of the problem.

The last field was gained, and with extended
stick Victor was groping his way
towards the stile which would take him
into the highway — for the moon at this
juncture had disappeared behind a heavy
cloud, leaving him in almost total darkness
when he heard a voice speaking close in
front of him. The voice was one he
recognised, and he was just about to utter
the name of its owner when something: in
the sense of the words he had caught
arrested the exclamation.

I tell you, it's a risk that must not be
It is dangerous you coming

about here. You must write. You might
have written all you had to say this
evening

Ay, maybe I might ; but, you see, I
thought I'd like to explain just how 'twas
that we wanted such a big lump of money
again, afore 'twas due. Father, he's alius
been so keen set on getting hold of that
land, and now 'tis in the market. Woa !
woa, there !'

The final interjections were accompanied
by a restive scraping and kicking of horse's
hoofs. Before that sound ceased, the
moon, suddenly sailing out from behind
the obscuring cloud, revealed to Victor
McNicoll the picture of two men standing
with their backs against the stile, about
four feet in front of him. One of these men
held a horse by the bridle with his right
hand, whilst with the other — a deformed
stump, from which two of the fingers were
missing — he grasped the upper rung of
the stile. Half-second later, Victor had

crept forward on the grass — fortunately he
had, in the darkness, wandered off the path,
so that his approaching footsteps had not
been heard — and was crouching stealthily
beneath the hedge.

This action, so foreign to his habitual
instincts, had, nevertheless, been performed
intuitively, without reflection, or, at
least, without conscious reflection. But,
when it was done, the young man felt
satisfied that it was well done. Under
conceivable circumstances, eaves-dropping
may become a duty.

Confound that animal ! Do keep him
still. We can't hear if anyone is coming
along the road,' resumed the voice Victor
knew.

Well, well, I'll be going, as you be so
nervous, master. Ween pretty well settled
everything, I think. You'll let's have the
chink, then, tomorrow ?'

No —not to-morrow ; the day after.
We don't keep a sum like that in the house,

my good fellow. I shall have to get it
from the bank. I'll bring it to you the day
after.'

What time about, do you think, sir ?'

I'll take the train. There's one a little
before eleven from the new station. I'll
be out by that. But we must make other
arrangements. I can't be seen travelling
that way again, or going near your place.
We must be more careful, man.'

Ay, ay, we're bound to be careful,'
assented the other, gruffly. ' 'Tis a bad
business, and not one to my liking, I can
tell you !'

How is he ?' demanded the more
cultivated speaker, with a sort of reluctant
hesitation. *I suppose you are making
him as comfortable as you can ?'

Um ! Ween give him a good flock-bed
and heaps o' blankets and things ; but 'tis
a dampish nest for the poor bird, and he
have got an awful bad cough. He don't
eat nothing, neither ; an' 'tis my opinion he

won't live long. Perhaps that'll be a good
job, eh ?'

I don't know — yes, perhaps it will —
but '

Looked here, young master, I bennet a
soft-hearted chap, that's certain, nor a
strait-laced one, neither; but this 'ere,
'tis the ugliest stroke o' business I ever
had to do with in my life ; and if 'twas todo
over again I'm blow'd if I'd have a hand
in it !'

*You get well-paid, Cole; and you'll
have to carry it through now, or '

Oh, ay ; you needn't get into a funk.
"We're in the mess now, and there bennet
no help for it ; we knows that well enough.
But you don't pay us none too much for
the dirty job. Woa, Sally ; quiet, lass !'

Hush ! I hear some one coming up
the road. Mount quick. Cole. I'm off !'

Don't 'ee forget the chink — a round
hunted, mind ! Good-night ; and '

A low muttered curse completed the

sentence; and in another minute Victor
knew that he was alone.

Yet, for some time, the young man did
not move, excepting to seat himself on the
ground where he had been crouching. A
kind of vertigo, both of body and mind,
seemed to have fallen upon him — a horror
of loathing and sickness. Once, in some
Continental zoological gardens, Victor had
been present at the feeding of a cage of
serpents, and, with a fascination of repugnance,
he had watched a small boa swallow
alive and whole a pretty, bright-eyed
rabbit. Then, as he had seen that living
lump distending the hideous reptile's body,
he had turned away, physically sick, and
filled with unutterable disgust, and it was
much such a sensation as that which he
was now experiencing.

By and by, however, other emotions
succeeded to this — emotions that stirred
him to movement and action. Vaulting
the stile now, Victor set off at a run — not,

however, towards Monkswood Hall, but in
an opposite direction. Presently he turned
in at a gateway, and arrived at the
house to which it belonged — he inquired
for Sir Arthur Ledsom, and marched in
without awaiting invitation.

CHAPTER Xii

PELEUS Brethren MAKES AN EXCURSION.

From the moment when he had watched
her being carried upstairs to Mrs. Carey's
spare room, after her rescue from that
watery grave, Luke Basset had not been
permitted to see his sister. He had been
assured, however, over and over again,
that Susan would very soon be all right,
and running about as briskly as ever.
But Luke did not believe this assurance.
He had many times seen kittens and puppies
put into water and drowned, but they had
never come alive again, or been able to
run about. They had always afterwards
been buried in a hole in the ground.

Further, Luke had just lately seen his
dead grandfather carried off to the churchyard
; and Susan's face, when she had lain
on the grass, had looked exactly like that
of his dead grandfather. Luke was convinced
in his own mind that the assurance
in question was an attempt to deceive him,
and that Susan was only being kept in bed
for a little while, as they had kept his
grandfather, until it was time to put her
into the ground.

What his own life would be without the
object of his semi-canine devotion poor
Luke had not, as yet, begun to realise.
For the present, every force and faculty of
his beclouded intellect was bent towards,
and stimulated by, a certain secret purpose
which dominated and inspired him. To
the accomplishment of that purpose it
seemed to him necessary that he should
regain possession of a treasured article
once belonging to him, but of which,
several weeks ago, his father had deprived

him on account of some ignorant mischief
he had been led into committing therewith.
For that article Luke sought high and low,
with the cautious cunning of idiocy ; but it
was not until the morning next after that
which had followed Susan's unfortunate
escapade that success rewarded his efforts.
Then, with the article in his pocket, and a
triumphant glee in his half-witted countenance,
Luke left the house and took a
walk towards Monkswood Hall.

There was only one turn of the road
between the two dwellings ; and as Luke
reached that turn he saw Peleus Brethren
emerge from the lodge-gates of the
hall, and step out quickly in an opposite
direction. The * softy's ' eyes twinkled ;
and, emitting a low chuckle of satisfaction,
he set himself to follow, keeping, however,
at a considerable distance, and evidently
not wishful that Peleus should perceive
him. Bent upon executing a deadly
revenge (for no further secret need be

made of the matter) upon this man, to
whom he believed his sister owed her
death, and whom he had himself always
hated with such a frenzy of dislike, Luke
was now prompted by his half-brutish
instinct to play with his quarry after the
manner of a cat or a tiger. To keep him
well in view, and to handle and turn over
that huge clasp-knife which he carried in
his pocket, was, for the moment, sufficient
gratification. Presently, however, after
his unconscious prey had led him a pretty
long chase, Luke was subjected to a
sudden alarm lest he was about to escape
him.

Until very recently, no line of rail had
come nearer to Upton than that small
branch one which terminated at High
Gaston. But within the last few months
this large though not populous parish had
become enriched by the possession of a
tiny station of its own, and of a means of
travelling up to London without going

VOL. m. o

round by the market town seven miles
distant. The iron road, which afforded
the desideratum of civilisation, had been
brought from a junction which lay at right
angles with Upton and High Radston, and,
without approaching the latter place, it
passed straight on to the sea-coast.

Its terminus there was Shelving Cove, the
spot which, it will be remembered, had formed
the scene of Miss Hester Courteney's
picnic. This little branch line — which at
present showed small prospect of paying
its shareholders — owed its existence chiefly
to the exertions of an enterprising company
of gentlemen, who had purchased a
good deal of ground in the vicinity, and
who believed that they had discerned capacities
in this lonely sea-side spot for the
future growth and development of a fashionable
watering-place. already, as an
earnest of its coming glory, a row of small
brick houses, suitable for the letting of
apartments, was in process of erection in

face of the sloping pebbly beach, with its
tiny jetty and few scattered fishermen's
huts.

It was to this new station on the line,
which communicated with Shelving Cove,
that the unconscious Peleus had led his
pursuer, and here it was that the latter
suffered a pang of alarm, in view of what
threatened to be an escape from his vengeance.
For when, hurrying at last, Luke
gained the platform, the train, with Peleus
in it, appeared to be on the very point of
starting.

Stealing cautiously forward, however, he
managed to slip unobserved into a third-class
compartment at the end of the train.
Like most of the other compartments, it
was an empty one ; and greatly excited by
this novel experience (he had never travelled
by rail before), Luke grinned and
chuckled to himself when the train moved
off, as delighted with his ride as a child.

His attention, however, although temp



polarity distracted, was by no means diverted
from the purpose which had taken such
settled possession of his home intellect,
and by the time the train reached the terminus
— having stopped at two other
country stations on the way — that purpose
had regained its full ascendancy.

Keeping his seat until he had seen
Peleus leave the station at Shelving Cove
by a small wicket gate, he slipped from his
carriage and prepared to recommence his
hunt. But at the gate he was unexpectedly
detained by the demand for a ticket.
Poor Luke had not provided himself with
this requisite, audit was a longtime — during
which he was fuming with insensate
impatience — before he could be made to
understand what was being claimed of
him.

By slow degrees, howbeit, the idea
dawned upon him that money would settle
the difficulty ; and producing a crown-piece,
which he had possessed ever since his

tenth year, be tendered it to his detainer.
Then, whilst the porter (who had already
made out where his lack-witted interlocutor
had taken the train) went to procure
change for the coin, Luke rushed off in hot
pursuit of his game.

Entirely unsuspicious, meanwhile, that
he was forming the object of such pursuit,
Peleus had turned off from the road leading
down to the embryo town, and was
now following a narrow path-way that
struck across some fields. This path,
which he had traversed for the first time
on the occasion of the picnic, brought him,
at the end of a mile's walk, to that solitary
farmhouse beneath the cliffs where Charlie
Nunnerley had been taken to change his
wet clothes after his accidental fall out of
the boat.

Arrived at this house, Peleus cast a
hasty glance around. But not a soul, sofar
as he could perceive, was within sight,
and, hurrying up the flagged walk that led

to it, be tapped at the door. Almost instantly
it was opened to him.

There you be, sir ! Ween just been
saying 'twas about time you was due
remarked the individual who had admitted
him. ' Step forrud ; father's inside.'

Ay, come in. How do you do ?' Mr.
Peter Cole executed as he spoke a sulky,
ungracious bow. ' Did 'ee meet my missus
anywhere on th' road ?'

No,' answered Peleus, ' I came by the
fields. But I'm glad she is out.'

"Wasn't likely we'd let her stay about
th' house, and you coming I' retorted the
other. 'A secret's in a poor way for
being safe if it gets to a woman's knowledge.
I've sent her on a message.'

'You think she has no suspicion yet,
then ?' demanded Peleus, with an anxious
air. The young man was looking altogether
haggard and wretched this
morning.

If she has, she's been too wise to let

me know it,' rejoined the amiable husband.
' Reckon she knows I'd break
every bone in her body if I caught her
prying into what doesn't concern her.
Well, master, I repose you've brought the
money ?'

*I have. But, before I hand it over,
I — I sant to know, Cole, whether he is
safe ?'

Safe ? He's as safe as nails.'

But I must be quite sure of it. I

The fact is, I had a dream last night, and
whether I'm getting nervous, or superstitious,
or what, I can't tell, but it has taken
a curious hold on me, and I can't get rid
of the impression.'

Dreamt he'd got away, did 'ee ?' asked
the elder man, laughing. ' He'd have a job
to do it, I guess !'

Yes. I dreamt that there was a connection
of some sort between the vault
and those caves in the cliff, you know, and
that '

Good lack ! Why, father, did you ever?'
exclaimed the younger Cole, in unaffected
surprise. ' And not a soul knowing it but
you and roe

Then there is such a connection ?' faltered
Peleus, turning pale.

'Tis confounded queer ! But I only
discovered it a day or two before we caged
the bird,' responded the son. *And there
bennet the least chance in the world of
anyone else finding it out, for 'twas all by
accident / did. Sure enough, though,
there's a bit of the rock that looks just
like a bit of a rough projection ; but 'twill
slide aside if you push it, along a sort o'
groove in the floor. And at the back of it
there's a hole that you can creep through into
a passage, wide enough and high enough
to stand upright in. I didn't go far so as
to see where it led to, only I haven't a
doubt it does lead to the caves, and as it
was used in smuggling days for getting
the goods slyly into the house underground,

and a very clever contrivance
'twas. But, my stars, how you come to
dream of it, that's the queerest thing !'

Peleus Bretherton sank upon a chair, an
expression of utter consternation on his
face.

He has escaped ! I am lost !' he cried,
wildly. ' Oh ! what shall I do !'

Fudge ! Stuff and rubbish !* sneered
Cole senior. 'Why, man, he be fastened,
up wi' a dog chain. We was forced to
fasten him up, so as he shouldn't knock
on the door or make noises as my old
woman mis^ht hear. But come along
down to th' cellar ; ween soon settle the
question. You shall see for yourself whether
he be safe or not.'

*No, no, I don't want to see him,' protested
Peleus ; * but if I could hear his
voice — I should be satisfied if I could hear
bis voice.'

You're safe to hear him when you get
near enough,' muttered Will Cole, the son,

who was occupied in procuring a light.
The poor old chap's got an awful bad
cough. I'm thinking it won't be long
afore we find some use for that secret
way out to th' sea as you dreamt about.
Got the keys, father?'

Peter Cole growled an affirmative, and,
having preceded the two younger men
down a flight of stone steps and along a
short passage, he produced a couple of
large keys, with one of which he unlocked a
black-painted door. ' Ween got to keep
the missus out o' this here cellar, you see
fear herd hear anything ; and I've felled
her a heap o' lies 'bout what I was using it
for. You'd ought to give me an extra fifty
pounds for the trouble them lies is to my
conscience.' And with a dull cackling
sound, which was his nearest approach to
a laugh, he led the way across the cellar
towards a door on the opposite side. Before
this the three men paused, listening
attentively ; but not a sound, either of

coughing or any kind of movement, greeted
their ears.

'By Jove! Give us the key, father!'
exclaimed the younger Cole, evidently disquieted
by the silence ; and, almost
snatching it from his parent's hand, he inserted
it in the lock, and in another moment
had passed inside.

'Tis all right !' he reported, emerging
again immediately ; ' he's only asleep.
Come in, and take a look at him, sir.'

Peleus hesitated.

He may awaken,' he said ; ' I — I should
not like him to see me.'

'Not him; he's as sound as a top.
Come along.'

Thus urged, young Bretherton followed,
to find himself, it need hardly be explained,
in that vaulted dungeon described in a
former part of this story. On a sofa-bed
at the further end lay a man asleep, but, as
Peleus' eye fell on the man's head, he gave
vent to an ejaculation of dismay. That

prostrate figure was not his father ! For,
despite his sixty-five years, poor Abner's
hair had been brown and glossy almost as
that of a boy, whereas this man's locks
were white as snow !

In his alarm, Peleus ventured quite close
to the couch, and bent over to look at its
occupant. Whilst he was in the act of
doing so, the latter suddenly opened his
eyes.

Peley ?' he interjected, springing up ;

Peley, my boy, I've hed ' he stopped

short and looked around. ' No, it aunt a
dream — It amt a dream. Oh, my son,
may God forgive you ! May the Lord not
lay this heavy sin to your charge !'

Peleus shrank back, bent upon making
his escape from the vault. But, stepping
in front of him, Will Sole barred his way.

^No, just you wait a minute, sir, now
you are here, and tell the poor old chap
about his daughter,' he said, putting out a
brawny, muscular arm. ' He's wanting for

everlasting to know how she is. And, by
Jove, you shall tell nn !'

'Thank you, mister, thank you,' said
Abner, gratefully ; * the's friendly, and
it's feel in'. Peley, I'm not a-going' to beg
you to let me out of this yere dreadful
place, because I know it wouldn't be of no
nse,' he went on, with dignified solemnity;
but ef I could lev died, my son, to lev
saved you from doing this dreadful wickedness,
I'd gladly lev done it — Lord, yes, I'd
lev done it gladly !' A fit of coughing,
that seemed to rack and tear the sufferer,
here interrupted him, during which the
wretched Peleus made a second attempt to
leave the vault, again frustrated by his
powerful accomplice.

Nay, stay a minute, Peleus ; stay a
minute,' gasped his father, when utterance
once more became possible; 'maybe we
-shall never meet again in life, I sorter
seem to feel we shan't; an' thar's things
thar's things I lev on my mind to say to

you. But give me time,' he went ou, raising
his hand to his brow ; ' I don't know
what I am, Peley, nor I can't properly
bethink me how I came yere, I can't make
it out anyways. But the strangeness an'
the horror on it all, it makes me by times
afeard the I may lose my reason before the
Lord is pleased to take my life. Seems,
sometimes, ez ef I got kinder dazed, an' ez
ef the darkness of this place hed got into
my brain, so's 1 couldn't think of nothing'
nor understand nothing'. But it ain't
about myself I wanted to talk, not to you
Peleus,' he added, huskily; ' it's — it's something
about Idalia — Give me time ?' He
passed his hands several times before his
eyes, as if to clear his sight. Then, all at
once, he appeared to recover the recollection
he desired. 'Thet'sit! Yes. Peleus,
you wrote me a letter, an' you said in it
the your sister had met with an accident.
Was the thar letter true ?'

*Idalia is quite well answered his son,
with sulky reluctance.

'Quite well, is she? Thank God for
the !' murmured the father. ' Then the
letter weren't true? You wrote it jest
to — Oh, my poor boy, you must be very
unhappy ?'

Peleus hung his head, but made no reply.

You are bound to be unhappy,' resumed
his father ; * you ve sinned again the
laws of God, an' again the laws of nature, an
you're bound to suffer fer it, an' to be
punished fer it. The thar it will come,
Peley ! But I'll pray fer you, my son —
I'll pray fer you till my latest breath, till
the Lord sets me free from these chains,
the — the you've hed me fastened up
with like a dog !' His voice shook for a
moment, and a visible shudder passed
over his frame. ' I'll pray the the punishment
may not be too heavy, an' the it may
bring you to sorrow an' to repentance. But

T want you to give me one promise, Peley — •
one promise, so ez I kin die in peace, an*
tliet is, the you'll be good to your sister —
to my poor Idalia !'

Peleus, to whom the sight of his injured
father was intolerable, and who was becoming
almost maddened by this interview,
turned furiously on the younger Cole,
without attempting to reply to Mr. Brethren's
questions.

Let me pass ! You villain, let me pass,
I won't be kept here !' he broke forth.

Villain be I ? There's a pair on us
then. But 'tis no use your setting on me,
sir. You shall go as soon's ever you've
answered the old chap, and given him his
promise — not before.'

There was a determined expression in
Will's ill-favoured countenance ; and, after
a glance from that countenance to his huge
powerful frame, Mr. Peleus Bretherton appeared
to decide that discretion was the
better part of valour.

You may be sure that I shall be good
to mj sister,' be muttered, turning to ibis
father; but not looking at bim. ' Tbe
question is a needless one. You know
that I am fond of Idalia.'

Well, I hope you are — I believe you
are ! An' I'm glad you kin love anyone.
It's a little leaven ez may leaven the whole
lump, maybe. Ob, Peleus — you're going' ?'
Mr. Bretberton bad said that be would nob
plead with bis unnatural son. But life
and liberty were still sweet to bim, at the
age of sixty-five. So, also, was the love
of bis daughter and the fellowship of ibis
kind. Was be to be left here to die like
a dog in a bole ? A despairing wail broke
from the poor man ; suddenly brought
back to a full realisation of bis horrible
situation, as he saw the reprobate Peleus
finally moving away, and no longer detained
by Will Cole. He sprang from
bis seat, following as far as bis chain
would allow, bis poor tremulous bands

VOL. III. P

held out in a dumb agony of supplication,
whilst he repeated his son's name, — ^Peley !
Peley !'

Peleus turned and cast one glance at
that pathetic, imploring figure. Then,
pushing roughly past his two confederates,
he pressed his fingers into his ears and
fled with blind haste to the upper regions.
In the sanded kitchen he sank panting
upon a chair. How warm, and bright,
and cheerful everything looked ! How
innocent of that dark tragedy which
was taking place below ! Sunshine
flooded the apartment; there was a
row of flower-pots in the window, green
and flourishing ; bright pewter was on
the walls, shining china in the rack,
and a pan, simmering on the hob, emitted
an appetising odour. The homeliness,
the cheerfulness, the utter unsuspicious-ness,
which seemed to be the natural
aspect of this pleasant farm-house kitchen,
enabled young Bretherton to recover some

degree of self-possession. His nerves,
however, had by no means regained their
ordinary tone by the time the two worthies,
who had tarried to lock up their prisoner,
rejoined him. Rising hastily on their appearance,
he threw down the money he
had brought for them. Then explaining
that he had more than an hour to wait
before he need set off to catch the return
train, he promised to come in again to
speak with them before he left, and, refusing
for the present to listen to a word,
passed from the house.

p2

CHAPTER XIV.

AN AWFUL Retribution.

Believed to find himself alone in the
pure, fresh atmosphere, Peleus Brethren,
on leaving the farm, turned to ascend
a grassy slope leading up to the precipitous
cliffs at the back of the house. His
eyes, as he walked, were bent on the
ground, and his step, partaking of the
agitation of his mind, was rapid and
uneven. Not for worlds, if he could
have avoided it, would Peleus have faced
his suffering and outraged victim. He
had been entrapped, as it were, into that
interview through which he had just

passed, and the effect of it bad been
violently disturbing. If by any possible
sacrifice of property or of ambition the
young man could, at the present moment,
have undone the vile deed which he had
committed, he would have made that sacrifice
with gladsome alacrity.

And yet it was not pity that moved
him, nor any softening of the heart towards
the innocent and inoffensive object
of his cruel atrocity. Intentionally to
injure a person is the surest way of
awakening dislike to that person ; and, if
possible, Peleus now hated his father worse
than ever. In the bitter remorse from
which he was suffering there was no
element of true repentance. Peleus
regretted what he had done, but he
regretted it for his own sake. The experiment
had turned out ill. He had planned
to get rid of his father ; but, instead of
succeeding in doing so, he had, so to speak,
pushed him into the very foreground of

existence. His friends and acquaintances
were so full of the old man and his
mysterious disappearance that they could
talk of nothing else. Idalia, the one being'
for whom he entertained any real affection,
was so prostrated by the blow she had sustained,
so altered from her old self, that
Peleus could find no pleasure in her society.
As for himself, who could describe the
constant wearing anxiety, the sudden
pangs of dread, to which he had become
subject !

Again, Peleus had lost a certain pride
and self-complacency which had formerly
added greatly to his personal happiness.
When his poor father had been at home,
he had at least had the satisfaction of contemning
his manners and despising his
speech and appearance. Then he had been
able to flatter himself with his own fancied
superiority. Now he had been forced to
recognise that his ill-used victim towered
above him colossal in worth and dignity.

Angrily resentful of the conviction, he was
yet compelled to admit to himself that
he, Peleus Bretherton, was a despicable,
unnatural scoundrel — a caitiff against
whom, if his deed could be known, the
whole world would cry out in horror and
shame.

But need the world ever know ? And
might he not outlive his present sense of
degradation and wretchedness ? His
father would soon die — at any rate, so he
had seemed to think himself — and then the
danger of discovery would be over. The
whole things micjht be buried, and done
with, and forgotten ! The brightness of
the morning, the lightness of the clear,
soft air, began by-and-by to lift the
crashing weight from the young man's
spirits. He sat down on the very edge of
the cliff, with his feet dangling over the
precipice, and gazing out over the blue
expanse below. How still and peaceful it
looked, with scarcely a wavelet flecking its

surface ! And how soothing was the low
rippling and murmuring of the tide as it
broke against the foot of the rock so far
beneath him. Away out in the horizon
two boats, with their white sails full set,
were slowly vanishing from sight. It all
looked so calm and restful and hopeful.
Yes, surely there was room for hope?
Things were bad enough at present, but
the evil day would pass.

This wretched excitement about the
missing man would die away; Idalia
would recover her spirits ; he would bury
the memory of his crime in oblivion ; and,
now that he should have no temptation
to hatred or evil feeling, he would become
a better man. Peleus' face brightened.
A sudden change came over the spirit of
his dream. No, he told himself, he was
not going to give way to despair. He
would have patience and live it out, and
all would come right. Young, rich, handsome,
how could it be but that life must

hold for him infinite possibilities? Already
that white-haired old man in his lonely
dungeon was half forgotten. Peleus actually
smiled.

All at once he became conscious that he
was no longer alone. How the consciousness
had come to him he did not know.
He had heard no sound of approaching
footsteps over the soft turf; he had seen
no one drawing near ; he had not even
noticed the fall of a shadow on the grass
by his side. Yet he seemed to feel that
there was some one behind him. Turning
his head sharply, he discovered that this
subtle intuition or prescience had not deceived
him. There, at the distance of only
a few feet, stood a man looking down on
him where he sat with a strange and horrible
ofrin. The man was tall and broad-shouldered,
and his frame, loosely-knit and
awkward, was as full of the suggestion of
brute strength as are the powerful, clump
limbs of a grizzly bear. The

shape of the man's face was angular, his
nose forming a strikingly prominent feature,
whilst the chin and brow retreated
precipitately backward.

At sight of this man Peleus Bretherton
became positively paralysed with terror.
He opened his lips, but not a sound would
come ; he tried to move, but found himself
unable to stir a limb. As plainly as though
the knell of doom were ringing in his ears,
he knew that his hour was come. There,
behind him, stood the avenger of blood,
the embodied retribution of his crimes. A
cold perspiration broke out all over him ;
his eyes almost started from his head ; his
tongue clave to the roof of his mouth. He
held out his hands with the same imploring
gesture — the same dumb appeal for mercy
which only one short half-hour ago had
been fruitlessly addressed to himself. A
mocking laugh was the only response.
Then, throwing down a knife which he had

been holding open in his hand, the idiot,
Luke Basset, stepped forward, and, without
a word, lifted the unresisting young
man in his arms, as though he had been a
child, and launched him into space. One
shriek of anguish, terrible and appalling,
rent the air, followed by the sound of a
heavy splash, and all was again still.

Peering over the cliffs, then, and rubbing
his hands together gleefully, whilst
he emitted an occasional low chuckle of
satisfaction, the ' softy ' remained gazing
downwards until he was, in his turn,
startled by an approach — not, however, a
silent one.

Glancing in the direction whence certain
excited vociferations reached him, Luke
perceived three gentlemen running at the
top of their speed up the incline. Their
demonstrations of consternation had, very
naturally, been called forth by the fact
that from a dog-cart, which they had left

in the lane below, these gentlemen had
witnessed the dreadful feat just performed
by the irresponsible man.

As they drew nearer a mutual recognition
ensued, and Luke then advanced to
meet the new-comers with an expression
of high delight on his countenance, evidently
under the impression that they had
come to share in his gratification.

I done it 1' he cried ; ' I done it ! Do
'ee come and look at 'un ! Our Susie, she
throned herself in the water along of he,
and now I've throned he in! And when
he's took out he'll be put into a hole in the
ground.'

For Luke this speech was a very long
and voluble one. But, to his intense
astonishment, his explanation evoked a
general burst of execration. Luke fell
back crestfallen. His own hatred and
abhorrence of young Bretherton had been
so vehement that he could not understand
how others failed to regard him with

similar sentiments. The disapprobation,
however, of these gentlemen seemed greatly
to distress the poor idiot. Gentle and
submissive in his own family, and mildly
good-humoured, with this sole exception,
towards everybody with whom he came
into contact, the unfortunate young
fellow had until now been regarded as
perfectly harmless. And now that his
enemy was gone, and his animosity satisfied,
his characteristic amiability and weak
inoffensiveness of nature appeared to be
reasserting itself.

Offering no expostulation against the
burst of horrified condemnation wherewith
his confession had been greeted, he
shrank away like a chidden child, and presently
disappeared from the scene.

Without pausing in the meantime, the
three gentlemen, who were Sir Arthur
Ledsom, Victor Mc^icoll, and Mr. Heath
the curate, having approached the edge of
the perpendicular cliff, were now looking

eagerly over it. The water at its base,
though probably some ten or twelve feet
in depth, was singularly clear, and from
the heights on which they stood the young
men could see perfectly the rocky, 
bottom.

Against the green background of that

seaweed, moreover, they could distinctly

discern the white, upturned face of a man.

'Merciful heavens! He is dead, of

course !' exclaimed the curate.

No, look ; he is moving !' cried Sir
Arthur.

It is the tide !' affirmed Victor, in an
awe-struck tone. 'It is going out. He
will be carried away ! See !' And, as he
spoke, the body of the unfortunate Peleus
seemed to be gently lifted by invisible
bands and borne, with a soft, swaying
motion, out into deeper water, where it
again sank to the bottom.

'And there is no boat about!' broke
forth Sir Arthur. 'If there had been a

boat, we could have signalled to it. What
in the world are we to do ?'

You must go for one, Arthur,' decided
Victor. ' Fly like the wind. Drive down
to Shelving Cove — you won't find one
nearer — and make the men bring some
grappling hooks. Heath and I will stop
here and watch the body. Quick ! Run,
man !'

Awaiting no further urgency, Sir Arthur
tore down the hill (as his friend knew, he
was a fleet runner) and in a couple of
minutes the dog-cart was being driven off
at a gallop.

'Don't speak, Heath, just for a few
minutes !' becro-ed Victor, when he and the
curate were left alone. And, throwing
himself on the grass, he lay with thoughts
too deep for utterance, gazing at the now
indistinct and flickering patch of white,
which he knew to be the face of Peleus
Bretherton. But he was not able to gaze
at it long. Once more the body was lifted

by a swell of the tide, and borne out
to sea, and, long before Sir Arthur Ledsom
returned with the boat, the two
young men were unable to point out
where it lay. They managed, however, in
answer to the signalled inquiries of the
boatmen, to express an assurance that it
must have been carried beyond a certain
point, and, once having been made to understand
this, the boatmen in their turn
indicated to the young men, by a series of
head-shaking, shoulder-shrugging, and
other telling gestures, their well-founded
conviction that any attempt to search for
the body in water which they knew to be
many fathoms deep, would be merely a
futile waste of time. Pointing shorewards,
then, towards that small creek not
far from Peter Cole's farm, where the little
party had landed on the occasion of the
picnic, the men emphasised their conviction
as to the futility of the search by rowing
off in that direction, whilst Sir Arthur

from the stern beckoned them to

follow.

As a matter of course, Mr. Heath and
Victor obeyed the sign ; and when the
young baronet sprang to the ground to
rejoin his friends he informed them that
he had already made arrangements with
the seamen which would ensure a careful
watch being kept all along the coast for
the return of the body with the incoming
tide. TVe may here state, however, that
although the arrangements in question
were carefully carried out, and the watch
prolonged for several days, the mortal
remains of Peleus Bretherton were, so far
as was ever known, seen no more by
human eye.

But now, what is to be done about our
business ? This awful affair has upset all
our plans observed Mr. Heath. ^ We
can't confront that poor fellow with your
discovery now, McNicoll, or catch him at
the farm.'

VOL. III. Q

We can catch his accomplices there
returned Yictor.

But we have no warrant to search
their premises. "We were depending, you
know, on taking the son by surprise. I'm
afraid our difficulties will be increased ?'

On the contrary,' said Yictor, * I think
they will be greatly lessened. How can
those villains hold out when they know
that their paymaster is dead? Their
motive for continuing the crime is gone

Of course it is assented Sir Arthur.
And in other ways, too, I can see that
our course will be simplified. We shall
not have to consider, now. how the father s
release will affect the son, or what is to
be done with Mr. Percival. That difficulty
has settled itself in a fearful manner.'

Fearful enough, indeed !' echoed Yictor.
^ But on the whole — I daresay you will
think it rather dreadful of me to say this
but really I don't see how his loss can

be deplored, and I consider that he richly
deserved his fate. I may be hard, but
when I think of the suffering he has caused
poor Ida — Miss Bretherton — not to speak
of the unutterable infamy of his act — I, for
one, find myself unable to pity him.'

If only he had not been cut off in the
midst of his iniquity !' sighed the clergyman.
' By the way, where is that unfortunate
fellow Luke Basset ?'

And how in the world did he get here ?'
broke in Arthur. ' He must have followed
poor Bretherton, and come by the same
train. But who would have believed that
he would have had the sense to travel by
rail, or to plan such a thing as this ? It
seems like a deliberately planned act,
doesn't it? And what could have been
his motive ?'

He said something about his sister, '
observed Mr. Heath. * The explanation of
this new mystery lies there, I imagine.'

q2

All ! Do you know, Victor, whether
there has been anything between the poor
wretch and that pretty little girl ?' asked
Arthur. ' Could that have been. You
heard about her fall into the river the
other day ? Is it possible that it was not
an accident?'

Very possible, indeed, I think replied
his friend. ' In fact, I was afraid of it at
the time. 1 had seen reason to suspect
that Bretherton had not been behaving
well to her. How mach there was in the
affair I cannot of course say ; but there
must have been enough to make the poor
child awfully wretched, or she could never
have dreamt of suicide. Luke's motive was
plainly revenge.'

But such desperate revenge will cost
him dear,' said Sir Arthur. ' He will have
to be put under restraint.'

Yes, we shall have to look after that,'
returned Victor. ' But, in the meantime,
let us get on to Cole's house. I am impatient



for the release of our poor friend,
dreadfully impatient ; and so, I am sure,
are you both.'

CHAPTER XV.

THE PRISONER IS RELEASED.

The distance from the little creek, where
Sir Arthur Ledsom had landed, to Peter
Cole's farm was only, as has been stated, a
short one. On their way thither, however,
the young men found time to arrange a
certain plan of procedure in respect to the
task they had before them, and, also, to
appoint Victor McNicoll chief spokesman
in carrying that plan into effect. Of the
three, he was the only one who had previously
visited the farm — the only one,
therefore, who was in a position to recognise
any of its inmates.

And Victor not only recognised, but

was immediately recognised by that member
of the Cole family who responded to
his knock at the door. This was Mrs.
Cole who, only a few minutes before, had
returned from the errand upon which her
husband had sent her, and who had not
yet had time to remove her bonnet. Her
recognition of the young man was testified
by an inarticulate ejaculation of surprise
and a slight curtsey.

Good-morning. Is your husband
within ?' Victor's tone was curt and
stern. He did not know how far the
woman was implicated in the guilt of her
relatives.

Yea, sure, I be in,' Peter answered for
himself, coming forward and presenting
his unattractive physiognomy over his
wife's shoulder. * What might your business
be, sir ?'

We will come into the house and tell it
you there,' rejoined Victor ; * our business
is of a very important nature.'

Oh ! Well, step forrud.' The invitation
was accorded in an ungracious fashion,
and with evident reluctance. ' Be it something
about that land o' Freeman's ? Sit
ye down, if you like, all on ye — there's
chairs enough.'

This civility was silently declined, and,
glancing from one to the other of his
visitors, Mr. Cole appeared to grow a little
uneasy.

Seems to me that I've seen 'ee afore,
sir, somewhere ?' he observed to Victor.

You have seen me here before,' said
Yictor ; * several months ago, in the
autumn of last year, I was here with a
small party of people, and we were taken
down by your wife to see that curious
secret vault in your cellar. If you would
allow them, these gentlemen, my friends,
would like to see it also.'

'Oh, they would, would they?' Mr.
Peter Cole's face flushed crimson with
sudden wrath, or alarm. ' Then they just

can't see ifc ! So there's ray answer
plain.'

"We will pay you handsomely,' suggested
Sir Arthur.

You couldn't see it, not if you paid me
fifty pounds. The place has been bricked
up. It don't exist no longer — so there !'
He got up as he spoke from a settle by
the hearth on which he had seated himself.
And if that's all the business you have,
coming into a man's house at his dinner-time,
I'll thank you to take yourselves off,'
he added, viciously.

It is not quite all,' returned Victor,
with slow, distinct emphasis, looking direct
in the man's face ; ' if your vile black hole
has been bricked up, what have you done
with Mr. Bretherton ?'

The effect of this unexpected question
was startling. Had there been the slightest
doubt in any of the gentlemen's minds
as to Peter Cole's complicity in the heinous
crime of poor Abner s abduction and

imprisonment, his present look of guilty
terror would effectually have removed that
doubt. The tell-tale expression, however,
did not linger long. Quickly recovering
himself, the man burst into a loud forced
laugh.

What have / done wi' Mr. Bretherton ?
He, he ! That's a good un ! And who
the dickens might he be ? Dont know
anybody o' that name, myself ?'

Don't you ? Then I will tell you who
he is.' Victor approached and stood over
the man, who had again fallen back upon
his wooden settle. ' Mr. Bretherton is the
owner of Monkswood Hall, the gentleman
whom you and your son contrived to
carry off from his home nearly a fortnight
ago, and whom you have since been hiding
away, keeping captive against his will, in
that horrible place, which has not been
bricked up. He is the father of that
young man who came here this morning
and paid you one hundred pounds as the

reward of an action for which sou may
perhaps get a taste of penal servitude !'

Victor did not know what legal punishment
the offence had actually merited,
but he added this threat with an air of
conviction.

Cole sprang to his feet.

'Where's Will?' he shouted. And,
rushing to the kitchen door, he called out
to his son, who was at work in a yard at
the back of the house. * Will ? Will ? do
'ee come in this minute I There's a lot o'
lunatics broke into the house. Come on
in, I say !'

Obeying at once, Will reappeared with
his father.

Well, what's the row ?' he demanded.

Oh, Peter, be it true what they gentlemen
say ?'

It was Mrs. Cole who broke in with this
question.

Her husband turned on her with the
fury he had not dared to expend elsewhere.

You get out o' this !' he commanded ;
be off with 'ee !'

No, stay here, Mrs. Cole. We may
want you,' said Victor.

Be off, I say V repeated her husband,
cr '

A menacing gesture completed the
sentence, and Mrs. Cole precipitately fled
from the apartment.

She is innocent, then,' commented the
curate. ' I am glad of that !'

'Now, what be it all about? AVhat's
the row ?' again queried Will, stretching up
his burly frame, and glaring with a reflection
of his father's angry disquietude at
the three gentlemen.

They fools ' began his father.

Let us waste no more time,' interposed
Victor ; * we know you two men are accomplices
with young Bretherton in the illegal
detention of his father. We know that he
came here this morning and paid you a
hundred pounds. We know that the poor

old gentleman is at present in this house.
We have come to take him away, and
we don't mean to leave the house without
him.'

For several seconds Will Cole gazed at
the speaker with open eyes and gaping
mouth. But he uttered no exclamation,
and, excepting by that involuntary betrayal
of his facial muscles, showed no sign of
alarm.

You seem to know a deal !' he observed,
with a pretence at satire. ' Make
so bold — who might have told 'ee that
tale?'

A part of it I heard from young Brethren
himself.'

Zounds !' ejaculated Cole senior, who
was much more deficient in self-control
than his son. * Can he have blabbed ?'

^ Father, you're a fool !' Will turned on
him with a contemptuous mutter. ' Where
be he, that young Bretherton? Bring
him here, and let's hear what he's gotten

to say himself. 'Tis all a big lie, darned
rubbish ! Bring un here, and let's see
which on us is cracked, you, or him,
or me ?'

Cole,' rejoined Victor, with impressive
solemnity, ' I could not bring him here if
I would. Your employer is dead. He has
just met with a fearful death.'

*Good lack!' The elder Cole's face
turned blue, which was as near an approach
to pallor as his weather-beaten complexion
would allow. ^ Why, what's happened
him?' he faltered.

He has been thrown from the cliffs
above there,' pointing in the direction.
I am not going to explain all the circumstances
to you, though we know who did
the deed, and why it was done. My friends
will bear witness to the truth of what I
say. We all three saw the dreadful act
committed.'

What !— Why !— Then, 'twas murder?'

stammered the old man. ' Lor', be it true ?
An' dead — be he really dead T

Mr. Heath and Sir Arthur confirmed, ina
manner that left no possibility of doubt in
their hearers' minds, the truth of McNicoll's
assertion, adding the information that the
body had been washed out to sea.

You will, therefore,' resumed the latter,
addressing himself particularly to Will,
who as yet had spoken no word in response
to this startling communication, although
evidently staggered and horrified, ^ you will,
therefore, never again see your paymaster
in life, and never again receive a single
penny for the continuation of your villainy.
Why, then, should you persist in it ? Yoa
may as well go at once and bring up your
poor captive.'

Will reflected a moment. Then he
repeated, doggedly,

'Tis all a big lie. I tell you, we hasn't
got no captive to bring up.'

Very well, the only consequence of
your obstinacy will be that we shall go
straight away and obtain a warrant to
search the premises observed Sir Arthur,
who could no longer refrain from putting
in a word.

Air right ; go away and get your
warrant, and then you can search the
premises as much as you like, and be
blowed to you !'

But, Will, hadn't us better — ' anxiously
commenced Peter.

Sh !' The son stooped and whispered
a few hurried sentences in the father's ear.
The old man's countenance changed.

Ay, ay, go and get your warrant he
said ; * you're welcome. There be nobody
here, and you'll find nobody. So be
off with you. Ween nothing more to
say, good or bad, and I'm wanting' my
dinner.*

As the reader will probably conjecture,
the idea which had presented itself to the

miDcl of the younger Cole as a way out of
their difficulty — a way that promised
escape from the punishment of their crime
for his father and himself — was to further
secrete Mr. Bretherton within that hidden
passage which led out to the caves. Todo
this, he had reflected, would be easy
enough, as would, also, to remove all traces
of his occupancy from the vaulted cellar.
As to what should ultimately be done with
the unhappy victim of this wretched
conspiracy in which they had taken part,
Will left that for future consideration:
to deny their guilt, and to conceal the
proofs of it, had been his first instinct.

But then, low much did these gentlemen
know ? How much bad they found
out about that hundred pounds ? How
had they come to suspect Mr. Bretherton
of being here at all ? Although he thus
tried to brazen the thing out, Will was
quaking in bis shoes, filled with inward
trepidation.

VOL. in. R

Oh, men, men ! What further iniquity
are you meditating?' cried Victor, to
whom a terrible inference from their
behaviour had involuntarily suggested itself.
' Would you shield yourselves at
the expense of — of human life? Is it
possible that you would dip your hands in
blood?'

^ No, no ! You shouldn't say such a
thing as that, McNicoll !' remonstrated the
curate, shuddering. ' That's an awful
thing to say 1 Surely, surely the men are
not fiends 1'

No, we bennet fiends, but he's a fool,'
retorted Will, glowering on his accuser
with an expression almost malignant
enough to have made the term seem
appropriate.

If I am mistaken I am only too glad of
it,' resumed Victor ; * but your whisper, I
am certain, meant mischief. However,
you can have neither wish nor motive
for perpetrating additional villainy when I

tell you something that I am about to do.
This is, that no steps will be taken to
punish you for what you have already committed.
If we could have helped it, we
should not have given you the relief of
this assurance. We should have liked
you to suffer at least some alarm on account
of your misdeeds. But it is of no
use wasting more time ; so now I tell you
that for the sake of the family — because
we could not expose you without exposing
that poor unfortunate fellow who is now
beyond the reach of reproach or penalty,
and because such exposure would ruin the
happiness of his sister's life — you will be
spared ; you will not be prosecuted.

Oh ! Humph !' Suspicious of a trap
to extort confession, Will glanced from
one to another of the young men, his
face a study of alternating hope and
fear.

The whole thing, I assure you, will
be hushed up.' affirmed Sir Arthur, in

r2

confirmation of this friend's unwilling
assurance.

*You will get off scot-frees protested
the young clergyman, ' so far as human
vengeance goes ; but you will have to bear
the accusation of your own guilty consciences,
and '

There, stow that, sir ! We bennet in a
church, nor you in a pulpit. We don't
want no preaching. But if you really
mean what you say '

He paused, still disturbed by doubt.
When, however, each of the gentlemen
had reiterated the promise of immunity''
so reluctantly accorded, both father and
son became convinced of their sincerity,
and, in consequence, of their own security.

Well, then, I'll go and bring him to 'ee,'
exclaimed Will ; ' and right down glad I
be to do it! 'Twas the dirtiest job o'
work I ever had a hand in in my life,
fiend or no fiend ! And I'll breathe a
mighty deal easier, I can tell 'ee, once that

poor old chap be out of the house. Give
us them keys, father.'

'Ay, ay said the old man, fuaibliuf^ in
his pockets. ' And you see, gentlemen,
'wasn't so much our blame. When that
young skunk come here a-offering us
money, and the whole business planned
out as easy as you please, and us a- wanting
money badly, what could 'ee expect ?
Lor' what could 'ee expect ?' His ill-favoured
countenance assumed an ingratiating
leer.

*Bah!' ejaculated Sir Arthur. 'Don't
sicken us by any attempt to palliate the
atrocity, man ! 'No words would be strong
enough to express what we think of your
conduct. For goodness sake be silent.'

Ay, hold your tongue, father,' urged
his son, casting, however, a vindictive
glance at Sir Arthur — "Will Cole's temper
was not of the sort that could bear much
fault-finding — * let's get rid of 'em all as
sharp as we can.'

He hurried off towards the cellar door
which opened from an adjoining back
kitchen. But before descending he returned
for a moment.

You'll find un a deal changed he
observed, popping his head back into the
living-room; *his hair be turned white,
and the poor old chap's got a baddish
cough. He be off his feed, too, and
regular out of sorts. But he'll soon come
round when you get un home, I make no
doubt.'

Notwithstanding this preparation, the
shock experienced by the three gentlemen
when poor Abner Bretherton, half-supported,
half-dragged by the powerful Will,
was brought into their presence, was very
great. It became still greater, however,
when they presently discovered that he did
not recognise them.

How d ye do, stranger ?' he murmured,
accepting Victor McNicoll's silently-tendered

band, and making a feeble effort to
smile.

'why, don't sou know me, Mr. Bretlier-
ton ? Ob, you must know me !' cried the
young mau, almost in tears.

Mr. Bretherton passed bis band over
his eyes. Then, without replying to victors
question, be observed, in a weak
voice, addressing Will Cole,

'I feel sorter dazed, Jabez, coming' out
o' bet thar pit ez they've dug under the
mountains to orifc diamonds. It's dark an'
it's cold thar — freezing' cold it is, and I
couldn't find my way out. Ef you hadn't
come for me, Jabez, I don't know when I
should lev found my way out. Peley, he's
thar, too, a-lookin' for diamonds. But he
ain't found none yet, an' he's gittin' put
out about it — terrible put out. Though
I'm his father, I was 'most afeard of him
he's in such a rain' passion, Peley is.'

He paused, shuddering visibly, and casta
nervous glance over his shoulder.

come to the fire, Mr. Bretberton?
Bring him to the fire said Victor. ^ This
is awful r

He has lost his reason !' exclaimed Sir
Arthur. ' Oh, what are we to do ?'

Poor Miss Brethertou ! Poor Miss
Bretherton !' sighed the curate.

But he was all right this morning,'
broke in Will Cole. * 'Pon mj word and
honour, he was all right this morning —
wasn't he, father ?'

Cole, senior, supported the statement
with some very strong language. He was
afraid that this new complication might
bring himself and his worthy son into
danger again.

'Tis no fault of our, this,' he asseverated.
'Ween done our best to make uncomfortable.
It must ha' been with seeing
that rapscallion of a son. That be what
have turned his head, Will, if so be 'tis
turned.'

Then he lias seen his son ?' asked Sir

Arthur. * The fellow actually had the
assurance to face him ?'

'Ay, he spoke to him this morning,'
answered Will, who had now placed Mr.
Bretherton in an easy-chair by the fire.
And, as father says, if he do have gone
wroncr in 's senses, 'tis that done it. 'A
were all right afore that darned whelp saw
him.' (Community in crime had evidently
not awakened much friendly feeling on
the part of the two Coles towards the
instigator of their delinquency). 'But,
maybe, 'tis just a passing maze-like, and
he'll come to himself in a minute.'

You speak to him, Arthur. See if he
knows you,' suggested Victor, in a whisper.

But poor Mr. Bretherton did not know
the young baronet.

'Well, no, mister, I don't jest recollect
your name,' he replied, apologetically, in
answer to Sir Arthur's gentle interrogation.
' But you're welcome to Prospect
Farm — welcome as roses ! Sit you down,

do, now! Idalia, she'll be in by-an'-bye.
She an' her governess, they're out a-ridin'.

They — she — grandmother ' he turned

towards the fire, growing confused in his
utterance.

The young men exchanged silent glances
of dismay, and for a couple of minutes no
one spoke. Then, without looking round,
Mr. Bretherton began to murmur again
apparently to himself,

It's cold — powerful cold, it is. I believe
we're a-going' to lev a snow-storm.
But this fire it's comforting' — it's comfort — '
All at once he slipped forward, and would,
if Will Cole had not managed to grasp
him, have fallen into the fire.

The sudden chase from the darkness
and chilliness of that damp vault to the
warmth and brightness above had proved
too much for the poor old man's weakened
frame; and, as it was seen when he was
laid back in his chair, Abner had swooned.

At the suggestion of one of the distressed

spectators, Mrs. Cole was instantly
summoned ; and by her conduct she proved
herself a true woman — tender, energetic,
and sensible — a woman worthy of a better
fate than that of being united to a brutish
scoundrel like Peter Cole.

Asking no questions respecting the insensible
man, and even forbearing to utter
an exclamation at his condition, she at
once set about using certain old-fashioned
restoratives, which were happily effectual
after a time in bringing the patient to
himself. Thereupon she ran off for a pan,
and, having heated some milk just within
boiling point, she poured it out in a cup,
and for the first time allowed herself to
make a remark.

'tis the best thing in the world — hot
milk is, for anyone as is weak or exhausted,'
she observed. ' He'll come round now,
poor man, you'll see. Do you think he'd
mind,' she added, after a while, * if I gave
him a wash ?'

Until within the last day or so, Mr.
Bretherton, who was exceedingly particular
about personal cleanliness, had pleaded
hard with his gaolers for his daily bath.
But of late his water had been neglected,
and he now accepted the proffered ablution
gratefully, suffering Mrs. Cole to sponge
his face, and dabbling his hands in the
basin like a child. From the operation,
which was supplemented by the brushing
of his whitened locks, poor Abner emerged
looking more like his former self. That
his mind was unhinged, however (although
his rescuers encouraged themselves to
hope, only temporarily), became more evident
with each moment, through the rambling,
incoherent remarks which he continued
to make. At intervals, too, a
puzzled expression would cross his face,
and a troubled frown pucker his brow, as
though he were vainly trying to grasp
some idea or recollection. To witness
these elusive efforts was very painful.

'Let US get him home,' Victor urged.
Let us get him home without further
delay.'

CHAPTER XVI.

NOTHING CAN SEPARATE US NOW?'

Foe nearly a fortnight after his return to
Monkswood, Mr. Bretherton lay in bis own
comfortable bed dangerously ill — so ill
that his state was pronounced highly critical.
The terrible experience he had
undergone — culminating in the shock of
his sons visit — had, for the time being,
unhinged his mind, whilst the protracted
exposure to the damp and unhealthiness
of that ill-ventilated * black hole ' had
(although Idalia, happily, did not yet
suspect the fact) fatally broken doAvn his
constitution. He did not, on being brought
home to her, recognise his beloved daughter

; and, throughout the fortnight that
followed, his mind remained a blank to all
outward sights and passing events, whilst
from his incoherent wanderings it was
evident that he was back again in imagination
at his old home and amongst his old
friends.

Scarcely for a moment during that fortnight
did Idalia leave his side. The phys
of vrhom were in constant
attendance — after much vain remonstrance
against this excessive devotion, had at
length taken upon themselves to engage a
trained hospital nurse from London. But,
so long as any immediate danger was to
be apprehended, Idalia persisted in her
obstinacy, and the nurse's position proved
a sinecure. Not, however,, that Idalia
really feared that her father would die.
From the first she had persuaded herself
that this was impossible. That he should
be restored to her only to die, and to die
without knowing her, was an irony of fate

too cruel to admit of conception. Trusting
to her own careful nursing, therefore,
buoyed up with the hope of his speedy
recovery, and over-toyed to have got him
back, even as he was, Idalia bore the strain
of her confinement and loss of sleep marvellously
well. The girl had been endowed
by nature — in addition to her other
gifts — with a splendid physique and the
soundest possible health. That this was
the case was the more to be rejoiced over,
in that, besides the demands now made
upon her physical strength, she had to
bear much trouble of mind. A day or two
after her father's return she had been informed
of her brother's death. It was
Mrs. McNicoU who had broken this news
to her, but it. was from that lady's son that
she learned the strange and shocking particulars
as to the manner of Peleus' death.
For almost every day, though she denied
herself to most other visitors, Idalia had
run down, if only for a minute, to ex-canoe

a word or two with Victor Mc-nicol.
That Victor loved her with all
the force of his deep and strong nature,
Idalia was well aware, although he had
never as yet confessed his love in words.
Further, the girl knew that she, too, loved
him, and that in doing so she loved for
the first time in her life. By comparison
with the feeling which now possessed her
in Victor s regard, and which had sprung
from a knowledge of his worth, and
had strengthened with a slow but steady
growth, Idalia recognised that the liking:
she had once entertained for Charlie
Nunnerley, and which she had fancied
might develop into love, had been but a
poor weak counterfeit of the emotion, one
that, under any circumstances, she must
soon have understood to be such. And
Victor it was who had been chiefly instrumental
in discovering and restoring her
father to her. Gratitude heightened her
love. Yet, at the same time, Idalia was
VOL. in. s

growing impatient, almost irritated against
the young man because of the singular
way in which he persisted in refusing to
satisfy her as to the how and the whereof
that discovery. He was keeping her
in the dark about things which she thought
she ought to know ; but what those things
were she little guessed. The enlightenment
was to come soon enough.

italia,' said Mr. Bretherton one day.
He had awakened that morning, still very
weak and ill, but with his mind evidently
restored to its balance — ' Idalia honey,
lev I bin away anywheres?'

'Yes, dear father, you have,' she answered,
softly. ' But don't think of that
or talk of it, until you grow stronger.'

It ain't a dream, then, about that horrid
darksome place, where they chained
me up like a dog ?' queried the sick man.

Father ! Oh, father !' Idalia ejaculated
in horror. And even as she spoke there
flashed before her mental vision a picture

of the very place he alluded to, that dark
vault which had affected her so strangely
on the day of the picnic. ' Tell me, father,
what sort of a place was it ?' she asked,
forgetting her prudent request that he
should put off speaking about the subject
of his absence until he was stronger.

Poor Mr. Bretherton shuddered. He
glanced around the pleasant, commodious
chamber in which he lay, with a nervous,
half-frightened expression.

I could almost fancy now it had been
a bad dream,' he murmured, ' only it's a-
coming' back to me so clear. Yes, it's all
coming' back clear. Thar was a man who
had some fingers admission' from his hand.
He brought me what I hed to eat and
drink, an by times he would leave me a
light. But in a general way it was dark,
and the darkness it sorter seemed to get
inter my head, an' — — '

'Father, was the place near Shelving
Cove ? Was that man's name Cole ?' interposed

Idalia, grasping bis arm quite
roughly in her excitement.

The action startled him. He was so
nervous and feeble still that very little
agitation would suffice to throw him back
into the fever from which he was recovering.
Idalia perceived that she was making
an error in thus questioning him, that she
ought not even to allow him, if she could
help it, to dwell in his own mind on those
strange and terrible sufferings he had
undergone.

'Never mind, father darling,' she subjoined,
soothingly ; * we won't think of it
now. See, you are at home again in your
own house and your own room, and with
your own daughter to take care of you.^
She stroked his hand, no longer rough or
red, with her old familiar caress, until a
sudden trembling which had seized upon
him ceased.

Yes,' he repeated presently, ' my own
daughter, my own child ! Thank the

Lord !' — reverently. * Thank the Lord,
honey, we're together again. I — I'd giv' up
the hope of it. But ' — with effort and
hesitation — ' what is what is Peley ?'

Idalia did not answer. She stooped to
hide her face, la3ang it on his hand. How
should she tell him that his son was
dead r

Is he afeard that I cannot forgive
him ? I essay he is. But ef he's sorry,
ef he repents, tell him — tell him,
Idalia '

What, father ? What is there to forgive
?' Idalia had lifted her head, and
was gazing at him with dilated eyes.
Peleus !'

Mr. Bretherton paused, and appeared to
reflect. His face flushed and paled again.

What lev I bin saying , child ? Maybe,
I was rambling' a bit,' he faltered. ' Don't
you take no notice of what I said. I

ain't rightly myself, deary. 1 I'd like

to sleep a bit.' He shut his eyes and

turned his face away from her. Idalia
settled his pillows in silence, but with a
new, scarcely defined horror stealing over
her mind ; and at this moment there came
a tap to the door.

It was the nurse. Announcing that Mr.
McNicoll was below, she asked if she
should remain in the sick-room whilst
Miss Bretherton went down to receive
him. Idalia nodded assent, and, running
downstairs, she almost burst into the
room where Victor awaited her. In her
impetuous desire to satisfy herself that
the shocking idea she had conceived could
not be true, she forgot even to greet her
lover.

*Mr. McNicoll, I know now where you
found my poor father,' she began ; * it was
at that old farm-house near Shelving Cove
Peter Cole's farm.'

Victor flushed and stammered, disturbed
by the abruptness of this address.

Your father, then — did he know ? Did
he tell you ?'

Ah ! It was so V Idalia pressed her
hand against her heart. But her manner,
in the intensity of her excitement, grew
calmer. * And it was there, close to the
house, that my brother was killed ! What
why do you think he had gone there ?'

Perhaps to look for his father. We
settled before, you know, that it must have
been so.'

But you did not tell me that — that he
had cause to suspect father of being there.
Mr. McNicoll, I want to know what their
motive could have been — those wretched
men's ?'

Perhaps — probably to get a ransom,'
suggested the young man, who was not at
all ready or practised in the art of
deception. ' Dear Miss Bretherton, I
wish '

Wait, please,' she interrupted. ^ Are

the men being prosecuted? Have they
been arrested ?'

Not yet ; no,' he admitted, reluctantly.

Why ?' she demanded, her face white,
her beautiful eyes full of dismay and
anguish. ' There, you need not tell me !
I know — I guess it all !' And without
another word, as abruptly as she had
entered the room, the horror-stricken girl
turned and fled.

For three long weeks Victor McNicoll
did not see her again. Every day he came
to the house to ask after Mr. Bretherton,
but Idalia only sent down courteous answers
to his inquiries. Her father was
better. He was much stronger to-day.
He was to be allowed to sit up for an
hour. He had been able to leave his
room, and to spend most part of the day
in a small apartment which she had had
arranged as a sitting-room close to his
bed-chamber. The tidings were nearly
always encouraging. But why would

Idalia not bring them to him herself?
Why would she never see him? When
her father had been at the worst — in his
most critical state — she had not refused
herself to him ! Now he could not obtain
a glimpse of her ! Once, indeed, when he
had been leaving the house disappointed
and distressed by the lame excuse she had
returned to his humble petition for a brief
interview, he had caught sight of her looking
after him from a window of her father's
room. But although, after that, Victor
lingered day after day in the garden,
watching with a hungry gaze for even a
momentary vision to relieve the misery
and dread that had laid hold of him, that
sign of interest was never repeated. . (At
least, Victor never saw it repeated.)

At last the young man could bear it no
longer. An explanation of Idalia's conduct
had occurred to him which he felt to
be unendurable. Forgetting that he had,
even yet, never put into words a confession

of the love that had so long burned
in his heart towards her, and which he
had found reason to believe Idalia returned,
he one day tore a leaf from his
pocket-book, and sent up to her these
lines —

Idalia, you are breaking my heart I
For pity's sake, come down to me, if but
for one moment !'

Then he paced the room impatiently
fearing and hoping by turns as to the
result. He had not to wait very long.
In a few seconds the door was quietly
opened and closed again, and there in the
room with him stood Idalia.

For a full minute the two looked at each
other without speaking or moving, and to
each the eyes of the other conveyed a
revelation. In those three weeks during
which they had not met — (a time that to
both had seemed like a year) — a change
had taken place in their mutual attitude,
subtle but potent, and both felt that a

crisis had arrived in their relations. Love,
self-restrained and beaten back on the one
hand, apparently repulsed on the other,
Lad taken its revenge. It had risen in
the hearts of both to a high tide of passion
a tempestuous flood, ready to bear down
all barriers against its course.

When first she had entered the room,
Idalia had looked very pale, but gradually
there stole over her face a rich glow of
colour, her sweet firm lips broke into a
tremulous smile, lier lovely eyes shone
under their long lashes with a tender light
which came straight from her translucent
soul. Sever had she looked more exquisitely
beautiful.

Victor gazed spell-bound during the
long minute wbicli had sufficed to work
this transformation in her aspect. Then,
as Idalia took the first step to meet him,
the spell was broken, and, springing forward,
Victor caught her to his breast.

Idalia ! Idalia ! why have you shut me

out of your presence ? Why have you refused
to let me share in your sorrow ?
Didn't you know — oh, my darling, you
must have known — that I loved you ?*

The words broke from him in a torrent
of fervent, low-voiced appeal.

For answer Idalia again lifted her eyes
to his face, and Victor saw that they were
full of tears. Hardly conscious of what
he was doing, Victor stooped and kissed
lier brow. Then their lips met as the lips
of lovers. Without coyness or protest,
Idalia yielded to the embrace, and thus,
almost without words, their love was confessed
and pledged. It was a moment full
for both, not only of rapturous sweetness,
but of deep solemnity. Presently, however,
Idalia drew herself from his arms.

Oh r she murmured, * I am afraid I
ought not to have let you do that.'

Idalia — why ? You love me, do you
not ?' he demanded, in surprise. ' I'm
Bxxve you love me !'

Of course I do. I love you dearly,
Victor — more than I could ever tell,' she
owned, with straightforward simplicity.
but '

But ' he interrupted. * But what ?

But nothing ! Oh, my Idalia ! since you
love me, there can be no *' buts." '

He tried to take her again in his arms,
but Idalia eluded the attempt.

Listen, Victor, I have something to say
to you ! But let us sit down ?' She
moved with that unconscious grace which
was habitual to her across the room, and,
seating herself in a low chair, motioned
him to one by her side. Victor took the
chair, ventured to draw it a little nearer,
and questioned her with his eyes. ' I am
going to tell you first, why I would not see
you all this time,' she began, a crimson
blush dyeing her cheeks, and then fading
away, to leave them nearly as pale as when
she had entered the room. ' That was because
of my brother '

Yes ? How ?' put in Victor.

The statement, nevertheless, fell in with
his own suspicions.

^ I felt so appalled — so degraded — so
unutterably distressed to know that I
could have had such a brother she answered
; ' that for a long time I was ready
to sink into the earth with shame and
horror. I felt almost as if I had committed
some abominable wickedness myself, and
as if I were not fit to associate with good
people. And I resolved, Victor, that I
would never let you know, or guess,
that I loved you — because — because '

Oh, Idalia ! How could you have
thought of yourself so? You! I can't
bear to think of it. It was preposterous.'

*No,' she rejoined; *I think it was
natural. But, at the same time, I have
come to see, Victor, that the sentiment
was a morbid one. The wickedness of
other people — even of the nearest relative
does not really degrade one, if one

loathes and abominates and shudders at
the very thought of it. Oh !' she broke
forth, suddenly, ' I can never forgive him
never ! If he had done it to me I might
but to father — to father !'

My poor love ! How you have suffered
!' cried Victor, falling on his knees by
her side. * But it has passed now, dearest
Idalia, it is past. Let us cast the remembrance
of it behind our backs. My whole
life shall be devoted to making you happy
to shielding you from every breath,
every shadow of trouble. Ah, how I love
you !' he went on, with a lover's passionate
exaggeration. ' I would die to save you
from a pang !'

She suffered him to take both her hands,
and to hold them in his warm clasp, whilst
she looked down on him with tears once
more glistening in her eyes.

Yes,' she said, simply, * I guess you do
love me : and I love you, Victor. You
believe that, don't you ?'

He bent and kissed her hands reverently
before replying.

It is almost too much honour and
happiness for me to bear, Idalia — but, yes
I believe it, I know it !'

'I wanted you to know it, once for all.
I felt that I must tell it you, dear — jusfe
once — just this once !' murmured Idalia.

Victor laughed softly.

^ This once T he echoed. * My darling,
you will tell it me hundreds of times f
You are going to be my wife, Idalia, are
you not ?'

No, Victor. This is what I wished to
say to you. I would marry you if I could.'
Idalia made this acknowledgment with no
affectation of reserve or mock modesty.
but, dear, it cannot be. I can never
marry anyone. My life belongs to my
father. I must devote myself to him.'

Victor, who had looked alarmed at the
commencement of this speech, heaved a
sigh of deep relief.

Oh, is that all ? Of course, my sweet
one, you must devote yourself to your
father. We will hoi devote ourselves to
him.'

*Ah, you don't understand. Victor, I
must atone to him — I must make up to
him for — for all he has gone through. I
must never think of myself or my own
wishes any more.'

But, dearest, your wishes will be his
wishes,' interposed Actor.

Yes, if he knows them,' she returned.
But he mustni know. He mustn't know
that I would rather stay here, in England
that it will tear my heart in two to leave
it — and you F

To leave England ? Idalia, what do
you mean ? Now I don't understand !' he
exclaimed.

She pressed his hands, and two large
tears fell on her lap.

Dear Victor, as soon as ever father is
strong enough to bear the voyage, we shall

VOL. III. T

go back to Clear Water Valley. We have
talked it over together, and I have pretended
that I wanted to go. It is the
thought of going " home," as he calls it,
that has helped him to get well. His heart
has always been there with his old friends
and now, now he must have all that he
wishes. Oh, Victor ! you must be content
with knowing that I love you, and you
must let me do what; I think right ? You
must help me to do it ?'

To be sure I will ! Idalia, I love your
father, and he shall be my father. If it
would help to restore his health, and to
make him forget what has happened, by
all means I would have you take a trip to
America. But '

But I did not mean only a trip,' , Idalia
explained, interrupting him. ' I mean
that, if he is happier there — and he will be
happier there — he shall stay as long as he
lives. We shall never come back to
Monkswood/ As she said this Idalia's

face blanched, and her lips quivered.
So you see, Victor, that, though we love
one another, we can never be anything but
friends ?'

I don't see it at all !' he cried. 'Do
you think I will give you up? No, never!
never ! I will wait for you ten years —
twenty years, if necessary ; but you must
be my wife, Idalia. I don't see clearly
yet how our way is to be made straight,
but I believe it will be made straight.
There is no difference between us, remember
; as to your father, he shall bethe
first consideration with us both. But
we will work together, darling, and plan
together. And you shall not talk of our
being friends. "We are lovers — plighted
lovers — husband and wife already in our
own hearts, and in the sight of heaven.
You shall not break my heart, or pain
your own, by talking as though it were
possible that we could be separated forever,

or even for long. / will think matters
out !'

Oh, Victor !' She bent towards him
in an abandonment of relief, of trust, and
submission. Her self-reliance gave way
before this burst of manly authoritativeness.
How sweet it was to hear him say
'you shall' and 'you must !' No one had
ever ventured to use such words to her
before. And he had not opposed her
doing what she thought right. He was
going to help her to do right. Only he
would * think matters out !' Idalia felt a
new burst of hope and joy. Something
must come of his thinking matters out —
and yet she did not see what, for her
resolve to return to her old home remained
as fixed as ever.

'Whatever happens or is to happen,
Idalia, one thing is sure. You and I
belong to one another for time and
eternity. Nothing can really separate us
now. And the seal of our union is this kiss.'

CHAPTER XVII.

'I'vE SET HT MIND ON IT.'

^ An' is that the end of the book, Idalia ?

^ Yes, father, that's the end.'

'But I ain't sure the I rightly understand.
Say now do you think, child — do
you think it kin really mean the he was
drowned — the poor Paul Emanuel ?'

Why, yes, it must mean so. Listen,
father, it says — " The storm roared frenzied
for seven days. It did not cease till
the Atlantic was strewn with wrecks ; —
Then — Peace, be still! Oh, a thousand
weepers, praying in agony on waiting
shores, listened for that voice, but it was

Bot uttered — not uttered till, when the
hush came, some could not feel it ; till,
when the sun came, his light was night
to some ! Here pause : pause at once.
There is enough said. Trouble no quiet,
kind heart ; leave sunny imaginations
hope." You see, father, it could not mean
anything else ?'

'Well, now, Tm afeared it couldn't!
But, in my idee, it ain't right — it jest
ain't right to make a story end the way.
It's sorter harrowing' to the feeling's. Now,
the book it's a powerful one, I'll 'low ; an'
it's stirring', an' it carries you along with it
wonderful, when you're a-readin' of it.
The lady who wrote it, she's bound to be
pretty smart. But, fer all the, it wasn't
jest to say fair on her to make it so sad at
the finish. Ef I'd lev wrote it now — ' He
paused to laugh — * Lord ! to think o' me
writing' a book ? Sounds curious, don't it,
Idalia? But ef I lied lev wrote it, I'd
lev left them two married an' happy.

rd lev been bound to lie bed them
married !'

Exhausted by this long speech, Mr.
Bretberton lay back in bis chair. It T\'as
a chair lined with cushions and soft white
pillows, scarcely writer, however, than the
"white bead they supported. Tbe face of
its occupant, too, was bleached by protracted
illness. It was a face seamed and
wrinkled and stamped with a history, the
history of a strange and terrible suffering.
But that suffering, whatever its nature or
strength, bad not, it was plain, soured the
sufferer. On the contrary, the sunken
eyes were luminous with kindly feeling,
and the whole countenance wbicb looked
so much more aged than it ought to bave
done, wore an expression of singular
sweetness.

Tbe time of the year was December
(the first week of it), and the time of the
day early afternoon. Tbe invalid's chair
bad been drawn close up to a bright coal

fire, and his daughter, on a low seat by
his side, had just closed the book from
which she had been reading aloud to him
for an hour. Out of doors the aspect was
very wintry, and a dull, grey heaviness in
the atmosphere seemed to threaten the
season's first fall of snow. But the dulness
without only served to heighten the
comfort and cheerfulness within.

It seems to me, father,' observed
Idalia, smiling, as she nestled against his
knee, ' that your thoughts have been
running a good deal on matrimony lately.
Is it through seeing how happy Dora and
Sir Arthur have looked since they came
back from their wedding-trip, I wonder?'

Well, no — no, honey, I don't know ez
it is, though maybe it might lev started
me thinking' some. An' them two, now,
they do look as ef they was happy from
their uttermost hearts, don't they ?'

I believe they are so,' declared Idalia,
in pleased conviction ; ' and I believe that

they will grow fonder of each other every
year of their lives. Do you know, father,
I think Sir Arthur once had a temptation
to do something that he felt would be
dishonourable and cruel ; but he didn't doit
; he acted nobly and bravely, and now
he is reaping his reward. Dora and he
suit each other splendidly. And I believe
he begins to feel that no other woman in
the world was just made for him, as she
appears to be.'

"Well, now, thetis pleasant to think on,
Idalia, pleasant an' cheery it is. I'm glad
o' the. I do love ez young folks should
be happy, an' they'd order be so. An'
thar's Jessie, now, she's a nice girl, particularly
nice she is. I hope, some day,
the she'll lev a good husband, too, like
her sister.'

Well, father, I rather think she will.
I rather think Jessie will get some one she
loves, anyhow.'

Now, is the so ?' Mr. Bretherton was

SO interested that he raised himself from
his pillow to put the question. ' Why, I
never hee'rn thar was anything o' the
sort settled for Jessie

It is not settled yet, father,' answered
his daughter. * So mind, you mustn't
speak of it to anyone. It is only my own
impression, or rather conviction, that Mr.
Heath is beginning to love her.'

Mr. Heath ? Say, now !' interjected
the sick man.

Yes, and I know Jessie thinks all the
world of him. She will make a capital
clergyman's wife, too, father, though she
is so fond of fun and full of spirit. And
Mr. Heath, you know, has been promised
a very good living before long.'

Well, I never see nothing' of the myself
But I don't doubt but it'll be a good match
an' a happy one. He's a pleasant young
follow, young Heath is. But 'seems like
he ain't been here jest lately, Idalia?' he
added.

Well, father, I have not let everyone
see sou who has called these last few
weeks she answered, ' because you have
looked so tired, dear, if people talked to
you too much.'

The's so. Yes, I do get tired pretty
soon,' he admitted, * though I'm alius glad
to see folks. But about the poor Lucy
Snow, now,' he went on, returning to the
subject of the book ; ' it's real sad to think
of her been' left thar, in a foreign country',
with no one to keep for her. I wouldn't
like it could ever be your case, Idalia.'

How could it ever be my case r' returned
the girl. * Haven't I my father to
care for me?'

Yes, honey, an some one else, too 1
Don't you forget him, Idalia. I've always
held to it the love was a grand thing.
Love, it brings out the very best thar is
in a man's nature, or a woman's either.
Thar's nothing' fer young folks like love,
an' like written' married an' levin' children,

ef the Lord sends them. When folks come
to be fathers an' mothers now, it kinder
stretches out their hearts, an' makes them
deeper an' wider, an' more tender like.'

Idalia clasped her arms round her
father's knee, and looked into his face with
moistened eyes. She did not say so, but
she thought to herself that she knew one
person, at any rate, who, whether by
reason of his paternity or not, had a large
and tender heart.

Father,' she asked, suddenly, after a
little pause, * is there something you want
to say to me ? I have been feeling all the
afternoon as though you were wishing to
speak about something particular. Is it
my fancy ?'

No, child, it ain't your fancy ! It's jest
so ! I lev something' on my mind to say to
you, deary. But it's queer you should lev
guessed it out ! It 'most seems ez ef thar
was something' kinder spiritual between us,
don't it? Something' modern ordinary, that

makes the one on us know what the other's
a-thinking' of, or a-feelin' like.'

He stroked her hair fondly as he spoke,
with a soft, lingering caress.

Tell me what it is, father, straight out,'
begged Idalia.

Straight out?' he repeated. 'Well,
now, they'd be the best way, wouldn't it,
jest to come plump to the point? An' so
I will! An' it's this — this is it, Idalia.
I'm a-longiu', honey, to lev ye married — to
lev ye married right away — afore Christmas
time.'

Ob, father !' Idalia blushed crimson,
astonished and startled by this suggestion.
*Iso, no!' she continued. 'What can you
mean, father? Victor has promised to
wait as long as I wish — even twenty years,
if necessary. He knows that I will never
leave yoUj or neglect you for anyone in the
world. He knows that you and I are
going home to Clear Water Valley in the

*No, he don't, deary! He knows the I
ain't in the notion of going' thar anymore.
He knows the I've giv' up the
notion.'

'Father! Oh, father— why?' There
was a ring of alarm and pain in Idalia's
voice.

Well, let's look at the question steddy
and calm, Idalia, an' without a-lettin' ourselves
git wrought up said her father,
gently. ' Stow, when first I come home
after the — the thar misfortune' ez happened
me, it was somewhat about the beginning'
o' May, wasn't it? Well, you an' me,
we hed a talk together, whilst I was a-lyin'
ill in bed, an' we fixed fer to start fer
home in a month's time, or thereabout —
when I'd got rid o' the fever an' weakness,
and was a bit better of the cough I hed —
didn't we ? An' then it got to be " sometime
in the summer, jest as soon's I was
able." Well, the cough it didn't go, an' I
didn't appear to get no stronger, an' so we

iVe set my mind ox it. 287

was forced to put off oar trip to the fall.
An' now, honey, it's winter, an' we're a-
talking' of the spring. But what d'ye think
now y with mild argumentativeness, ' do
you think I seem anyways better fit fer to
take a long journey than I did a spell
back — say in the summer? What, fer
instants, do you think o' me not been'
able to walk across the floor now without
help?'

'Oh! father— father ! What do you
mean ?' cried Idalia, grasping both his
hands. 'Don't — don't break my heart!'

Idalia, honey, let's face the truth
square an' honest ; let's face it honest.
'Taint such a dreadful truth. Ef we jest
look at it steddy an' calm, 'ain't at all
dreadful.'

For one moment Idalia looked up at
him, her face pale, her lips parted and
trembling. Then, with a piteous cry, she
dropped her face against his knee, and
broke into sobs, not loud, but so violent

that her whole slender frame quivered
and shook, as with physical agony. And
yet, had she not known it all along? It
seemed to her now that she must have
known it, that she had only been blindly
and obstinately keeping her eyes closed in
order that she might not see the truth —
the truth that this dear father was going
away to leave her for ever.

Oh, I can't bear it ! I can't bear it !' she
moaned presently.

Mr. Bretherton did not speak. He leaned
back in his chair, passing his hand now
and then over her bowed head, but offering
no remonstrance against her emotion:
By-and-by, however, she heard him sob,
too.

'Father, I am hurting you 1' she exclaimed,
lifting her head.

Yes, deary, you are,' he admitted ;
you are hurting' me badly. It goes again'
me hard to lev you grieve so.'

Then I won't, father — I won't, dear !

I will not crj any longer ; and I will do
anything — everything you wish, father.'

The's my own daughter !' he commended,
his face brightening into a smile.
Why, it would lev hed to lev come sometime,
Idalia, fer it ain't natural but the
parents should go afore their children.
But it mayn't come jest yet, an' thar ain't
no sense in troubling', an' in spoiling' what is
left to us of the time we've got to spend
together, is thar ? Let's take it quiet an'
happy. Ef I kin leave you well fixed, an*
with some one to love you, an' some one
the's got the right to keep for you, an'
look after you, child, why I shall be jest as
contented as kin be ! Ez fer money, now,
you'll lev a-plenty, an' modern a-plenty.
An* I should like, Idalia, the cousin Jabez
Dean should lev the old home an' the
farm at jest as easy a bargain ez we kin
run it. You don't want to speak of the ?'
(Idalia had broken down anew into the
sobs against which she was struggling so

VOL. III. u

bravely). * Well, Victor an' me, we'll
settle all bet sort of thing between us.
But now, what about the wedding', honey?
I've set my heart on it, the it shall be
now, jest straight away. You love him,
don't ye?'

Again a warm blush suffused Idalia's
cheeks.

Ton know T do, father,' she faltered ;
< but '

Well, an' he loves you, an' I love him,'
resumed Mr. Bretherton. * What more is
thar needed ? Idalia, I've got it into my
head, an' I've got it into my hearty ez I
must lev you married at once, an' him to
come here an' live with us. I jest can't
rest till it's done. An' it won't make me
die any sooner, deary. It'll make me live
longer, I believe.'

Father, if you feel like that, I — but
perhaps he — how do we know that he
would like it so soon, father ?'

Mr. Bretherton laughed softly, and lifted

her chin to study the lovely face that
looked all the lovelier for the flush of
excitement in it, an excitement compounded
of many emotions, not all of them sad ones.

How do I know ? Well, now, I do
know, Idalia, because I've spoke to him on
the subject. Him an' me, we've talked it
all out. An' I may say that he's villain to
lev it so ez I've set my heart on it been'.
'H.esivillm — jest to put it thetway, an' not
to flatter you, honey !'

Mr. Bretherton laughed again, but feebly,
for the exertion of so much conversation
was fatiguing in his weak condition.

An' modern the, I'm expecting' him here
every mint fer to tell you himself how
willing' he is. Thar ! ain't the the front
door? They'll maybe be him.'

It incas him — and in another moment
Victor McNicoll entered the room. His
first glance was towards Mr. Bretherton ;
and that gentleman answered the unspoken
query with a nod and a bright smile.

u2

*Yes, my boy, it's all right. You an'
me, we're to lev our own way

*Idalia, is this true?'

She answered the question by rising
slowly from her seat at her father's knee
and turning towards him ; Victor McNicoll
caught his promised bride to his heart.

Oh, my love, my love !' he murmured.
The one only love of my life !' Then,
dropping his voice to a whisper, he added,
My life /'

*And my son, put in Mr. Bretherton,
who had not been intended to hear the
whisper.

Yes, sir, your son,' responded the young
man, promptly. ' And may I be a better
son — May I be able in some measure to — '

Mr. Bretherton had made a gesture of
remonstrance, and Victor left the sentence
unfinished.

Hush — don't ye, now ! The thar, it's
jest the only fault I kin find in you, Victor.
You've always been rather too hard on

poor Pelej. But, then, you ain't his
father,' he added, with a faint smile, ' an'
it ain't to be expected the you should make
allowances like a father kin. A father,
now, he kin forgive 'most anything. An'
the's how it comes to be such a wonderful
an' such a comforting' thing that we kin all
of us, young an' old, living' an' dying', think
of Him as is above all as a Father ain't it
now? Fer, you see, thar's things — heaps
o' things — ez we've all got to lev forgiven.'

Neither of the young people spoke in
reply to these remarks, but the eyes of
both filled as they stood looking down at
the simple and humble old man. By-and-by
Victor blew his nose suspiciously, and
changed the current of conversation by
observing,

Do you see that it is snowing? The
flakes are coming down faster and faster.
And do you remember, Idalia, that the
first time I ever saw you was in a snowstorm
?'

CHAPTER Xviii.

SEVERAL MARRIAGE ARRANGEMENTS.

Although he had only now, for the first
time, spoken to Idalia upon the subject
the conviction that he was about to die
was no new conviction with Mr. Brethren.
It was true that in the beginning he
had thought and hoped that he might
recover so far as to be able to return to
his native land, if only to end his days
there ; and it was true that he had recovered
so far as to be able to drive out once or
twice in the season of roses and hay-making.
But even then he had known that
those were the last roses, and that the last
hay-making he would ever see.

He had trusted, however, that the truth
would reveal itself gradually to his devoted
daughter, and that she might in this way
be spared some pain. But Idalia did not
appear to suspect what was coming, and
poor Abner, feeling that it was coming
nearer and nearer, and beginning to be
afraid that it might come very suddenly',
had at leo-th felt olio-ed to break the
matter to her himself. Further, reflecting
that she could not marry immediately after
his death, and distressed at the thought of
leaving her alone and unprotected, he had,
as we have seen, determined to have her
married at once. And so anxious and
urgent did he prove upon this point, that
Victor, nothing loth, betook himself to
London on the very evening whereupon
the foregoing conversation had taken
place, and returned the following day with
a special licence in his pocket.

Within the week a very quiet wedding-had
taken place, and Idalia Bretherton

had become Mrs. Victor McNicolL Then

to the great joy of both son and daughter,
the dear old man, happy in the removal of
a weight from his mind, seemed to revive
for a time. For nearly four months he
lingered with them, fading away in a painless
decline that presented none of the
horrors of death. His appearance, etherealised
by sickness, lost whatever of
coarseness (if it could ever truly have
been said to show any coarseness) it had
possessed, whilst the expression of his
countenance grew sweeter and, if possible,
more benignant day by day. When, eventually,
they had laid him to rest beneath
the green sods of Upton churchyard, within
sight almost of the Monkswood gates,
Idalia strove hard to obey an injunction
he had laid upon her — an injunction repeated
many times before his last moments
to the effect that she should not indulge
in inordinate grief for his loss. * Don't
you fret, now, Idalia ; promise me ez you

won't fret when I'm gone ?' he had begged ;
and Idalia had been compelled to promise
that she would strive not to fret.

As a mode of enabling her to keep that
promise, Victor, almost directly after the
funeral, carried her off for a little tour
abroad. This, since they had enjoyed no
other, the young couple looked upon as
their wedding-trip. Sailing up the Rhine,
they lingered a little at Heidelberg and
Baden-baden ; then, passing on to the
Black Forest, they explored many exquisite
valleys and quiet, unfrequented nooks
in that delightful district, their love growing
closer and deeper day by day as they
wandered arm-in-arm through lonely, sweet-scented
pine-forests, or sat by the side of
some purling brook, letting the calm beauty
of the wooded hills and the soft green
vales sink into their very souls.

A swifter passage through the Grisons
and Tipper Engadine completed the trip,
and somewhat reluctantly the pair turned

their faces homewards. Although Mr.
Courteney had obligingly left the length
of his holiday to Victor's own decision,
the latter had felt that he ought not, for
too long a time, to throw upon his partner's
shoulders the extra burden which his
absence entailed.

The affairs of Courteney, McNicoU and
Co., we may here observe, were, and were
long to continue to be, in a highly flourishing
condition.

We'll die millionaires yet, McNicoll,'
Mr. Courteney had once observed to Victor's
father; and, though that gentleman
had not lived to see the realisation of this
prophecy, there seemed every chance that
his son might. In addition to the woollen
mills, the firm had for some time been
carrying on a second industry — the manufacture
of sail-cloth. A former allusion
to this fact may perhaps be remembered,
as likewise the statement that the premises
used for this purpose stood in another

suburb of High Radstou. The
management of that branch of the business
had, after Mr. McNicoll's death, been
committed to a gentleman who soon proved
himself thoroughly competent to the post.

Sydney Grenville, the gentleman in question,
boasted descent from a very ancient,
aristocratic, and proud family. Conservative
of foolish notions, and behind the
age as respected their sentiments towards
commerce, nearly all his relatives had condemned
Mr. Sydney Grenville's entrance
into trade as a degradation to himself and
his race. But the young man had paid
no attention to their scruples. He was
poor, and not proud. He did not feel inclined
towards any particular profession,
and he did feel inclined towards trade.

Therefore, he had set himself to learn
one of the principal industries of his native
county — this manufacture of sail-cloth ;
and, after some years spent in acquiring
the requisite knowledge, had come, at the

age of thirty, to be manager for ' Courteney,
McNicoll and Co.' In this capacity he, of
course, saw a good deal of both partners,
but especially of the senior partner — and,
by-and-by, he began to see a good deal of
the senior partner's daughter. The end of
that seeing was that Hester Courteney
presently obtained a second offer of marriage
— honourably made to her by an
honourable man. This offer, with her
father's cordial approval, and to her own
ever increasing satisfaction, Hester accepted.
And the effect of this new engagement
on the young lady's character and
conduct proved a happy one. There were
no secret meetings now, no clandestine
correspondence, no necessity for concealment
or deceit. With her present lover
everything was open and above-board.
Moreover, Hester knew that Sydney Grenville
loved her for herself, and not for her
money ; and, though her own attachment
for him never reached the romantic ardour

of the affection she had once borne to
Charlie Nunneries, it Tvas a truer and
more enduring sentiment. Although she
would have been too proud even to have
owned the fact to herself (since it seemed
to involve the survival of some interest
in him), Hester rather hoped that the
news of her approaching marriage with a
man so far his social as well as moral
superior might reach Charlie Nunneries's
ears.

And the news did reach Charlie's ears,
but not before he had himself entered
into a new matrimonial contract. His
partner in this contract was a lady whose
age, according to the birth register, was
fifty, who dressed and tried to look like a
girl of twenty-five, and who, if put to it,
would modestly own to thirty years.
Having met the young artist at the house
of a friend, this lady (who was in possession
of six thousand a year) invited him
to paint her portrait. Only too thankfully

(he bad found little employment of
late) Charlie undertook the commission.
The portrait was painted at the house of
the lady, Miss Helsham by name, and
represented her attired in a gorgeous robe
of cream-coloured satin, gracefully reclining
in a low chair, and flirting in her bejewelled
hand a peacock's-feather fan.

Pandering to his patroness's only too
perceptible vanity, Charlie made the portrait
a good deal more flattering than faithful.
Miss Helsham. however, was delighted
with it ; but she was still more delighted
with the young artist, who had managed to
reduce her too matronly figure to those
sylph-like proportions, and to make her
blooming complexion appear so natural.

Her own portrait satisfactorily finished,
Miss Helsham requested Charlie to take
the likeness of a favourite cat, and, notwithstanding
the young man's protest
that he was not an animal painter, she so
pressed the petition (offering at the same

time so absurdly liberal a payment) that
Charlie was tempted to undertake the task.
In his own idea he was anything but successful
in the accomplishment of that task.
But again Miss Helsham expressed herself
perfectly satisfied ; and, in proof of
her satisfaction, gave him a further commission
to paint her green parrot.

Before the parrot's plumage was transferred
in a completed form to his canvas,
Charlie, who had been very slow to understand
Miss Helsham's patent advances, at
length perceived that if he chose to accept
this old young lady, along with her six
thousand a year, his days of monetary
anxiety and art drudgery might be over
for ever. And after a brief hesitation —
during which he told himself that, although
he could never love any woman in
the world but Idalia Bretherton, there
was no reason why he should not enjoy,
since he could get them, the compensated
blessings of wealth — Charlie had swallowed

the gilded pill. He had offered his hand
and handsome person to Miss Helsham,
and she in return had given him her heart
and her money.

A word or two in conclusion of our
story mast be devoted to Miss Susan
Basset. Long before she left the flour
mill, convalescent from the illness which
had supervened upon her attempt to drown
herself, Susan had recognised the inexpressible
folly of that act. Deeply ashamed
of having committed it, she had further
grown more and more ashamed of the
feelings that had led her to commit it. By
his own words and deeds, her faithless
lover had betrayed to her his utter baseness
and worthlessness ; and as she lay in
Mrs. Carey's dimity-hung bed, pondering
over the events of the last few months,
Susan began to wonder how she could
ever have loved such an unfeeling wretch
as Peleus Bretherton.

Yet' how her poor little heart ached with

the void that had been left in it. Her
idol had fallen from its pedestal, and, in
the fall, had proved to be, not gold, but
the very commonest clay. Nevertheless,
the world seemed the emptier for the loss
of that idol, and of the glamour and excitement
which her ignorant worship had
induced. Though * wiser,' the poor child
was also, for the time being, undoubtedly
sadder,' by reason of this unfortunate
episode in her young life. And when she
heard how that episode had ended — how,
at the hands of her half-witted brother,
young Bretherton had met with so awful
a fate — Susan was well-nigh crushed by
the news.

It was not, however, until she was on
the point of returning home, several weeks
after the dreadful deed had been done,
and after poor Luke, in consequence of it,
had been lodged in a lunatic asylum, that
this news was communicated to Susan.
By that time the girl had begun to feel

VOL. III. X

the effects of a certain soothing balm that
had been poured into her wounds. That
James Carey loved her, she had, of course,
long known ; but she had never suspected
that his love was such love as this — a love
that had proved itself * stronger than
death !' At the risk of his own life, he
had saved hers. How could Susan help
contrasting the noble devotion of this
lover with the selfish, ephemeral passion
of the other ?

She did contrast them, and, when after
her return to the Fold Farm the young
miller began to renew his evening visits
there, she looked upon him with very
different eyes from those wherewith she
had formerly regarded him. But James —
not wishing to presume on her gratitude —
was very patient in his suit. He did not
know that Susan's heart had already been
caught at the rebound ; he did not understand
that every point of difference which
he presented to her late admirer constituted

SO many points in his favour. And
there were differences enough, physical,
mental, and moral. James was fair, Percival
had been dark ; the former was intelligent,
humble, self-oblivious ; the latter
had been shallow-brained, conceited, and
selfish. The two natures, in short, were
wide as the poles apart. Long before
James, rendered timid by his former rebuff,
could make up his mind to put again
to her that important question, Susan had
quite decided what her answer would be.

And, when at length question and answer
had been exchanged. Farmer Basset's
sanction of his daughter's choice was
readily given. Two conditions, however,
were exacted as the price of his consent to
an engagement — first, that the young
couple were to wait a year before marriage
; and, secondly, that after their
marriage James was to take up his abode
at the Fold Farm, in order that Mr. Basset
might not be separated from his favourite

child and heiress. That Susan tuas his
heiress, and that, consequently, after his
own death, the ancient race mast die out,
that there would be no more Bassets of
the Fold Farm, was, despite his love for
his 'little girl,' a source of much secret
grief to the worthy farmer.

Annette — Lady Standon — remained a
widow to the end of her days. For an indefinite
number of years she continued to
look excessively juvenile. Also she continued
to keep in her train an indefinite
number of lovers, even after she had ceased
either to be or to look juvenile. But,
whether from her own fault or theirs,
none of those lovers was ever converted
into a husband.

THE END.

LONDON : PRINTED BY DUNCAN MACDONALD, BLENHEIM HOUSE.

MESSES. Hues MD Blackest

LIST OF NEW WORKS.

REMINISCENCES OF THE COURT AND

TIMES OF KING Ernest OF Hanover. By the Rev C.

A. Wilkinson, Mea., His ;Majesty's Resident Domestic Chaplain.

2 vols. With portrait of the King. 21s.
An interesting book, entitled ■ Reminiscences of the Court and Times of King
Ernest of Hanover,' has just been published by Messrs. Hurst and Blackett The
two volumes in-which these reminiscences of a septuagenarian are comprised
abound in characteristic stories of the old king, in anecdotes of many celebrities
English and foreign, of the early part of this century, and, indeed, of all kinds and
conditions of men and women with whom the author was brought in contact by
his courtly or pastoral office'— .Sf. James's Gazette.

THE EGYPTIAN Campaigns, 1882 to 1885,

AND THE Events which led to their. By Charles Rote,

Barrister at-Law, of Alexandria. 2 vols, demy 8vo. Illustrated

by Maps and Plans. sos.

"Mr. Eoylehas done well in the interests of historical completeness to describe

not only the entire military drama but also the political events connected with

it, and whoever reads the book with care has gone a considerable way towards

mastering the difficult Egyptian question." — Athenaeum.

"The Egyptian fiasco has found in Mr. Boyle a most painstaking, accurate, and
judicious historian. From a literary point of view his volumes m'iy be thought to
contain too many unimportant incidents, yet their presence was necessary perhaps,
in a complete record, and the most fastidious reader will unhesitatingly acquit
Mr. Boyle of filling his pages with anything that can be called padding." — St.
James's Gazette.

THE PALACE AND THE HOSPITAL; or,

Chronicles of Greenwich. By the Rev. A. G. Estrange,
Author of ' The Tillage of Palaces,' ' The Friendships of Mary
Russell thetford,' &c. 2 vols, crown 8vo. With Illustrations. 21s.
"Under the title of 'The Palace and the Hospital,' Mr. Estrange has provided
for those who have a taste for topography, or rather for the historical and biographical
annals of a locality famous in history, two volumes which are rich in
romantic interest, and his pages abound in curious and interesting glimpses of
old manners'' — Daihj Xetcs.

"Mr. Estrange's volumes will well repay perusal, and readers who may not
be well versed in English history will gather from them information, agreeably
told, as to many matters besides Greenwich Palace Hospital"— Q«€e/?.

FOOTSTEPS OF JEANNE D'ARC. A Pilgrimage.

By Mrs. Florence Cadet. 1 vol. demy 8vo. With
Map of Route, los.
"This is a conscientious work, involving much travel and research, and throws
a flood of light on many obscure parts of the heroine's career, and will long be a
standard work on the Maid of Orleans." — Graphic.

The reader, whatever his preconceived notions of the maid may have been,
will soon find himself in sympathy with a writer who, by the charm of her descriptive
style, at once arrests his attention and sustains the interest of her
subject" — Morning Post.



NEW WORKS— Continued.

THE REAL SHELLEY: New Views of the Poet's

Life. By John Cord Jefferson, Author of " The Real Lord

Byron," " A Book about Doctors," " A Book about Lawyers," &c.

2 vols, demy 8vo. sos.

"Those who have read Mr. Jefferson's account of Byron will be prepared to

find that impartiality is the distinguishing feature of his endeavour to clear away

the fancies and misconceptions which have been given to the world in some of

the biographies of Shelley, and they will not be disappointed. The author has

striven to ascertain, fairly and fully, the truth concerning a poet whose influence,

while it has been greatly exaggerated by his most enthusiastic admirers, is still a,

living factor in the life of many." — Morning Post.

"Mr. Jefferson's book has corrected in not a few cases errors committed by
previous biographers of Shelley, and he has produced fresh and interesting documentary
evidence bearing upon the poet's career"— (?rap/«'c.

WITHOUT GOD: Negative Science and Natural

Ethics. By Percy Greg, Author of "The Devil's Advocate,"

"Across the Zodiac," &c. 1 vol. demy 8vo. 12s.

''Mr. Greg has condensed much profound thought into his book, and has fully

succeeded in maintaining the interest of the discussion throughout." — Morning Post.

This work is ably written ; there are in it many passages of no ordinary power

and brilliancy. It is eminently suggestive and sin: hating'" — Scotsman.

This is the work of a man full of thought upon ;\, number of highly important
subjects, and of strong convictions strongly enunciated, which no one can read
without benefit." — Morning Advertiser.

SIBERIAN PICTURES. By Ludwig Niemojowskl

Edited, from the Polish, by Major Szulczewski. 2 vols. 21s.
This book contains a good deal of interesting matter. M. Niemojowski's description
of Siberian game and the hunting of it is clearly valuable, and shows
that he really has lived among the people. His work is not without interest to
biographers, for it deals with almost every race that inhabits Siberia— tongues
and Tartars, Samoyedes and Sticks, the Burials of Lake Baikal, and the
Gilliacks of the Pacific co-s^Bisy —Saturday Review.

Reminiscences OF MILITARY SERVICE

with the 93rd SUTHERLAND HIGHLANDERS. By

Surgeon-general Munro, M.D., Cab., Formerly Surgeon of the

Regiment. 1 vol. demy 8vo. 15s.

This book is not only bright and lively, but thoroughly good-natured. What

makes these reminiscences exceptionally readable is the amount of illustrative

anecdote with which they are interspersed. The author has a keen appreciation

of humour, with the knack of recalling appropriate stories." — Saturday Review.

THE FRIENDSHIPS OF MARY RUSSELL

Milford : As Recorded in Letters from her Literary
Correspondents. Edited by the Rev. A. G. Estrange,
Editor of " The Life of Mary Russell Milford," &c. 2 vols. 21s.
These letters are all written as to one whom the writers love and revere. Miss
Barrett is one of Miss Milford's correspondents, all of whom seem to be inspired
with a sense of excellence in the mind they are invoking. Their letters are extremely
interesting, and they strike out recollections, opinions, criticisms, which
will hold the reader's delighted and serious attention"— ZJatVj^ Telegraph.

THE Bronze FAMILY, With Special Reference
to Patrick Branavell Bronze. By Francis A. Lei land. 2
vols. 21s.
"This book is so full of interesting information that as a contribution to literary
biography it may be considered a real success." — Academy.

Mr. Leland's book is earnest and accurate, and he has spared no pains to
master his subject and present it with clearness; the book is valuable, and should
be read by all who are familiar with the previous works on the family"— C?ra^/iic.

NEW ^VOUKS— Continued,

THE Pictorial Press : Its Origin and Progress.

By Mask Jackson. 1 voi. demy 8vo. 'With 150

Illustrations. Pigs.
'• Mr. Mason Jacksons learned and exhaustive work on the 'Pictorial Press,"
with its rare and curious illustrations, should be acquired and appreciatively consulted,
not only by those amateurs of the art, in the exercise, criticism and bibliography
of which Mr. Jackson is so skilled a proficient, but by students of the
history of journalism'' — G. A. S. in HI tis rated London jyeics.

THE LIFE AND Adventures OF PEG

WOFFINGTOX : "With Pictures of the Period ix which She

Lived, By J. Fitzgerald :Mollot, Author of " Court Life

Below Stairs'' &c. Second Edition. 2 vols, crown Svo. With

Portrait. 21s,

"Peg WofSngton makes a most interesting central figure, round which Mr.

Molly has made to revolve a varied and picturesque panorama of London life in

the middle of the eighteenth century. He sees things in the past so clearly, grasps

them so tenaciously, and reproduces them so vividly, that they come to us without

any of the dust and rust of times'— G-. A. S. in Illustrated London Xeics.

WOMEN OF Europe IN THE FIFTEENTH

AND SIXTEENTH CENTURIES. By Mrs. Napier Higgins.

Vols. 1 and 2 demy Svo. sos.
These volumes contain biographies of women more or less directly connected
with the history of Scandinavia, Germany, Hungary, Russia, Lithuania, and
Poland, during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The work is likely to be of
permanent value to the students of history." — Moving Post.

ON THE Teach OF THE Crescent: Erratic

Notes from the Piraeus to Perth, Bv Ma-jor E. C. Johnson,
M.A.I., F. R. Hist. S., etc. With Map and Upwards of 50 illustrations
by the Author, 1 vol. demy Svo. 15s,
The author of this bright, pleasant volume possesses keen power of observation
and vivid appreciation of animate and inanimate beauty. It wil brighten
hours for many readers who will only follow the track of the Crescent through its
pages and its numerous illustrations." — Morning Post.

Memoirs OF A CAMBRIDGE Chorister.

By William Glover. 2 vols, crown Svo, 21s.

"In these amusing volumes Mr. Glover provides us with the means of spending
a pleasant hour or two in his company'' — Times.

"These volumes contain a miscellaneous set of reminiscences, comments, and
anecdotes, written in a light and jocular style. Mr. Glover is always cheerful
and never didactic." — Athenaeum.

Memoirs OF Marshal Bureau, From

His Private Correspondence and Original Documents, 17S4 —
1819. By the Count H. dTdeville, Edited, from the French,
by Charlotte M. Yonge. 2 vols, demy Svo. BOs,
This is a work of great value to the student of French history. A perusal of
the book will convince any reader of Bureau's energy, his patriotism, his unselfishness,
and his philanthropy and humanity He was, indeed, a general who
may serve as a pattern to all countries, and hia name deserves to live long in the
memory of his countrymen." — Athenaeum.

WITH THE CONNAUGHT Angels in Quarters,

CAiCP, AND ON LeAVE. By GENERAL E. H, MaXWELL, Cab.,

Author of " Griffin, Ahoy I" 1 vol. Svo. With Illustrations, 15s.
"When General Maxwell made his deut in that capital book, 'Griffin, Ahoy.'
we expressed a hope that we should soon meet him again. This expectation is
now fulfilled, and again we have to congratulate the author on a distinct success.
Scarcely a page in his volume but has its little anecdote and these stories have a
real touch of humour in ihexa '"— Globe.



GLIMPSES OF GREEK LIFE AND SCENERY.

By Agnes Smith, Author of " Eastern Pilgrims," &c. Demy 8vo.
"With Illustrations and Map of the Author's Route. 15s.

"A truthful picture of the country through which the author travelled. It is
naturally and simply told, in an agreeable and animated style. Miss Smith displays
an ample acquaintance and sympathy with all the scenes of historic interest,
and is able to tell her readers a good deal of the present condition and prospects
of the people who inhabit the country." — St. James's Gazette.

"Every lover of Greece must hail with pleasure each new book of travels in
that country which tends to increase the interest of English people in Greece, and
spreads the knowledge that it is not only delightful, but quite safe, to travel there.
Miss Smith's 'Glimpses ' are lively and pleasant." — Academy.

These ' Glimpses ' are presented to us in a very bright and sensible fashion
It is a very agreeable and instructive book. The chapter on the language and
character of the modern Greeks is well worth reading for the sound judgment
and knowledge of the subject which it displays"— PaZJ Mall Gazette.

LIFE OF MOSOHELES ; with Selections from

HIS DIARIES AND CORRESPONDENCE. By His Wife.

2 vols, large post 8vo. With Portrait. 24:S.
"This life of Moscheles will be a valuable book of reference for the musical historian,
for the contents extend over a period of threescore years, commencing with
1794, and ending at 1870. Moscheles writes fairly of what is called tho ' Music of the
Future,' and his judgments on Herr Wagner, Dr. Liszt, Bernstein, Dr. von Billow,
Litolff, &c., whether as composers or executants, are in a liberal spirit. He recognizes
cheerfully the talents of our native artists: Sir S. Bennett, Mr. Mac-barren,
Madame Goddard, Mr. J. Barnett, Mr. Hullah, Mr. A. Sullivan, &c. The
volumes are full of amusing anecdotes." — Athenaeum.

MONSIEUR GUIZOT in Private Life (1787-

1874). By His Daughter, Madame de Witt. Translated by Mrs.
Simpson. 1 vol. demy 8vo. 158.

Madame de Witt has done justice to her father's memory in an admirable record
of his life. Mrs. Simpson's translation of this singularly interesting book is
in accuracy and grace worthy of the original and of the subject." — Saturday Review.

WORDS OF HOPE AND COMFORT TO

THOSE IN SORROW. Dedicated by Permission to The Queen.
Fourth Edition. 1 vol. small 4to. 5s.

"The writer of the tenderly-conceived letters in this volume was Mrs. Julius
Hare, a sister of Mr. Maurice. They are instinct with the devout submissiveness
and fine sympathy which we associate with the name of Maurice ; but in her there
is added a winningness of tact, and sometimes, too, a directness of language, which
we hardly find even in the brother. The letters were privately printed and circulated,
and were found to be the source of much comfort, which they cannot fail
to afford now to a wide circle. A sweetly-conceived memorial poem, bearing
the well-known initials, 'E. H. P.', gives a very faithful outline of the life." — British
Quarterly Review.

PLAIN SPEAKING. By Author of '' John Halifax,

Gentleman." 1 vol. crown Svo. 10s. 6d.
"We recommend 'Plain Speaking' to all who like amusing, wholesome, and
instructive reading. The contents of Mrs. Crank's volume are of the most multifarious
kind, but all the papers are good and readable, and one at least of them
of real importance"— ,Si. James's Gazette.

Lodge's PEERAGE

AND BARONETAGE,

CORRECTED BY THE NOBILITY.

FIFTY-if TH Edition N FOR 1886.

Lodge's Peerage axd Baeoketage is acknowledged to be the most
complete, as-well as the most elegant, work of the kind. As an established
and authentic authority on all questions respecting the family
histories, honours, and connections of the titled aristocracy, no work has
ever stood so high. It is published under the especial patronage of Her
Majesty, and is annually corrected throughout, from the personal communications
of the Nobility. It is the only work of its class in which, tht
type being kept constantly standing, every correction is made in its proper
place to the date of publication, an advantage which gives it supremacy
over all its competitors. Independently of its full and authentic information
respecting the existing Peers and Baronets of the realm, the most
sedulous attention is given in its pages to the collateral branches of the
various noble families, and the names of many thousand individuals are
introduced, which do not appear in other records of the titled classes. For
its authority, correctness, and facility of arrangement, and the beauty of
its typography and binding, the work is justly entitled to the place it
occupies on the tables of Her Majesty and the Nobility.

LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL CONTENTS.

Historical View of the Peerage. ; The Archbishops and Bishops of England

Parliamentary KoU of the House of Lords, i and Ireland.

English, Scotch, and Irish Peers, in their The Baronetage alphabetically arranged,
orders of Precedence. Alphabetical List of Surnames assumed by

Alphabetical List of Peers of Great Britain members of Noble Families,
and the United Kingdom, holding super Alphabetical List of the Second Titles of
prior rank in the Scotch or Irish Peerage. ' Peers, usually borne by their Eldest

Alphabetical list of Scotch and Irish Peers, ' Sons,
holding superior titles in the Peerage of Alphabetical Index to the Daughters of
Great Britain and the United Kingdom. '• Dukes. Marquises, and Earls, who, have

Collective list of Peers, in their order of ' ing married Commoners, retain the title
Precedence. ■ of Lady before their own Christian and

Table of Precedency among Men. ' their Husband's Surnames.

Table of Precedency among "Women. Alphabetical Index to the Daughters of

The Queen and the Royal Family. I Viscounts and Barons, who, having

Peers of the Blood Royal I married Commoners, are styled Honour-the

Peerage, alphabetically arranged | able Mrs. : and, in case of the husband

Families of such Extinct Peers as have left being a Baronet or Knight Hon. Lady.
Widows or Issue. A List of the Orders of Knighthood.

Alphabetical List of the Surnames of all the : Mottoes alphabetically arranged and trans-peers,
i lated.

"This work is the most perfect and elaborate record of the living and recently deceased
members of the Peerage of the Three Kingdoms as it stands at this day. It is
a most useful publication. We are happy to bear testimony to the fact that scrupulous
accuracy is a distinguishing feature of this book"' — Times.

"Lodge's Peerage must supersede all other works of the kind, for two reasons: first, it
is on a better plan ; and secondly, it is better executed, "We can safely pronounce it to bethe
readiest, the most useful, and exactness of modem works on the subject"— S/iecfatof:

A work of great value. It is the most faithful record we possess of the aristocracy
of the day"— foss.

EACH IN ONE VOLUME CROWN 8vo, 6s.

A MODERN ENGLISHMAN.

"This is a very admirable work. The reader is from the first carried away by the
gallant unconventionality of its author. ' Donovan ' is a very excellent novel ; but it is
something more and better. It should do as much good as the best sermon ever written
or delivered extempore. The story is told with a grand simplicity, an unconscious poetry
of eloquence which stirs the very depths of the heart. One of the main excellencies of
this novel is the delicacy of touch with which the author shows her most delightful 
to be after all human beings, and not angels before their time." — Standard.

' Donovan ' is told with the power of truth, experience, and moral insight. The tone
^ the novel is excellent and very high "— Daily News.

Ave Two.

This book is well written and full of interest. The story abounds with a good many
light touches, and is certainly far from lacking in incident." — Times.

' We Two ' contains many very exciting passages and a great deal of information.
Miss Lyell is a capable writer and a clear-headed thinker." — Athenaeum.

A work of deep thought and much power. Serious as it is, it is now and then brightened
by rays of genuine humour. Altogether this story is more and better than a novel."
Morning Post.

There is artistic realism both in the conception and the delineation of the personages;
the action and interest are unflagging sustained from first to last, and the book is pervaded
by an atmosphere of elevated, earnest thought— Scotsman.

TN THE alden Days.

"Miss Lyell has given us a vigorous study of such life and character as are really worth
reading about. The central flgui-e of her story is Algerian Sydney; and this figure she
invests with a singular dignity and power. He always appears with effect, but no liberties
are taken with the facts of his life. The plot is adapted with great felicity to them.
His part in it, absolutely consistent as it is with historical truth, gives it reality as well as
dignity. Some of the scenes are remarkably vivid. The escape is an admirable narrative,
which almost makes one hold one's breath as one reads." — Spectator.

' In the Golden Days ' is an excellent novel of a kind we are always particularly glad
to recommend. It has a good foundation of plot and incident, a thoroughly noble and
wholesome motive, a hero who really acts and suffers heroically, and two very nice
heroines. The historical background is very carefully indicated, but is never allowed to
become more than background"— (y^/arc^/are.

"The Dean's daughters are perfectly real characters— the learned Cornelia especially ;
the little impulsive French heroine, who endures their cold hospitality and at last wins
their affection, is thoroughly charming; while throughout the book there runs a golden
thread of pure brotherly and sisterly love, which pleasantly reminds us that the making
and marring of marriage is not, after all, the sum total of real \UQ:'—Acctdemy.

' "Won by Waiting ' is a very pleasing and well-written tale ; full of graphic descriptions
of French and English life, with incidents and characters well sustained. A I took
with such pleasant reading, and with such a healthy tone and influence, iS' a great boon
to the young people in our families." — Freeman.

LONDON : HURST AND BLACKETT, PUBLISHERS.

PUBLISHED BY HURST & BLACKETT.

THRO' LOVE AND WAR. By Violet Fane,

Author of " Sophy : or the Adventures of a Savage," &c. 3 vols.

'Thro' Love and War' haa a succinct and intelligible plot, and is-written
with a quaint combination of acute perception, veiled sarcasm, and broad fun,
which is certain to ensure for it a wide popularity'' — The World.

We find, as we might expect from Miss Fanes past work, these three volumes
brimful of cynical and racy humour, yet not lacking in serious foundation'" — Times.

SIR ROBERT SHIRLEY, BART. By John Berwick
Harold, Author of " Lady Flavian," " The Tenth Earl,"
&c. 3 vols.

' Sir Robert Shirley, Lart.,' is a thoroughly good story. The book is wholesome
in tone, and will please all those whose taste is not perverted by a-too
highly spiced style of QcXion."— Morning Post.

A FAIRE Dalzell. By Esse Stuart. 3 vols.

"For she was faire, as faire mote ever bee'' — Spenser's Faire Queene.
"In 'A Faire Dalzell," the interest is steadily maintained, and the progress of
the plot gives rise to some strong situations in the third volume.' — Athenian.

THE VERGE OF NIGHT. By Percy Greg,

Author of "Ivy: Cousin and Bride," &c. 3 vols.

This novel, which abounds in incidents more or less startling, is one of remarkable
power, pathos, and well-managed passion'" — Figaro.

"Mr. Percy Greg has so intermingled the political and the domestic action in
his clever novel that they make a unity which enables the reader to follow the
development of character and events with untiring interest"' — Scotsman.

MADAME DE Pressed. By E. Frances

Pointer, Author of '• My Little Lady," &c. Second Edition. 2 vols.

"A charming story, full of originality. The dialogue is full of life, and the
characters are strongly and concisely drawn." — Saturday Review.

"A novel of considerable quiet charm, containing much natural dialogue.
There is refined portraiture and graceful description in the book'' — Athenxuni.

ENTANGLED. By Miss Fairfax Byrne, Author

of " A Fair Country Maid." 3 vols.

' Entangled ' is a story of real genius, bliss Byrne shows her full powers in
her marvellously vivid and impressive treatment of strong or delicate situations.
The writer holds us as the ancient mariner held his listener, and for the time we
live only in the lives which are acting or agonising before us. " — Academy.

THE LAW FORBIDS. By Katharine King,

Author of " The Queen of the Regiment," " Off the Roll," &c. 3 vols.

There are several effective incidents, and there is much admirable character-sketching
in 'The Law Forbids.' "' — Academy.

We find in ' The Law Forbids ' that wholesome, breezy freshness which
forms the atmosphere of Miss King's preceding stories. There are some excellent
sketches of life and character." — Spectator.

LOVE AND MIRAGE. By M. Bentham-Edwards,

Author of '' Kitty," " Bridget," &c. 2 vols.
A singularly refined and beautiful story, in which we know not whether to
admire most the fair landscape, rich in ideal and real loveliness, or the simple
figures moving before it.''— Spectator.

PUBLISHED BY HURST & BLACKETT.

A DIAMOND IN THE Enough. By Alice

O'Hanlon, Author of " The Unforseen," &c. 3 vols.

LOVE, THE PILGRIM. By May Crommelix,

Author of " Qiieenie," " A Jewel of a Girl," (fee. 3 vols.

THE FAVOURITE OF FORTUNE. By Ella

Curtis (Shirley Smith), Author of " All for Herself," '' His Last
Stake." 3 vols.

' The Favourite of Fortune ' is an entertaining story, with distinct merit and
attractions'" — AtJienccum.

"This novel is by far the best Miss Curtis has yet written, and it deserves success;
there is plenty of action and go, an abundance of incident, and a very well-constructed
plot"— Fawn Fai}\

VENGEANCE IS MINE. By Eliza Pollard,

Author of " Hope Deferred," " Lady Superior," &c. 3 vols:
Miss Pollard's story is, on the whole, entertaining." — Academy.

UNTIL THE DAY BREAKS, ^j Emily Spender,

Author of " Restored," " Son and Heir," &c. 3 vols.

Miss Spender always did creditable work, and in most respects she seems to
have increased in strength from novel to novel. ' Until the Day Breaks ' contains
some of her most successful writing ; it is really a delightful story." — Athena inn.

'Until the Day Breaks ' is a clever and rather entertaining story." — Saturday
Review.

A FAIR MAID. By F. W. Robinson, Author of

Grandmother's Money," &c. 3 vols.

"Mr. Robinson has devoted much of his remarkable powers of description to
the task of bringing before the readers of English fiction the sorrows of England's
homeless waif. Not that 'A Fair Maid' is so powerful as 'No Church,' or so
humorous as 'Grandmother's Money;' but it is sweeter in temper, more idyllic
in suggestion, and written in much purer style." — Athenaeum.

"'A Fair Maid' will be found decidedly enjoyable. It is a good and well told .
siovy.''' —Academy .

MARION'S MARRIED LIFE. By the Author of

"Anne Dysart," " Sir John," &c. 3 vols.

This story is interesting, and told in an unaffected manner. It shows knowledge
of character, considerable descriptive power, and testifies to sound, wholesome
views of life'" — St. James's Gazette.

"The story Is of great interest." — Scotsman.

THE KING CAN DO NO WRONG. By Pamela

Sneyd, Author of "Jack Urquhart's Daughter." 2 vols.

This novel gives evidence of imagination, insight into character, and power of
delineation." — Athemnmi.

Shows command of exceptional narrative and descriptive power— the story is
told with cleverness and force." — Scotsman.

FAIR KATHERINE. By Harley Dale. 3 vols.

' Fair Katherine ' is a very clever novel indeed ; all the leading characters are
clearly drawn and individualized, and the dialogue is natural and suitable." —
Academy.
